Article
                                                                                                            Australian Journal of Education
Critical thinking skills in the                                                                                                  0(0) 1–18
                                                                                                   ! Australian Council for Educational

International Baccalaureate’s                                                                                              Research 2015
                                                                                                               Reprints and permissions:
                                                                                                   sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
‘‘Theory of Knowledge’’                                                                                DOI: 10.1177/0004944115603529
                                                                                                                         aed.sagepub.com
subject: Findings from an
Australian study
David R Cole
Associate Professor in Education, University of Western Sydney,
Australia

Jacqueline Ullman
Lecturer in Adolescent Development, University of Western Sydney,
Australia

Susanne Gannon
Associate Professor, University of Western Sydney, Australia

Paul Rooney
Lecturer in Secondary Methods, University of Western Sydney,
Australia



Abstract
There is considerable debate both in Australia and internationally about the best way for schools
to deliver the thinking skills required for university study and professional work life – skills that
are often referred to by the term ‘‘critical thinking’’. This article reviews the literature on the
effective teaching of critical thinking and looks at one example of a secondary school subject
aimed at developing critical thinking skills in its graduates, namely the Theory of Knowledge (ToK)
subject in the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program (DP). ToK, a core element of the DP,
has no set curriculum. Instead, ToK requires students to think deeply about knowledge problems
and to formulate coherent views on the nature of knowledge. This article reports on an
Australian study into the teaching and learning of ToK and presents associated outcomes in
cohorts of both secondary and tertiary students.

Keywords
Theory of Knowledge (ToK), critical thinking, mixed-method research, International
Baccalaureate (IB) in Australia, academic self-concept

Corresponding author:
David R Cole, University of Western Sydney, Locked Bag 1797, Penrith, Sydney, New South Wales 2774, Australia.
Email: david.cole@uws.edu.au



                          Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
2                                                                                      Australian Journal of Education 0(0)

Introduction: Teaching critical thinking
The study reported in this article examined the relationship between the International
Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Program (DP) subject ‘‘Theory of Knowledge’’ (ToK) – a
compulsory (100-hour), pre-tertiary, epistemological subject – and the practice of critical
thinking (CT), which has been deﬁned as:

    . . . [t]he ability to engage in purposeful, self-regulatory judgement based on rigorous intellectual
    concepts and principles . . . and which is widely recognised as an essential academic skill
    (Facione, 1990, p. 2).
Despite the agreed signiﬁcance of critical thinking for academic and professional success
(Abrami et al., 2008; Paul, 1992), a global debate continues as to the best pedagogical
approach for students’ development of critical thinking skills, abilities, and
understandings (Hatcher, 2006). At the heart of this debate is whether it is best to teach
critical thinking explicitly and systematically in an epistemological course, as is the approach
of the IB’s DP course through their ToK subject, or whether the learning of critical thinking
should develop implicitly as a bi-product of the inculcation of students into speciﬁc academic
disciplines (see, Aizikovitsh & Amit, 2010 and Swartz, 1992 for their summative perspectives
on this debate).
    To contribute to this debate, the research reported here focused on the ToK subject which
is currently the only stand-alone course in Australia that intends explicitly to deliver critical
thinking skills in the pre-tertiary curriculum. According to its ‘‘Subject Brief’’, ToK is . . .

    . . . [A] course about critical thinking and inquiring into the process of knowing, rather than
    about learning a speciﬁc body of knowledge. It plays a special role in the DP by providing an
    opportunity for students to reﬂect on the nature of knowledge, to make connections between
    areas of knowledge and to become aware of their own perspectives and those of the
    various groups whose knowledge they share (International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO),
    2014, p. 1).

ToK gives students in years 11 and 12 the opportunity to understand and develop their
critical thinking skills in an environment without the reproduction of learnt curriculum
knowledge (Cole, Gannon, Ullman, & Rooney, 2014; Cole & Hager, 2010). Furthermore,
while ToK does stand alone as a discrete subject, teachers across the DP, which services
students in years 11 and 12 in schools following the IB curriculum, are encouraged to
develop their students’ critical thinking skills and facilitate transfer of their students’
learning and insights from ToK through to their other DP subjects.
   This study presents some preliminary data on the eﬀectiveness of ToK delivery in
Australian schools through 1) a comparison of critical thinking skills in ToK students
across year cohorts (years 11 and 12), as cross-sectional proxy measure of their skill
development and 2) a comparison of critical thinking skills in DP graduates and non-DP
graduates within a cohort of ﬁrst year university students.
   Given the beneﬁt of a mixed-methods approach for triangulation of data (Creswell &
Plano-Clark, 2011), this study employed ToK teacher interviews, classroom observations
and artefact analyses in four case study schools in the Australian state of New South Wales
(NSW) in order to understand better the complexities of students’ critical thinking skill
development within the ToK course.
   In Australia, the skill of critical thinking is, by and large, developed within key learning
areas across the curriculum, including science, mathematics, English and history, and is


                           Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
Cole et al.                                                                                            3

understood as evidence of higher-order thinking or metacognition (Flavell, 1977) within the
subject areas (McGuire, 2012; Pintrich, 2002). While metacognition is a crucial aspect of
critical thinking (see Bruer, 2000), if schools frame critical thinking as thinking about
knowledge in discrete, domain-speciﬁc ways (e.g. thinking about knowledge in science or
thinking about knowledge in English), it may have limited use as a general thinking skill,
since students may not receive explicit instruction in its transfer or use beyond the domain in
which it is presented. Although some attempts have been made to conceptualise the teaching
of critical thinking as a cross-curricular capacity (Australian Curriculum, Assessment and
Reporting Authority, 2012), and to provide cross-curricular support for the development of
higher-order thinking skills, cross-curricular innovations (such as the Tasmanian ‘Essential
Learnings’; see Watt, 2006) have not been maintained. Proponents of the domain-speciﬁcity
approach argue that it is easier to learn to think critically within a given subject area than it
is to learn to think critically in a generic sense (Willingham, 2007), contending that domain-
speciﬁc knowledge is necessary for critical thinking since what constitutes valid evidence,
arguments and standards varies across domains (Bailin, 2002). However, traditional,
content-based curricula dominate in Australia, which can push the speciﬁc teaching and
learning of critical thinking to the periphery, potentially resulting in minimal explicit
instruction of critical thinking skills. In other words, if critical thinking is an implicit
expectation within discrete subject areas across the curriculum, it is more likely to be
dropped from a given subject as curricular demands increase, particularly if it is not
positioned as a measurable outcome.
    This implicit, ‘infusion’ approach to developing students’ critical thinking skills is
markedly at odds with available research on what works in the purposeful teaching and
learning of critical thinking. In their meta-analysis of 117 studies with 20,698 participants,
Abrami et al. (2008) concluded that critical thinking skills were developed best through
explicit teaching methods rather than implicit teaching, which positioned critical thinking
as a by-product of the subject being learned. In their comprehensive evaluation of empirical
studies of critical thinking development in students, students’ greatest critical thinking skill
gains occurred where critical thinking was explicitly taught in a stand-alone way (Abrami
et al., 2008). Echoing ﬁndings from the above meta-analysis, Marin and Halpern (2011)
reported on results from their two studies by comparing direct/explicit and indirect/implicit
instruction in critical thinking within a population of high school students from
disadvantaged, low-performing schools in the United States. Across both afterschool/
supplementary classes and instruction during school hours, students in classrooms with
explicit critical thinking instruction demonstrated much larger, statistically signiﬁcant,
gains in critical thinking skills. These gains were larger both in terms of the diﬀerences
between pre- and post-instructional intervention measures and compared with outcomes
of students who received implicit critical thinking skills instruction. These ﬁndings are
critical to the ﬁeld, as Marin and Halpern’s (2011) research remains the only randomised
controlled trial undertaken in high schools to compare both approaches to teaching critical
thinking. The results provided by these studies support the explicit instruction of critical
thinking in a stand-alone subject such as ToK, as opposed to the implicit instruction of
critical thinking across the curriculum. Furthermore, these results reinforce the need for
further investigation into the role of explicit critical thinking instruction and, in
particular, the impact of such instruction on students’ long-term employment of critical
thinking skills and related measures of academic success across primary, secondary and
tertiary education.


                      Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
4                                                                                  Australian Journal of Education 0(0)

   In addition to emphasising the importance of how the instruction of critical thinking is
framed, research has shown that both teacher training and pedagogy have a signiﬁcant
impact on students’ critical thinking outcomes. In their aforementioned meta-analysis,
Abrami et al. (2008) found that students’ critical thinking skills acquisition was highest in
groups where their teachers had received speciﬁc pedagogical training in the teaching of
critical thinking skills and where their teaching in this area was assessed and monitored. In
contrast, student outcomes were lowest when there were no eﬀorts at professional
development or elaboration of course design and implementation by and for the teacher.
The authors concluded that better outcomes for critical thinking instruction can be achieved
through active, purposeful training and teacher support. Unfortunately, studies of critical
thinking in schools have shown that teachers’ critical thinking pedagogic knowledge and
skill can be lacking (Aliakbari & Sadeghdaghighi, 2013; Thomas, 1999), which has
implications for teacher education, in-service teacher training, and in the development of
pedagogic strategies for the teaching and learning of critical thinking over time.
   Two large-scale studies by Gardiner (1995) and Paul, Elder, and Bartell (1997) reported
that while teachers say that they place primary importance on teaching critical thinking
(90% and 97% respectively), authors concluded that ‘‘only 19% [of interviewees] gave a
clear explanation of what critical thinking is . . . [and] only 9% of the respondents were
clearly teaching for critical thinking on a typical day in class’’ (Paul et al., 1997, p. 18).
Of greater concern is evidence which seems to suggest that many teachers see critical
thinking as relevant only to high achieving students, despite evidence to the contrary
(Dweck, 2002; Halpern, 2003; Kuhn, 2000; Zohar & Dori, 2003). Studies in the USA
have demonstrated a diﬀerence in the critical thinking instruction given to high and low
achieving high school students, with students in honours and high achieving classes having
greater access to exemplary teachers who demonstrably encourage critical thinking through
their teaching (see Thomas, 1999 for a California case study of this phenomenon).
Furthermore, Stanton-Salazar (1997) points out that many disadvantaged students do not
have access to the beneﬁts of critical thinking in the curriculum and are likely to fall behind
in the skills of problem solving, decision making, reasoning through arguments, and
identifying how to avoid subtle coercion. As a consequence, these students can be
deprived of the skills that are required to make positive long-term decisions and goals for
their futures. Such conditions are likely to contribute to the cycle of underachievement,
failure and exclusion from participation in productive and meaningful occupations that
disadvantaged students face.
   The beneﬁts of explicit critical thinking instruction have been shown to have long-term
positive impact across a variety of student populations, including those from disadvantaged
backgrounds. Coca, Johnson, and Kelley-Kemple (2011), for example, provide longitudinal
evidence of the impact of the IB DP on students of low socio-economic status (SES) in
schools across the Chicago-metro area. As discussed, while the DP program does imbed
critical thinking across multiple domains, the ToK subject is positioned as a central, cross-
curricular and independent means to raise the academic performance of students through the
speciﬁc teaching and learning of critical thinking skills. This study which compared the
performance of DP graduates and non-DP graduates across a group of low-SES schools
in the Chicago area revealed that: 1) DP graduates were 40 per cent more likely to complete a
four-year college course and 50 per cent more likely to attend a more selective college and
2) DP graduates in four-year colleges were signiﬁcantly more likely to persist in their tertiary
education for two years or more (Coca et al., 2011). The two demographic groups with the


                       Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
Cole et al.                                                                                            5

strongest gains in academic performance as a result of their inclusion in the DP stream were
African Americans and Latina/Latinos, who were prepared for the DP starting in year 9.
Over the past three decades the connection between students’ epistemological approach and
their intellectual development has been bolstered by research across age ranges, academic
subjects, and in diﬀerent cultures (see Gow & Kember, 1993; Samuelowicz & Bain, 1992 for
excellent reviews of the literature on this topic).
   At the time of writing, only Australian schools which oﬀer the IB DP deliver the subject
of ToK; contrariwise, the current state of critical thinking teaching and learning across the
curriculum in non-IB schools across Australia is largely piecemeal and uncoordinated (Cole
et al., 2014). Two states will be used here as examples, namely NSW and Victoria. In NSW,
critical thinking is mentioned principally as one of a repertoire of skills that is developed
through the selection by examination of students in terms of ‘opportunity classes’ (e.g.
invitation-only classes in government schools for top-performing students in years 5 and 6
of primary school), ‘selective schools’ (e.g. invitation-only government secondary schools for
top-performing students) and ‘selective streams’ in mainstream government secondary
schools (e.g. invitation-only academic streams for top-performing students). This strategy
has been justiﬁed by the NSW Department of Education and Community (DEC) with
respect to the literature on ‘gifted and talented’ students, which has shown that these
students need speciﬁc extension activities to keep them engaged in the learning process
(New South Wales, Department of Education, 1991, 2001). As a result, the NSW strategy
can have the unwanted consequence of reserving the provision of critical thinking education
for students who have been categorised (via standardised testing) as being high achievers,
contrary to evidence demonstrating the beneﬁts of critical thinking for students from a range
of academic levels (Coca et al., 2011). In Victoria, critical thinking has been bundled with
creativity and meta-cognition as skills and dispositions that underpin the curriculum as an
inter-disciplinary ‘thinking’ capacity – Critical and Creative Thinking (CCT) (Victorian
Curriculum and Assessment Authority, 2013). One could argue that the lack of both a
speciﬁc, well-designed and properly resourced critical thinking subject and targeted
teacher training that aids the instruction of this course could make the provision of
critical thinking in Victorian schools reliant on the inclinations of individual teachers and
school leaders. This curricular structure persists despite the Victorian Department of
Education and Training (DET) making online CCT-focused resources and strategies
available to teachers as well as psychometrically testing 4,900 Victorian schoolchildren in
2014 for evidence of their creative and critical thinking skills and dispositions. Concurrently,
CCT is being promoted as a cross-disciplinary focus to be embedded across the new
Australian curriculum (Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority,
2012) as evidence of Australia’s ‘general capacity’ approach to critical thinking. However,
teachers may well be confused about exactly how to implement this general capacity,
particularly given a recent government report into the implementation of the Australian
curriculum (Donnelly & Wiltshire, 2014) which sided with the domain-speciﬁc ‘side’ of the
critical thinking debate as discussed above, eﬀectively writing the CCT general capacity out
of the Australian national curriculum.
   While empirical evidence appears to support the short- and long-term beneﬁts of an
explicit, stand-alone approach to teaching critical thinking skills, no comparative data
have been collected in the Australian context. Accordingly, the study reported in this
article sought to investigate the inﬂuence of the IB DP ToK subject and its stand-alone
approach to the delivery of critical thinking skills.


                      Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
6                                                                                   Australian Journal of Education 0(0)

   Furthermore, this study explored one of the key claims in a previous empirical
investigation of the DP in the Australian and New Zealand contexts (Coates, Rosicka, &
MacMahon-Ball, 2007) – namely that the DP, inclusive of its speciﬁc provision of critical
thinking skills via the ToK course, provides an optimal preparation in the academic skills
needed for university. Critical thinking skills appear to constitute the diﬀerence between the
rote learning of content knowledge and being able to purposefully manipulate any new
knowledge to a speciﬁed end (Coates et al., 2007; Paul et al., 1997).


Method
This study followed a three stage, convergent, mixed-methods approach (Creswell, 2012),
with data collection occurring concurrently for each stage. This approach allowed for the
triangulation of the information in order to understand better the link between students’
completion of the ToK subject and their critical thinking skill development. The quantitative
component of the full study involved data collection across both ToK student and ToK
teacher cohorts and explored a larger number of related variables (see Cole et al., 2014 for
the full report). In this article, a snapshot of 1) ToK student data relevant to critical thinking
skills acquisition and 2) comparative outcomes for a population of DP and non-DP ﬁrst year
university students is reported.
   In the ﬁrst stage of the study, the IBO sent all Australian DP school leadership staﬀ an
email invitation to participate in the national study, inclusive of text with the online survey
URL to distribute to their population of ToK students in years 11 and 12. As students were
aged 16 and older, parental consent was waived for the purposes of this study and survey
completion was taken as evidence of informed consent, as participant information was
located at the start of the online survey. The survey assessed critical thinking outcomes
using both an original measure, developed for the purposes of this study, namely the
Critical Thinking Strategies Scale (CTSS), as well as the ﬁve-item ‘‘Critical Thinking’’
subscale of the Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ) developed by
Pintrich, Smith, Garcia, and McKeachie (1993). The latter was used to enable additional
comparison of critical thinking skills with a well-established, validated measure of high
internal validity (Cronbach’s alpha ¼ .80).
   The 14-item CTSS was developed using evidence of critical thinking skills as outlined in
the ‘‘Delphi Report’’ (Facione, 1990), widely regarded as the leading synthesis of expert
consensus on measureable critical thinking skills. Students were asked ‘‘How likely is it that
you will . . .’’ and exposed to a series of actions associated with critical thinking ability (e.g.
‘‘How likely is it that you will work to clarify meaning and deﬁne terms with which you are
unfamiliar?’’), with responses measured on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from ‘‘extremely
likely’’ (7) to ‘‘not very likely’’ (1). Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) was used to reduce the
number of items in the scale. This resulted in a 14-item measure which showed excellent
internal reliability (Cronbach’s alpha ¼ .96).
   In stage two of the study, a convenience sample of four NSW schools oﬀering the IB DP
curriculum were chosen as sites for in-depth case study. Semi-structured interviews (see
Appendix A for questions) were conducted with teachers, students (focus groups) and
administrators, who were chosen for interview if available and at the discretion of the
schools. The interviews took place in the schools, and asked how respondents viewed the
subject of ToK, and where the subject of ToK was located in their learning programmes, both
in terms of the value of ToK, and the how their programming was organised. In addition,


                        Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
Cole et al.                                                                                            7

ToK lesson observations (see Appendix A for observation focuses) were undertaken through
which ToK lesson notes were taken, and document analysis of any documents produced by
the schools with reference to ToK, for example, school reports, curriculum documents,
student help guides. Data were synthesised in terms of agreed upon qualitative themes,
that came about after rigorous discussion between the researchers involved in the project,
and attempted to frame and develop ways in which ToK currently operated in the four
schools. Researchers returned regularly to the schools over a four-month period, which
provided an opportunity for follow up interviews, extra observational work and
clariﬁcation with respect to the ways in which ToK provided a platform for CT skill
development or otherwise (some researchers visited schools a maximum of 4 times).
   Stage three involved data collection from a convenience sample of Australian ﬁrst year
university students, including those who had previously completed the ToK subject. DP
graduates from the year prior to data collection were recruited through the Australian
IBO Alumni contact list and approached via email by the IBO with the online survey
URL. Non-DP graduates were solicited via targeted email/online announcements on their
various units’ online content management systems (e.g. Blackboard). While a number of
universities were targeted based on completion data for DP students in eﬀorts to generate a
strong comparison sample, only courses at the University of Sydney and the Queensland
University of Technology assisted with recruitment eﬀorts.
   During stage three, DP and non-DP graduates in their ﬁrst year of university students
were compared using the 75-item California Critical Thinking Disposition Inventory (CCTDI;
Insight Assessment, 2000), a well-regarded commercial measure of the students’
dispositional tendencies to deploy critical thinking as a ‘natural thinking habit’. This
measure has been shown to have a very high internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha ¼ .90)
with reliabilities for the seven subscales ranging from 0.67 to 0.82 (see Appendix B, for a
complete list).
   In addition, given the aforementioned links between critical thinking skill development
and university success (Coates et al., 2007; Gardiner, 1995), as well as the ways in which
enhanced critical thinking skills ease the cognitive load of myriad subject areas via a more
discerning set of thinking skills and improved strategies for learning over time (Higgins et al.,
2004), university students’ general academic outcomes were also measured in the study. To
this end, the 10-item Academic Self-concept (General) Scale (Marsh, 1992) was used as a
reliable, internally consistent (Cronbach’s alpha ¼ 0.92) proxy measure of students’ actual
academic outcomes (Byrne & Worth-Gavin, 1996). This proxy measure was deemed
preferable to students’ reports of their actual academic achievement, given the challenges
of standardising marks across multiple schooling institutions. Students were compared on
two further measures. First, students were asked to report their Australian Tertiary
Admissions Rank (ATAR) which is a standardised measure of their year 12 results.
Second, a six-item measure of their anticipated university outcomes, speciﬁcally designed
for this study was used to assess students’ self-beliefs regarding course completion,
anticipated marks and anticipated unit failures (sample item: ‘‘I will ﬁnish my course
without having failed a single unit’’; Cronbach’s alpha ¼ 0.78).


Sample
Table 1 shows the national sample of ToK student participants from stage one of the data
collection alongside the total number of Australian schools oﬀering the DP in each State


                      Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
8                                                                                    Australian Journal of Education 0(0)

Table 1. Number of schools in Australia which offer the IBO Diploma Programme (ToK) by state/territory,
together with number of student questionnaires received.

                # DP schools                   ToK students in sample (Yrs. 11 & 12)

                Frequency                      Frequency                      %                       # of schools represented

QLD             10                             423                             31.6                    8
NSW             16                             363                             27.1                   14
VIC             14                             263                             19.7                    8
SA               9                             208                             15.5                    7
WA               5                              36                              2.7                    4
ACT              5                              34                              2.5                    5
TAS              1                              11                               .8                    1
NT               1                               0                              0.0                    0
Total           N ¼ 61                         N ¼ 1,338                      100.0                   N ¼ 47


and Territory. With the exception of the Northern Territory, all States and Territories of
Australia were represented, representing approximately 37 per cent of the total number of
Year 11 and 12 ToK students in Australia at the time of data collection, according to
estimates provided by the IBO.
   In stage two, members of the research team performed: 1) 22 teacher interviews; 2) eight
focus groups with current ToK students; 3) ﬁve interviews with administration or other
school personnel; 4) a document analysis of relevant ToK literature produced by the
schools, and 5) 10 observations of ToK lessons. Interviews with each teacher lasted for
approximately 40 minutes while focus groups took approximately half an hour each and
consisted of between four and seven students. The ﬁnal sample of stage three participants
included 389 ﬁrst year students, of whom 99 (¼25% of the total sample) were DP graduates.


Results and discussion
Stage one was designed to allow for a cross-sectional comparison of group means between
the cohort of Year 11 and Year 12 students of ToK as a proxy measure of growth in critical
thinking skills across the two years of study. An examination of student means on the CTSS
measure showed that students in year 12 reported a statistically signiﬁcantly higher mean
score for both the full scale measure, as well as for 11 of the 14 individual items (see Table 2),
indicating a higher reported likelihood of employing these critical thinking skills.
   These diﬀerences were further conﬁrmed by students’ outcomes on the ﬁve-item Critical
Thinking subscale of the MSLQ. The mean scale score for the Year 12 cohort (M ¼ 4.69,
SD ¼ 1.15) was higher than for their Year 11 counterparts (M ¼ 4.48, SD ¼ 1.22), with
students’ year level shown to have a statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect (t(1240) ¼ 3.04, p < 0.01).
While both cohorts of students’ scores fell between the anchor point of ‘‘Moderately true of
me’’ (4) and the high end of the scale (‘‘Very true of me’’ [7]), the Year 12 cohort mean was
moderately closer to the higher end of the measurement scale.
   Taken together, these two quantitative outcomes point to greater awareness and use
of critical thinking skills as students move from their ﬁrst to their second year of the
ToK subject. Analysis of the four case study schools aids in the interpretation of these
ﬁndings.


                         Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
Cole et al.                                                                                                                     9

Table 2. Mean differences in CTSS individual item and full scale scores, by ToK year cohort.

CTSS measure: Commenced with
 prompt, ‘‘How likely is it that                      Year of                                                Comparison of
you will . . .?’’                                     school               N               Mean (SD)         means (Yr. 11–12)

Work to clarify meaning and define                    Year 11              630             4.72 (1.45)       t(1260) ¼ 3.38*
  terms with which you are                            Year 12              632             4.99 (1.39)          p < 0.01
  unfamiliar? (skill 1)
Work to understand the significance                   Year 11              630             4.60 (1.36)       t(1260) ¼ 2.05*
  of the new material to see how it                   Year 12              632             4.76 (1.35)          p < 0.05
  fits with your prior knowledge or
  experience? (skill 2)
Express the new question in several                   Year 11              630             4.23 (1.41)       t(1260) ¼ 3.68*
  ways to clarify its meaning and                     Year 12              632             4.53 (1.46)          p < 0.001
  scope? (skill 3)
Break the question into                               Year 11              630             4.36 (1.49)       t(1260) ¼ 2.44*
  sub-questions? (skill 4)                            Year 12              632             4.57 (1.52)          p < 0.05
Seek to identify arguments being                      Year 11              630             4.67 (1.39)       t(1260) ¼ 3.94*
  made? (skill 5)                                     Year 12              632             4.97 (1.37)          p < 0.001
Work to analyse arguments being                       Year 11              630             4.72 (1.39)       t(1260) ¼ 4.04*
  made? (skill 6)                                     Year 12              632             5.03 (1.36)          p < 0.001
Seek to assess claims being made                      Year 11              630             4.73 (1.48)       t(1260) ¼ 4.70*
  (rather than passively accepting                    Year 12              632             5.12 (1.48)          p < 0.001
  those claims)? (skill 7)
Imagine alternative ways to solve the                 Year 11              630             4.74 (1.46)       t(1260) ¼ 3.57*
  same problem? (skill 8)                             Year 12              632             5.03 (1.39)          p < 0.001
Draw conclusions about a problem                      Year 11              630             4.90 (1.41)       t(1260) ¼ 1.61
  based on the evidence at hand?                      Year 12              632             5.00 (1.46)          p ¼ 0.25 (NS)
  (skill 9)
Restrict your claims to those                         Year 11              630             4.29 (1.44)       t(1260) ¼ 0.07
  supported by the evidence you                       Year 12              632             4.28 (1.48)          p ¼ 0.95 (NS)
  have? (skill 10)
Search for information that opposes                   Year 11              630             4.66 (1.50)       t(1260) ¼ 2.37*
  your position as well as                            Year 12              632             4.86 (1.49)          p < 0.05
  information that supports it? (skill
  11)
Consider how your assumptions are                     Year 11              630             4.67 (1.45)       t(1260) ¼ 2.43*
  shaping your point of view? (skill                  Year 12              632             4.87 (1.48)          p < 0.05
  12)
Be able to justify the strategies that                Year 11              630             4.61 (1.41)       t(1260) ¼ 2.04*
  you used to solve a problem or                      Year 12              632             4.78 (1.43)          p < 0.05
  create an argument? (skill 13)
Be able to present your argument to                   Year 11              630             4.84 (1.46)       t(1260) ¼ 1.84
  others in a way that they will                      Year 12              632             4.99 (1.42)          p ¼ 0.07 (NS)
  understand? (skill 14)
Total score on the 14-item CTSS                       Year 11              620             4.62 (1.08)       t(1240) ¼ 3.04*
                                                      Year 12              622             4.85 (1.05)          p < 0.001

NS: non-significant.
Note: Missing cases eliminated listwise (n ¼ 1262 for items; n ¼ 1242 for total); *Indicates statistical significance. Items
measured on a 7-point scale, with higher scores indicating greater use.




                            Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
10                                                                                  Australian Journal of Education 0(0)

    The case studies focused on how the diﬀerent schools conceptualised and operationalised
their critical thinking skills improvement programmes through the ToK subject. While each
of the four schools framed students’ critical thinking skill development as central to their
school’s ‘mission(s)’, analysis of the case study data highlighted diﬀerences in the schools’
approaches to meeting this goal.
    While such data do not allow for generalisations, the cases here highlighted links between
the selected schools’ culture and openness (or otherwise) to critical thinking, its deﬁnition and
framing of critical thinking as well as delivery of explicit critical thinking instruction (Table 3).
The case studies illustrated how the history and makeup of a school, including the experience
and mix of the teacher community, school policy and ethos, and the intellectual heritage that
the school calls upon, can all inﬂuence the speciﬁc teaching and learning of critical thinking in
the classroom. Table 3 shows how ‘School 1’ has taken ToK as the centrepiece of the DP’s
critical thinking learning programme and has, therefore, integrated the learning strategies used
in ToK across the whole school; in contrast, ‘School 2’ has taken the domain-speciﬁc approach
to critical thinking improvement. ‘Schools 3’ & ‘4’ have evolved their own approaches to
critical thinking instruction: ‘School 3’ based on Socratic dialogue and logic, ‘School 4’ on
life-world skills (e.g. everyday questions of logic and problem solving) and issue discussion.
    Results from phrase three of the data collection allowed for an exploration of the longer-
term diﬀerences in students who had completed the ToK curriculum and those who had not.
A comparison of mean results on the CCTDI revealed higher scores1 for the former ToK
students across all seven categories of the inventory (Table 4).
    Table 5 shows the mean diﬀerences between DP and non-DP graduates’ academic
outcome measures, including their reported ATAR scores, their academic self-concept and
their perceived university outcomes. DP graduates had statistically signiﬁcantly higher mean
scores across all three of these predictors of postsecondary school success.
    These ﬁndings point to the tangible impact of completion of the DP curriculum, inclusive
of the ToK subject, on students’ university readiness and access to competitive courses, as
well as their own personal perceptions of their academic ability and their future university
successes. Results suggest a link between the DP focus on students’ development of critical
thinking skills and increases in both habits of critical thinking and representative measures
of academic success.


Limitations and implications of the study
ToK requires DP students to think deeply about the knowledge and skills that they are
learning across the curriculum and asks that they formulate answers to questions with
respect to the nature of knowledge. Given the body of empirical research supporting the
beneﬁts of explicit, stand-alone critical thinking education (Abrami et al., 2008; Marin &
Halpern, 2011), this study sought to explore these beneﬁts in an Australian context via the
IBs’ ToK subject.
   While the ﬁndings reported in this article do appear to support explicit delivery of critical
thinking education via ToK, it should be noted that students who have completed the ToK
course have also completed the full DP course, of which ToK is only one component. Given
our cross-sectional research design, it was not possible to separate the eﬀects of ToK
completion from the eﬀects of completing the DP curriculum as a whole.
   Still, these ﬁndings provide an interesting and extended picture of not only diﬀerential
critical thinking outcomes for DP graduates, of which ToK is a deﬁning feature, but also


                        Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
Cole et al.                                                                                                                           11

Table 3. Summary of the case study results for critical thinking (CT) skills.

                                                                                                           Extent to which
              Means to deliver           critical          Links between ToK                               ToK delivers
School        thinking skills                              & critical thinking                             critical thinking skills

1             ToK links; inter-disciplinary                Based around published                          The practice of ToK has
                  work; inquiry-based                        ToK curriculum and                              been aligned with CT in
                  learning; questioning of                   IBO documentation,                              school 1. This is helped
                  knowledge assumptions;                     e.g. analysis of the areas                      by a whole school
                  setting up challenges to                   of knowledge and ways                           approach to IBO
                  conventional knowledge;                    of knowing.                                     concepts and
                  research-based activities;                                                                 curriculum, which are
                  resources that spark                                                                       shared, for example, in
                  inquiry around knowledge                                                                   devotional time.
                  issues; ways of knowing &
                  areas of knowledge
2             Discussion work; open                        Other specialist subject                        CT skills are mainly
                  debates around knowledge                   areas heavily influenced                        delivered through the
                  issues (for and against);                  the teaching of CT                              connection between
                  thematic work around                       through ToK, e.g. the                           ToK and other subjects
                  knowledge issues; ToK                      examination of                                  such as history, English
                  essay writing practice;                    evidence in history or                          and science.
                  knowledge as a cultural                    the study of rhetoric in
                  practice; scientific                       English.
                  examination of knowledge
3             Logic; philosophical debate;                 CT linked primarily to                          The focus on CT skills as a
                  detailed specialist                        philosophy and logical                          traditional aspect of
                  knowledge about CT;                        argument. ToK                                   philosophy in school 3
                  analysis of philosophical                  therefore is conceived                          means that the subject
                  arguments (i.e. premise/                   as a means to improve                           of ToK has been
                  conclusions); teaching of                  CT through close                                moulded in this light.
                  philosophical methods, e.g.                examination of how to                           The subject of ToK is a
                  Socratic dialogue; ToK                     argue logically.                                subset of philosophical
                  journal writing                                                                            studies.
4             ‘Lifeworld’ discussions; ethics;             ToK has been embedded                           The delivery of CT skills
                  specific linguistic                        within a whole-school                           was a central part of
                  preparation for ToK                        approach to CT. ToK                             the school’s mission to
                  assessments; publication of                sessions are therefore                          encourage critical
                  ToK work; introduction to                  an opportunity to focus                         thinking & independent
                  university-style CT skills;                and improve CT skills                           girls. The ToK course
                  links to Community–                        learnt elsewhere and to                         was an aspect of this
                  Action–Service (CAS)                       link to subjects such as                        bigger picture school
                  issues/debates; teaching                   psychology.                                     ethos.
                  thinking routines



improved academic outcomes which are potentially linked to the development of critical
thinking skills.
   Results, therefore, highlight the need for longitudinal research with DP students before,
during and post-ToK completion in eﬀorts to parcel out the predictive impact of ToK on


                          Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
12                                                                                           Australian Journal of Education 0(0)

            Table 4. Mean differences on the CCTDI for DP and non-DP graduates.

                                                            Former ToK-DP student?                                 Mean (SD)

            Truth-seeking                                                  Yes                                     37.02 (5.88)
                                                                           No                                      35.00 (6.33)
            Open-mindedness                                                Yes                                     43.48 (5.41)
                                                                           No                                      42.85 (5.42)
            Inquisitiveness                                                Yes                                     48.17 (6.45)
                                                                           No                                      46.96 (6.35)
            Analyticity                                                    Yes                                     44.95 (5.39)
                                                                           No                                      44.75 (5.02)
            Systematicity                                                  Yes                                     39.74 (6.59)
                                                                           No                                      38.91 (6.78)
            Confidence in reasoning                                        Yes                                     45.93 (5.96)
                                                                           No                                      43.75 (6.12)
            Maturity of judgement                                          Yes                                     41.98 (7.06)
                                                                           No                                      41.90 (6.35)
            CCTDI total score                                              Yes                                    300.95 (30.05)
                                                                           No                                     293.98 (27.75)

            Note: Former ToK-DP students (n ¼ 42); non-ToK-DP students (n ¼ 126); this drop in participants
            was likely due to the secondary online location of the commercial CCTDI, access to which required
            login details, which may have resulted in participant fatigue/disinterest. Additional details are
            available in the full report (Cole et al., 2014).


Table 5. Mean differences in ATAR, ASC & perceived university outcomes, by cohort.

                                                                                                                          Comparison of
Measure                                        Secondary school                  N              Mean (SD)                 means

ATAR score                                     DP graduate                        94            94.13 (6.79)              t(290) ¼ 4.76*
                                               Non-DP graduate                   267            89.29 (12.07)             p < 0.001
General academic self-                         DP graduate                        99              6.25 (0.96)             t(380) ¼ 4.24*
  concept (10-item scale;                      Non-DP graduate                   283              5.75 (1.02)             p < 0.001
  Marsh, 1992)
Anticipated university                         DP graduate                        99              3.43 (0.43)             t(380) ¼ 2.25*
  outcomes (6-item scale)                      Non-DP graduate                   283              3.32 (0.47)             p < 0.001

*Indicates statistical significance.

students’ critical thinking, short- and longer-term academic outcomes. Furthermore, small
tertiary student sample sizes and a convenience, rather than a representative, statistically
matched, sample of ﬁrst-year university students mean that the tertiary student ﬁndings
provide tentative, rather than unequivocal, evidence of impact.
   Case study ﬁndings point to the need for greater clariﬁcation regarding the precise school
climate and framing of ToK to allow for enhanced critical thinking skills, particularly


                                 Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
Cole et al.                                                                                            13

around the ‘translation’ from epistemology as an overarching concept to the exploration and
practical application of new and varied ways of thinking and knowing. There is much to
learn about the best pedagogical methods for ToK teachers to employ in order to enable this
translation and the optimal school conditions to support this work. To this end, case study
ﬁndings highlight diﬀerences between schools in terms of ToK subject interpretation and
operationalisation. For some schools, these interpretations were not always helpful, nor did
they result in purposeful and explicit teaching of critical thinking. This was reﬂected in
School 2, where student focus groups, teachers’ reports and lesson observations revealed
an over-reliance on whole-class discussion work. Additional case study explorations could
help to elucidate the mechanisms by which teachers of ToK interpret the IB’s oﬃcial ToK
subject outcomes in order to design and resource their lessons.
   The present curricula position of ToK at the inter-disciplinary centre of the DP makes it an
invaluable arena for critical thought and debate, and a possible ‘spark’ for students to go
further in their own thinking, research and inquiry. Case study ﬁndings revealed that while
students may struggle initially in their ToK classes (which we called ‘ToK-shock’), this is a
subject that many will come back to, and will positively appreciate in the future, as they learn to
think critically in an adult and mature manner, to question assumptions, and to more fully
articulate their own knowledge and thinking beliefs. Further, ﬁndings from the case study
element of this research supported the idea that key to ToK’s success (e.g. enhancement of
students’ critical thinking skills) lies in the fact that the ToK subject is not subsidiary to any
other subject, as it does not have learnt curriculum knowledge tied to its functioning (see, Cole
& Throssell, 2008); instead, ToK allows students to fully use and explore their knowledge
through structured thinking exercises and cross-curricula activities. Indeed, one of the case
study schools had copied (but rebadged for propriety reasons) the ToK course for its non-IB
students, and runs it as a compulsory aspect of its pre-tertiary education for all students. The
local enthusiasm for exploring knowledge claims fully and the explicit modes of questioning
that ToK can generate in communities are vital aspects of the classroom experience of ToK,
and do contribute to the continued smooth functioning of ToK in DP schools as a ‘thinking
mechanism’ (see, Cole, 2005) and a form of critical thinking practice with wide-ranging beneﬁt.
   Findings presented here add to the evidence and rationale for teaching critical thinking as
an explicit subject. However, the implementation of a similar subject across the Australian
national curriculum would require wholesale education reform and present great challenges
for an already crowded curriculum landscape. Coupled with the previous empirical data on
the beneﬁts of such curricular inclusions, the current ﬁndings suggest beneﬁts if schools in
Australia considered to initiate pre-tertiary, ‘stand-alone’ critical thinking courses to
enhance students’ academic success rather than relying on the implicit teaching of critical
thinking through the key learning areas of the curriculum. It is acknowledged, however, that
this is not a simple proposition, but rather one with signiﬁcant implications for a number of
areas, including pre-service teacher training, school staﬃng, curriculum organization and
content as well as timetabling.


Authors’ note
The full report can be found at the IBO research web site: http://ibo.org/
globalassets/publications/ib-research/dp/tokﬁnalreport_000.pdf. A summary of the report
can be found here: http://ibo.org/contentassets/d74675437b4f4ab38312702599a432f1/
toksummaryengweb.pdf


                      Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
14                                                                                    Australian Journal of Education 0(0)

Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.



Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article: the International Baccalaureate Organization (IBO).


Notes
1. Scores on each of the CCTDI subscales ranged from 10 to 60 with assessment categories of Low
   (10–29), Ambivalent (30–40), Positive (40–50) and High (50–60).
2. Source: Facione (1990) The Delphi Report. Critical Thinking: A Statement of Expert Consensus for
   Purposes of Educational Assessment and Instruction.


References
Abrami, P. C., Bernard, R. M., Borokhovski, E., Wade, A., Surkes, M. A., Tamim, R., . . .Zhang, D.
   (2008). Instructional interventions affecting critical thinking skills and dispositions: A stage 1 meta-
   analysis. Review of Educational Research, 78(4), 1102–1134.
Aizikovitsh, E., & Amit, M. (2010). Evaluating an infusion approach to the teaching of critical
   thinking skills through mathematics. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2(2), 3818–3822.
Aliakbari, M., & Sadeghdaghighi, A. (2013). Teachers’ perception of the barriers to critical thinking.
   Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 70(0), 1–5.
Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority. (2012). General capabilities in the
   Australian curriculum. Retrieved from: http://www.acara.edu.au (Critical and creative thinking):
   pp. 53–63.
Bailin, S. (2002). Critical thinking and science education. Science & Education, 11(4), 361–375.
Bruer, J. T. (2000). Schools for thought: A science of learning in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: MIT
   Press.
Byrne, B., & Worth-Gavin, D. (1996). The Shavelson model revisited: Testing for the structure of
   academic self-concept across pre-, early, and late adolescents. Journal of Educational Psychology,
   88(2), 215–228.
Coates, H., Rosicka, C., & MacMahon-Ball, M. (2007). Perceptions of the International Baccalaureate
   Diploma Programme among Australian and New Zealand Universities. Canberra: Australian Council
   for Educational Research.
Coca, V., Johnson, D., & Kelley-Kemple, T. (2011). Working to my potential: The postsecondary
   experiences of CPS students in the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme. Chicago:
   University of Chicago, Consortium on Chicago School Research.
Cole, D. R. (2005). An examination of Hegelian and Spinozian Philosophy and their relationships with
   the International Baccalaureate subject, Theory of Knowledge. Journal of Research in International
   Education, 4(2), 211–226.
Cole, D. R., Gannon, S., Ullman, J., & Rooney, P. (2014). Report for IBO: IB Programme: Theory of
   Knowledge (TOK): Exploring learning outcomes, benefits, and perceptions (pp. 1–115). Washington:
   International Baccalaureate Organization. Singapore.
Cole, D. R., & Hager, P. (2010). Learning-practice. The ghost in the education machine. Education
   Inquiry, 1(1), 21–40.
Cole, D. R., & Throssell, P. (2008). Epiphanies in action: Teaching and learning in synchronous
   harmony. The International Journal of Learning, 15(7), 175–184.



                          Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
Cole et al.                                                                                             15

Creswell, J. W. (2012). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and
   qualitative research (4th ed). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Creswell, J. W., & Plano-Clark, V. L. (2011). Designing and conducting mixed methods research
   (2nd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Donnelly, K., & Wiltshire, K. (2014). Review of the Australian curriculum. Canberra: Australian
   Government Department of Education.
Dweck, C. S. (2002). Beliefs that make smart people dumb. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Why smart people
   can be so stupid. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Facione, P. A. (1990). The Delphi Report: Executive summary. Fullerton: California University Press.
Flavell, J. H. (1977). Cognitive development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gardiner, L. (1995). Redesigning higher education: producing dramatic gains in student learning.
   ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report, Vol. 23, No. 7. The George Washington University,
   Graduate School of Education and Human Development, Washington, DC.
Gow, L., & Kember, D. (1993). Conceptions of teaching and their relation to student learning. British
   Journal of Educational Psychology, 31, 93–97.
Halpern, D. F. (2003). Thought and knowledge: An introduction to critical thinking (4th ed.). Mahwah,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hatcher, D. (2006). Stand-alone vs. integrated critical thinking courses. The Journal of General
   Education, 55(3 & 4), 247–272.
Higgins, S., Baumfield, V., Lin, M., Moseley, D., Butterworth, M., Downey, G., . . .Thacker, D. (2004).
   Thinking skills approaches to effective teaching and learning: What is the evidence for impact on
   learners?. In: Research evidence in education library. London: EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research
   Unit, Institute of Education.
Insight Assessment. (2000). California critical thinking dispositional inventory web site. Retrieved
   from: http://www.insightassessment.com/Products/Critical-Thinking-Attributes-Tests/California-
   Critical-Thinking-Disposition-Inventory-CCTDI
International Baccalaureate Organization. (2014). International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme
   Subject Brief Diploma Programme core: Theory of Knowledge First assessments 2015 – Last
   assessments 2021. Cardiff, UK: International Baccalaureate Organization.
Kuhn, D. (2000). Metacognitive development. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 178–181.
McGuire, S. (2012). Teach students how to learn: Metacognition is the key. Louisiana State University,
   Center for Academic Success. Retrieved from: https://www.alabamacca.org/pdfs/2-ACCA-
   Birmingham-2012-Metacognition.pdf
Marin, L. M., & Halpern, D. F. (2011). Pedagogy for developing critical thinking in adolescents:
   Explicit instruction produces greatest gains. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 6(1), 1–13. DOI:
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tsc.2010.08.002
Marsh, H. W. (1992). Self-Description Questionnaire (SDQ) III: A theoretical and empirical basis for
   the measurement of multiple dimensions of late adolescent self-concept. An interim test manual and
   research monograph. Macarthur, Australia: University of Western Sydney.
New South Wales, Department of Education (NSW DOE). (1991). Implementation plan for the
   education of gifted and talented students. Sydney: NSW Government.
New South Wales, Department of Education (NSW DOE). (2001). Gifted and talented education
   programs and initiatives of the NSW Department of Education and Training. Sydney: NSW
   Government.
Paul, R. W. (1992). Critical thinking: What, why, and how?. New Directions for Community Colleges,
   77, 3–24.
Paul, R., Elder, L., & Bartell, T. (1997). California teacher preparation for instruction in critical
   thinking: Research findings and policy recommendations. State of California: California
   Commission on Teacher Credentialing.
Pintrich, P. (2002). The role of metacognitive knowledge in learning, teaching and assessing. Theory
   into Practice, 41(4), 219–225.



                       Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
16                                                                                   Australian Journal of Education 0(0)

Pintrich, P., Smith, D., Garcia, T., & Mckeachie, W. (1993). Reliability and predictive ability of the
   Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ). Educational and Psychological
   Measurement, 53, 801–813.
Samuelowicz, K., & Bain, J. (1992). Conceptions of teaching held by academic teachers. Higher
   Education, 24, 93–112.
Stanton-Salazar, R. D. (1997). A social capital framework for understanding the socialization of racial
   minority children and youths. Harvard Educational Review, 67(1), 1–39.
Swartz, R. (1992). Critical thinking, the curriculum, and the problem of transfer. In D. Perkins,
   J. Bishop, & J. Lochhead (Eds.), Thinking: The second international conference (pp. 261–284).
   Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thomas, P. (1999). Critical thinking instruction in selected greater Los Angeles High Schools.
   Unpublished dissertation, Azusa Pacific University.
Victorian Curriculum and Assessment Authority (VCAA). (2013). The AusVels curriculum. Victoria,
   Australia: Victoria Department of Education.
Watt, M. G. (2006). Looking back at curriculum change in Tasmania: Is the essential learnings
   framework promoting successful curriculum reform? In M. G. Watt (ed.), Proceedings of the
   2005 National Biennial Conference of the Australian Curriculum Studies Association. ACSA
   Biennial Conference, Sunshine Coast.
Willingham, D. T. (2007). Critical thinking: Why is it so hard to teach?. American Educator, 8–19.
Zohar, A., & Dori, Y. (2003). Higher order thinking skills and low-achieving students: Are they
   mutually exclusive? Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 145–182.




Appendix A
Qualitative research/case study

1) Interview questions (from the list below as a broad range of inquiry):
    What works best for you in ToK? Why?
    How could ToK be improved? Can you explain why?
    What does ToK mean for you?
    How does ToK relate to your IB study/teaching in general?
    What is critical thinking (for you)?
    Can critical thinking be taught/learnt? Why? How?
    Can you discuss some of the elements of critical thinking?2 E.g. purpose in thought/
       concepts/inference/points of view/question producing/problem solving/critique . . .
    What are the traits of a critical thinker?
    What are the standards for critical thinking? How can it be assessed?
    How/why is critical thinking useful to you?
    What skills are necessary for critical thought?
    What is the relationship between critical thought and ToK?
    How is performance in critical thought evaluated through ToK? How could this
       assessment process be improved (in your opinion)?
    Can critical thinking be improved? How?




                         Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
Cole et al.                                                                                          17

    How is involvement with critical thinking induced in the classroom?
    What attitudes to critical thinking and ToK do you ﬁnd in your school? Can you explain
       why?
    What is a good ToK/critical thinking class? Why?
    Are you good at ToK/critical thinking? Can you explain why?
    How does ToK/critical thinking relate to your identity?
    Do you understand philosophy, and how it relates to ToK/critical thinking?
2) Focus groups. Themes for discussion will include (as starting points):
    Eﬀectiveness of ToK as a pre-tertiary subject.
    Motivation or otherwise to succeed in ToK.
    ToK as preparation for post-secondary education.
    ToK as a central pillar of the IB.
    Experiences of ToK.
    Knowledge and ability to understand ToK.
    Relevance of ToK to contemporary study.
    The teaching and learning of critical thinking.
    Importance of critical thinking in the curriculum.
    Diﬀerent areas of critical thinking such as inference, deduction, etc.
    Importance of critical thinking as a life skill.
    Other factors connected to critical thinking and ToK such as school environment,
       school ethos, social & peer pressure, the IB in general.
    Do they perceive themselves as critical thinkers?
    Is ToK necessarily philosophical?
3) Observation. Focus for class observations (notes only, sessions will not be recorded).
   These observational sessions were not designed to be critical of the teacher:
    How is ToK being taught?
    How are the students responding to the particular ToK pedagogy under observation?
    What is the teacher doing to explain ToK?
    What elements of critical thought being applied/used in this session?
    How is critical thought being enhanced or otherwise in the class?
    What are the aﬀective dimensions on display with respect to critical thinking?
    What are the factors that are inﬂuencing the eﬀectiveness of the pedagogy? E.g.
       classroom management issues, group dynamics.
    What school policies/directives are mentioned with respect to ToK or critical thinking?
    What are the students doing in the class?
    Does the teacher refer to only academic material or bring in out-of-class materials?
    Do the students know how they could improve in ToK/critical thinking?
    Is the ToK pedagogy clear and purposeful?
    What have the students learnt?
    How does the teacher use group dynamics in their ToK pedagogy?
    Is the ToK class imaginative/creative?
    Has philosophy been mentioned in the class? If so, how, why?




                    Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
18                                                                                  Australian Journal of Education 0(0)


Appendix B
Scales of the CCDTI


                                                                                      Cronbach’s alpha,
       Sub-scale name                                                                 reliability measure (range)

       Truth-seeking                                                                  .70–.78
       Open-minded                                                                    .67–.74
       Analyticity                                                                    .70–.73
       Systematicity                                                                  .72–.74
       Critical thinking confidence                                                   .75–.78
       Inquistiveness                                                                 .78–.82
       Maturity of judgement                                                          .73–.76

       Note: Range scores as reported in the CCTDI Test Manual (Insight Assessment, 2000).




                        Downloaded from aed.sagepub.com at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on September 8, 2015
