Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part II: European Spaces: The Northern and Southern Ties
Chapter 2: Dewey as an Epistemic Figure in the Swedish Discourse on Governing the Self
Ulf Olsson; Kenneth Petersson
Original print pages 39–60; PDF pages 58–79

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 39] [PDF page 58]

2
                Dewey as an Epistemic Figure in the
            Swedish Discourse on Governing the Self

                                       Ulf Olsson and Kenneth Petersson




                                                        Introduction
We are witnessing today the ideas of the American philosopher and
social theorist John Dewey being revisited and revived. In the Swedish
context this renewed interest is manifested in rather a construc-
tivist way. Dewey’s thought on, for example, freedom, democracy,
community, and communication during the early twentieth century is
again being inscribed in contemporary narratives about society and
citizens in relation to the future, that is, the constructivist project as
shaping the current conditions for self-governance in the name of
those concepts.
    Dewey was, during all of his intellectual life, engaged and occupied
with ideas about the future-oriented individual and his/her relation-
ship with the questions of community, democracy, and education.
Contemporary questions, taking up a great deal of space in the dis-
course concerning the remolding of the relationship between the civic
subject and society are not essentially different from those Dewey
brought into fashion in the early 1900s. In the early twentieth-century
Swedish context Dewey’s thought became linked to the system of
governmental discourse on individuality and modes of living respond-
ing to rapid changes in Swedish society. In the current constructivist
“paradigm,” Dewey is emerging as part of a traveling library in a
new system of governance concerned with questions and discussions

[p. 40] [PDF page 59]

of democracy relating to notions of pluralistic and multiple societies. In
this way Dewey has reincarnated into a new figure and has been
reestablished as an indigenous foreigner whose ideas are viewed in rela-
tion to and linked with current educational and political discourses.
But rather than a reincarnation, what we are witnessing in current
constructivist theories and practices is the emergence of a new Dewey,
different from the “original” one. While the name of Dewey, as intel-
lectual author still remains, contemporary political reforms “exist
within an amalgamation of institutions, ideas, and technologies that is
significantly different from those of the turn of the century.”1
   Dewey is becoming thought of in a different way, thus, as a para-
digmatic case in the Swedish reform discourse, particularly in relation
to the refashioning of the relationship between democracy, the indi-
vidual self, and education. Dewey is reinstated, not as a figure of the
past, but as a contemporary productive figure of support in the recon-
struction of the present and in the rediscovery of learning and educa-
tion as significant technologies in the project of reframing and
remolding governance of Man and Society. In this respect, the use of
Dewey’s educational, philosophical, and political thought could be
viewed as a technology in the service of shaping the future, different
from the one molded during the end of the nineteenth and the beginning
of the twentieth century.
   We will endeavor to illustrate this from a genealogical point of view
by looking more closely at the problem of producing future-oriented
individuals in contemporary Swedish political discourses on democ-
racy, the education and training of teachers, public health and crimi-
nal justice. Our main concern is to elucidate how the ideas of Dewey
as an indigenous foreigner are assembled and connected with other
discourses on the reconstruction of a national and collective sense of
who and what the Swedish citizen is and ought to be.
   We begin this chapter by looking more closely at how Dewey’s
ideas were brought into play in the earlier periods of the Swedish wel-
fare state. This is followed by a more general description of what char-
acterizes the Swedish discourse on the relationships between Man,
Society, and the Future in the beginning of the twenty-first century.
Next, we illustrate the way in which Dewey as an indigenous foreigner
is present in the different contemporary institutional narratives we
have chosen to explore. We end with a discussion and some conclu-
sions that point to changes in the way government reasons in the name
of the learning society.

[p. 41] [PDF page 60]

Dewey as an Epistemic Source of the
                           Development and Formation
                the Swedish Version of the Welfare State,
                       Folkhemmet,The People’s Home
Dewey’s philosophical thought and theories on education were
operating in the political narrative of the 1930s and 1940s and in
the vision of an alteration of power relations in society and the creation
of a welfare state, as translated from the Swedish, The People’s Home.
   The foundation of the People’s Home is fellowship and a spirit
of togetherness. The good home is not acquainted with privileged or
disadvantaged people; there are no favourites and no one is excluded.
In the good home nobody looks down on anyone else, nobody tries to
get advantages at someone else’s expense, the strong do not oppress
or the exploit the meek. In the good home equality, consideration,
cooperation, and helpfulness prevail.2
   Dewey’s ideas were operating in this vision of the Future expressed
by influential Social Democratic politicians and educationalists. In
their use of Dewey’s ideas, the education system became a technology
for the ambition to alter society in a socialist direction. Oskar Olsson,
a prominent Social Democratic popular educationalist, held that
school must become a democratic community with the main task to
create a democratic society.3 Stating this, Olsson was making refer-
ences to Dewey; “democratic ends demand democratic methods for
their realization.”4
   We can turn to Ernst Wigforss (1881–1977), secretary of state for
the treasury and regarded as the most important Social Democratic
ideologist in the construction of the Swedish welfare state after World
War II. In his memoirs he emphasizes the importance of Dewey’s ideas
for the development of his own philosophical and political thought.5
He was introduced to the pragmatic ideas of William James and John
Dewey in a meeting of a group of radical students, which he described
as his spiritual home around 1905. Through Wigforss, Dewey was
inscribed in a Marxist and then later a socialist context. According to
Wigforss, there is a lot of pragmatic thought in Marxism, for instance,
the conviction that a human being is first of all an acting being inter-
acting with his/her environment. In his memoirs, Wigforss wrote that
it was a relief to read Dewey because he emphasized the constantly
changing nature of human beings.

[p. 42] [PDF page 61]

The adaptability and plasticity of human nature, that during the
last decades, with abundance of concrete details has been illustrated
by ethnologists and social psychologists, was a natural element in
Dewey’s psychology.6
    Dewey’s criticism of the conception of the human being as a
“ready-made and finished self” was well matched to Wigforss’s narra-
tive about the reformation of Man and Society. In the narrative of
society and future advocated by Wigforss, plasticity and adaptability
were necessary characteristics. It was thus easy for Wigforss to bring
Dewey’s conception of Man into play in the political project of Social
Democracy. Dewey’s ideas became embedded in the narrative of The
People’s Home, and were a crucial part of the library of thoughts con-
stituting the intellectual framework not only for the development of
the postwar Swedish education system, but for the formation of the
Swedish welfare state as a whole.
    Other influential Social Democrats inscribing Dewey’s ideas in their
vision of the Future were Alva and Gunnar Myrdal. Referring to
Dewey, they held that “society must become improved by improved
human beings.”7 They wrote almost exuberantly about American
society and about Dewey’s experimental schools. In their opinion, the
United States had become, thanks to Dewey, the forerunner for
modernity in general and for education in particular.
    Like Sweden, which has been a laboratory for progress within
the field of social policy, the United States of America has become a
laboratory in the field of education.8
    It could be suggested that Dewey’s thoughts to a great extent
became instrumental, to the process that resulted in what can be
described as a paradigmatic shift in the Swedish welfare project. This
becomes clear in the report by the Education Commission, appointed
by the government in 1946.9 The Commission proposed the introduc-
tion of a nine-year basic compulsory education. However, the idea of
abolishing the old class-stratified education system and replace it with
a common basic school for children from all social groups, “a school
for all” was not new. We are saying that “the school for all” is not new
as an idea as Dewey’s ideas were known in Sweden before Dewey
appeared as an indigenous foreigner. As early as 1883, Fridtjuv Berg
(1956–1916), who was the chairman of the Swedish Association of
Public Primary School Teachers and Secretary of state in two liberal
governments was advocating the introduction of an education system
where every single child, in cooperation with children from all social
backgrounds, could flourish and grow according to their own aptitude

[p. 43] [PDF page 62]

and interests.10 Berg embodied a thought that made possible the
linking of Dewey as an indigenous foreigner into his own narratives
about School, Society, and Future. Thus, we could say that Dewey was
here already before he arrived. He was present, as a poser of problems,
as a figure of thought and discursive practice, long before he entered
the Swedish educational arena in the name of Dewey.
   But the crucial question is what vision of society and the future was
Berg talking about? According to Berg, a stratified school system, that
separated children from wealthier families from those from poorer
backgrounds, was a threat to the development of individuals as well as
to the development of society. He expected the basic education system
to bridge the chasm between social classes and thus to reduce social
conflict in society.
   The divided school system breeds a split in peoples’ mind, smothers
and restrains the only force that could unify people in society, namely
a sense of fellow-feeling.11
   According to Berg, the coexistence in a school common to all, and
the shared upbringing of children would create a New School and thus
a new Citizen, capable of fellow-feeling, not only with their social
group, but also with other social groups and with society as a whole.
Berg was inscribing ideas of how citizens should live in a liberal
political system of thought with the intention to create a school that,
in his opinion, would be a more democratic and liberal school. But in
the final analysis, it was not about the education system. It was about
society, about education as a technology for managing increasing
social disorder. In Berg’s narrative Dewey’s ideas were inscribed in the
library of thoughts used to fabricate and develop a citizen capable of
sympathy with others but who would not question fundamental
power relations in society. Berg’s Future was of the future of yesterday
and in his program education became a technology targeting on
the self of the individual and on the development of dispositions and
capacities supporting this “Future.” In both Berg’s and Wigforss’s
cases the individual has to be reconstructed, but in the Berg vision the
individual was thought of as helping to preserve society, while in
Wigforss’s and the Social Democrats’ vision of the future, society
needs reconstructing.
   According to the vision of the People’s Home, the main task of
the education system was to bring up a democratic citizen and to
develop democracy as a political project. School had to “establish a
democratic spirit in people’s minds.”12 Education became an essential
technology for supporting political changes leading to the development

[p. 44] [PDF page 63]

of empowered, self-governed, and future-oriented subjects and conse-
quently for a “rehabilitation” of society in the name of democracy. Of
crucial importance was the question of freedom versus authority and
how to utilize education as a technology for promoting the interest of
the individual as well as of the collective.
    The task of the democratic school, thus, is to develop free human
beings who have a desire for and take pleasure in cooperative action.13
    The modern future-oriented individual of the Commission’s vision
of a new education system, was a free and democratic human being
with a deep interest in and ability to cooperate with others. Dewey’s
thought about “education as a freeing of individual capacity in a pro-
gressive growth directed to social aims”14 was operating in that narra-
tive. The Education Commission deeply questioned the traditional
teacher-centered and obedience-oriented school. It referred to progres-
sive writers such as the German Kersechensteiner, the Austrian Köhler,
and the American Kilpatricks. The progressive conception of Dewey’s
thought that was reassembled in Sweden was concerned with the nat-
ural interest of the child, the child in focus, individualization, creativ-
ity, and spontaneity. School was seen as a laboratory for concrete and
reality-based teaching with “learning by doing” as the core principle.
    The ideas of Dewey inscribed into the narrative after World War II
were not the same ideas that were inscribed into the narratives of the
beginning of the twentieth century. Berg’s narrative embodied figures
of thought that made it possible to connect Dewey to a Swedish dis-
course about the future of yesterday. Wigforrs was inscribing Dewey’s
thought in quite a different narrative, the discourse of the idea of the
People’s Home, an idea with the power to change society. The vision
of the People’s Home was built on an idea that it was possible to fore-
see and make plans about the future and that it was possible to fabri-
cate autonomous citizens that were dependable and willing to play
their part in a collective nation-building enterprise. The kind of soci-
ety created in this discourse was an all-embracing society, which came
to be known as “Folkhemmet”—The People’s Home—where people’s
lives are put in order. School was seen as a crucial practice in the shap-
ing of the constitution of the individual with the kinds of dispositions
and capacities needed to fulfill the aims of this project.
    Dewey’s ideas were alive in the discussions about the Swedish school
system during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s and possibly longer.
Direct references to Dewey were more apparent in the earlier parts
of the period than in the latter. During the 1970s, when the under-
standing of school as an apparatus in the service of democracy was

[p. 45] [PDF page 64]

overshadowed by the conception of a value-free school, with voca-
tional training in focus, Dewey’s position was no longer as eminent.
However, his ideas were still present in the thought of various
progressive pedagogues.15


                        The Futures of Today and Yesterday
During the postwar period the welfare state emerged as an open
field for an all-encompassing field of practice. It was during this period
that Dewey once again became an indigenous foreigner in the Swedish
educational and political context. Educational thought at this time
addressed society in its entirety, where society equaled the welfare
state. There was, for example, no distinction made between the state
and civil society. The Swedish historian Yvonne Hirdman described
this vision of the state as an all-embracing power with the task of
ordering people’s lives.16 This had an obvious impact on educational
reasoning. Inconsistencies in and failures of “the system” would be
given structural explanations.17 The shaping and building of knowl-
edge and understanding in the other areas of society that we cover in
this chapter, such as criminal justice18 and public health19 followed a
similar course.
    In this framework of knowledge and politics it was impossible to
conceive of the individual subject as the agent of his or her destiny.
The shaping of the future was a collective affair, and there were in fact
very few special personal demands made on the individual as long as
s/he were prepared to conform to the common standards of welfare.20
    The 1990s mark the appearance of new welfare politics and
new regimes of knowledge. Pedagogy, which in Sweden is the term
name for educational science as well as for the practice of teaching,
underwent a considerable transformation. While the pedagogy of the
1970s saw in society the main key to an understanding of educational
processes, that of the 1990s limited its concern to Education proper.
So what was formerly considered as determined from “without” (soci-
ety) has now become something that is internal to education and can
be manipulated and dealt with in the course of the educational
process. The subject that fits this agenda is created in the absence of
“society” that is replaced as the organizing principle of educational
thought. The individual subject is now the organizer of his or her des-
tiny and future, and the task of education is to empower the subjects
to put their own lives in order themselves.21

[p. 46] [PDF page 65]

In the following section we give examples of the inscription of
Dewey’s thought in contemporary Swedish discourses about governance.


“The Future Is Here and Now—What Are We
Waiting For!”22
There is always a kind of mysteriousness about things, which deal
with the future, as if it might be something decreed by Fate and out of
sight of our own activities. The future, however, is not unexpected,
something we are unable to defend ourselves against. The future does
not consist of a number of strange spaces, into which people are enter-
ing by force [. . .]. The future is not a space into which people have to
enter by force or by absolute necessity. The new society cannot be
designed independently of people existing here and now. The future is
designed by people present in society at this very moment.23
    During the end of the twentieth and the beginning of the twenty-first
century the future, and democracy as a method of governing the future
was problematized once again. In narratives about the society of the
future and about who and what the future-oriented child and adult cit-
izen are and should be, figures of thought on Dewey’s model are com-
ing alive once more. In this context Dewey’s thought is inscribed into
most political areas, not only that of education. This comes as no sur-
prise given that contemporary educational thought is, in the name of
lifelong learning, inscribed into different political and institutional
areas that were not previously conceived of as educational.
    The concept of lifelong learning crosses the boundary between
political sectors. Educational policy, employment policy, the policies
of industry and commerce, regional development policy, and social
policy all have a common responsibility for lifelong and life-wide
learning.24
    The contemporary constructivist discourses about Man, in sectors
such as education, public health, criminal justice, and the reformation
of democracy, are organized through a fairly distinct epistemological
language for shaping ideas of a new type of citizen or organization;
one that is autonomous, responsible, learning, and problem solving.
    The citizens have to be equipped with autonomy that enables them—
in different kinds of mutual self-government and to the greatest possible
extent—to order their lives for themselves.25
    This notion of the citizen of the future, is based on two assumptions
in the Swedish Democracy Report.26 The first is that the life-projects

[p. 47] [PDF page 66]

of the citizens are developing in increasingly heterogeneous directions,
which brings about risks, fragmentation, and moral crises. The indi-
vidual life-project becomes estranged and the spirit of solidarity is lost.
The second assumption is that this development needs counteracting
by nurturing the receptiveness in the citizens to the ideals of democ-
racy as applied to their own lives. According to the Committee Report,
in order to realize the ideals of a society where the individuals are will-
ing and able to participate and act in a spirit of mutual solidarity in a
context of pluralism and fragmentation, a certain kind of autonomy
has to be developed and nurtured. Education as a School of Democracy
will thus be central in shaping and developing the autonomous indi-
vidual and encourage him/her to take responsibility not only for him/
her self but also for creating a common community narrative as part
of his/her own life-project. Contemporary government reasoning adopts
this extended and paradoxical route in an attempt to bridge the
increasing and unforeseeable multiplicity and fragmentation of society
by the encouragement and provision of a system of person-centered,
creative, and democratic education, which is expected both to extend
and strengthen the sense of solidarity in Swedish society.
    Most narratives about the future being created in the present are
created from an early twenty-first-century perspective with focus on
the complexity of today’s problems. In different contexts and with
different logics, we are told the same story, that is, that we have to
live with constantly rapid changes in society and with conflicts between
various group interests and forces in society. The Government
Commission, Health on Equal Terms—National Targets for Health,27
which is proposing national targets for public health in Sweden, is
concerned about the effects of changes in society and the present
health situation in Sweden and about what will happen in the future,
if appropriate measures are not taken. According to the Commission,
the Swedish model—a welfare state and with a public health system—
is “exposed to huge external and internal tensions.”28 Increasing
inequalities with regard to health and social conditions threaten the
basic trust in society and the attempt to found a society based on
solidarity between different population groups.
    A weakening of fellow-feeling and an increasing lack of trust lessen
the possibilities of finding solutions based on a sense solidarity that
provides welfare to everybody.29
    In a deeper meaning the Public Health narrative is not about health.
First and foremost the text, and thus the narrative, is about Society,
Man, and Future. A similar picture of the future is painted by the

[p. 48] [PDF page 67]

Teacher Education Commission,30 commissioned to draw up the design
required for the teacher of tomorrow. According to the Commission
the rapid transformation of society makes it impossible to predict
what knowledge and skills students will need in the future.
   For that reason, an essential dimension of teacher competence is
an ability to foresee and manage changes and to design a learning
environment that enables development of basic human relationships.31
   A future-oriented teacher is thus produced, a teacher with the
competence to work in a pluralistic and constantly changing society,
and equipped with an ability to support children in their learning of
how to understand and manage life and society of the future.
According to this narrative the future is already here and there is noth-
ing to wait for. You cannot really be certain what the future holds, but
this is of no interest since the future is shaped by what we do and how
we are preparing and mobilizing ourselves in the present through “the
choices we are making today, which are decisive for the development
of an improving future. We can not sit and wait.”32 According to the
Democracy Report, in this constantly changing world, it is “important
as a matter of urgency to reinforce the kind of democratic disposition
that can create democratic institutions with the power of solving prob-
lems in a peaceful way.”33 What should be defined as common goals
and solidarity, however, is one of the problems for the Committee
Report and other similar works on reformation at the present. The
notion of pluralism and the contemporary trend based on a culture of
networking are somewhat problematic with regard to this. The emer-
gence of pluralism is, on the one hand, favored because of its sponta-
neous nonhierarchal way of functioning and for the way it facilitates
active participation and spontaneous initiatives. On the other hand, it
runs the risk of being developed in an unintended direction and con-
sequently developing into something that becomes ungovernable since
there is no longer a system of comprehensive or coherent schooling in
the principles and practice of democracy and solidarity as was the case
in earlier periods.
   The expansion of the culture of networking challenges the democracy
of popular movements in several respects. It shapes the conditions
into becoming more conducive to rapid initiatives and to more action-
oriented participation, which is favorable for those taking part. On
the other hand the popular movements are a training ground for the
exercise of democracy for its members.34
   The Committee Report sees this trend of civil networking and net-
widening and the increasing cultural multiplicity and fragmentation,

[p. 49] [PDF page 68]

as a problem of the future, notwithstanding that at the same time this
trend is perceived to be the very source of the possibility of widening
the notion of solidarity and an increasing sense of freedom. Dialogue
seems to be the saving dimension of the current mode of democratic
problem-solving.
    Recognize, accept, support, and stimulate the free associations of
citizens! Invite them to recurrent conversations about the long-term
creation of the cement that deepens the democracy.35
    The Committee Report is a rather characteristic manifestation of
the kinds of reasoning taking place in the circles of government of the
early twenty-first century. The motto is: Since the democratic society is
developing in rather indefinite and uncertain ways we have to speak to
each other. The imagination of an uncertain future requires the citizens
to enter the path of communication and meeting others in interaction,
to entertain the possibility of creating spaces of autonomy and self-
regulation in the realm of an extended sense of community. And
Dewey’s figures of thought are thus inscribed in technologies created
to resolve the paradox of a widening of the notion of solidarity on the
one hand, and a continuing movement in the direction of an increasing
sense of freedom, on the other.


                            Governance through Interaction
                                      and Communication
A prominent technology for the development of autonomy and self-
regulation is the creation of spaces of interaction and communication
to widen the sense of community by including and encouraging the inte-
gration of diverse values and lifestyles. Dewey’s ideas about democ-
racy, community, and communication, thus, are directly and indirectly
inscribed in a number of areas of political discourse. We demonstrate
this with regard to the areas of Education, Public Health, and
Criminal Justice in the following sections.

                                                               Education
The importance of the assignment to develop democratic competence
in children and young people in education has been emphasized in the
debate about education during the past decade.36 One crucial aspect of
this technology is the ability to engage in deliberative democracy and
deliberative discussion. In this context, Dewey’s figures of thought
have been inscribed on the political discourse on education both in the

[p. 50] [PDF page 69]

name of Dewey himself and in the name of other thinkers such as
Benhabib, Habermas, Mead, and Putnam. According to the current
narrative, school should be a meeting place where children, young
people, and adults from a variety of cultural backgrounds and experi-
ences can gather and, through communicating, have their minds
opened to the enriching experience of exposure to and interaction with
others in a context of diversity.
    Communication requires of those participating to possess an ability
to listen, to consider their own view and that of others. It requires peo-
ple to make a case for their own standpoint whilst at the same time
working with others to find common ground on norms and values.37
    The main goal of this kind of deliberative communication, however,
is not about the individual; the goal is about development of school as
a democratic community and, in the final analysis, about the develop-
ment of society as a whole.38 In this narrative democracy becomes a
moral ideal to be practiced in everyday life. An ideal that is similar to
Dewey’s thought on democracy.

     . . . democracy is a personal way of individual life; (that) it signifies
     the possession and continual use of certain attitudes, forming personal
     character and determining desire and purpose in all the relations
     of life.39

Thus, Dewey’s way of thinking about democracy is embedded in
contemporary practices of governance and in the contemporary proj-
ect of developing a democratic and communicating citizen taking
responsibility for his/her own life and that of others, as well as for the
democratic development of society as a whole. The collective endeavor
to find common ground with regard to values and norms becomes a
technology for the management of potential social conflict and to create
feelings of solidarity in a pluralistic and constantly changing society.
   Like Dewey,40 Skolverket41 is arguing for a non-dualistic rela-
tion between knowledge, values, and social processes; these develop
in the interaction between human beings in different social contexts.
Nevertheless, there are clear limitations to what can be questioned
within the practice of communication of the kind we are discussing
here. Deliberative communication “does not mean that all opinions
and perspectives can be tolerated.”42 You cannot make compromises
regarding the basic values settled in the curriculum.
   The basic values decided on have to be valid. The basic values in the
curriculum must not become relative.43

[p. 51] [PDF page 70]

There are thus limitations on the inscription of Dewey’s nondualistic
way of thinking with regard to the discourse on education. According to
Skolverket, there are absolute and noncontingent values and norms
that cannot be questioned, such as freedom, solidarity, and equality.
In the final analysis, deliberative communication and democracy
become the technology for passing on specific values and capabilities
to children and young people. The focus on deliberative communica-
tion also has an impact on the education and training of teachers. The
aspiring teachers must be able to design the educational setting as a
social meeting place and a learning organization, as a technology aiding
the promotion of deliberative communication and democratic compe-
tence. Hence, the aspiring teacher has to have democratic competence
and share the basic values inscribed in the curriculum.
   The teacher has to be aware of the basic values that must be taught
in school and have the ability to convey and how to instil these values
in the minds of children and young people.44
   As we already have seen, these basic values are considered as absolute
and noncontingent and as a foundation of society. These values cannot
be questioned; the teacher’s task is to convey the values to the pupils
and make them shared values, through dialogue, discussions, and
reflection, because this method is regarded as being the most likely to
succeed. Thus, the teacher of tomorrow, in the process of preparation,
is a reflecting, communicating, and analytic practitioner with an abil-
ity to design learning environments. To this end, the teacher training
context needs to function as a deliberative democracy focusing on
deliberative communication. The student teacher has to be a coactor
with a genuine sense of shared responsibility for most activities in the
context of teacher education and training.
   However, this is not only a student privilege; in a broad sense,
the student is obliged to participate in the internal activities of the uni-
versity. Higher education means, not only studying for exams, but also
to be a coactor and coresponsible for the universities’ internal life as
well.45
   In the conception of the Commission, engaging in deliberative
communication and exercising freedom become obligations for aspir-
ing teachers. This thinking is based on the assumption that the indi-
vidual is positioned as the cocreator of his/her future and that the
future must be freed from earlier meritocratic thought and allowing
the possibility of cocreation on an equal basis, that is, it presupposes
a new and more flexibly organized future built around a radical
democratic power.

[p. 52] [PDF page 71]

Public Health
The Public Health Commission’s vision for the future is a society with
robust social cement holding it together, a society where solidarity is
central, where trust in society and in other people prevail.46 The key
element in making this vision come true is a commitment to develop
and deepen democracy and participation in society as a whole. In the
staging of this project of democracy a community approach becomes
crucial.
   Health is created and lived by people within the settings of their
everyday life; where they learn, work, play, and love.47
   The key principle for government in this approach is to mobilize local
multi-organizational alliances labeled as, for instance, health-promoting
communities, health-promoting workplaces, health-promoting schools.
The aims are to strengthen solidarity and social relationships through
communication, to develop new knowledge about health issues, and to
increase the sense of commitment among all interest groups to share in a
common goal, which is to develop the local community as a health pro-
moting society. Thus, in contemporary Public Health discourse there is
a deep, more or less Deweyian, belief in face-to-face cooperation and
communication as a way of managing conflicts and disputes between
group interests in society.48 Applied to school as a community for
health promotion, the idea is to involve teachers, students, and other
members of the staff, parents, citizens, voluntary organizations, pri-
vate bodies, community groups, and other local agencies in the work
for school as a health promoting organization. In Public Health dis-
course school becomes a community, and the concepts of school and
society become interchangeable in the context of Public Health dis-
course. Through the creation and regulation of new relationships in a
space that is local Dewey’s figures of thought form an element in a
technology for governing in the name of public health and for the
development and fabrication of the health-promoting citizen, who is
prepared to self-govern, taking responsibility for him/herself and
his/her environment.
   The individual is seen as an active, acting, and responsible social
being who strives to shape his conditions of life in accordance with
his desires and needs, but who also strives to take responsibility for
society as a whole and the well-being of others.49
   In this context, Dewey’s figures of thought are inscribed in a traveling
library including ideas from thinkers such as Antonovsky, Putnam,
Rawls, and Sen.

[p. 53] [PDF page 72]

The paradox of the forces of individualization on the one hand, and
the need of cooperation on the other, is solved by the Commission
while introducing the concept of the solidarity-feeling individualist,
who as an active, free, and autonomous individual takes responsibility
for himself and for others and for creating an environment supportive
of public health and the development of communication and democ-
racy in society as a whole. The crucial welfare dimension and the
ultimate criteria for success in the public health arena are, according
to the commission, “human beings’ freedom to control and arrange
their conditions of life in accordance with their conscience” and in
cooperation with others.50 Thus, the freedom of individuals requires
cooperative actions and participation in projects intended to make life
and health better for all. Dewey’s thought is present in this concept of
freedom, for according to Dewey, freedom requires pluralism, which
can only be guaranteed by cooperative actions. Thus, freedom is
included in the concept of community.51


                                                        Criminal Justice
Dewey’s ideas about community and communication are also present
in changing contemporary ideas about “doing justice.” In this field the
local community approach operates in the name of restorative justice
or community mediation.52

  . . . mediation provides a practical conceptualization of how the self will
  have to relate to itself to appropriate a style of life, a mode of being,
  which will avoid future disputes. It is this dimension of the telos that
  leads advocates to view mediation as an educational process, as a means
  of imparting a “life skill” to selves, and as a way of avoiding future
  conflicts.53

The principles of restorative justice emphasize the importance of
problem solving and communication and interaction between parties
involved in and affected by crime or other conflicts, and they focus on
what is to be done in the future, not on what has been done in the past.

  Restorative justice places both victim and offender in active problem-
  solving roles that focus upon the restoration of material and psycholog-
  ical losses to individuals and the community following the damage
  that results from criminal behavior. Whenever possible, dialogue
  and negotiation serve as central elements of restorative justice. [. . .]

[p. 54] [PDF page 73]

Problem solving for the future is seen as more important than establishing
     blame for past behavior. Public safety is a primary concern, yet severe
     punishment of the offender is less important than providing opportuni-
     ties to: empower victims in their search for closure and healing; impress
     upon the offender the human impact of their behavior; and promote
     restitution of the victim.54


Restorative justice, and community approaches within education and
public health, could be seen as new ways of ordering the lives of citi-
zens in contemporary societies. This is based on the rationale for pro-
moting communication, that is, we make peace by speaking to each
other and we become reconciled with each other by telling the “truth”
about ourselves. This new way of doing justice is very much about
interaction, whilst at the same time it serves an ambition to personal-
ize and humanize the justice process in order to facilitate “the empow-
erment of both parties to resolve the conflict at a community level.”55
In the same way as the institutional practices of education and public
health pay tribute to concepts such as empowerment, future orienta-
tion, interaction, communication, democratization, and so on, similar
Deweyian figures of thought are operating in the realm of restorative
justice. On one level its official aim is to resolve conflicts between
people and increase harmony, on another level it is a question of
producing new technologies for the governing of the soul.56
    The Swedish experiment of community mediation started in 1978.
It was based on the collaboration between the police, the legal system,
and social services, and has during the early 2000s expanded into a
rather widespread activity. On the one hand it is an extension of the
legal system, and on the other, it is also a new way of linking the
citizen closer with the community.
    The theory of restorative justice also contributes to the will of
empowering the local community and strengthening the local influ-
ence over the individual by moving the legal system to a lower level—
one is of the opinion that misconduct and wrong behavior should be
corrected in a less formal way, namely through social control at a local
level.57
    In this context “the state” is no longer imagined as the victim;
“restorative justice theory postulates that criminal behavior is first and
foremost a conflict between individuals.”58 One of the aims of media-
tion is to get the offender to express remorse and ask for the victim’s
forgiveness. The victim is invited to listen, and to understand the
whole story of the offender’s criminal activity, and the story has to be

[p. 55] [PDF page 74]

told in the presence of the victim and the mediator/confessor. In this
respect, the mediation process is the technology for the empowerment
of individuals in conflict through a confessional face-to-face relation.


                                                 The Learning Society
The epistemological basis for government action is that it is possible to
order and control the future in the present by qualifying and prepar-
ing the individual citizen with dispositions for new commitments in a
constantly changing, pluralistic, and fragmented world. To make this
way of governance possible, lifelong and life-wide learning becomes
crucial.59 The citizen promoted in all narratives about the future has
to be an educational and learning subject. A prominent Scandinavian
educationalist is emphasizing this development in visionary words:

  We are entering the era of the knowledge based society where the
  speed of change is ever greater and where demands for new skills and
  qualifications are made on each of us. Education will no longer be
  something which is linked to a certain age or educational background,
  but will be a necessity and a self-evident part of everyday life for citizens
  from all walks of life, social classes and occupational groups. We are
  already there. We know that “life-long learning” has become a reality.60

    Learning is not limited to the setting of a classroom or to a specific
place or time. Education and training need to extend to encompass the
entire body of society and to be an ongoing, everlasting pursuit.
    It is not possible for the education system to carry out this task
alone.61
    The subject citizen must be prepared to learn during all of his/her
life and to engage with learning in a wider sense. Education is once
again a project for national mobilization, but with a hugely different
meaning than earlier. Education is not just a question of schooling, but
something that permeates the governance of all social activities. The
new technologies applied in the area of criminal justice have more ped-
agogical implications than penal ones. It is more about learning how
to be a law-abiding, problem-solving, communicative, and responsible
member of society than it is to do with punishment for wrongdoing.62
In the Public Health field technologies of pedagogy become significant
for the conduct of the health of the population and the conduct of the
individuals, not only within formal educational settings, but also in
people’s everyday lives and in society as a whole. The Public Health

[p. 56] [PDF page 75]

Committee emphasizes that it is “important for a society that the
citizens look upon learning and personal development as a life-long
process.”63 According to the Commission on Teacher Training and
Education64 learning is an integral part of all activities in society.
Society is seen as a learning society. The Commission emphasizes that
school and teacher education as social institutions in many respects
have a potential to become models for social life in general.
    There is a paradox involved here. On the one hand, it rather seems
to be the case that educational thought is spreading and tending to
dominate even more spaces than in the past. On the other hand,
educational thought is currently tending toward becoming narrower
than before making pedagogy limited and reserved for the realm of the
individual as an educable subject and to an individual task, often
expressed by the rhetoric of lifelong and life-wide learning, self-
regulation, empowerment, and so forth, indicates a more complex view.
It does not seem farfetched to argue that society has turned into
a school. Thus, Dewey’s notion of “School as Society” has been
reshaped into “Society as School.”

Conclusion
Dewey’s figures of thought have been inscribed into the Swedish
political context since the end of the nineteenth century. His ideas of
democracy, community, and communication have been used, directly
in the name of Dewey and indirectly in the names of others, when
changing conditions and concerns about the future have put the
Future, Society, Citizen, School, and the Child on the stage. However,
it is not the same conception of Dewey that has been brought into play
in different political narratives, and it is of course not the same Future,
Society, or Citizen either. From a genealogical point of view it is, fur-
thermore, relevant to say that the indigenous foreigner Dewey even
was here before he arrived, as a figure of thought and discursive prac-
tice. One example is Berg, who in the beginning of the twentieth
Century was inscribing Dewey into his narrative about a school pro-
moting the development of citizen capable of fellow-feeling but not
questioning existing power relations in society. During the 1930s and
the 1940s, Dewey was operating in socialist narratives and visions to
alter existing power relations in society. Now, Dewey’s thought
became embedded not only in the development of the postwar
Swedish school system but also in the formation of the Swedish wel-
fare state, the People’s Home, as a whole. In this project school was

[p. 57] [PDF page 76]

seen as a crucial institution for practice in the constitution of a future-
oriented and democratically minded citizen. The vision of the People’s
Home was built on the idea that it was possible to foresee and make
plans about the future, and that it was possible to fabricate autonomous
individuals, with a strong sense of individuality, as a part of a collective
nation-building enterprise.
    Compared to the nineteenth century and the first half of twentieth
century, there has occurred a shift in the thinking and practice within
such institutional domains as public health, teacher education, and
criminal justice, and with regard to organizing the division of respon-
sibilities and duties between citizen and state. In this respect, we see
today signs of a new recodification of the concept of freedom. As
Wagner65 claims, this is a significant event, which can be seen as an
expression of the changing view of the welfare state and of how the
citizen should be governed. Wagner argues that the welfare states are
no longer able to structure their citizens’ lives in the name of their col-
lective welfare, and that welfare tasks, to an increasingly greater extent,
have become the duty of the individual citizen. The idea of the citizen
as cocreator of the future is not a new one, but Wagner’s point is that
the liberal way of thinking has radicalized recently. The future is
controlled less through society and more through individuals’ own
initiatives. A change of language corresponds to this liberalization in
governing as does a change in the categorizations, and divisions of
institutions and areas of activity.
    Today, Dewey is newly arrived in this new constructivist narrative
about Society, the Future, and the Citizen. In a constantly changing
society it will not be possible to foresee and plan for the future. The
individual subject, according to this narrative, are not as stable and
predictable as before, but capable of problem solving, of taking respon-
sibility, and being flexible, and so being capable of responding to chang-
ing conditions and situations. To make this reconstruction possible,
lifelong as well as life-wide learning becomes crucial.
    Paradoxically, the citizen is governed with the object of becoming a
learning individual, at the same time as educational thought and
pedagogy is applied over the entire body of society. School becomes
society and society becomes school.
    Yesterday’s narratives using Dewey’s figures of thought are quite
different from contemporary ones when it comes to the question
of organizing the relationships between Man, Society, and Future.
However, they are all variations on the same theme, that is, a variation
of the problematic question of “who the citizen and the child are and

[p. 58] [PDF page 77]

should be” (Popkewitz, chapter 1, in this book) and the question of
the will to govern in the name of the Future.


Notes
 1. Thomas S. Popkewitz, “Dewey and Vygotsky: Ideas in historical spaces,” in
    Cultural History and Education: Critical Essays on Knowledge and
    Schooling, ed. Thomas S. Popkewitz, Barry M. Franklin, and Miguel A.
    Pereyra (New York and London: Routledge Falmer, 2001), 313.
 2. Per Albin Hansson, Folkhemstalet (Stockholm: Sweden: Riksdagstrycket,
    1928).
 3. Oskar Olsson, Demokratins skolor (Stockholm, Sweden: Frihetens Förlag,
    1943).
 4. John Dewey, “Democratic ends need democratic methods for their rea-
    lization,” in The later works (1925–1953), ed. Jo Ann Boydston, Vol. 14,
    s. 224–230 (Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press,
    1939b), 367.
 5. Ernst Wigforss, Skrifter i Urval. VII; VIII. Minnen (Stockholm, Sweden:
    Tidens Förlag, 1980).
 6. Ernst Wigforss, Skrifter i Urval. VII; VIII. Minnen, 327.
 7. Alva Myrdal and Gunnar Myrdal, Kontakt med Amerika (Stockholm,
    Sweden: Bonnier, 1941), 90.
 8. Myrdal and Myrdal, Kontakt med Amerika, 96.
 9. SOU 1948: 27, års skolkommissions betänkande med riktlinjer för det sven-
    ska skolväsendets utveckling (Stockholm. Sweden: Eckleastikdepartementet,
    1946).
10. Fridtjuv Berg, Folkskolan såsom bottenskola: Ett inlägg i en viktig
    samhällsfråga (Stockholm, Sweden: Lars Hökerbergs Förlag, 1883).
11. Berg, Folkskolan såsom bottenskol, 60–61.
12. SOU 1948: 27, års skolkommissions, 5.
13. SOU 1948: 27, års skolkommissions, 4.
14. John Dewey, Democracy and Education (New York: The Free Press,
    1966/1918), 98.
15. Sven G. Hartman, Ulf. P. Lundgren, and Ros Mari Hartman, Individ, skola
    och samhälle. Pedagogiska texter av John Dewe (Stockholm, Sweden: Natur
    och Kultur, 2004).
16. Yvonne Hirdman, Att lägga livet till rätta: Studier i svensk folkhemspolitik
    (Stockholm, Sweden: Carlssons Förlag, 1989).
17. See Ulf P. Lundgren, Att organisera omvärlden: En introduktion till läro-
    plansteori (Stockholm, Sweden: Liber, 1988).
18. See Kenneth Petersson, Fängelset och den liberala fantasin: En studie om
    rekonstruktionen av det moraliska subjektet inom svensk kriminalvård
    (Norrköping, Sweden: Kriminalvårdsstyrelsens forskningskommitté, 2003).
19. See Ulf Olsson, Folkhälsa som pedagogiskt projekt: Bilden av hälsoupplysning
    i statens offentliga utredningar (Uppsala, Sweden: Studies in Education, 1997).

[p. 59] [PDF page 78]

20. Kenneth Hultqvist, “The travelling state, the nation and the subject of
    education,” in Dangerous Coagulation: The Uses of Foucault in the Study of
    Education, ed. Bernadette M. Baker and Katharina E. Heyning (New York:
    Peter Lang, 2004).
21. Kenneth Petersson, Ulf Olsson, Thomas S. Popkewitz, and Kenneth Hultqvist,
    Reframing Educational Thought: Subjects and Technologies of the Future in
    the Early 2000 (Paper for ECER Conference, Crete, September 22–25, 2004).
22. The title is borrowed from Lena F. Ljunghill, “The future is here and now—
    what are we waiting for!” Pedagogiska magasinet 1, no. 1 (Stockholm,
    Sweden: Lärarförbundet, 1996).
23. Lena F. Ljunghill, “The future is here and now—what are we waiting for!” 7.
24. Skolverket, Det livslånga och livsvida lärandet (Stockholm, Sweden: The
    National Agency for Education, 2000a).
25. SOU 2000: 1, En uthållig demokrati: politik för folkstyrelse på 2000-talet,
    Demokratiutredningens betänkande (Stockholm, Sweden: Fritzes Förlag).
26. SOU 2000: 1, En uthållig demokrati.
27. SOU 2000: 91, Health on Equivalent Conditions: National Targets for Health
    (Stockholm, Sweden: Socialdepartementet).
28. SOU 2000: 91, 55.
29. SOU 2000: 91, Health on Equivalent Conditions, 82.
30. SOU 1999: 63, Att lära och leda: En lärarutbildning för samverkan och
    utveckling, Lärarutbildningskommitténs slutbetänkande (Stockholm, Sweden:
    Fritzes Förlag).
31. SOU 1999: 63, Att lära och leda, 57.
32. Per Dalin, Utbildning för ett nytt århundrade, Bok 1 (Stockholm, Sweden:
    Liber, 1994).
33. SOU 2000: 1, En uthållig demokrati: politik för folkstyrelse på 2000-talet,
    Demokratiutredningens betänkande (Stockholm, Sweden: Fritzes förlag), 204.
34. SOU 2000: 1, En uthållig demokrati.
35. SOU 2000: 1, En uthållig demokrati, 206–208.
36. Skolverket, En fördjupad studie om värdegrunden: om möten, relationer och
    samtal som förutsättningar for arbetet med de grundläggande värdena. Dnr
    2000: 1613 (Stockholm: Skolverket, 2000).
37. Skolverket, En fördjupad studie om värdegrunden, 6.
38. Tomas Englund, Deliberativa samtal som värdegrund: historiska perspektiv
    och aktuella förutsättningar (Stockholm, Sweden: Skolverket, 2000).
39. John Dewey, “Creative democracy the task before us,” in The Later Works
    (1925–1953), Vol. 14, ed. J. A. Boydston (Carbondale and Edwardsville:
    Southern Illinois University Press, 1939), 224–230.
40. Dewey, Democracy and Education, 98.
41. Skolverket, En fördjupad studie om värdegrunden.
42. Skolverket, En fördjupad studie om värdegrunden, 10.
43. Skolverket, En fördjupad studie om värdegrunden, 10.
44. SOU 1999: 63, Att lära och leda, 10.
45. SOU 2000: 91, Health on Equivalent Conditions, 63, 297.
46. SOU 2000: 91, Health on Equivalent Conditions.

[p. 60] [PDF page 79]

47. “Ottawa Carter WHO/1987,” in The Health Promoting School: Policy,
    Research and Practice, ed. S. Denman, A. Moon, C. Parsons, and D. Stears
    (London: Routledge, 2002).
48. cf. John Dewey, “Creative democracy the task before us.”
49. SOU 1999: 137, Mot nationella mål för folkhälsa (Stockholm:
    Socialdepartementet), 6.
50. SOU 2000: 91, Health on Equivalent Conditions, 63.
51. Dewey, Democracy and Education.
52. Mark S. Umbreit, Victim Meets Offender: The Impact of Restorative Justice
    and Mediatio (New York: Willow Tree Press, 1994); Howard. Zehr, Changing
    Lenses. A New Focus of Crime and Justice (Scottsdale: Herald Press, 1990);
    Mark S. Umbreit, The Handbook of Victim Offender Mediation: An Essential
    Guide to Practice and Research (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2001);
    R. Bush, A. Baruch, and J. P. Folger, The Promise of Mediation: Responding
    to Conflict through Empowerment and Recognition (San Francisco, CA:
    Jossey-Bass, 1994).
53. G. Pavlich, “The power of community mediation: Government and formation
    of self-identity,” Law & Society Review 50, no. 2 (1996): 725.
54. Umbreit, Victim Meets Offender, 2.
55. Umbreit, Victim Meets Offender, 17.
56. Nikolas Rose, Governing the Soul: The Shaping of the Private Self (London,
    New York: Free Association Books, 1999).
57. Brottsförebyggande Rådet (The National Council for Crime Prevention),
    Medling vid brott: Slutrapport från en försöksverksamhet. Brå-rapport 1999:
    12 (Stockholm, Sweden: Fritzes, 1999) 11.
58. Umbreit, Victim Meets Offender, 2.
59. SOU 2000: 1, En uthållig demokrati.
60. Per Dalin, Utbildning för ett nytt århundrade, 143.
61. Per Dalin, Utbildning för ett nytt århundrade, 101.
62. Umbreit, Victim Meets Offender.
63. SOU 2000: 91, Health on Equivalent Conditions, 423.
64. SOU 1999: 63, Att lära och leda.
65. Peter Wagner, A Sociology of Modernity: Liberty and Discipline (London,
    New York: Routledge, 1994).
