Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part II: European Spaces: The Northern and Southern Ties
Chapter 3: Langue as Homeland: The Genevan Reception of Pragmatism
Daniel Tröhler
Original print pages 61–83; PDF pages 80–102

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 61] [PDF page 80]

3
                      Langue as Homeland: The Genevan
                                Reception of Pragmatism

                                                            Daniel Tröhler




Hardly in any other European country than in Switzerland can
we demonstrate evidence of an early and long-lasting interest in
pragmatism.1 To be accurate, the Swiss reception had three centers,
one of them a kind of “headquarters”: Neuchâtel, Lausanne, and
above all Geneva—in other words, in the three Protestant capitals of
cantons in the French part of Switzerland. In order to explain this
phenomenon, I first reconstruct the early contacts between Geneva
and the United States; these show a familiarity going beyond personal
sympathy. Next, I focus on the transcontinental exchange after 1905,
which became more and more educational, in connection with pro-
gressive education; this points out the core element of the Genevans’
specific interest in Deweyan education: activity. Then I try to show
that this core element was part of the liberal reformist langue, show-
ing that langues are homelands without political borders, although
they do not rule out local readings and accentuations. Finally, I show that
the activity of reception was not limited to the Genevans, and that they,
in turn, experienced an active reception abroad, showing that libraries
do not travel without specific preconditions in the destinations.


                                             “C’est mon homme”
The transcontinental exchange of ideas between Geneva and the
United States that proves to be important for our topic began—as far
as reconstruction is possible—with the publishing of contributions by

[p. 62] [PDF page 81]

William James in the dominant British journal Mind and in the French
journal La Critique philosophique in the 1880s. Apparently, the
Genevan scholar Théodore Flournoy, who was twelve years younger
than James, showed a deep interest in James’s research on physiologi-
cal psychology, including James’s response to Huxley’s famous 1874
statement “We are conscious automata”2 and James’s reflections on
emotions.3
   On one of James’s long trips to Europe, he visited the International
Congress of Physiological Psychology in Paris in 1889, where he was
introduced to Théodore Flournoy.4 A year later, James sent his
Genevan colleague his two-volume work, Principles in Psychology
(1890),5 and Flournoy expressed his deep appreciation in a letter
dated October 15, 1890, thanking James for the books and confessing
that, besides a few minor points of disagreement, James inspired him
and put into words his own feelings: “. . . I am forced frequently to
say, in speaking of you, ‘C’est mon homme!.’ ”6 In the spring of 1891,
Flournoy published a most favorable review of Principles in the
Journal de Genève, and James assured him in a letter on March 31,
1891 that Flournoy “had better than anyone else caught the ‘point of
view’ of my lengthy pages.” Reading Flournoy’s Métaphysique et psy-
chologie (1890)7 James felt the transcontinental affinity even more
deeply. James expressed his hopes that, with each other’s help, “our
‘School’ will prevail!”8
   This “school” was not based only on personal characteristics or
intellectual affinities. James and Flournoy both felt “at home,”9 because
they shared the same mode of thinking, the same intellectual horizon
that was shaped by the Calvinist-Protestant and republican langue.10 It
is not by accident that James calls Switzerland, foremost Geneva, “the
terrestrial paradise” and praises Flournoy as “a citizen of that fortu-
nate republic.” According to James, the worldwide “neurotic fin-de
siècle element” had “comparatively little hold on” Geneva. This was a
compliment to Geneva, but also an inexplicit side attack on Germany,
with its constant prejudices against the United States (31). Nowhere
(at least not in Europe), says James, have the beauty of nature and the
political institutions joined together more harmoniously than in
Switzerland (115). Discussing the intervention of American troops in
Spanish-occupied Cuba, Flournoy wrote to James on December 11,
1898 in the same “spirit” but more explicitly: “. . . on the whole we
[the Swiss, DT] applaud the triumph of a republican and Protestant
nation representing liberty and modern civilization over the old
monarchical and Catholic despotism” (76).

[p. 63] [PDF page 82]

But neither political nor religious topics dominated the discussions
between the two scholars. Their correspondence focused on personal
subjects and, in second place, on the evolving world of academic psy-
chology. Flournoy and James had their own laboratories in their uni-
versities, which very soon began to trouble them both. The enthusiasm
that Wilhelm Wundt’s physiological psychology had been able to
engender in the 1870s was eclipsed by the slow and uninteresting
results. Flournoy talks about “My laboratory, which bores me more
and more” and says that the results “accomplish nothing worthwhile”
(December 30,1892, 17);11 James confirmed that Wundt’s time was
over and that he should be retired (20). In 1895, Flournoy began to
suffer even, because his laboratory was “becoming a fixed, morbid
idea, a real phobia with me” (45). In 1896, James’s judgment was
clear: “The results that come from all this laboratory work seem to me
to grow more and more disappointing and trivial” (61). These lines
were written in the same year that John Dewey’s The Reflex Arc
Concept in Psychology12—based on the laboratory work at the
University of Chicago under the direction of James Roland Angell—
brought to public expression the unsatisfactory results of a mechanistic
and dualistic psychology.


           Psychology, Liberal Reformist Protestantism,
                                          and Evolution
The skepticism against the laboratory work was rooted in religious
convictions—but not in theological questions. The distance that
William James felt can be demonstrated as early as 1879 in his chal-
lenge of Huxley’s mechanistic Darwinism, which Flournoy applauded
in Geneva long before he and James met in Paris for the first time.
Among many other arguments, James cites a strophe of a poem by
Goethe (in German):

                  Nur allein der Mensch
                  Vermag das Unmögliche.
                  Er unterscheidet, wählet und richtet,
                  Er kann dem Augenblick
                  Dauer verleihen.13

    The poem, Das Göttliche (The Divine), was published in 1783 and
was one of the most popular poems of the late eighteenth century. At
first glance, that James would cite a poem about the divinity of

[p. 64] [PDF page 83]

humankind is surprising in the context of a scholar considered to be
an evolutionist. But it is a common error to interpret the intellectual
discussions in the late nineteenth century as similar to the intransigent
debates between creationists and evolutionist today. Finding phenom-
ena like the struggle for existence, natural selection, probabilities, or
adaptation convincing did not necessarily mean that you had no faith
or were unchristian. “True” science was not meant to be opposed to
Christianity, as the history of the universities in the United States
shows.14 Menand says about James: “He was Darwinian, but he was
not a Darwinist. This made him truer to Darwin than most nineteenth-
century evolutionists.”15
   James took a position that was shared by many American intellec-
tuals in the last third of the nineteenth century. It was called liberal,
and liberal meant not caring much about dogmas, such as the idea of
original sin. Theological arguments could not, in their view, add any-
thing to the only important thing, namely, being religious, experiencing
religion, in a Protestant sense. Of course, the theological tensions
between Darwin(ism) and the belief in creation were recognized, but
there were efforts to reconcile them, pragmatically. This pragmatic
handling of questions of dogma was deeply rooted in the liberal
Calvinism of the end of the nineteenth century: Religion is a (social)
fact, and theoretical discussions about it are rather idle.
   “True” life was religious as well as social and political—a deep
Calvinistic conviction—and was therefore not to be understood by
mechanistic methods. That is why both James and Flournoy were
interested in doing psychical research in spiritism, telepathy, and hyp-
nosis, and in working with mediums. Flournoy’s most famous book,
Des Indes à la planète Mars: étude sur un cas de somnambulisme avec
glossolalie (From India to the Planet Mars: A Study of a Case of som-
nambulism: with glossolalia), was published in 1899 and translated
into English as early as 1900, published in Italian in 1905, and in
German in 1914. There were countless new editions and reprints of
the book throughout the twentieth century—the last printing in
English was in 2003 and in French in 1994. Years before this publica-
tion, William James was attending (anonymously) the séances of
medium Mrs. Leonora E. Piper, and he wrote about her in The will to
believe.16 Apparently, James had an agreement with his Cambridge
colleague and psychical researcher Frederic W. H. Myers; they agreed
that when the first of them was dying, he would send news to the other
from the kingdom of the unknown. And indeed, in 1901 James was
waiting, pen and notebook in hand, outside the door of the hotel room

[p. 65] [PDF page 84]

in Rome where Myers lay dying. James’ notebook remained empty, as
Alex Munthe tells us in his immensely popular Story of San Michele.17
Spiritism remained an important topic in the correspondence between
James and Flournoy up to James’s death in 1910.
   Visible life was understood to be as real as religious feelings, and
reflection about psychological facts was called “philosophy.” By 1900,
religion had become James’s central topic. His Varieties in religious
experience18 was translated into French in Switzerland by a friend of
Flournoy’s, Frank Abauzit, and edited in Paris with an introduction by
French philosopher Emile Boutroux as L’expérience religieuse: essai de
psychologie descriptive.19 It is no coincidence that the Faculty of
Theology of the University of Geneva had planned to award James the
honorary degree of “Docteur en Théologie honoris causa” in 190920
or that the 1910 lecture that Flournoy was to hold on William James
was organized by a union of young (Protestant) Christians in Neuchâtel.
Religion was questioned as metaphysical humbug, but not as a real
phenomenon.
   Flournoy wanted to understand religion psychologically, for example,
through scientific methods, starting out from the fact of the diversities
of religious experience in different social contexts.21 Religious psy-
chology, he says, has the advantage over religious philosophy, as it
restrains us from giving any interpretation of what is true—and he
remembers history “where every one believed himself to be the only
judge not only for himself, which would be perfectly legitimate, but
for the others, too.”22 This speaks quite strictly against Catholicism,
against Lutheranism—but not against Protestantism as it is found in
Baptist circles, for instance. What seems to be secular proves to be—on
a quite invisible background—liberal reformist Protestantism. Flournoy
published this 1903 article, Les principes de la psychologie religieuse
(The Principles of Religious Psychology), in the journal Archives de
psychologie, which he and his nineteen-year-younger cousin, Edouard
Claparède, had coedited since 1901. Claparède eventually became a
professor of psychology at the University of Geneva (1908) and
founded the “International Bureau of Education”23 in 1925 together
with Pierre Bovet. Bovet was the author of Le sentiment religieux et la
psychologie de l’enfant (The Religious Feeling and Child-Psychology),24
third of the prominent Genevans in the reception of pragmatism,
Adolphe Ferrière, took the chair of the International Bureau of
Education in 1929 and was later succeeded by his “disciple” Jean
Piaget, whose first writings had also dealt with religious feelings. But
by then, Pragmatism and Dewey had become an essential element of

[p. 66] [PDF page 85]

the intellectual discourse in Geneva. The questions to be examined are
how Pragmatism was understood and, vice versa, what reading of
Pragmatism was able to express what the Genevans were thinking.

Pragmatism and Progressive Education
The issue of the transcontinental discussions was “facts and religion,”
as William James pointed out in his public lectures in Boston and
New York 1906 and 1907, published under the title Pragmatism.
A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking; Popular Lectures of
Philosophy.25 He thus challenged both of the dominant doctrines of
his time, rationalism and empiricism. “My reading is more philosoph-
ical than psychological in these days,” James writes on January 2,
1907 to Flournoy.26 It is as if the Genevans were just waiting for this
philosophical justification of their interest in the American psychology.
Flournoy confirmed that he saw James as the “genuine creator” of
pragmatism, “for the worthy Peirce does not appear to me to have
been more than the starting push” and that without James, Dewey,
and Schiller, neither Bergson nor Boutroux would have been able to
develop their philosophical systems.27 Dewey may have been received
in Geneva earlier, but it is certain that he was introduced in a letter of
January 1, 1904, when James highly recommended Dewey’s Studies in
Logical Theory28 and sent along a copy.29 In a letter of 1907, Flournoy
writes to James: “I have grown more and more deeply into pragma-
tism, and I rejoice immensely to hear you say: ‘je m’y sens tout gagné.’
It is absolutely the only philosophy with no humbug in it, and I am
certain that it is your philosophy.”30 In the field of psychology, prag-
matism seemed to be the tool against causal empiricism, and in the
field of philosophy it was the tool against (German) rationalism or
idealism. Together with Bergson, James believed, his pragmatism
would “converge [history] toward an antirationalistic crystallization.
Qui vivra verra!”31 the context of this mission, James praises Flournoy’s
cousin Edouard Claparède—and at the same time makes an accusation
against German philosophy: “When will the Germans learn that art?”32
    With James’s (re)turn to pragmatism in the early 1900s, the intel-
lectual dispositions between Geneva and Harvard had been adjusted
and clarified to the extent that now, James, Dewey, and his (former)
Chicago colleagues could be received well beyond philosophical
reflections on religious psychology. Pragmatism struck the right note
for the mental dispositions of an old republic, which had demanded
political ethics, virtue, and education ever since Rousseau’s Lettre

[p. 67] [PDF page 86]

à d’Alembert (1758). James’s Talks to teachers appeared in French
translation in Lausanne under the title Causeries pédagogiques in
1907,33 which launched a broad discussion within the field of
education. After having announced the French translation already
in February 1907, in March the Department for Public Education in
Neuchâtel lauded the advantages of James’s psychology for education,
not forgetting to mention the difference between psychology and
education,34 in the Bulletin Mensuel, a newsletter that was distributed
to all school board members, school administrators, and teachers.
A month later, the Lausanne journal L’Educateur gave a brief sum-
mary of the translation,35 and in August, the same journal contained a
short introduction to the philosophy of William James written by his
translator, Louis[-Samuel] Pidoux.36 In 1910, the educational society
of Neuchâtel dedicated its fiftieth anniversary celebrations to James.
Pierre Bovet, since 1903 professor of philosophy in Neuchâtel, dedi-
cated his key note address to James’s psychology: William James
psychologue: l’intérêt de son oeuvre pour des éducateurs.37 Two
years later Bovet was the first director of the “Institut Jean-Jacques
Rousseau”38 in Geneva founded by Edouard Claparède, and in 1920,
he became professor of education at the University of Geneva. Together
with the Genevan sociologist Adolphe Ferrière, Bovet and Claparède
dominated the educational scene in Geneva and made it a worldwide
center of educational discussion.
   What Flournoy came to mean for James, Claparède would—about
ten years later—prove to mean for Dewey. The increasing interest
in Dewey can be reconstructed by examining one of Edouard
Claparède’s best-selling books, Psychologie de l’Enfant et Pédagogie
experimentale.39 The book grew in content between 1905 and 1922
from 76 to 571 pages, and it was republished after World War II
(Claparède died in 1940) in two volumes, from the eleventh edition on
containing also a study by Jean Piaget called La psychologie d’Edouard
Claparède. The book was translated into more than six languages and
appeared in English, based on the fourth French edition, in 1911
(Experimental Pedagogy and the Psychology of the Child; reprinted
1975).40
   The original 1905 edition of Claparède’s book contains one single
reference to James and no references at all to John Dewey, but both
authors become more and more important with each new edition pub-
lished. In 1909 the French journal L’Éducation41 published John
Dewey’s The School and the Social Progress.42 Two years later, in the
introduction to the 1911 fourth edition of Claparède’s Experimental

[p. 68] [PDF page 87]

Pedagogy and the Psychology of the Child (the basis of the German
and English translations), William James is the authority for advocat-
ing the importance of psychology for education, and John Dewey is
the authority for having expressed one of the core problems of educa-
tion, namely, the genetic-functional phenomenon. This replaced the
simple, 1905 conception of an “attractive” education. According to
the pragmatic idea that life means active adjustment to constraints,
the term “functional education” was central in this new edition. In the
eighth edition ten years later in 1920, Dewey is additionally the
authority for child development—based on his texts collected in
The School and Society. Meanwhile, L’Éducation had published
in 1912 the translation of The School and the Life of the Child43 and,
in 1914, Waste in Education.44
   A 1913 volume containing four Dewey texts published under the title
John Dewey. L’école et l’enfant,45 translated by Louis-Samuel Pidoux46
and edited by Claparède, demonstrates the increasing importance of
Dewey in the Genevan discussion. Claparède’s introduction to the
volume, titled La pédagogie de John Dewey,47 may well be the first elab-
orated French study on Dewey, and it proves that almost every paper
that Dewey had published after 1886 had been read in Geneva. The
Dewey quote (cited in English) that heads Claparède’s introduction indi-
cates the quite different interest Claparède had in Dewey than Flournoy
had in James; it represents the core of what was called in Geneva
education nouvelle (new education): “Learning?—Certainly, but living
primarily, and learning through and in relation to this living.”48
   Claparède’s argumentation is interesting. First, he refers to a certain
similarity between G. Stanley Hall, who at this time was much more
famous in Europe than Dewey, and Dewey, whose theory of education
was considered to be “more genetic and dynamic.”49 Listing all the
different areas of Dewey’s research, Claparède hastens to tell his read-
ers that there has always been just one method: “it is pragmatism, of
which Dewey is, together with William James and F. C. S. Schiller, one
of the most brilliant heads.” Claparède cites Flournoy’s definition of
the core of pragmatism, namely, to renounce to the use of decontextu-
alized terms and, instead, to look at real and situated consequences.
Claparède demonstrates how Dewey uses this method in his moral
philosophy, his logic, and his psychology and mentions that it contains
in itself an “educational method.”50
   Most interesting is that Claparède sees in Dewey’s “psychopeda-
gogics” a representation of pragmatism at its best, but he denies any

[p. 69] [PDF page 88]

common destiny with the fortune of pragmatism as a “doctrine,”
which had been the object of raving attacks in Europe ever since the
International Congress of Philosophy in Heidelberg 1908.51 Claparède’s
intention is “pedagogic” insofar as he tries to show his deep convic-
tion in progressive education. Dewey’s education is, as Claparède says
in short, “essentially dynamic” and deeply rooted in life. “Life! Life!
Ah! If we want life, let us place ourselves into life; let us see how the
child is, and where it is heading.”52
   Dewey’s education is, according to Claparède, threefold: genetic,
functional, and social. The genetic aspect is believed to have overcome
the mechanistic and/or analytic-empiric psychology of nineteenth-century
Germany by stressing the dynamics of the child’s self-development.
The focus on the child’s development turns out to be very useful for
practitioners, because it solves the Gordian knot of education: the
relation between the arbitrariness of the child and exterior constraints.
To leave children on their own to “obey” their desires is no education
at all, because the skills and abilities of the child develop only through
mastering obstacles. The functional aspect reinforces the contrast to
the empirical psychology, because it indicates active adaptation to a
situation created by interaction of external circumstances and inner
desires—and this active adjustment is usually neglected in the tradi-
tional schools. And the social aspect, according to Claparède, can in
fact be reduced to the functional aspect.53
   Claparède’s introduction shows that the three dimensions of edu-
cation analyzed were estimated unequally. Claparède’s own book,
Experimental pedagogy (from the fourth edition in 1911),54 proves
that the two first elements, “genetic” and “functional,” were seen in
combination. They are interpreted as one of the core problems of
education, while the “social” aspect is hardly discussed at all. This
“ignoring” of the social dimension accords with the way in which
Dewey’s educational theory was viewed in “isolation” from pragma-
tism. From this, one could easily conclude that the Genevans were not
interested in the social and political part of Dewey’s philosophy of
education, but only in his progressive psycho-pedagogical construc-
tion. But why, then, were James and Dewey so much more highly esti-
mated in Geneva than the well-known German progressive educators?
The reason for this is to be found not so much in explicit concepts or
arguments, but in the same reformist Protestant langue that they
shared, which made the American foreigners seem indigenous in
Geneva.

[p. 70] [PDF page 89]

Reformist and Lutheran Protestantism
It is a remarkable phenomenon that Germany was familiar with James
and Dewey at least as early as the French Swiss were. James was
known as an important psychologist, and Dewey was known—even
earlier than in Geneva—as a reformer of schools: The School and
Social Progress (1899) appeared in German as early as 1903 and The
School and Society in 1905. But when it became obvious that James
and Dewey were strongly interrelated with pragmatism, sympathy
soon waned.55 James’s 1907 volume, Pragmatism. A New Name for
Some Old Ways of Thinking; Popular Lectures of Philosophy, was
published in German only a year later (1908) by Wilhelm Jerusalem.
As the discussions during the Third International Congress of
Philosophy in Heidelberg 1908 show, arguments in favor of pragma-
tism had a very hard standing, because it refuted eternal truths and
metaphysics. Schiller, for instance, argued that truths were always
related to real human life and that the idea of an “independent, super-
natural, eternal, incommutable, unachievable, inapplicable, and use-
less truth” was a childish delusion.56 Later in the discussion he
assessed that this way of looking to truth is useful and leads human
kind to a “progressus in infinitum.” Truth does not have to be true in
the beginning—the likeliness is the utmost certainty we get when
assumptions “stand the test of experience.”57 These positions were
unique and exposed to attacks, and on this background it is almost an
ironic aperçu that the Second International Congress for Philosophy
had been organized by Flournoy and Claparède in Geneva 1904.
They did not attend the Heidelberg congress (neither did James),
and Flournoy remarked in a letter to James of September 20, 1907:
“I have had news of the Congress at Heidelberg only through
[Lorenzo M.] Billia, the philosopher from Turin, who passed through
Geneva . . . He found the Congress very tedious, much too German
and not international; . . . .”58
    The scandal within European, and most of all German, philosophy
was enormous, and it was in this context that Eduard Spranger, pro-
fessor of education and philosophy in Berlin, belittled John Dewey’s
work, which he reduced to education that was merely economic and
technical. He assessed it as vastly inferior to the “latitude of German
education.” For Spranger, Dewey’s work represented—in stark con-
trast to the higher ends woven into the German mind—a despicable
kitchen and handyman utilitarianism that had to be countered by the
“theory of the ideal Bildung.”59 Compared to this militant refutation

[p. 71] [PDF page 90]

of pragmatism in Germany, the “emancipation” of Dewey’s education
from the destiny of pragmatism, as Claparède had written, was a very
careful formulation.
   The harsh rejection of pragmatism in Germany does not yet explain
why James and Dewey found greater acceptance in Geneva than
in Germany, but it indicates a deep difference that I see as religious-
cultural. One of James Hayden Tuft’s recollections of his year of Ph.D.
study at the University of Berlin before coming to the newly founded
University of Chicago (where at his urging Dewey and Mead were
hired away from Michigan in 1894) throws light on this difference:
He describes how when entering the University of Berlin he was required
to state his denomination: “I didn’t think ‘Congregationalist’ would
mean much in Deutschland. Fortunately a friendly German solved the
difficulty by two questions and a syllogism. ‘Are you Jewish?’ ‘No.’
‘Are you Roman Catholic?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then you must be evangelical,’ for
these are the only possibilities.”60 Evangelical, which Tufts had to be,
meant German Lutheran Protestantism, which, according to Dewey,
was the basis of the German philosophical idealism with its dualistic
worldview.61 The German intellectuals of the time were skeptical
about intellectualism and deeply indebted to the dualistic two-world
conception of Luther and indebted politically to the German Reich,
believing in the superiority of the German Volk. This mode of think-
ing necessarily led to deep distrust in conceptions that denied ideas of
eternal truths as well as dualisms, that built on interaction and on
cooperation, and therefore on democracy. Pragmatism had to appear
as a danger and was therefore discredited, under the banner of slo-
gans like “dollar philosophy” or similarly disrespectful terms. Swiss
reformist Protestantism was based on Zwingli (Zurich) and Calvin
(Geneva), and it—transformed by British Protestantism—was domi-
nant in the United States. It is socially and politically very different
from German Lutheran Protestantism, both in its original positions of
the sixteenth century and in its liberal versions around 1900. Tufts and
Dewey were very well aware of that fact; at least it became obvious on
the occasion of World War I and again later in the context of World
War II.

                                            Langue as Homeland
From this perspective, the Genevans’ appreciation of American
psychology and their distancing from German psychology becomes
more understandable. Claparède’s introduction to the French translation

[p. 72] [PDF page 91]

of the four Dewey articles admires Dewey’s psychology as against
German psychology, which he characterizes as “static”62 and criticizes
for dividing up development into analytic elements that have no inter-
relation to each other 63 and as “sterile doctrine.”64 This critique is
very similar to Dewey’s objections in his article Reflex Arc Concept in
Psychology that German psychology, building on the dualism of stim-
ulus and response, was too mechanical, “a patchwork of disjointed
parts.”65 Dewey’s article was first published 1896 in Psychological
Review, together with articles by colleagues from the philosophy
department at the University of Chicago. The articles appeared again
in the same year as offprints in the first issue of Studies from the
Psychological Laboratory: The University of Chicago Contributions
to Philosophy, edited by James Rowland Angell66—a former student
of Dewey at Ann Arbor and son of congregational minister and presi-
dent of Ann Arbor, James B. Angell. The anonymous Introductory
Note (1896) to the issue sets out the purpose of the collection as pre-
senting articles that were all based on experiments that were under-
lined by a certain hypothesis: “This is the conception of consciousness
as an organic unity, with the resulting ideas that the facts are facts of
growth or continuous realization, and are to be interpreted as such. It
is believed that this principle is as important in its bearing upon labo-
ratory work as upon those phases of psychology definitely labeled
genetic: that, in other words, mental phenomena are to be regarded
as continuous changes in an interaction of organisms and environ-
ment. This point of view, of necessity, throws the emphasis upon
activity . . . .”67
   This fundamental way of looking at man’s soul was decisive for the
positive reception in Geneva, and it explains why James and Dewey,
although foreigners, were indigenous. “Organic unity,” “growth or
continuous realization,” “interaction,” “activity” were all attractive
in psychology, education, and politics framed by liberal Calvinism
or secularized Congregationalism. It is no coincidence that George
Herbert Mead, the son of a congregational minister, tried to prove in
a lecture in Ann Arbor the deep truth of the Sermon of the Mount with
the theory of action that he found in James’s Psychology. To recognize
Jesus and therefore the community of interests of all men, Mead
writes, would be neither a question of rationality, nor one of “emotion
in the sense in which we generally perhaps consider love an emotion.
It does not represent a feeling insofar as this is something static but
a state [of] mind prepared for the most absolute, the most perfect
activity—it is the condition of perfect activity.”68 To prove this

[p. 73] [PDF page 92]

statement, Mead cites William James’s Psychology,69 where James had
insisted that emotions were connected to physical activities and there-
fore prior to all attempts to rationalize. Mead concludes that the emo-
tion of love occurs only with activity. Love is the emotion stemming
from the most complete and most absolute activity of humankind:
“I come back to our theme if the principle which Jesus represents is to
be expressed as an emotion. The emotion of love—it can only be as an
action principle—the principle of the most complete and absolute
activity our natures are capable of.” It must have “back of it the
instinctive” actions of the whole social—in other words: religious—
nature and it must have the power of supporting these activities at
once “and without cessation.”70
    It is not a coincidence that the two persons in Geneva who were the
first to feel “at home” in the pragmatist way of thinking, Flournoy and
Claparède, were not only cousins, but that both stemmed originally
from French Huguenot families that left France after the revocation of
the Edict of Nantes in 1695 by Louis XIV. The Protestant view of a
fundamentally active person—as laborer as well as citizen—frames the
background of the Genevan interest in pragmatism. Thus we under-
stand why Claparède points out Dewey’s “primacy of action” in his
introduction in countless variations.71 The aim of education was “self-
realization,” which meant calling “all inner activities.”72 According to
Claparède, Dewey’s psychology built on “mental activity”73 and on
the faculties as “instruments of action,” adapting to circumstances.74
All development is considered to be “genetic,”75 leading to a “unity,”76
so that education could not be different than active, for example,
manual training. Pierre Bovet, in his William James lecture in 1910,
used Herbert Spencer’s terms to adapt it to pragmatism. “Life is the
continuous adjustment of internal relations to external relations,”77and
this adjustment, which can be understood as passive (as it still is in
Germany today), was interpreted by the Genevans—according to
James or Dewey—as activity.78 Whether or not the Genevans had read
Dewey’s entry on Adaptation in Monroe’s Encyclopaedia of Education,
they certainly would have agreed with Dewey’s attempt to warn
against interpretation influenced by Herbert Spencer. According to
Spencer, “adaptation” was reduced to “passive organic beings,” an
assumption that would lead to a “perversion” in educational thinking,
Dewey fears, because it would mean “the accommodation of individ-
uals to the existing type of social polity and customs.” “To avoid this
error,” says Dewey, “it is necessary to realize that adaptation is a case
of control involving the subordination of the environment to the life

[p. 74] [PDF page 93]

functions of individuals.” Adaptation is always active79—it is the
essence of life.
    How important “activity” was to the Genevans can be demon-
strated not only in the way that they received James or Dewey or in the
way that they were “affected” by the American scholars. In addition,
it becomes visible in a public conflict between the two colleagues and
friends, Ferrière and Claparède. The conflict was about the interpreta-
tion of “activity” as the top slogan around 1920: L’école active, the
Activity School. The term had shown up first in 1917 and was in the
core of educational semantics within less than eight years. In 1922,
Adolphe Ferrière published a two-volume book, L’école active, with
many references to James and Dewey, and the combined edition of
1929 shows even a significant increase in these references. Almost
countless articles in journals used the title L’école active to praise the
very core of all progressive education. Albert Chessex, a teacher and
comrade-in-arms of Ferrière, for instance, demanded in the Genevan
journal L’Educateur that every student had to be “active in the broadest
and highest sense of the term.”80
    The same year, Edouard Claparède published an article in the same
journal criticizing the advocates of L’école active, but not, of course,
because he favored anything like a passive school. He argued first
that Ferrière had departed psychology for some metaphysic fields,
arguing with unintelligible slogans such as Bergson’s “élan vital.” The
practitioner will not know what to do with slogans like that, and
when Chessex contents himself with demanding “a broadest and high-
est sense” of activity, the practitioner still is left on his own. Then what
exactly does Chessex mean? The notion “active” is equivocal, Claparède
teaches.81 According to him, we have to differentiate between two dif-
ferent senses of “active.” There is active in the “sense of effectuation”
and active in the “sense of function”.82 Claparède advocates for the
latter: “Activity is always evoked by needs,”83 which is his core idea in
a book he would publish in 1931, L’Education fonctionelle.84 Activity
as a function of adjustment was a Darwinian-Protestant idea that
Claparède had seen in Dewey and Rousseau: “If you want to make
your child active, put him in circumstances that call for a need to fulfill
an action you expect from him.”85 Ferrière, too, when he defended the
slogan L’école active, saw Rousseau and Dewey as his own forerunner:
“If all life is essentially adaptational work, a reaction to the environ-
ment, in other words: activity and labor, so we have to admit that
Dewey across the ocean was the first pioneer for labor in school, not
just for manual labor, but mainly for labor as a whole.”86

[p. 75] [PDF page 94]

Reception as Activity
The slight relativization of Dewey’s pioneer work that one can read in
Ferrière’s phrase above is no coincidence. It relates to the self-confident
Genevans’ own ambitions in general, but to Ferrière’s in particular.
Behind all the recognition of James or Dewey, we find little modesty in
the arguments. The Genevans believed that they were fulfilling the
program of a “science of education” that had been announced by the
eminent French educationalist Gabriel Compayré in 1879 and 1881,
urging that history embodies all good ideas of education—French his-
tory in the main, of course—and that all that was needed now was the
evaluation of those ideas by a pedagogical psychology. This program
had been highly attractive to the Genevans,87 only they switched
around the chronology somewhat. They did not evaluate historical
ideas with the means of modern psychology (which would have hardly
been possible anyhow); instead, they constructed a history of their
own pedagogical psychology. Thus, the argumentation architecture of
most of the Genevan books was similar. The books usually began with
a historical look at comparable enterprises in the past in order to rein-
force their own concerns and ideas, and the more renowned the edu-
cational “predecessors” were, the better: Rousseau and Dewey were
merely ideal witnesses of their own ambitions. Ferrière was just a bit
more crass in expressing his pride than his colleagues when he asked
Dewey, who had stayed in the French part of Switzerland in 1914, in
a letter (in French) whether he was the author of The School of Society
having been published in French under the title L’école et l’enfant
(School and the Child).88 If this were the case, Ferrière writes, he
would be delighted to welcome Dewey to Geneva, his own birthplace.
And while he assures Dewey that there were “few men with whom
I share so completely a philosophical and pedagogical ideal,” he names
some of his own articles that cited Dewey and invites Dewey to a talk
that he would hold in Geneva.89 A similar strategy is found in his book
L’école active. After having described the ideas of Dewey, Decroly, and
Lighthart (the Dutch “Deweyan”), Ferrière writes: “I, myself, have
also—in absolutely autonomous way—taken about the same paths as
John Dewey, Decroly, Jan Lighthart, and Lay. Here you find along
general lines what I have been doing in practice.”90 How little Ferrière
in particular really studied Dewey becomes apparent in his comment
on Dewey’s Democracy and Education in L’Éducation. Ferrière holds
that Democracy and Education had been published only in 1923.91
Limiting himself to “collecting” the best ideas that Dewey’s book

[p. 76] [PDF page 95]

contains, Ferrière does little more than point out those elements that
support him, for example, his own doctrine. The word “active” or
“activity” appears at least fifteen times in his seven-page-long com-
ment. Of course, Ferrière sees in Dewey the “spiritual descendent” of
Rousseau as well as the exponent of European progressive education
“across the ocean.” On the other hand, he does not mention any of
Dewey’s critique of Rousseau, nor do we find any hint of Dewey’s idea
of active adaptation that changes the circumstances, itself causing
new constraints. Ferrière ignores the fundamental problem that Dewey
fights against, the dualisms in both philosophy and society. When
Dewey describes that in democracy the aim of “culture” emanates
from education beyond the two false dualistic alternative aims of
“social efficiency” and “something purely ‘inner’,”92 Ferrière simpli-
fies the problem in his psycho-pedagogical view. He redivides aim and
process: “In a democracy . . . we have to cultivate the child’s faculty of
joining voluntarily and completing the collective activities within the
division of labor. This is not possible without a strong culture.”93
   Indeed, the deep confidence in the psychological basis of education
and the interpretation of psychology as psychologic eclipsed to a
certain extent the social and political dimension of Protestantism,
much more so than we find in Dewey. When Ferrière writes that
Dewey was “a philosopher rather than a psychologist, but a knowl-
edgeable adept of childhood,”94 he expresses the differences quite
well. Dewey’s writings about (new) education that were received were
closely connected with his early phase in Chicago and his Laboratory
School—with the exception of Schools of Tomorrow, which he
jointly wrote with his daughter Evelyn in 1915.95 This selection of arti-
cles by the Genevans indicates the selection of perception within these
articles. Dewey’s considerations of contingency in life and the danger
that democracy faced in a capitalistic society are not really appreciated
in Geneva—and a book like Dewey’s The Public and Its Problem
(1927) would have hardly been liked in Geneva.
   This basically psychological fundament of educational thinking
steered the reception of pragmatism in Geneva—on the basis of polit-
ical and psychological reformist Protestantism that they were little
aware of. The difference can be seen, for example, in the way that
Dewey and Claparède responded to the political situation at the end of
the 1930s. Dewey was defending American democracy by referring
back to political virtues as portrayed by Thomas Jefferson in Freedom
and Culture (1938) and the Living Thoughts of Thomas Jefferson
(1940). Claparède, in contrast, complained shortly before his death of

[p. 77] [PDF page 96]

the loss [vacation] of individual righteousness in a talk, titled Morality
and Politics, that he held before the circle called “Friends of Protestant
Thinking” in Geneva and La Chaux-de-Fonds (canton of Neuchâtel).
Here again, education becomes the means of reinstituting these virtues.
But in a naive reading of Rousseau, Claparède says: “Education means
to form ‘the human,’ in other words the person, to lead him to the
spiritual unity characterized by the fact that the ‘higher self’ is capable
of perceiving and thwarting the traps stemming from the ‘lower
self.’96 Politically, Claparède was quite at a loss, as can be expected of
someone who had a lifelong dedication to interpreting everything
according to the psychological point of view and progressive educa-
tion. He thus shared the langue with pragmatism, using it when for-
mulating his paroles, but he did not engage in conscious reflective
thinking about it.
   But this is not the end of the story. An astonishing number of
books and articles by the Genevans were translated into other languages,
such as Esperanto, Romanian, Polish, English, German, Portuguese,
and, by far most of all, in Italian and Spanish. It is obvious that the
Genevans were widely read and appreciated, particularly in Catholic
countries with rather rudimentary democratic experience (including
South America). For example, Edouard Claparède’s Experimental
Pedagogy and the Psychology of the Child was already translated in
1910 into Spanish and reprinted in 1911, 1927, and 1930, and it
appeared in Italian in 1934, 1936, 1971, and 1973. His How to
Diagnose the Aptitude of Students was printed in Spanish in 1924,
1927, 1933, 1959, 1961, 1964, 1967, and 1972. Pierre Bovet’s Feeling
of Oughtness, which appeared in English in 1912, was published in
Spanish in 1922, 1925, 1927 (twice), 1928, and 1934. Ferrière’s
Activity School—printed in English 1928—was published in Spanish
in 1927 and 1932 and in Italian in 1939, 1947, and 1958; his
Spontaneous Activity of the Child was translated into Italian only and
published there in 1947, 1951, and 1970.
   Whether or not the translations of the Genevan books and articles
stimulated scholars in the Catholic countries to read primary literature
and how this “steered” their active reception of Dewey or James is a
question that cannot be answered in this book. “Transfer” is—and
here pragmatism proved to be right—unpredictable, because it depends
on the interests and activity of the receptors. The principle of activity
is not logic—neither psychologic nor teleologic—but contingency.
But paradoxically, the international attractiveness of the Genevan
publications was based in the psychologic foundation of education

[p. 78] [PDF page 97]

that promised to fabricate a “modern self” able to master both the
opportunities and challenges of modern industry and democracy. The
reduction of the active citizen to the psychological activity of child was
in its core still deeply Protestant, but this was difficult to recognize. To
most of the educators in the world, who feared the contingent modern
developments, these roots remained unrecognizable because of the
attractive promise of the comforting vision of well-ordered child devel-
opment. They were not aware that their own reception was active and
contingent, too, and that their conception of the “modern self” could
well differ from the vision of the ideal (and idealized) Genevan citizen.
The resulting Catholic and (at best) apolitical active reading of Dewey
or James or Claparède or Ferrière in Italy or Spain is neither only a sin,
nor only degeneration, but perhaps just a bit awkward. But this
reception has something to do not only with questions of theoretical
compatibility across contexts, but also with the exalted educational
semantics that, among others, all four authors were themselves reinforc-
ing around 1900 (and after 1900, too). Maybe it is not a coincidence
that the older Dewey got, the less he wrote about education.


Notes
1. I would like to thank Ruth Villiger, Sylvia Bürkler, and Markus Christen, who
   helped me find the sources.
2. William James, “Are we automata?” Mind: A Quarterly Review of Psychology
   and Philosophy 4, no. 1 (1879): 1–22.
3. William James, “What is an emotion?” Mind. A Quarterly Review of
   Psychology and Philosophy 9, no. 2 (1884): 188–205.
4. Robert C. Le Clair, ed., The Letters of William James and Théodore Flournoy
   (Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press, 1966), xiiiff.
5. William James, Principles in Psychology (New York: Holt, 1890).
6. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 6.
7. Flournoy’s booklet resulted out of studies on the relation between the soul and
   the body. His aim is to develop a psychology that has “the character of a
   science” Théodore Flournoy, Métaphysique et psychologie (Genève: Georg,
   1890), V. The bases of this psychology are first of all the “laws” behind the
   so-called psychophysiological parallel and, second, the effort to emancipate
   psychology from the field of metaphysical philosophy. Flournoy legitimated this
   effort by the “empiric fact” that “psychophysiological parallelism” was dualis-
   tic. According to tests in his laboratory, there was no mutual relation between
   psychological facts and physiological events—they are just “simultaneous”
   (17). From the point of view of an experimental science, the psychophysical
   parallel is a given thing, inexplicable, an enigma, that seduces people into meta-
   physics (20). Flournoy insists that all metaphysical explanations and systems are
   fruitless attempts (51).

[p. 79] [PDF page 98]

8. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 7f. A photograph of Flournoy
    and James in Geneva on May 18, 1905 is available on the Internet at:
    http://www.emory.edu/EDUCATION/mfp/jamesn.html.
 9. “My dear Flournoy, there is hardly a human being with whom I feel as much
    sympathy of aims and character, or feel as much ‘at home’ as I do with you”
    (August 30, 1896); Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 54.
10. The notion of republican langue does not refer to contemporary political
    parties in the Western world, be it in France, Germany, or the United States.
    Republicanism was a political mode of thinking, a language that was domi-
    nant in specific epochs of the Roman Empire, in some of the late medieval
    cities in Italy such as Florence, in Switzerland since its foundations, in England
    during the Commonwealth in the middle of the seventeenth century, and in the
    United States since the discussions in 1776. It is usually an anticapitalistic and
    pro-agrarian political ideal, as we find, e.g., in the writings of Thomas
    Jefferson. Liberty as the citizens’ right to self-government is the core of this
    way of thinking, including the virtues that these rights presuppose: unselfish-
    ness, non-corruption, love of liberty, and love of the law. A (broadly discussed
    and often challenged) history of republicanism from Florence to the discus-
    sions of independence is provided by Pocock, see: J. G. A. Pocock, The
    Machiavellian Moment. Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic
    Republican Tradition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975); an analy-
    sis of the discussions in and after 1776 in the United States by Woods, see
    Gordon S.Woods, The Creation of the American republic 1776–1787 (Chapel
    Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1969). Although this political mode
    of thinking builds on virtue(s), republicanism has hardly been discussed in
    education, regardless of the fact that Rousseau and Pestalozzi were committed
    republican citizens: The dominant historiography of education has success-
    fully suppressed this tradition, see Daniel Tröhler, “The establishment of the
    standard history of philosophy of education and suppressed traditions of edu-
    cation,” Studies in Philosophy of Education 23, no. 5/6 (2004), 367–391. The
    influence of the mixture of Protestant and republican thinking in the United
    States in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries on school politics is described
    in David Tyack and Elisabeth Hansot, Managers of Virtue. Public School
    Leadership in America, 1820–1980 (New York: Basic Books, 1982).
11. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy.
12. John Dewey, “The reflex arc concept in psychology,” in Studies from the
    Psychological Laboratory: The University of Chicago Contributions to
    Philosophy 1, no. 1, ed. James R. Angell (Chicago: Chicago University Press,
    1898).
13. Only the human being / is able to do the impossible. / He distinguishes,
    chooses, and judges, / and he can give permanence / to the moment (freely
    translated here), See, William James, Are we automata? 15.
14. Dorothy Ross, The Origins of American Social Science (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 1991); George M. Marsden and Bradley J.
    Longfield, The Secularization of the Academy (New York: Oxford University
    Press, 1992).
15. Louis Menand, The Metaphysical Club. A Story of Ideas in America
    (New York: Farrar, Straus und Giroux, 2001), 141.

[p. 80] [PDF page 99]

16. William James, The will to believe, and other essays in popular philosophy
    (New York: Longmans, 1897), 319.
17. Axel Munthe, Story of San Michele (New York: Dutton, 1929), 372–373.
18. William James, Varieties in Religious Experience (New York: Longmans,
    1902).
19. William James, L’expérience religieuse: essai de psychologie descriptive, trans.
    Frank Abauzit (Genève: Kündig, 1906).
20. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 213.
21. Théodore Flournoy, “Les principes de la psychologie religieuse,” Archives de
    Psychologie 2, no. 1 (1903): 43.
22. Théodore Flournoy, “Les principes,” 38.
23. This institute is now a part of UNESCO. See: http://www.ibe.unesco.org/
    AboutIBE/hise.htm.
24. Pierre Bovet, Le sentiment religieux et la psychologie de l’enfant (Neuchâtel:
    Delachaux & Niestlé, 1925).
25. William James, Pragmatism. A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking;
    Popular Lectures of Philosophy (New York: Longmans, 1907).
26. “I am all aflame with it [Pragmatism, DT],” and “I want to make you all
    enthusiastic converts to ‘pragmatism’ ” (James to Flournoy, January 2, 1907;
    Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 181).
27. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 193–194.
28. John Dewey, Studies in Logical Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1903).
29. Dewey’s book, by the way, was dedicated to William James, who was not
    insusceptible to vanity and reacted quickly by publishing a short article, The
    Chicago School, in Psychological Bulletin in 1904, see William James, “The
    Chicago School,” Psychological Bulletin 1 (1904):1–5. James praised Dewey
    as the head of this innovative school, just as Dewey was about to leave
    Chicago for Columbia, see Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 152.
30. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 187.
31. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 205.
32. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 217.
33. A German translation had been published in Germany already in 1900, and
    it was published in Italian as early as 1903. See William James, Talks to
    teachers on Psychology and to Students on some life ideals (New York:
    Longmans, 1899); William James, Causeries pédagogiques (Lausanne:
    Payot, 1907).
34. H. Blaser, “Les Causeries pédagogiques de William James,” Bulletin mensuel
    du Département de l’Instruction publique 9, no. 3 (1907): 21–25.
35. M. Métral, “Résumé des ‘Causeries pédagogiques’ de W. James,” L’Éducateur
    43, no. 16 (1907): 260–261.
36. Louis[-Samuel], Pidoux, “Le philosophe William James,” L’Éducateur 43,
    no. 31–32 (1907): 485–487.
37. Pierre Bovet, “William James psychologue—L’intérêt de son œuvre pour des
    éducateurs,” Bulletin mensuel du Département de l’Instruction publique 12,
    no. 10 (1907): 115–132.

[p. 81] [PDF page 100]

38. Today the institute is a part of the University of Geneva. See: http://
    www. unige.ch/rousseau/welcome.html.
39. Edouard Claparède, Psychologie de l’Enfant et Pédagogie experimentale
    (Genève: Kündig, 1905).
40. The very same fourth French edition was the basis of the German translation
    in 1911. See Edouard Claparède, Psychologie de l’Enfant et Pédagogie
    experimentale, 4th ed. (Genève: Kündig, 1911); Adolphe Ferrière, L’école
    active, Vols. 1 and 2 (Genève: Forum, 1922).
41. The editor of this journal, Georges Bertier, was the director of the experimental
    school L’École des Roches, and in the same year he translated William James’s
    Principles. He advocated a secular state and was active in the Protestant dom-
    inated French Boy Scouts movement that today call itself l’Unité scoute
    protestante Jean Calvin (Protestant Scouts Unity Jean Calvin).
42. John Dewey, “L’école et le progrès social,” L’Education 1: 198–217.
43. John Dewey, “L’école et la vie de l’enfant,” L’Education 3: 315–327.
44. John Dewey, “Le gaspillage en éducation,” L’Education 6: 8–25
45. These were: L’intérêt et l’effort (Interest and Effort in Education, 1913);
    L’enfant et les programmes d’études (The Child and the Curriculum, 1902);
    Le but de l’histoire dans l’instruction primaire (The Aim of History in
    Elementary Education, 1902); Morale et éducation (Moral Principles in
    Education, 1909).
46. Louis-Samuel Pidoux had already translated William James’s Will to believe
    under the title La volonté de croire, which was edited in Saint-Blaise near
    Neuchâtel 1908, and Talks to teachers on psychology and to students on some
    life ideals, which was edited in 1907 in Lausanne and published under the title
    Causeries pédagogiques (see Louis[-Samuel] Pidoux, Le philosophe).
47. Edouard Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” in John Dewey. L’école
    et l’enfant (Neuchâtel: Delachaux & Niestlé 1913).
48. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 5.
49. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 6.
50. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 13.
51. Theodor Elsenhans, ed., Bericht über den 3. Internationalen Kongress für
    Philosophie zu Heidelberg, 1.–5. Sept. 1908 (Heidelberg: Winter, 1908).
52. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 14–15.
53. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 33.
54. Claparède, Psychologie de l’Enfant.
55. Philipp Gonon, “Dewey und James in Deutschland—Verpasste
    Rezeptionschancen des amerikanischen Pragmatismus,” in der deutschen
    Pädagogik. Pragmatismus und Pädagogik. Gesellschaftstheorie und die
    Entwicklung der (Sozial-)Pädagogik, ed. Daniel Tröhler and Jürgen Oelkers
    (Zurich: Pestalozzianum, 2005).
56. F. C. S. Schiller, Der rationalistische Wahrheitsbegriff. Bericht über den 3.
    Internationalen Kongress für Philosophie zu Heidelberg, 1.–5. Sept. 1908
    (Heidelberg: Winter, 1909), 711.
57. F. C. S. Schiller, Schlusswort. Bericht über den 3. Internationalen Kongress für
    Philosophie zu Heidelberg, 1.–5. Sept. 1908 (Heidelberg: Winter, 1901), 739.

[p. 82] [PDF page 101]

58. Le Clair, The Letters of James and Flournoy, 202. One of the most striking
    examples of foreignness between the Germans and pragmatism can be found
    in a rather unknown text, namely, in the introduction to the German transla-
    tion of the book La philosphie de William James, which was published by
    Flournoy a year after James death in 1910 in French (in 1917, it appeared in
    English translation in New York); (See Théodore Flournoy, The Philosophy of
    William James, trans. Edwin B. Holt and William James, Jr. [New York: Holt,
    1917]). In this introduction, the German editor Arthur Baumgarten, who had
    studied under Flournoy in Geneva, praises James as the greatest philosopher
    after Schopenhauer—but with the severe blemish of a “pragmatistic theory of
    truth”: “Verifying through experience and practical probation are most wor-
    thy indications for the truth of an assumption, but it is not acceptable to iden-
    tify it with truth.” See Arthur Baumgarten, “Einführung,” in Théodore
    Flournoy, Die Philosophie von William James (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr,
    1930), x. Also see: Théodore Flournoy, La philosophie de William James
    (Saint Blaise: Foyer Solidariste, 1911); Théodore Flournoy, Die Philosophie
    von William James.
59. Daniel Tröhler, “The Discourse of German Geisteswissenschaftliche
    Pädagogik—A Contextual Reconstruction,” Paedagogica Historica.
    International Journal of the History of Education 21 (2003): 759–778.
60. James Hayden Tufts, Germany. University of Chicago, Regenstein Library,
    Special Collections, The James H. Tufts Papers, Box 3, Folder 13, n.d.
61. John Dewey, German Philosophy and Politics (New York: Holt, 1915).
62. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 11.
63. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 17.
64. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 21.
65. John Dewey, “The reflex arc concept in psychology,” 39–40.
66. James Rowland Angell, ed. Studies from the Psychological Laboratory:
    The University of Chicago Contributions to Philosophy 1, no. 1 (Chicago:
    Chicago University Press, 1896).
67. James Rowland Angell, ed., “Introductory Note,” in Studies from the
    Psychological Laboratory.
68. George Herbert Mead, [Untitled essay on Jesus, love, and activity] in
    University of Chicago, Regenstein Library, Special Collections, The Mead
    Papers Box 10, Folder 1, 26.
69. William James, Principles in psychology, 449–450.
70. George Herbert Mead, [Untitled essay], 37–38. Punctuation: DT;
    asterisk ⫽ uncertain reading of Mead’s handwriting.
71. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 13.
72. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 15.
73. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 20.
74. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 21.
75. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 16.
76. Claparède, “La pédagogie de John Dewey,” 24.
77. Pierre Bovet, “William James psychologue,” 3.
78. Daniel Hameline, “Profil d’Éducateurs: Édourad Claparède,” Perspectives 26,
    no. 3 (1986): 437–444.

[p. 83] [PDF page 102]

79. John, Dewey, “Adaptation,” in A Cyclopedia of Education, ed. Paul Monroe.
    Vo1. 1, no. 35 (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1911), 35.
80. Albert Chessex, “A propos de l’école active,” L’Éducateur 59, no. 15 (1923):
    241–245.
81. Edouard Claparède, “La psychologie de l’école active,” L’Éducateur 59,
    no. 23 (1923): 371.
82. Claparède, “La psychologie,” 377.
83. Claparède, “La psychologie,” 372.
84. Claparède, L’éducation fonctionelle (Neuchâtel: Delachaux & Niestlé, 1931).
85. Claparède, “La psychologie,” 373.
86. Adolphe Ferrière, Schule der Selbstbetätigung oder Tatschule (Weimar:
    Böhlau, 1928).
87. Nanine Charbonnel, “La pensée pédagogique de Gabriel Compayré: ou la
    longue marche (de l’éducation) vers le moderne,” in Die neue Erziehung.
    Beiträge zur Internationalität der Reformpädagogik, ed. Jürgen Oelkers and
    Fritz Osterwalder (Bern: Peter Lang, 1999).
88. Dewey, “L’école et la vie de l’enfant.”
89. The letter is not only embarrassing because Ferrière is obviously trying to
    display to Dewey his own ingenuity, but also because the articles collected
    in Claparède’s L’école et l’enfant were not identical with the articles in
    The School and Society (see earlier), Adolphe Ferrière, Letter to John Dewey,
    February 5, 1914, Past Masters. The Correspondence John Dewey
    (Charlottesville, VA: InteLex Corporation, 1914).
90. Adolphe Ferrière, Schule der Selbstbetätigung, 226.
91. Adolphe Ferrière, “La démocratie et l’éducation selon John Dewey,”
    L’Education 18, no. 5 (1927): 274.
92. John Dewey, Democracy and Education (New York: The Free Press,
    1916/1944).
93. Adolphe Ferrière, “La démocratie,” 276.
94. Adolphe Ferrière, “La démocratie,” 274.
95. Dewey, “Letter to Evelyn Dewey, August 4, 1913,” Past Masters.
96. Edouard Claparède, Morale et politique ou les vacances de la probité
    (Neuchâtel: Edition de la Baconnière, 1940), 178.
