Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part II: European Spaces: The Northern and Southern Ties
Chapter 4: Dewey in Belgium: A Libation for Modernity? Coping with His Presence and Possible Influence
Tom De Coster; Marc Depaepe; Frank Simon; Angelo Van Gorp
Original print pages 85–109; PDF pages 104–128

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 85] [PDF page 104]

4
                            Dewey in Belgium: A Libation
                                         for Modernity?
               Coping with His Presence and Possible Influence

                          Tom De Coster, Marc Depaepe, Frank Simon,
                                                and Angelo Van Gorp




                                  The Libation Hypothesis as
                                        a Point of Departure
Frans De Hovre (1884–1956), the (anglophile) pioneer of Catholic
pedagogical theory in Flanders, repeatedly1 attributed to the American
philosopher and educator John Dewey (1859–1952) worldwide
renown as well as an impressive impact on the educational world of
the time. But did this presentation of things by De Hovre ever actually
correspond to the reality? When we summarily consider the history of
Belgian education, we observe that any great presence of the non-
Catholic Dewey is probably not so very obvious.2 Even the Catholic
primary school teacher Edward Peeters had to take refuge in pseudo-
nyms and was forced to resign because his interest in the New
Education allegedly gave non-Catholic modernists too loud a voice.3
   Nevertheless, the same New Education gradually became part of
the general pedagogical discourse that integrated to a large extent the
different views of the actors in the educational field, whatever their
political and/or ideological backgrounds might have been. In our view,
this discourse developed in Belgium as an educationalized answer to the
needs of “modern” society as some of us have been able to demonstrate

[p. 86] [PDF page 105]

elsewhere.4 Catholics and non-Catholics (mainly Liberals and, later
on, also Socialists) did not differ in the long run too much from each
other concerning the educational conceptions that had to underpin
their struggle for institutional power in the schools. The first official
curriculum for the primary school dates from 1880, fifty years after
the so-called Belgium Revolution, in which the country gained its
independence. It was of a Liberal cast and honored unity, simplicity,
clarity, and universal applicability as the underlying didactic principles.
The Catholics did not want to challenge these principles, not even
when they returned to power. What counted for both groups, was,
apart from the possible tensions and conflicts about the teaching of
religion, the moral character of the school, in which the Socratic
maxim of the Enlightenment, knowledge is virtue, had to be applied.
The introduction of the working-class children to their place and role
in society took place in response to the imperatives of bourgeois
society—a social order that rested on a class difference; whether it was
created by God or not did not matter. In such a context the formation
of educational theories (and science[s]) that would occur from the late
nineteenth century onward mainly had a legitimizing function.5 For
example: the Liberal program of 1881 for the “normal schools” (the
teacher training of primary school teachers) provided for a discussion
of the masters of the “newer” pedagogy, like Montaigne, Comenius,
Locke, Fénelon, Rousseau, Pestalozzi, and Fröbel. Much more important
than the content element of this educational canon was the prospect of
incalculating a “pedagogically” correct attitude into future teachers.6
This attitude did not change very much during the twentieth century.
As long as the school remained the preferred locus of education, a
monopoly that was not even questioned when one sought to integre-
tate New Education ideas in the 1930s, the responsibility for its
success or failure rested undiminished on the professional competence
of the teacher in pedagogy. The primary school Curriculum of 1936,
which was considered allover the world as being in the strand of
the New Education, stipulated “in addition to the essential science,
there is the wonderful art of education.” Discipline on the basis of the
nature of the child envisioned an orderly school as well as an orderly
society in which there was place for authoritative leadership. Like no
other, the curriculum designers praised the “prudence,” the “wisdom,”
the “pedagogical tact”—all concepts that had developed in the educa-
tional ideology of the end of the nineteenth century—and they realized
that it was easier to formulate these principles than to apply them.

[p. 87] [PDF page 106]

In our view, research about the way in which “Dewey”—as far he
was and is known in Belgium—was used, and possibly abused, must
be framed within this context. As an icon of the New Education, he
served, according to us, as a libation for modernity, that is, as a liba-
tion for a modern school in a modern society. In such a society
“schoolish” life was, in preparation as well as while waiting for “real”
life, diluted to a prestructured entity of well-organized relations and
networks, whereby it gradually took on more and more the character
of an educational island in society, on which pupils were isolated
during a moratorium period. They were forbidden to take part in
“real” life. On the other hand, the society itself became, as some of us
have argued in Order in Progress more and more “schoolish.” Not
only because the role of the school steadily expanded in the society but
also primarily because the late-capitalist and social-democratic social
ordering appeared to want to appropriate itself constantly the schoolish
characteristics of order and authority.
    However, before discussing the “context” of the use, and possible
abuse of Dewey in Belgium we do need empirical evidence (i.e., the
“text”) of his “presence” and possible “influence.” Such studies do not
exist at the moment, nor does, in our view, an adequate and appropriate
methodology to undertake such research.


                  Operationalizing Research Questions
            about Presence and Influence of Dewey into
                                    the Belgian Context
The concept of “presence” has, at least, a double meaning and can be
linked to what traditionally is indicated within the German research cul-
ture as Rezeptionsgeschichte. First, it concerns the material presence of
Dewey’s progressive educational heritage. How were his publications
and translations actually used?7 Second, the term refers to the reception
of Dewey within the educational canon as this is formulated, for exam-
ple, in encyclopedias and in the educational press. The notion of “influ-
ence,” on the other hand, focuses on the incorporation of Dewey in the
educational world. It is a much used but little defined and even less
operationalized category in educational historiography. Moreover, we
cannot concur with the general presentation of “influence” in the his-
tory of education circles as a “chain of ideas” that, apparently, runs
from one author to another.8 Indeed, an idea does not arise in a vacuum.

[p. 88] [PDF page 107]

Therefore we will also try to examine the incorporation of Dewey’s ideas
from the framework of Wirkungsgeschichte. Such an approach proceeds
from clusters and networks developing a pedagogical creed, part of
a universal pedagogical canon, “common speech” and “mutual
interests”—the general pedagogical discourse we had in mind in the
introduction. In other words, in combination with mixtures and assimi-
lations with other factors and ideas, in the nature of the Belgian context,
a compilation developed that can be deemed to be “melting pot.” The
inclusion of Dewey in this (whether or not identified by the mention of his
name in the literature), is, of course, more difficult to discern than mate-
rially demonstrable presence. However, the study of implicit assimilation
traditionally constitutes the core domain of this Wirkungsgeschichte.
    Belgium certainly is an interesting case for such a study.9 First of all,
it is multilingual, an element that, at first glance, can play an important
role in the search for Dewey’s ideas or heritage.10 In Belgium, we can
distinguish at least two “cultures”: the Flemish (i.e., Dutch speaking)
on the one hand and the Walloon (i.e., French speaking) on the other.
The historical dynamics of the two—in the sense of an uncoupling
process from the unitary Belgium—has been traditionally seen from
the Flemish standpoint as an emancipation process. Since this process,
after a long history, has become a reality only since the 1970s, a division
would be to no purpose, since Belgium had previously profiled itself
predominantly as a unitary state. However, we will indicate, where
appropriate, the individual accents given by the constituent regions.
In addition, Belgium is situated within Europe at the crossroads of
several cultures, and—by the multilinguality of the academically
educated—many had access to these cultures (the most obvious being
the French, the English, the Dutch, and the German). Consequently,
Belgium had and has no idea-historical frontiers but was and is taken
up in a “traveling library of ideas,” also and mainly in the area of
education. The relativity of geographical frontiers can also be demon-
strated because the promoters of the heritage of the New Education
and Dewey in their turn having again hastened also in Belgium the
international transfer. Belgian opinion formers had an effect also
beyond the borders of their small kingdom.11 Restriction to Belgian
publications would be senseless since foreign books were often used in
educational higher education. Thus, the Catholic Dutchman, Frater
Sigebertus Rombouts—who, for his work itself, was also greatly
indebted to De Hovre—acquired considerable renown in Flanders for
such things as his handbooks for the history of education.12

[p. 89] [PDF page 108]

But to return to the Belgian situation, one also has to take into
account the political and ideological differences between the Flemish
and Walloon cultures. Flanders had traditionally a predominantly
Catholic cast, which manifested a privileged connection with denomi-
national education. Wallonia, however, underwent the process of sec-
ularization much sooner. It has a primarily non-Catholic majority that
is emphatically influenced by Socialism and is associated with public
education. Thus, we can understand why the protagonists of the edu-
cational mentality in Flanders must be situated not exclusively but still
in large measure within the Catholic world, with De Hovre, for the
first generation, and D’Espallier, a teacher and inspector that became
during the interwar period a university professor of education in
Leuven, for the second period, as exponents. Next to them, of course,
were also representatives of public education (Verheyen, who had a
similar career as D’Espallier, at the State University of Ghent for exam-
ple), authors whom we will treat here as a kind of control group as
regards the reception of Dewey in order to determine the extent to
which their adaptation deviated from that of the Catholic version. In
Wallonia and the French-speaking part of Brussels, where educational
notions had received a rather progressive-liberal coloring from the
past, the main players were ideologically Masons (like Decroly, who
was politically a Liberal) and politically Socialists (Coulon, Clausse).
Frère Léon and Frère Anselme were their Catholic opponents in the
French-language area—but perhaps one might speak here rather of
parrots.
    On the basis of these concepts of “presence” and “influence,” we
wonder about the way in which the activeness—more by implicit than
by explicit assimilation—of “reception and assimilation processes”
precisely functions. Protagonists feverishly sought in Dewey’s works,
as they did with ideas they found in other great thinkers and opinion
makers at home and abroad, elements to defend their “Catholic”
or their “official”-pedagogical practice.13 By pedagogical-didactic
processes of adaptation, filling in, discoloring, didacticization, and
simplification,14 their practice could be legitimized. Indeed, not every-
one who wrote about Dewey had, in fact, read him, let alone under-
stood him. The result in Belgium is that Dewey was taken up as an
indigenous foreigner, a foreigner who was part of one’s own heritage,
in order to serve “the higher purpose.” This finality of pedagogy in
general and of the educational reform following the New Education
principles in particular, is the service for the salvation of the child.

[p. 90] [PDF page 109]

Within the meritocratic project of modernity, the increased pedagogical
action, however, still had to assure “order in the progress.”
    We may ask, for example, the question of what remains of the
complexity of Dewey’s ideas when they have to be learned by rote by
the “consumers” of the learning process. Thus, pedagogical thinkers
were, it is true, traditionally on the program of teacher training and
inspector’s examinations, but the course in the history of education—
in which they were treated—was part of the general pedagogical dis-
course that we outlined above. Further, teachers and educators had
handbooks, but their authors excelled rather in the art of copying. In
the best case, these books are constructed from very summary synthe-
ses on the basis of the author being treated or from data gleaned from
pedagogical opinion makers. These syntheses, too, were always
further reduced, simplified, and didacticized. Thus, for example, we
can point to the severely truncated image of Dewey in Paedagogische
Denkers.15 As an exponent of the American society, he is painted
as the man of the “work school”—naturalist, pragmatist, and
instrumentalist—who gave too much attention to sociology and too
little to religion.
    Of course, on the basis of the limited number of sources we have
consulted for this, no detailed picture can be sketched of the filtering
and dissemination processes that operated on the heritage of Dewey in
our country. What follows is thus only an initial and very rudimentary
attempt to frame all this better in preparation for future research
rather than to map in an encyclopedic manner Dewey’s after-effect.
For this, the preliminary research is completely lacking.16 Indeed, the
processes we have in mind, precisely because of the problem of
sources, are difficult to study. Therefore, we focus primarily on the
heuristic element and try to mark paths for an appropriate analysis of
the problem of reception and Wirkungsgeschichte. For this, we can use
such things as the interchange between “higher” and “lower” peda-
gogy, layers that we have already introduced previously as ordering
categories of the pedagogical mentality.17 For us the pedagogical men-
tality is first of all constructed at the basis, by educational agents, like
authors of educational journals, who set out what education actually
means in practice, thereby limiting the possibility for action. This layer
can be called “lower pedagogy.” In constructing this lower pedagogy,
educational agents constantly reiterate the principles of “higher peda-
gogy,” that is, higher discourse of education that is mostly prophetic.
It relates to the “inspiring” ideas of predecessors (Rousseau, Pestalozzi,
Dewey, etc.) and the academic pedagogy that perpetuates this tradition

[p. 91] [PDF page 110]

(humanities) or attempts (empirically or otherwise) to react against
it. Here, we will try to determine how the Deweyan “progressive”
heritage in “higher” pedagogy was applied as theoretical legitimiza-
tion of what was being done in educational practice. Then, we will
focus on the uses of his “progressive” heritage in “lower” pedagogy
(the educational mentality that governed the dissemination of all kinds
of so-called child-centered innovations). And finally, we will try to say
something about the filtering processes between these two layers of
pedagogical mentality. In sum, attention will be given to the “genera-
tional” influence in the dealing with the heritage from the pedagogical
canon, of which Dewey certainly was a part. Indeed, in this, the
transmission from teacher to student played a decisive role.


                       Works,Translations, and Presence in
                                   the Pedagogical Canon
Those who would want to investigate the presence of works and
translations of Dewey can, first of all, focus on the academic world.
This assumes an orientation to the personal possessions of professors
of pedagogy. What did their libraries look like? Which of Dewey’s
works did they contain? What happened to them later on? It is possi-
ble that the collection was passed on to “successors”—but, as will be
seen further on, that was not obvious—or that it was donated to the
library of the university where the academics worked. This last
possibility would seem to be easier to deal with by the researcher than
the generally catalogued but very disparate archives of professors of
pedagogy, of whom in Belgium there is not even a prosopography.18
Do these institutions have works by Dewey (and, if so, from when)?
Who purchased them or were they donated? To such questions, one
can try to obtain an answer from computerized or handwritten cards.
Aware of the methodological pitfalls that such work involves (as well
as the patience of a saint that would be required), we intend here to
indicate only a few tracks that are relevant to the problem.
   As an example, we refer to the Central Library of the Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, where we could find the most systematic and
complete information. Needless to say, that this institution, till 1968 a
unified castle of academic training of future Catholics, played an
important role in the formation of the Belgian intelligence. The
purchases, gifts, and registers, however, date from after World War II,
a restriction that is the direct result of the burning of the library in

[p. 92] [PDF page 111]

1940. Card files in combination with registration lists and computer-
ized data showed that several works by Dewey found their way to the
Leuven library. A few purchases by university professors such as
the pedagogue Albert Kriekemans cannot hide the fact that the lion’s
share of the works of Dewey were donated to the library. First, there
were the donations from America, which, after World War II, set out
to hasten the reconstruction of Western Europe in general and the
Leuven university library in particular. Second, a considerable portion
of the Dewey collection consists of the donation of the personal library
of Canon De Hovre (in 1955–1956) to the university. In addition, the
donation is striking of the Leuven professor of experimental pedagogy,
Raymond Buyse (four books, in 1977, 1994, and 1997). Consequently,
we can say that what the library has is not the result of systematic
purchasing but is rather dependent on generous donors who had an
eye for Dewey.
   As for the presence of translations, re-editions, and finally also
for the entire collected works, we note that there is absolutely no
“Flemish” translation. The Paedagogische Encyclopaedie, the
Standaard Encyclopedie, and the handbook of Cyriel De Keyser19
mention only the Dutch translation of The School and Society (1929)
by T. J. de Boer in the Netherlands.20 After that, it was not until 1999
before another work by Dewey, Experience and Education by
Gert Biesta and Siebren Miedema21 would be published, again in the
Netherlands. The connection with the Dutch is important for us
because it was precisely these works that constitute the corpus of the
Dutch-language references to Dewey.22 Geographic borders thus form
no adequate limitation, and linguistic borders also have to be taken
into account. This implies that we, if we are to sketch a precise picture
of Dewey’s presence in Belgium, also have to take the situation in the
Netherlands into account.23
   The appearance of the collected works24 was undoubtedly a catalyst
for the further dissemination of Dewey’s publications. In the year 2004,
any self-respecting scientific library is unimaginable without their multi-
color bindings. Before the publication of his opera omnia, the situation
was different in Belgium. Then, only a handful of Dewey’s writings were
available, certainly as regards to his pedagogical works. In addition to
the study of the attention that this extensive work yielded, his death on
June 1, 1952 can also be approached as a possibility for the investigation
of the peaks in the interest for his heritage. Obituaries can do good serv-
ice in this regard for obtaining more insight into this attention, but again
we can only offer this track as a possible route for further research.

[p. 93] [PDF page 112]

The limited number of mentions of Dewey—only twenty-two—in
the index of names of the Bijdragen tot de geschiedenis van het
pedagogisch leven in België, which provides a detailed overview of the
pedagogical press in Belgium up to 1940,25 shows that the reception of
Dewey never scored at the top in the pedagogical periodicals. The
interbellum period accounts for most of these references, fifteen in
total. Depending on the orientation of the journal—for or against
Dewey—he was either listed in a row of reformers or great educators
or under the “worshipers” of experimental science, who, through their
“idolatry” had lost sight of the true God.26 Sometimes, however,
Dewey received a presentation of his life and works out of interest
for renewal, in particular for the so-called active methods or l’école
active.27 We refrain, however, from risky conclusions and speak here
only of an initial indication. Indeed, staff members varied and the editors
of the Bijdragen had made no precise agreements about the approach
of the articles. Therefore, the journals themselves must be examined.
   On the basis of an introduction via the pedagogical encyclopedias,
moreover, we note that this limited supply—which is not surprising—
virtually coincided with what was seen as the “hard core” of his
theory of education. Both the Standaard Encyclopedie (1974), and the
Paedagogische Encyclopaedie (Volume I in 1939, Volume II in 1949)
as well as the Katholieke Encyclopaedie (1951) mention The School and
Society, How We Think, Schools of Tomorrow, and Democracy
and Education as Dewey’s standard works. The syllabi, course texts,
and textbooks of prominent Catholic pedagogues like De Hovre or,
for example, Leuven professors in pedagogy like Nauwelaerts and
De Keyser, end up each time with the same works.28 In 1925, How We
Think became a permanent feature as obligatory examination material
for inspectors of primary education.29 Nauwelaerts also called
attention to My Pedagogic Creed and Experience and Education by
citations in his course text.30

                            Methods for Examining Influence
Where Rezeptionsgeschichte can make relatively easy use of search
strategies with the name “Dewey” in, for example, encyclopedias,
libraries, or the pedagogical press—which will be facilitated once all
these files are electronically accessible—searching in the framework of
Wirkungsgeschichte becomes considerably more difficult. Classic
source research with regard to such questions proceeds from pedagogical
brochures, press, normal school textbooks, handbooks in the series

[p. 94] [PDF page 113]

from the Vlaams Opvoedkundig Tijdschrift, and so on. But actually,
the study of these sources leaves the researcher with an unsatisfying
answer to his or her question. How on earth can one find the “influ-
ence” of Dewey if it has already merged into a larger pedagogical
canon or if his basic ideas have already been processed by others and
are attributed to them? Perhaps, by studying the biographies and
libraries on the educational opinion makers.
   Among the most important disseminators of the pedagogical ideol-
ogy are the inspectors, who were often former teachers. For this rea-
son, their notes and markings in the works through which they came
to know the pedagogical heroes are very interesting.31 That these
markings are then generally made in schoolmasterly red and blue—
the famous two-color pencil served for a couple of decades as an icon of
the “corps”—makes this hunt for the dealing with the pedagogical
heritage of the “great thinkers” all the more fascinating. A telling
example can be found in the copy of the Paedagogische Encyclopedie
that was worked over by the school inspector, Michel Steels.
Underlined passages that also received markings in the margin spring
immediately to the eye, and give an impression of the slogans by which
members of the profession came to be acquainted with Decroly and of
the message that was retained.32 Such assimilation generates the idea
that Dewey’s thoughts must have been very straightforward, consis-
tent, and simple. It would therefore be wise to query such filters more
systematically in future.
   In this same regard, one can, of course, also consider more explicit,
personal testimonies that were written down in letters, memoirs,
diaries, interviews, and so on. Particularly appetizing is, for example,
the travel report of Raymond Buyse, which is preserved in the Leuven
library, about his trip with “Master” Decroly to the United States in
1922. In April of that year, the two Belgian fellows of the Commission
for Relief stayed a few days in New York at Teachers College where
Dewey was a professor at that time. There they met Dewey very
briefly: “At 3 o’clock we [Buyse and Decroly] went to Dewey’s office
to say hello to one of the biggest philosophers in the world. The mood
was cheerful. He was a bit shy, sitting there between a pile of books.”33
It was probably a typical situation, but it also told something about
Dewey’s position regarding his Belgian fans (because that was what
they were). Say “hello,” a brief conversation out of politeness, and
“goodbye.” Decroly and Buyse wanted to talk about educational
methods with Dewey, whom they called “the Master,” but he didn’t
have enough time. Friendly, but firmly he referred his fans to the Park

[p. 95] [PDF page 114]

School. There, they would find what they were looking for!34 But
prudence is called for in the interpretation of the reaction of Dewey.
Elements of which the Belgians were not aware could have been
involved. For example, did Dewey see them as practitioners with whom
a discussion “on an academic level” was not necessary? Or was his
interest in 1922 actually focused more on cultural topics? Or were his
thoughts in China, where he had traveled for two years (1919–1921)?
On the basis of answers to these hypotheses, the filtering into the
published scientific travel report can then be investigated.35
   In our hunt for “influence,” we deal with three categories: clearly
demonstrable traces in the heritage, the sliding of Dewey into the
pedagogical canon, and, finally, the penetration of Dewey.


           Clearly Demonstrable Traces in the Heritage
For the directly demonstrable traces of Dewey’s heritage, we can best
start from the analogy with Ovide Decroly (1871–1932), who, for that
matter, is sometimes called the “European Dewey” in the United
States.36 Decroly was a neurologist, who became a world-famous
Belgian educationalist, a “pioneer” in Progressive Education and a
leading figure in the New Education Fellowship, in particular in the
French-speaking branch of the Fellowship. After World War I, in the
late 1920s, he also had been appointed a professorship in psychology
at the Université Libre de Bruxelles. Already in 1908, Decroly
mentioned Dewey as one of his primary sources of inspiration on the
educational level.37 Is it then surprising that Decroly was the only
Belgian who translated Dewey, the French translation of How We
Think:38 Comment Nous Pensons?39 Moreover, exemplary in the case
of Decroly is the influence of Dewey’s book The School and Society40
in his daily educational praxis. Especially the motto “par la vie, pour
la vie,” the central idea in The School and Society, gives an impression
of such an impact. Indeed, that pedagogical motto could be called
Decroly’s interpretation of this quotation from The School and
Society: “Learning? Certainly, but living primarily, and learning
through and in relation to this living.”41
   The question then arises of which ideas must be attributed to
Dewey and which to Decroly. Did Decroly hinder the identification of
the ideas of Dewey with the person of Dewey? Or, if you have read
Decroly, why read Dewey? Decroly’s case reveals the complexity of
Dewey’s work (his ideas and his language). The translation of How

[p. 96] [PDF page 115]

We Think took about ten years of work, which was not just due to the
war. In his introduction on Comment Nous Pensons as well as in
several other chapters, Decroly pointed out many difficulties.42 This
complexity may have played an important role in the absence of
identification of person and idea. Dewey himself complained that
many of his followers—and especially among educators—either did
not understand his work or garbled it just enough to use it for their
own purposes.43 It seems to us that he hit the nail on the head. Just as,
for example, Darwinistic theories because of their ambiguity found
shelter in the most divergent applications, so, too, Dewey’s texts are
open to several interpretations and are thus easy to implement in
diverse social and ideological contexts. Contemporary commentators
come to the same conclusion, like Richard Hofstadter who said:
“Dewey was hard to read and interpret. He wrote a prose of terrible
vagueness and plasticity.”44 And Martin Dworkin noticed: “Dewey wrote
badly. His style was often opaque, his terminology ambiguous. (. . .)
The problem of his language is inextricable from the problem of his
philosophy, quite apart from the infelicities of his style.” Many of
Dewey’s fans did not get the message, according to Dworkin: “It may
be no compliment to professional educators,” he said, “that they so
easily understood Dewey while philosophers shook their heads.”45
    Paradoxically, the difficulties in complexity that have obstructed the
dissemination may also have facilitated the diffusion of Deweyan ideas.
It was exactly Dewey’s vagueness and plasticity that contributed to the
dissemination of his ideas. From this point of view, complexity has
been a factor that helped the dissemination of Dewey’s ideas. How do
we reconstruct the process that took place? Besides the assumption that
Dewey’s ideas themselves didn’t arise in a social, cultural, or intellec-
tual vacuum (and thus have to be seen as an elaboration of other ideas),
this means in the concrete, that his ideas were absorbed, fitted, assimi-
lated, mixed, and identified with ideas of others. Moreover, they were
filtered and implemented in new contexts apart from the American
context—with their specific idiosyncrasies—without the conservation
of the identification with Dewey. An example is the certain, but diffi-
cult to operationalize influence of The School and Society on Decroly’s
method. Indeed, Decroly used Dewey’s ideas only to the extent that he
could apply them in his own work.46 Dewey was reduced to the
“indigenous foreigner”: he was an alien, a foreigner whose “language
system” Decroly made his own as though he were a native.47
    Ideas from Dewey were not just translated by Decroly but were also
integrated in a set of “New Education ideas.” Dewey became part of

[p. 97] [PDF page 116]

this “melting pot,” his language fitting very well into Decroly’s
missionary, evangelistic, and propagandistic discourse of the first half
of the twentieth century. In the Introduction à l’histoire de l’éducation
by Arnould Clausse, both are even thrust forward as the figureheads
of the école nouvelle, shackled to the slogan “école par la vie, école
pour la vie.”48 The conclusion is that the authenticity problem
between Dewey and Decroly actually is of little importance.49 When
we test this conclusion against textbooks by, for example, Frère Léon,
it is confirmed. Although Dewey belonged in the bibliography to the
classics that everybody had to have read—generally with the label of
progressive scientist—50 Dewey is no longer mentioned in the text: his
name was not important; it was the message that counted.51 The
principle of learning by doing also underwent this transformation.
Although it was generally mentioned in discussions of Dewey, it also
took on its own life within the reformed pedagogical heritage.52

     The Sliding of Dewey into the Pedagogical Canon
This transformation took on the character between the two world
wars of sliding of the reform-pedagogical ideas (“child centered,”
pedocentric, Vom Kinde Aus, etc.)—from Dewey and others—into the
“canon” of pedagogical ideas. The Catholic pedagogue De Hovre
labeled the non-Catholic Dewey as someone whom educators could
not ignore and also cited Dewey in the introduction of his study ’T
Katholicisme: zijn paedagogen, zijn paedagogiek.53 In Daelemans and
Van Hove, it sounds like this: “The principle of the activity has, since
the work of Dewey . . . and others, become generally accepted in
the new education along with other dynamic slogans.”54 We hear the
same sounds also in the French-language publications: “one can say
that it was truly in America with Dewey that this current of functional
psychology and of scientific pedagogy in which we are immersed
today in Belgium took shape in its concrete and positive form.”55 The
integration of the New Education in pedagogical textbooks was, in
other words, a success. From the reform-pedagogical position, too, the
same sounds were made, but authors like D’Espallier expressed mostly
astonishment that Dewey was able to settle in so quickly and so
pervasively. In Nieuwe banen in het onderwijs, he states that it is
“striking that the psychology of James and of that other pragmatist
Dewey . . . penetrated so quickly.” How profound this influence was
is clear from the following example: “Without Dewey’s psychology of
thinking, without his instrumental logic, without his criteria for truth,

[p. 98] [PDF page 117]

the success of the material progress, the act, one can hardly under-
stand the present school reforms from a psychological standpoint.”56
   These New Education elements were introduced, integrated, and
adapted in the quest for a pedocentric Eldorado in order to support
the thesis that pedagogy can save children.57 A few examples, to give
the floor to the opinion makers, can add force to this idea. So Marion
Coulon stated: “For us, it is Dewey, the great American psychologist
and educator who, on the threshold of modern times, first and most
eloquently denounced the aberration of these traditional methods . . .
with the ambition of thus preparing for a social life that would situate
itself ever more under the sign of solidarity and collective effort.”58
Rombouts cites Dewey’s figurative comparison of Dewey’s work
school with the Copernican revolution: “The child will henceforth be
the sun around which the school institutions will turn, the middle
point around which all of the education will be organized.”59 More crit-
ical was Merecy, a state normal-school teacher in Lier, where he
pointed to the lack of “belles lettres and artistic expression” and the
excessive attention to “technical-industrial thinking.”60 To what extent
could this be reconciled with the postulated pedagogical wonderland?
   For all the great ideals, the history of the New Education teaches
primarily that it, too, could not escape the demands of modernity and,
even more, that its ideas had to be of service to this modernity61—in
other words, that Dewey became a libation for modernity. Thus, pre-
cisely as for Decroly, the concept of modernity occupied the first rank
with Dewey, even to the point that Tom Popkewitz correctly calls him
“an international spokesperson for the processes of modernization.”
The image of society that Dewey in School and Society took as the
starting point was the new society, the modern and democratic society
that was related to a particular reform Protestantism that he saw as
the same as American democracy and which demanded far-reaching
social changes. The most important change, which overshadowed and
controlled all the others, was the industrial revolution.62 The social
effects had spread so quickly and so completely around us that Dewey
deemed it inconceivable that education would only bear formal and
superficial traces of it. In Belgium, it was primarily Omer Buyse who
stressed Dewey’s merits on the level of manual labor—travaux
manuels à caractère social. This is understandable from the service
that Dewey thus granted to modernity.63 The fact that in the Belgian
context the concept “society” could have had other coordinates and
connections in constituting the modern was by the educational agents
disseminating the “message” not taken into account.

[p. 99] [PDF page 118]

Other pedagogical opinion makers also spoke in the same sense.
Arnould Clausse agreed with R. Hubert, on the occasion of the
Russian Revolution in 1918, that “the pedagogical revolution responded
to an economic and technological necessity as well as to a political
one.”64 Frère Léon warned the reader in his introduction to Nieuwe
wegen op: proeve van een nieuwe methodiek that the object of his
publication was “to help educators of good will forward, to bring
those who wanted to advance themselves in contact with the new
ideas.”65 Survival of the fittest—advancement under whatever form—
was held before the curious reader as a reward, while Dewey himself
preached general social progress.66 That the principle “order in
progress” remained an important theme is shown by the continuation:
“We will apply these theories to public education in the spirit sketched
above without faltering, without attacking anyone or anything but
with the firm will to improve what is bad.”67 Van Coppenolle stressed
this “order in progress” when he emphasized Dewey’s American
optimism: “I must frankly state that this American pedagogue was
excessively optimistic and much too set against the old school and has
committed many ‘American exaggerations,’ which has already become
proverbial by its frequent occurrence.”68 Thus Dewey, as well as the
reform-pedagogical discourse, became a libation for modernity.
   That the insertion of the New Education into the Catholic camp did
not necessarily constitute a problem was demonstrated by A. Daelemans,
director-general of the Nationaal Secretariaat van Katholiek Onderwijs
(the coordinating body of Catholic education), and Doctor W. Van Hove,
teacher at the secondary Catholic normal school, in their Algemene
Onderwijsleer: “Some philosophical assumptions, with which we do
not necessarily have to agree, were at the foundation of the concep-
tions of these reformers, among others, pragmatism (Dewey).” In their
Algemene Onderwijsmethodiek, they sought points of contact:
“Finally, we find in our philosophie also a principle that points to the
profound unity of body and soul, which together constitute the human
compositum. Thought and action are together the factors of the human
dynamic.” However, he warns: “We have to avoid the excesses of an
exaggerated manualism.”69 Regarding this exaggeration, Rombouts
speaks of Dewey’s one-sidedness.70 All this leads to a sharp distinction,
Dewey, so thought Daelemans and De Hovre, can be applied better
to nature than to man, which also implies that the two can co-exist
provided the terrain is thoroughly marked out and respected.71 Thus
far then the warning of Windey, Preter, and Pelgrims was kept in
mind: “Does not one forget all too often that only the return to the

[p. 100] [PDF page 119]

centuries-old and forever young Christian doctrine of life can save the
society? That only this doctrine can promote a healthy, balanced, and
enduring renewal?” Moreover, these authors rely on the manual of
De Keyser rather than their own reading of Dewey or visits to his
schools.72 Consequently, the Catholic religion took up the necessary
task of guarding “order in progress” with regard to the social edu-
cation of Dewey: “This system tries to develop itself outside of
the Catholic religion. Therefore, it misses firm foundations and
remains a pure experiment that will soon be thrust aside by a still more
modern one.”73
   We are convinced that the study of transformation processes
between higher and lower pedagogy (as noted in the example of
De Keyser) offers insight into the size of the gap between theory and
practice, but even much more in the manner in which the starting
points were interpreted in function of the legitimation of the practice.
There where we have linked the slowness of educational reform to its
insertion into modernity, we also discussed the nature of the filter or
transformation processes. Depaepe admits that the results of pedagog-
ical didactic research “from the beginning of the twentieth century
have been an a posteriori legitimation . . . of modernizing processes”
and that researchers also felt the need to highlight the practical, future
relevance.74 In order to be able to be of service to modernity, sloganiz-
ing language was stripped from the underlying conceptual frameworks
so that it became useful for everyone’s purposes and could be inte-
grated within its own structure. We encounter a striking example in
Daelemans and Van Hove: “Although very many techniques of the
education reformers are highly appreciated by us as important gains,
we cannot concur with an obviously materialistic tendency in some
New Education movements.”75 Arnould Clausse brings up for discussion
the content of the great terms from the higher pedagogy. Thus, for
example, it must be clear what the New Education means by “fulfill-
ment in exploiting that which is fundamental in it,” if not “one falsi-
fies the truly human impact of the Ecole Nouvelle since it is placed at
the service of an ideology that is the very negation of its objectives.”76
The question remains how this process precisely functioned. We give a
number of indications of this below.

Penetration of Dewey
That the child-oriented New Education was able to place itself within
a “meritocratic,” neoliberal educational project of modernity stimulated

[p. 101] [PDF page 120]

the penetration but also detracted from the purity of the principles.
Thus, the 1936 curriculum is generally considered as having been
inspired by the New Education, but still the dilution of the principles
“between the desire and the reality” is obvious. “The meager involve-
ment of the teachers and of the representatives from the educational
milieu in the decision-making process, the instability in the policy
itself, and, not least, the high degree of personal tensions and rivalries
among the policymakers” are important explanations for this gap.77 In
relation to the educational reform proposals around World War II,
Olaf Moens, Frank Simon, and Jeffrey Tyssens came to the conclusion
that the continuity of meritocratically inspired proposals constituted
the theme both before and after World War II.78 Indeed, the great
revolution does not seem to have happened. That science legitimates
also appears from the account of Dominique Grootaers: “the many
references to the human sciences by the protagonists of comprehensive
schooling actually mean a continuation of a concern of the represen-
tatives of the Education nouvelle from the previous two phases,
namely the concern for a scientific basis for pedagogical practices. In
the new approach, the same principles as from the psychology and the
experimental pedagogy of the first half of the twentieth century
regularly return: rationality and efficiency.”79
   Also with regard to the Flemish progressive pedagogical heritage
after the 1960s, the diluted penetration can be linked to an insertion
within the meritocratic, and in fact often neoliberal project of moder-
nity, of which the educational policy amply witnessed since the
1970s.80 Here, one cannot pass by the Onderwijskrant, since this pro-
gressive journal from its outset in 1977 has profiled itself as a critical
forum for the progressive ideas of its own members. First of all, atten-
tion to progressive school models was replaced after awhile by interest
in empirical research and psychological sophistication.With this, it is
easier to legitimize one’s own activities. For example, Onderwijskrant
devoted a complete, albeit concise and critical article to Dewey. In
fact, the article did not deal with Dewey but rather formed the back-
ground for the discussion of the legitimation arguments of construc-
tivists on the basis of Dewey.81 Second, the economic and cultural
selection mechanisms in the alternative schools must be exposed: it is
primarily the cultural elite of Flanders—those who can and will pay
for a school of their own—who find shelter there while other groups
of parents are represented to a much lesser degree. This group is not
driven by a critical-emancipatory reflex to change society but rather
by the hope that their children will acquire the critical skills needed to

[p. 102] [PDF page 121]

do well in the society of tomorrow. These are indications that Dewey
and by extension the New Education in general were thereby so filtered
that they served within the pedagogical melting pot to legitimate a
meritocratic, neoliberal project, although New Education considered
rhetorically paramount the emancipation of the child and with it also
a social-democratic model of society.82


“From here you are on your own”
(De Craene)
Instead of looking back on the foregone sections, we look forward and
encourage further research. With recently acquired research material,
the opportunities for the source research we proposed are central. The
material consists of documentation that the Leuven Center for the
History of Education received on the occasion of the retirement
of Roland Vandenberghe, professor in educational innovation. It is
of inestimable value for studying presence and influence. Even on
the basis of a cursory examination, the documentation, which includes
three studies of Dewey himself, offers a nuanced picture of the
American. Further research should be able to determine whether or
not Vandenberghe had still other works of Dewey and what picture of
Dewey there emerges. Moreover, the study of intergenerational
transfer is also a possibility, for Professor D’Espallier had given his
books to Professor Vandenberghe. The passages marked by
D’Espallier and Vandenberghe would then clarify the filter process.
Carroi states in the introduction to Expérience et éducation that
Dewey goes back to Rousseau and Froebel.83 D’Espallier wrote in that
same introduction “interesting” in the margin—where the text states
“Agreeable and disagreeable lose their meaning; it’s the motivation
that counts”—and so unwittingly offers us an insight into his view of
Dewey. The same applies in Expérimentation en pédagogie by Buyse
with the indication “cfr. Dewey” for the sentence “To have ideas, to
ask oneself questions, to devise hypotheses, to develop theories, to set
up control experiments, to compare results, to draw conclusions—all
this requires a new effort that engages other mental functions.”84
A wealth of opportunities is thus waiting with the object of acquiring
knowledge about the filter processes that occur on the level of the
pedagogical opinion makers.
   In addition, there remains the question of the distance between
the results of our investigation and the actual content of Dewey’s

[p. 103] [PDF page 122]

publications. In this chapter, we have, with the concepts of “presence”
and “influence” as the theme, only examined the reception and assimila-
tion processes as regards the figure of John Dewey in the Belgian context.
On the basis of exemplary source research, we came to the conclusion
that Dewey is present as an “indigenous foreigner” in Belgium in the
pedagogical “melting pot.” Plucked from the “traveling library of ideas”
and filtered through pedagogical opinion makers, the thoughts of this
American philosopher and educator were used—and misused—as a sac-
rifice on the altar of the neoliberal modernity whereby unmistakably a
gulf developed between the original, innovation-oriented ideas of Dewey
and their ready-made application in the renewal-shy environment of
education. So what actually remained of all that rhetoric as soon as the
practitioners, who at most had to learn fragments by heart to earn their
diploma, stood in the classroom? Probably very little at all. This applies
a fortiori for the contemporary situation, for Dewey stands, like all the
other gods of the pedagogical pantheon, hardly at all on the education
menu of the teacher training colleges. In the present successful period of
free-market thought, the neoliberal educational project seems to have
become so self-evident that the average educational worker did not want
to have anything to do with this theory.
    Nevertheless, this does not exclude the desirability of research in the
direction suggested in this chapter. Quite the contrary, for only the crit-
ical unraveling of the high-sounding words that pedagogues of every
sort use to legitimate their agendas, hidden or not, can help in the
search for a more “realistic” expectation with regard to education. And
in this historiography and its nuisance value can be a powerful partner.


Notes
1. For example: Frans De Hovre, Paedagogische wijsbegeerte: een studie in de
   moderne levensbeschouwingen en opvoedingstheorieën, Malmberg’s Paedagogische
   Bibliotheek, Vol. 14 (’s-Hertogenbosch and Antwerp: L.C.G. Malmberg, 1924),
   94; Frans De Hovre and L. Breckx, S.d. Les maîtres de la pédagogie contempo-
   raine (Bruges: Charles Beyaert; Paris: Casterman), 35; Frans De Hovre, ’T
   Katholicisme. Zijn paedagogen. Zijn Paedagogiek. Malmberg’s Paedagogische
   Bibliotheek, Vol. 17 (’s-Hertogenbosch: L.C.G. Malmberg, 1925), XXIV.
2. With regard to the anglophilia in De Hovre, see Marc Depaepe, “Katholische
   und nationalsozialistische Pädagogik in Belgien, 1919–1955. Ihre ambivalente
   Beziehung im Spiegel der ‘Vlaamsch Opvoedkundig Tijdschrift.’ ” Zeitschrift
   für Pädagogik 44, no. 4 (1998): 504–522. In relation to the non-Catholicism
   in Dewey, see Jay Martin, The Education of John Dewey: A Biography
   (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002), 19–25, 147–149, 163–164.

[p. 104] [PDF page 123]

3. Marc Depaepe, Gesplitst of gespleten? De kloof tussen wetenschappelijke en
    praktische kennis in opvoeding en onderwijs (Louvain and Leusden: Acco,
    2002), 37.
 4. Marc Depaepe, De pedagogisering achterna. Aanzet tot een genealogie van de
    pedagogische mentaliteit in de voorbije 250 jaar (Louvain and Amersfoort:
    Acco, 1998); Marc Depaepe, Kristof Dams, Maurits De Vroede, Betty
    Eggermont, Hilde Lauwers, Frank Simon, Roland Vandenberghe and Jef
    Verhoeven, Order in Progress. Everyday Educational Practice in Primary
    Schools: Belgium, 1880–1970, Studia Paedagogica, n.s. 29 (Louvain: Leuven
    University Press, 2000), 13.
 5. Marc Depaepe, “De spanning van verborgen agenda’s. Ontwikkelingen inzake
    het onderwijs in de historische pedagogiek,” Comenius. Wetenschappelijk
    Forum voor Opvoeding, Onderwijs en Cultuur 17, no. 3 (1997):
    200–215.
 6. Marc Depaepe, “The practical and professional relevance of educa-
    tional research and pedagogical knowledge from the perspective of history:
    reflections on the Belgian case in its international background,” European
    Educational Research Journal 1, no. 3 (2002): 360–379. Electronic text
    available at http://www.wwwords.co.uk/eerj/.
 7. Jo Ann Boydston, ed., Guide to the Works of John Dewey (Carbondale and
    Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press; London and Amsterdam:
    Feffer and Simons Inc, 1972).
 8. Susan Semel, F. “Women progressive leaders in the twentieth century: From
    Caroline Pratt and Helen Parkhurst to Lillian Weber and Deborah Meier,”
    Paper presented at the 26th annual meeting of the ISCHE at University of
    Geneva, Geneva, July 14–17, 2004.
 9. Marc Depaepe, Frank Simon, and G. Verbeek, “Vom französischer Dominanz
    zur kulturellen Autonomie. Sprachproblematik und Unterricht im flämischen
    Teil Belgiens (1830–1990),” Für Prof. Dr. Maurits De Vroede, Zeitschrift für
    Pädagogik 40, no. 1 (1994): 97–112.
10. Sol Cohen, Challenging Orthodoxies. Toward a New Cultural History of
    Education (New York: Peter Lang, 1999), 89.
11. See, e.g.: Jaime Caiceo Escudero, “Algunos antecedentes sobre la persencia
    de la escuela neuva en Chile durante el siglo XX,” Paper presented at the
    26th annual meeting of the ISCHE at University of Geneva, Geneva, July 14–17,
    2004; Angelo Van Gorp, “Gedragswetenschap in de steigers. Het psycho-
    pedagogisch vertoog van Ovide Decroly ontmythologiseerd? (1871–1932)”
    (Dissertation, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Louvain, 2003), 1–32, 263–316.
12. Frater Sigebertus Rombouts [Godfried Frans Rombouts], Historiese
    pedagogiek. Grote lijnen der geschiedenis van het opvoedkundig denken en
    doen in doorlopend verband met de kultuurontwikkeling, 4 vols. (Tilburg:
    RK Jongensweeshuis; Amsterdam: RK Boekcentrale; Antwerp: NV Veritas,
    1928); Frater Sigebertus Rombouts [Godfried Frans Rombouts] Leerboek der
    historiese pedagogiek (Tilburg: RK Jongensweeshuis; Amsterdam: RK
    Boekcentrale; Antwerp: NV Veritas, 1928).
13. Depaepe, Gesplitst of gespleten? 16.

[p. 105] [PDF page 124]

14. Depaepe, Gesplitst of gespleten?; Tom De Coster. “Gefilterd verleden: over de
    afstand van wetenschappelijke en schoolse kennis in het geschiedenisonderricht
    in de lagere scholen van het interbellum” (Lic. Thesis, Katholieke Universiteit
    Leuven, Louvain, 2002); Jürgen Schriewer, “Internationalisierung der
    Bildungsforschung und nationale Reflexionstraditionen,” in Science(s) de
    l’éducation 19e–20e siècles. Entre champs professionnels et champs disciplinaires/
    Erziehungswissenschaf & (en) 19.–20. Jahrhundert. Zwischen Profession und
    Disziplin, ed. R. Hofstetter and B. Schneuwly, 507–527. Exploration:
    Education: histoire et pensée (Bern e. a.: Peter Lang, 2002).
15. Frans De Hovre, Paedagogische denkers van onzen tijd. Bloemlezing
    (Antwerp, Brussels, Ghent and Louvain: N.V. Standaard-Boekhandel, 1935),
    13–15, 34.
16. See, e.g.: Jan Baert “De aandacht voor John Dewey in het Belgisch peda-
    gogisch milieu (1920–1940): een eerste verkenning” (Lic. Thesis, Katholieke
    Universiteit Leuven, Louvain, 1982), 194–203.
17. Depaepe et al. Order in Progress, 44.
18. We only know of a licentiate thesis: See Liesje Raemdonck, “De belgische
    academicus tijdens het interbellum. Een veldanalyse van de professoren van de
    faculteit Letteren en Wijsbegeerte van de vrije universiteiten” (Lic. Thesis,
    Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, 1996–1997).
19. Frederik Lilge, “Dewey, John,” in Standaard Encyclopedie voor Opvoeding
    en Onderwijs, Vol. 1, ed. Alfred De Block et al. (Antwerp: Standaard; Hoorn:
    Kinheim, 1974), 392–393; P. A. Hoogwerf, “Dewey, John,” in Paedagogische
    Encyclopaedie, Vol. 1, ed. Jozef E. Verheyen and Rommert Casimir, 350–355
    (Antwerp: De Sikkel, 1939), 354; Victor D’Espallier, “Dewey, John,” in De
    Katholieke Encyclopaedie van Opvoeding en Onderwijs, Vol. 1, ed. Victor
    D’Espallier et al., 458–461 (’s Gravenhage: Pax; Antwerp: ’t Groeit, 1951),
    461; Cyriel De Keyser, Inleiding in de geschiedenis van het Westerse
    vormingswezen (Antwerp: Plantyn, 1958), 440.
20. John Dewey, School en maatschappij, trans. from the English by T. J. de Boer
    (Bekende paedagogen, Groningen and The Hague: J.B. Wolters’ Uitgevers-
    Maatschappij N.V, 1929).
21. John Dewey, Ervaring en opvoeding, trans. from the English by Gert Biesta
    and Siebren Miedema (Houten and Diegem: Bohn Stafleu Van Loghum,
    1999).
22. Coming then in the picture, inter alia, are: G. Wielenga, “Dewey,” in Grote
    denkers over opvoeding, ed. I. Van Der Velde (Groningen: E. P. Noordhoff
    e.a, 1964), 309–336; N. F. Noordam, “John Dewey,” in Onderwijskundigen
    van de twintigste eeuw, ed. Q. L. van der Meer and H. Bergman (Groningen:
    Wolters-Noordhoff, 1975), 15–22; Frater Sigebertus Rombouts [Godfried
    Frans Rombouts], Historische pedagogiek, 7th ed. (Tilburg: Uitgeverij
    Zwijsen, 1958); Louis M. A. N. Van Schalkwijk, De sociale paedagogiek van
    John Dewey en haar filosofiese grondslag. Academisch proefschrift door
    Louis Marthinus Albertus Nicolas van Schalkwijk (Amsterdam: ’t Portiekje,
    1920); Joop W. A. Berding, De participatiepedagogiek van John Dewey:
    opvoeding, ervaring en curriculum (Leiden: DWSO Press, 1999).

[p. 106] [PDF page 125]

23. For a survey of French translations till 1967, see: Gérard Deledalle, L’idée
    d’expérience dans la philosophie de John Dewey, Publications de l’Université
    de Tunis, Faculté des lettres et sciences humaines 6, no. 1 (Paris: Presses
    Universitaires de France, 1967), 538–539.
24. Boydston, Guide to the Works of John Dewey.
25. John Dewey in the index of names of: Maurits De Vroede et al. Bijdragen tot
    de geschiedenis van het pedagogisch leven in België in de 19de en 20ste eeuw.
    Deel I: De periodieken 1817–1878; Deel II: De periodieken: 1878–1895;
    Deel III: De periodieken 1896–1914; Deel IV: De periodieken 1914–1940
    (Louvain: Universitaire Pers, 1974–1987).
26. Maurits De Vroede et al., Bijdragen tot de geschiedenis van het pedagogisch
    leven in België in de 19de en 20ste eeuw. Deel IV: De periodieken 1914–1940
    Eerste stuk (Louvain: Universitaire Pers, 1987), 476.
27. This conclusion is also raised in: Jan Baert, “De aandacht voor John Dewey in
    het Belgisch pedagogisch milieu” (1920–1940), 194–203.
28. Frederik Lilge, “Dewey, John,” 393; P. A. Hoogwerf, “Dewey, John,” 354;
    Victor D’Espallier, “Dewey, John,” 461; Frans De Hovre, Paedagogische
    denkers van onzen tijd. Bloemlezing, 34; Marcel A. Nauwelaerts, Opvoeding
    en onderwijs in het verleden: teksten en documenten. Deel 2. 2d. ed. (Louvain:
    Acco, 1977), 136–140; Cyriel De Keyser, Inleiding in de geschiedenis van het
    Westerse vormingswezen, 440.
29. Ministère des Sciences et des Arts/Ministerie van Kunsten en Wetenschappen,
    Rapport triennal sur la situation de l’instruction primaire en Belgique présenté
    aux Chambres Législatives le 9 mars 1928 par M. M. Vauthier/Verslag over den
    staat van het lager onderwijs in België op 9 maart 1928 aan de Wetgevende
    Kamers aangeboden door den Heer M. Vauthier (Brussels: Ministère des
    Sciences et des Arts/Ministerie van Kunsten en Wetenschappen, 1928), 28.
30. Marcel A. Nauwelaerts, Opvoeding en onderwijs in het verleden, 136–140.
31. For example, about the material and symbolical meaning of the pencil, see:
    Henry Petroski, The Pencil: A History of Design and Circumstance
    (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1993).
32. P. A. Hoogwerf, “Dewey, John,” 351–353.
33. Raymond Buyse, “Voyage d’Etude aux USA” (Diary, Archives of Professors,
    University Archives K.U. Leuven, Central Library, Louvain, 1922).
34. Paraphrased in: Ovide Decroly and Raymond Buyse, “Le rêve entrevu. Une
    journée à ‘Park School” (Buffalo, United States). Pour l’Ere Nouvelle 1, no. 4
    (October 1922): 70.
35. Ovide Decroly and Raymond Buyse, Les applications américaines de la
    psychologie à l’organisation humaine et à l’éducation (Documents
    Pédotechniques, vol. 2.2. Brussels: Lamertin, 1923); About the interpretation of
    Dewey’s reaction: see Jay Martin, The Education of John Dewey: A Biography
    (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002); Robert B. Westbrook, John
    Dewey and American Democracy (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991).
36. Guy Montrose Whipple, ed., The Twenty-Eighth Yearbook of the National
    Society for the Study of Education. Preschool and Parental Education
    (Bloomington, IL: Public School Publishing Company, 1929), 17; Angelo Van
    Gorp, Gedragswetenschap in de steigers, 332.

[p. 107] [PDF page 126]

37. Ovide Decroly, “Le programme d’une école dans la vie,” 362, L’Ecole
    Nationale 7, no. 11 (1908): 323–325; 7, no. 12 (1908): 360–362.
38. John Dewey, How We Think (Boston, New York and Chicago: D.C. Heath
    and Co., 1910).
39. John Dewey, Comment nous pensons, trans. from the English by Ovide
    Decroly (Bibliothèque de Philosophie scientifique. Paris: E. Flammarion,
    1925).
40. John Dewey, The School and Society (Chicago: The University of Chicago
    Press, 1899).
41. John Dewey [The Child and the Curriculum and] The School and Society.
    Introduction by Leonard Carmichael (Chicago and London: The University of
    Chicago Press, 1971); John Dewey, The School and Society, in Dewey on
    Education: Selections, 7th ed, ed. Martin S. Dworkin, Classics in Education,
    Vol. 3 ( New York: Teachers College Press, 1971), 34–88.
42. Dewey, Comment nous pensons, 284; Dewey, How We Think.
43. Dewey, The School and Society, 14.
44. Richard Hofstadter, Anti-Intellectualism in American Life (New York: Alfred A.
    Knopf, 1979), 361.
45. John Dewey [The Child and the Curriculum and] The School and Society,
    13–14.
46. William J. Reese, “The origins of progressive education,” History of
    Education Quarterly 41, no. 1 (2001): 10.
47. Sol Cohen, Challenging Orthodoxies: Toward a New Cultural History of
    Education (New York: Peter Lang, 1999), 89.
48. Arnould Clausse, Introduction à l’histoire de l’éducation (Brussels: Maison
    d’édition A. De Boeck, 1951), 18.
49. Regarding the exchangeability of the ideas of Decroly and Dewey, see: Angelo
    Van Gorp, “Gedragswetenschap in de steigers,” 330–333: Tobie Jonckheere,
    Fragments d’une histoire de l’éducation: quelques noms et quelques faits
    (Brussels: De Boeck, 1958), 227, 247, 249.
50. Cyriel De Keyser, Inleiding in de geschiedenis van het Westerse vormingswezen,
    440; Victor D’Espallier, “Dewey, John,” 458; Frederik Lilge, “Dewey, John,”
    392.
51. For example: Frère Léon [Jules Cyriel Lust], Leçons de psychologie appliquée
    à l’éducation (Paris: Desclée and De Brouwer, 1943).
52. For example: Victor D’Espallier et al., Nieuwe banen in het onderwijs,
    2nd. ed. Vol. 1 (Antwerp, Brussels, Ghent and Louvain: Standaard
    Boekhandel, 1937), 121; Frère Anselme [Joseph D’Haese], Pour enseigner
    mieux—méthodologie, 167, 192, 295.
53. For example: Frans De Hovre, Paedagogische wijsbegeerte, 94.
54. Alfred Daelemans and W. Van Hove, Algemene onderwijsmethodiek,
    (Hoboken: Uitgeverij Plantijn NV, 1954), 65.
55. Marion Coulon, Jeunesse à la dérive, Vol. 5 and 6, Pour un nouveau statut
    général de l’enseignement et du personnel enseignant (Mons: Silène, 1948), 49.
56. Victor D’Espallier et al., Nieuwe banen in het onderwijs, 8.
57. Depaepe, Order in Progress, 11–19; Marc Depaepe, De pedagogisering
    achterna. Depaepe, 13–42; encyclopedias have stressed the contrast between

[p. 108] [PDF page 127]

“old” and “new” education in the discourse of the New Education: Marcel A.
    Nauwelaerts, “Nieuwe-schoolbeweging,” in Standaard Encyclopedie voor
    Opvoeding en Onderwijs, Vol. 4, ed. Alfred De Block et al. (Antwerp:
    Standaard; Hoorn: Kinheim, 1974), 19–20; Rombouts, Frater Sigebertus
    [Godfried Frans Rombouts]. 1951. Nieuwe-Schoolbeweging. In De
    Katholieke Encyclopaedie van Opvoeding en Onderwijs, Vol. 3, ed. Victor
    D’Espallier et al. (’s Gravenhage: Pax; Antwerp: ’t Groeit, 1951), 236–238.
58. Marion Coulon, Jeunesse à la dérive, 90.
59. Rombouts, Frater Sigebertus [Godfried Frans Rombouts], Historiese
    paedagogiek. Grote lijnen der geschiedenis van het opvoedkundig denken en
    doen in doorlopend verband met de kultuurontwikkeling, Vol. 3 (Tilburg: RK
    Jongensweeshuis; Amsterdam: RK Boekcentrale; Antwerp: NV Veritas, 1928),
    249, 265.
60. Renaat Merecy, Historische pedagogiek. Schets van ideeën en werkelijkheden:
    Hellas tot heden (Antwerp: De Sikkel, 1966), 144.
61. Depaepe, Gesplitst of gespleten? 40.
62. Dewey [The Child and the Curriculum and] The School and Society, 9.
63. With regard to Buyse: Raymond Buyse, Méthodes américaines d’éducation
    générale et technique, 3rd. ed. rev. and enlarged. Paris: H. Dunod & E. Pinat,
    1913), 141. With regard to the section: Angelo Van Gorp, “Gedragswetenschap
    in de steigers,” 317–333.
64. Arnould Clausse, La relativité éducationnelle. Esquisse d’une histoire et d’une
    philosophie de l’école (Paris: Fernand Nathan; Brussels: Editions Labor, 1975),
    45; see also: Arnould Clausse, Introduction à l’histoire de l’éducation, 132, 143.
65. Broeder Leon [Jules Cyriel Lust], Nieuwe wegen op. Proeve van een nieuwe
    methodiek, Vol. 1, Algemene methodiek (Brussel: Broeders Maristen, 1937), 6.
66. See e.g.: Clausse, La relativité, 175–176.
67. Broeder Leon [Jules Cyriel Lust], Nieuwe wegen op, 6.
68. Valère Van Coppenolle, De activiteit op school. Bondig historisch overzicht.
    Opvoedkundige Brochurenreeks van de Studiekringen van het Christen
    Onderwijzersverbond, Vol. 12 (Torhout: Pyck, 1939), 52; With regard to
    exaggerations, see: R. Windey, K. De Preter, and M. Pelgrims, Geschiedenis
    van opvoeding en vorming met bloemlezing, 4th ed. (Antwerp: Plantyn,
    1965), 178–179.
69. Alfred Daelemans and W. Van Hove, Algemene Onderwijsleer (Hoboken:
    Uitgeverij Plantijn NV, 1954), 41.
70. Frater Sigebertus Rombouts [Godfried Frans Rombouts], Historiese paeda-
    gogiek. Grote lijnen der geschiedenis van het opvoedkundig denken en doen
    in doorlopend verband met de kultuurontwikkeling, Vol. 4 (Tilburg: RK
    Jongensweeshuis; Amsterdam: RK Boekcentrale; Antwerp: NV Veritas,
    1928), 204.
71. Daelemans and Van Hove, Algemene onderwijsmethodiek, 65–66, 74.
72. Windey et al., Geschiedenis van opvoeding en vorming met bloemlezing,
    178–179.
73. Désiré Pissens, Geschiedenis van onderwijs en opvoeding voor normalisten,
    2nd ed. (Brussels: Vrije Normaalscholen, 1925), 132–133.
74. Depaepe, Order in Progress, 11–17, 249; Depaepe, Gesplitst of gespleten? 9–16.

[p. 109] [PDF page 128]

75. Daelemans and Van Hove, Algemene onderwijsleer, 69.
76. Clausse, La relativité educationnelle, 42–43.
77. Marc Depaepe, Maurits De Vroede, and Frank Simon, “The 1936 curriculum
    reform in Belgian primary education,” Journal of Education Policy 6, no. 4
    (1991): 371.
78. For example, the “école unique” idea of general primary education, a
    forerunner of comprehensive secondary education; see: Olaf Moens, Frank
    Simon, and Jeffrey Tyssens, “De dag van de opvoeders is nu op komst:
    onderwijshervormingsvoorstellen rond de Tweede Wereldoorlog,” in De
    Tweede Wereldoorlog als factor in de onderwijsgeschiedenis/La Seconde
    Guerre mondiale, une étape dans l’histoire de l’enseignement, ed. Marc
    Depaepe and Dirk Martin (Brussels: Navorsings- en Studiecentrum voor de
    Geschiedenis van de Tweede Wereldoorlog/Centre de Recherches et d’Etudes
    Historiques de la Seconde Guerre Mondiale, 1997), 57–58.
79. Dominique Grootaers, “Belgische schoolhervormingen in het licht van de
    ‘Education nouvelle’ (1870–1970),” in Reformpedagogiek in België en
    Nederland, ed. Nelleke Bakker, Pieter Boekholt, Hans Van Crombrugge, Marc
    Depaepe, and Frank Simon, 9–33, Jaarboek voor de geschiedenis van opvoeding
    en onderwijs (Assen: Van Gorcum, 2001), 26–27.
80. For example with the “redefining” of the idea of comprehensive education in
    secondary schools; see: Bregt Henkens, “The rise and decline of comprehen-
    sive education: Key factors in the history of reformed secondary education in
    Belgium,” Paedagogica Historica 40, no. 1 and 2 (2004): 193–209.
81. Raf Feys, “John Dewey: boegbeeld van progressive education,”
    Onderwijskrant 118, November: 18–22.
82. Lieven Viaene, “Kiezen voor een niet traditionele basisschool. Een
    exploratieve studie naar het recruteringsveld van de alternatieve basisscholen
    in Vlaanderen en naar de keuzemotieven van de ouders” (Lic. thesis, Vrije
    Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, 1992); Dirk Dieltjens, “Tussen utopie, rebellie
    en seculaire religie. Een biografisch onderzoek naar belief systems bij emanci-
    patorische onderwijsvernieuwers in de Werkgroep Basisschool van Aktiegroep
    Kritisch Onderwijs” (Lic. thesis, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,
    1990–1991); Tom De Coster, “Wat is er in Vlaanderen met het progressief
    pedagogische erfgoed gebeurd? Inspiratiebronnen en hun filterproces in het
    kader van receptie- en implementatiegeschiedenis van ‘emancipatorische’
    opvoedingsmodellen in de neoliberale context na de jaren 1960,” Paper pre-
    sented at the 7th annual meeting of the Association des Cercles Francophones
    d’Histoire et d’Archéologie de Belgique and the 44th annual meeting of the
    Fédération des Cercles d’Archéologie et d’Histoire de Belgique at University of
    Louvain-la-Neuve, Louvain-la-Neuve, August 26–27, 2004.
83. John Dewey, Expérience et éducation, trans. from the English by M. A. Carroi,
    Educateurs d’hier et d’aujourd’hui (Paris: Editions Bourrelier and Cie, 1947),
    13, 17.
84. Raymond Buyse, L’expérimentation en pédagogie (Brussels: Maurice
    Lamertin, 1935), 122.
