Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part II: European Spaces: The Northern and Southern Ties
Chapter 5: Dewey on Lima or the Social Prosthesis in the Construction of the New Education Discourse in Portugal (1925–1936)
Jorge Ramos do Ó
Original print pages 111–132; PDF pages 130–151

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 111] [PDF page 130]

5
             Dewey on Lima or the Social Prosthesis
          in the Construction of the New Education
                  Discourse in Portugal (1925–1936)

                                                     Jorge Ramos do Ó




                                                      Introduction
This chapter discusses the use of John Dewey in the educational
discourse of Adolfo Lima (1874–1943). Lima was a fundamental ped-
agogue in the reception, structuring, and re-launching of the so-called
New Education in Portugal. His action has been highlighted by the
historiography of education,1 alongside figures such as Faria de
Vasconcelos (1880–1914), Álvaro Viana de Lemos (1881–1972), and
António Sérgio (1883–1969). While these three can take most of the
scientific, philosophical, and organizational credit for the movement,2
it was Adolfo Lima who articulated the reforming ideas to transform
the school landscape. He was a teacher trainer, secondary school-
teacher, and pedagogical director of private and public institutions,
where he implemented innovative educational experiments at the start
of the twentieth century in Portugal. Furthermore, he founded and ran
a pedagogical reflection journal, published a methodology and didac-
tics manual for teachers, and, in addition to a host of essays about
education, even published a pedagogical encyclopaedia.
   Adolfo Lima did much more than merely disseminate the work
of John Dewey in Portugal from the mid-1920s onward. Certainly
without Lima, Dewey would have remained practically unknown in
Portugal for at least the first half of the twentieth century.3 But the

[p. 112] [PDF page 131]

essence of Lima’s work was not this. I argue in this chapter that Dewey
functioned as a reference point that enabled Lima both to structure his
entire educational discourse and to put forward proposals to trans-
form Portuguese schools, which were immediately deemed credible by
the different school authorities.


John Dewey as a Germ and Crystal of
Adolfo Lima’s Pedagogical Discourse
In the formation of Lima’s differentiated thinking, with regard to his
peers in Portugal, Dewey played a decisive role, transforming into the
conceptual personage of Adolfo Lima. His educational ideas only
effectively made global sense when associated with the conceptual land-
scape created by the American philosopher. The expression “conceptual
personage” is used here in the sense that Deleuze and Guattari4 attrib-
uted to a skill of thinking that operates in the fields of immanence of the
author and intervenes in the creation of his concepts. Dewey was there-
fore the “heteronym” and enunciation agent, always complying with
this role of manifesting the “territories” and the “reterritorializations”
of the Portuguese educator.
   John Dewey’s name must also be associated with the emergence
in Portugal of truly innovative organizational solutions that, through
the educational practices implemented by Lima, had a big impact on
the public educational system from the 1930s onward. The historical
construction of national discourses and practices should be under-
stood, as pointed out by Popkewitz,5 in the light of a hybridization
and a symbiosis, in which the foreign hero becomes part of the indige-
nous culture. Dewey did indeed function for Lima as the indigenous
foreigner able to lend his discourse a strong operative force: Lima
claimed educational innovation based on a scientific framework able
to separate the boundaries of reason and non-reason and to construct
social progress. He introduced, and in a certain way became the
unique owner, of the prosthesis of political subjectivation in the peda-
gogical renovation discourse in Portugal. He elaborated in detail on
the topic of the school as a miniature society to project the practical
scenario in which the ideal independent-responsible-free child would
be formed: By only exercising a specific kind of political power, he
would learn to interiorize a set of rules of conduct that will enable
both to promote his spontaneous adaptation to school life and his
ability to self-govern.

[p. 113] [PDF page 132]

Always backed up by Dewey, Lima was also one of those peda-
gogues who argued that the traditional school model would only be
superseded when all the methods and techniques were adapted to the
reality of each child, that is, the child’s innate laws and particular
interests. But it was gradually understood that the core of educational
reforms involved finding an organizational scenario in which the
child’s idiosyncrasy could be transformed into a calculable and gov-
ernable force. The education through measurement advocated by
psycho-pedagogy was recognized as extremely important, but not
entirely sufficient to bring about the sought-after change to the para-
digm. Lima wanted to be seen as the author of an original proposal
when he defended the theory that the traditional school model can
only be supplanted by another that placed the social over the psycho-
logical. Indeed, he believed that the school should not merely understand
and act on the psychological soul. The training of the pupil required
political subjectivation, that is, the reproduction within the school of
political institutions. Therefore, the bulk of his efforts focused on con-
ceiving the school as a project of power in which the principles of a
pedagogy exclusively based on psychology and individual morality
were supplanted by the dynamics of work and civism, always aimed at
social integration. Lima viewed school as an organization completely
indistinct from any other institution developed by the modern state. Its
utopia would derive from the pragmatism of Dewey, as it seemed to
him necessary to invent an organizational formula that merged the
interior and exterior of the child via the child’s social duty and per-
sonal interest. What is fascinating is that in Portugal this dynamic of
self-government of the child interested the authorities, the liberals and
the conservatives alike.

        Criticize the Model of the Faculties of the Soul
Lima included a sentence in the first volume of Metodologia written
by John Dewey. This helps us to begin to understand, at a glance, how
the pedagogical discourse of the Portuguese author attempted to
achieve global intelligibility using the legacy of the American philoso-
pher as his starting point. The sentence reads: “repelling the doctrine
of the faculties of the soul and adopting ‘the functionalist conception,
as corresponding more closely to the complete evolution of the child,’
manifestation of the existence of a psychic state or conscience is in the
interest shown by the child with regard to the quality and quantity of
knowledge or education that he would like to have.”6

[p. 114] [PDF page 133]

This citation legitimizes a notion of frontier in the educational field,
borne out of a new cultural image of childhood. Only the psychic inte-
riority of the pupil was mentioned, affirming that all the work to be
carried out by the school institution depends on the willingness or
desire of the child. Although referring to the processes of integration
into social life, Lima wrote with the certainty of one who was
redesigning an educational metanarrative.
   On several occasions, Lima appropriated from Dewey the expression
“Copernican revolution” to identify the kind of change that should
occur in the educational field. While Copernicus shook the founda-
tions of astronomy by showing that our planet was not at the center of
the universe, one has to recognize in the author of The Child and the
Curriculum the proposal for a deep-rooted and radical inversion of
school values.
   The crux of the change as defined by Dewey is: Where previously
one would read teacher, one should now read pupil. “Today it is
acknowledged as a mistake,” continued Adolfo Lima, “to consider the
master as the centre, around which all school life revolves and is sub-
ordinated”; the new centrality around which all school activity should
gravitate has to be the child. “Blind and absolute” subordination to
the teacher was no longer valid and it is the job of the teacher to adapt
to the demands of the nature of the child, so that, “in going through
the metamorphoses necessary for the expansion of his later life” the
child develops completely “physiologically, aesthetically, mentally and
socially” as “a personality conscious of his duties and rights.”7
   This new centrality would have a big impact on the various foun-
dations of the school system. The new paradigm obviously implied a
frontal refusal of both the current conceptions of childhood and the
traditional school model, which was completely operative at the time.
In general, children continued to be looked upon as “things” without
their own character, and hence adults maintained their complete
omnipotence, selecting for the pupils “the studies and games, books
and toys, occupations, leisure activities and professions.” They con-
tinued to “command, govern, order, admonish, censure and punish.”
“School functioning has been subject to, and still is subject to,”
explained Adolfo Lima in his Pedagogia Sociológica, “the exclusive
conveniences and whims of the teachers.” As such, the timetables,
organization of the classes, the discipline and the distribution of the
service as a whole were still “subordinated to the pure autocratic
arbitration of the commanding adult.” In his opinion the disciplinary-
repressive empire of the “prison-school,” the “barracks-school,” or

[p. 115] [PDF page 134]

the “convent-school” with its “ancient school customs” had not yet
been supplanted.8
    In an obvious contradiction “to the aspirations of modern social
life,” the school institution therefore continued to “pull apart and shred
to pieces for ever all aspects of an individuality,” making the child “an
automaton, a slave, a half-wit, a sheep able to be tamed by the shep-
herd.”9 For Lima, all this “passivity” was fed by the “intellectualism”—
this “abusive and sterile tendency towards an education through
formalist education, without an objective goal.”10 The era of the citizen
and the “social man” had therefore not yet reached the educational
territory.11
    But in the preceding decades and owing to the “development of the
teaching of Psychology and the evolution of societies,” a worldview of
childhood and a rationality of the educational relation began to be
structured that could dethrone centuries-old conceptions and prac-
tices.12 And here Lima’s criticism became less general and was directed
at the prior generation of pedagogues. Obviously, it was the process of
replacing legitimacies, aimed at bringing about the downfall of the
theories of Buisson, Compayré, and Marion, names that had been
associated from the last quarter of the nineteenth century, in the estab-
lishment of Education Sciences as an autonomous disciplinary field of
knowledge.
    These authors, among several others, articulated a pedagogical
discourse based on Philosophy that, although claiming a psy frame-
work, kept intact the idea of the Cartesian–Kantian subject, that is,
absolutely fixed to the universes of reason around the so-called facul-
ties of the soul.13 For them, it was child psychology that would
respond to the need to ascertain the three faculties of “sensibility,”
“will” and “intelligence” because this science acknowledged the diver-
sity of individual characters. Henri Marion provided an appropriate
definition of the discipline: “psychology means science of the soul: the
field of psychology changes according to the way one understands
the soul and according to whether one accepts that there can be a
scientific knowledge of it.”14 Compayré explained: “Pedagogical
action in the field of the faculties of the soul should come as close as
possible to the order of nature. In this way an evolution is favoured
that leads from the concrete to the abstract, from instinctive life to
reflective life; in this way the faculties of the soul gain their own activ-
ity, a dynamism and an energy that will allow them to increasingly
develop by themselves throughout life; therefore, school education can
be successful in all ages through personal education, self-education.”15

[p. 116] [PDF page 135]

A New Pedagogical Legitimacy Based on Psychic
Economy and on the Interest of the Child
Lima returned to his main source to begin to explain arguments of a
scientific nature able to demonstrate the distinct psychological body of
each child. At the helm of the American psychologists was again
Dewey, who internationally was the face against the formal culture
and the doctrine of the faculties. In the words of Lima, Dewey’s
modern psychological science, based on experimentation, was able to
guarantee that thought, reason, or observation could not continue to
be viewed as “uniform powers, existing in themselves, but rather as
multiple paths through which a need could be developed in an action.
They would have to be understood as forms of adaptation that varied
according to the circumstances of each child and the respective
surrounding environment. Lima clarified the sense of change of the
educational paradigm:

  Thinking, says Dewey, “is the power of coordinating the particular
  suggestions that particular things arouse into a group.” The representa-
  tives of this functionalist conception are, however, far from wanting to
  lower education from the spirit to an apprenticeship. They believe just
  the opposite; that it is by constantly connecting mental work to needs,
  to tasks defined so as to arouse the interest of the child, that these habits
  of thinking shall be formed. This will develop in the child, little by little,
  the techniques that become more complicated as he ages, which will
  enable the child to solve problems put before him.16


   John Dewey’s position in today’s philosophical debate is decisive to
scientifically validate the point of view that educational action is only
effective if it is presented as a work of subjectivation borne out of the
subconscious fantasy of the child and then returns to the child in the
organized form of a habitus of his thinking. It is as if the outside/inside
dichotomy disappears in this dynamic of an action on the mental
action, and if the self-consciousness would lead to self-creation.
   According to Lima, contemporary philosophy led to “two orienta-
tions.” One, belonging to the intellectuals, who, “excited by the pro-
gresses of science,” were convinced that it was “exclusively through
science that the human being could obtain certainty.” The other,
belonging to the philosophers that were not “satisfied with science,
demanding more from it than it could give.” This second group did
not belittle science itself, but opposed “scientific exclusivity, the pure

[p. 117] [PDF page 136]

positivists.” Among them, of particular note was “American pragma-
tism” and within this “the instrumentalisation of J. Dewey.” If one
continued to admit that science served to “ensure effective power over
nature,” this second current postulated that it was exactly “at the irra-
tional heart of our being, often even in the subconscious, that we must
search for who we are and what nature is.” Lima continued to criticize
the empire of rationalism, accepting the possibility of a theory that
one reached the public sphere starting from the private space: “the
aspirations of our heart, our most obscure instincts, know far more
than the clarified truths of reason.” True knowledge should be sought
in other places, “in our moral ideas, in our sentimental intuitions.” It
was important that the “cerebral physiology” came into play in the
experimental, and only Psychology, “as an applied science and deter-
minist of the soul,” could reasonably explain states of conscience as
“sensations, desires, commotions, knowledge, reasoning, decisions or
violations.”17
    Therefore, it was based on the “applied” knowledge of the child
that a starting point should be established for the new education. Lima
viewed this question of observation as a permanent task that was
never entirely settled. The pedagogue could not for a single moment
neglect to follow “the various processes of natural development of the
child, to be able to surprise the most beneficial psychological moments
of action for determined kinds of teaching and education.” This task
was extremely delicate because it involved acting on spontaneity and
establishing the criteria of internalization of social practices, far from
any external, rational, and conscious point of support. He explained
his argument in a good deal of detail, dealing with the problem of
childhood attention. This aspect provided him with a good example to
justify his theories. It seemed to him undeniable that the child was, “by
nature, inattentive, distracted, erratic, unable to concentrate for long
on a single subject.” It was necessary to act on this “weak and feeble
will,” so that, with time, he could become “stronger.” A methodology
would therefore have to be adopted that used “the most effective
means” that led the child “to naturally and spontaneously pay full
attention, creating in her/him the habit of applying himself to an activity
continuously and persistently.” Lima asked, “How can I grab the
attention of the child?” and came up with the answer: “By observing his
nature and respecting it.” It was evident that the regulator of education
resided in “the strength, the attention span and the resistance to
tiredness of the child.” The educator would be no more than an attentive
student of the “vital evolution of the child.”18

[p. 118] [PDF page 137]

In these terms any intervention in the educational territory claiming
to be an integrated solution supposed itself to be functional and tech-
nological because it was constantly structured on the interest of the
child. It was indeed the “manifestations of the states of appearance of
energies and the symptoms of the psychic states” that indicated “the
only way forward in the education and teaching of a child.”19
   It is here that Lima transforms himself into an indigenous foreigner
and his discourse leans on an axis constantly attributed to John Dewey:
He puts forth that only through the “centre of interest of each child”
can one achieve, revolve, and let loose his will. Dewey clearly became
the metonymy of the discourse about the possibility of a modern kind
of pedagogy. The Portuguese educator elaborated long theoretical
reflections, always aiming at validating the principle that interest sup-
posed a “reciprocal relation of convenience between the subject and
the object,” or, put more clearly, that interest was the “psychological
form of value.” The concept of interest was applied “both to the
object of interest and the psychic state aroused in the subject by the
presence or idea of an object.” From there, he proposed a complex
taxonomy of interests, based on splits such as surface–depth, form–
substance, or outside–inside, whose dynamics had to be ascertained
in order to overcome these opposites, which always involved acting on
the second element of the pair. Lima believed that this was where, in
the first instance, a battle of the saving of the self was waged, where
affirmation of the conditions of possibility to master oneself was
sought.20
   It would be licit, based on these considerations, to present a law of
the evolution and the succession of interests entirely based on “the
Spencerian idea of progress and perfection, moving normally and
naturally from the primitive homogenous to the perfectible heteroge-
neous (. . .). For Dewey’s school and in line with Spencer’s thinking,”
Lima explained, one had to recognize that the child’s mentality under-
took a series of similar states of development “to the epochs of civili-
sation.” The individual developed fully by going through certain
necessary steps that were interdependent, gradually increasing his level
of interest. And if one could make a parallel between the evolution of
the species and the individual, then it was necessary to discuss, as did
“Dewey’s school,” “adaptation,” and “conformity.” Each of the child’s
states, in its evolutionary line, would correspond to the development
of a certain function or aptitude whose activity causes “pleasure”
because it translated “a need for adaptation” and at the same time
served “as a natural step to other superior activities.” In a word, the

[p. 119] [PDF page 138]

previous interests were “indispensable steps for the existence and
appearance of later interests.” Things happened as if all this effort of
discovery of the mechanisms of subjectivation authorized—and to a
certain extent was even motivated by this strategic goal—the discovery
of a principle of general homogenization. The observation of the suc-
cession of interests suggested the formation of a structure of develop-
ment of the child’s thinking, which could be observed in at least six
aspects, always aiming toward perfection: “(a) from the simple to the
complex; (b) from the concrete to the abstract; (c) from passive recep-
tiveness to spontaneity; (d) from generality to specialization; (e) from
subjectivity to objectivity; (f) from immediateness to mediation in
space and in time.”21 Lima argued that the school had to respect the
succession of these states and adapt its entire organization to them.
   The question of knowledge was presented and developed by Lima,
based on the same topic of the child’s interests. He argued that “the
order of the subjects and knowledge corresponds to the order that
individual interests appear.” He championed the axioms of modern
didactics—interconnection of the various contents of each branch of
knowledge and their gradually increasing levels of complexity—
regarding them as something that should be in perfect harmony with
the “chronological and pedagogical age, the social and geographical
environment of each child.” The expression “active method” began to
become more clear, arguing for an education that was “synthetic,
united, assimilated, based not on the study of the isolated phenomena
but rather on the cosmic phenomena of life”; an education now not
made up of “isolated branches, but methodical units,” of complexes
that represented “a harmonious and organic system,” of actions and
of knowledge with respect to the different areas of knowledge. The
psychological basis of the “active” educational processes led Lima also
to speak of the “association of the states of conscience.” He believed
that all children were “small machines of association” and that edu-
cating them would require nothing more than organizing in them
given “tendencies, associated with one another.”22
   Again, aligning himself directly with Dewey’s thinking—who
argued for the need for “ ‘times’ or ‘moments’ of the associative
process of acquisition of knowledge”—Lima explained that it was not
sufficient to “construct a knowledge or a usable knowledge” and then
“record it in the memory or acquire it through repetition or habit of
past isolated experiences.” This knowledge would be of no practical
use to the learner. For knowledge to become useful, serving to be
implemented and applied, it had to be associated and merged with

[p. 120] [PDF page 139]

other ideas, “constituting a constellation, a system of intellectual
forces.” Knowledge must be able to form “an associated group, a con-
scious system” that established “the unit of individual conscience in its
diversity and in its infinite and kaleidoscopic variety.” The ambition of
the educator here was to, through the association of ideas, feelings,
and sensations, format the human brain, making it more “potent and
progressive” in its function of governing and relaunching individual
existence.23
   As can be seen, Lima took from Dewey an essentially “dynamic”
conception of the psy territory. The author of The Child and the
Curriculum appeared on the contemporary pedagogical scene as some-
one who had “most” furthered the “need to make education genetic.”
This involved no longer educating the child from outside inward, but
rather from inside outward. The child should “train himself and not
be trained, should instruct himself and not be crammed with knowl-
edge built by others, should develop himself.” Likewise, the icon
Dewey proposed an essentially “functional” educational model based
only on the child’s interests. These were always viewed by him as
“symptoms and signs of the deep needs,” of virtualities that tend to
transform themselves into “new functions” and which the educator
should know how to second, placing the child in the most favorable
material circumstances for their emergence. Under this functional
aspect he proposed a pedagogy that aimed to develop the mental
processes in their “vital biological significance, useful for present and
future action.” As if the psychic activities emerged as “tools” destined
to promote external action and to transform individual conduct,
“functional pedagogy does not forget that the child is a living being, in
which one should stimulate the need for action through spontaneous
means that life itself creates.”24


The Modern School: A Microcosm
of all the Methods of Social Life
According to Lima, this derived a third characteristic, which arose “as
the fundamental thesis of J. Dewey: pedagogy is social.” Indeed,
school should accept itself as the first institution that, maintaining and
respecting the natural and idiosyncratic conditions of the human
being, trains the child in all the “practices of social life.” School had
to know how to create this environment. Lima again appropriated
expressions directly from Dewey, which were given the status of

[p. 121] [PDF page 140]

redemption and salvation ideas. The school of the future would
transform into a “miniature community,” into a “society in which the
pupils would collaborate, help one another, carry out works with a
social purpose, as ‘methods of life,’ as ‘centres of scientific curiosity, of
active investigation’ as starting points for the study of all other sub-
jects. Only as such, he concluded, could the most important compo-
nent of the child’s soul be aroused—“the conscience of the value of
work, of its social and human significance!’ ”
   One can see how Lima identified the social as the last level in the
pedagogical thinking of John Dewey, aimed at legitimizing an alterna-
tive school model. The director of the pedagogical journal Educação
Social: Revista de Pedagogia e Sociologia could now talk like the mil-
itant who states that he has the key that enables the transformation of
the most traditional structures of existence. As such, he too was ready
to accept the modern principle that psychological vision should be
associated to the government of men and be intermingled with it, as if
“the sources of private satisfaction and human solidarity could be one
and the same.”25
   Lima began to advocate a model of organization whereby the child
has to be at the center of the school system and that the central goal of
school is to prepare the child for active life. “The only process of
preparing one for life is to live life!” In these terms a school institution
of the new type had to see itself as socially structuring. The model
school would therefore promote a kind of existence that led toward
“upward progress,” that was in constant evolution, “never being the
same thing.” Lima often spoke about the “Social School”—and also
about “Art School,” “Science School,” “Workshop School”—to sum up
the spirit of what his model of the reformed public school would be:
an institution characterized by the plasticity and by the permanent
absorption of the evolution of art, science, and work. He simultane-
ously idealized it as an organ and a laboratory of social life, which
should include in its curriculum “all the social activities borne out of the
needs felt by individuals.” Each lesson should acquire the atmosphere
of a studio, a laboratory, or a workshop. All the didactic materials
would have to be of a technological nature and completely adaptable
to everyday life. The Social School should also be based on “a free, col-
lective and conscious pact” among all its members. “Outside coercion,
violence or force from elders” was to be replaced by “persuasion, con-
viction, the grand principle of human solidarity, by a collective ideal to
be implanted.” Its pedagogical orientation, concluded Lima, would
have to be of an “essential and exclusively sociological nature.”26

[p. 122] [PDF page 141]

He immediately felt the need to return to Dewey, to describe him
this time as the most highly reputed pedagogue on the international
scene, as a messenger and a prophet of the New Discovery of the
Social School. While the philosophy and the general orientation of
the Social School did not belong to him—Lima attributed the origin of
the idea to the French anarchist Paul Robin (1837–1912) who put the
ideal into practice in an orphanage he ran in Cempius, in France,
between 1879 and 1894—there was no doubt that he embraced it
completely, in the mid-1930s, in the figure of the author of Democracy
and Education. Dewey would acquire the guise of the messianic hero:

   The pedagogical solution of the educational problem idealised and
   undertaken by Paul Robin, in Europe, can be seen in America person-
   alised in John Dewey. It is he, living in a less traditionalist country, who
   now manages to propagate the Truth and impose it, not only in his
   country but also to disseminate it as the New Truth, in the name of the
   New World, in the Old World which, full of traditions, did not want to
   accept or understand this same Truth presented, then by Robin!
   Nobody is perfect on earth. A truth never dies. If in a given place or
   moment it is forgotten or does not have instigators and co-operators, in
   another place or moment it appears strong and imposing. This Truth
   has to appear, because it is necessary to correspond to an epoch, to the
   psycho-collective aspirations of a generation—it has to emerge, here or
   there, simultaneously or successively . . ., although this person is no
   more than the simple agent of the collective will! Therefore we can say
   that the Social School is based principally on the social pedagogy of
   John Dewey.27

   Following this line of thought, Lima’s pedagogical discourse began
to converge to the theme of work. He championed work as able to
produce the desired paradigmatic revolution and promote a complete
education of the pupil in a different way. “For the school to be mod-
ern, whereby life is lived, functional, active, social, it has to be of work
through work.” In other words: Education would be carried out
through work drawn up by the educator and entirely in a working
environment. Indeed, only in a context of constant activity can knowl-
edge be acquired and assimilated. The director of the Lisbon Teacher
Training School never abandoned this one certainty.
   Until manual educational works do not become the “basis of the
entire school life of the pupil,” are not effectively “the process of
teaching all the subjects,” do not transform into the “exclusive process
of primary, physiological, hygienic and aesthetic, mental and social

[p. 123] [PDF page 142]

instruction,” it is certain that school will continue to be what it has
always been: “a classical artificial institution, passive, sinister and
gruesomely dead!”28
    It would be necessary to “repeat, time and again,” that the activities
undertaken manually constituted: (i) “a process of acquiring knowledge
through the motor activity,” seen as the “most in line with the psychic
nature of the early years of the human being”; (ii) “a manner of refin-
ing feelings, elevating and fine-tuning the first warnings of human aes-
thetics”; (iii) a practical form of “transplanting social life to school,
conferring it an atmosphere in which the gregarious animal is trans-
formed into a socially conscious and sociable human being.” In man-
ual work, the effort of the child is no longer isolated and becomes
“synergic. It is carried out in association, it is collective, cooperative,
and common to all the pupils. It is, in a word, social, creating solidar-
ity, the foundations of the moral and of justice.” Thus with manual
work, a single school practice enables the accumulation of benefits, both
in the forming of personal identity and with regard to life in society. But,
it is clear that the motor of disciplinary integration is always maintained
in the interior of the subject. No other activity is more in accordance
with the nature of the child and his “centres of interest” than manual
work. This is why Lima viewed it as the “best kind of conditioning of
the child’s physiological, aesthetic, mental and social development.” In
the same vein, the major duty of the reformed school would be to fur-
nish each subject with the conditions to experiment with the respective
“manual aptitudes and to have, on the threshold of manual life, an idea
of the conditions to exercise the most well-known trades.”29
    This positioning served a clear purpose of regulation of economic
life: The aim of maximum profitability would be achieved when one
could place, one by one, the right man in the right place. One therefore
had to produce the homos faber, “that industrious human being,
transformer and adaptor of matter for his profit,” which also charac-
terized “human nature.” This is the utopian vision that directly links
to a unitary image of human existence as a changing state. Past and
future are interconnected by the same genealogy of perfection and
progress. Lima argued for “the industrialisation of education, or
rather, an education based on technology,” which would be no more
than a logical consequence of the application of the “biogenetic
law,” of the “abbreviated recapitulation,” or of the “positivist theory
of the epochs of civilisation.” The operability of a mythical belief was
accepted: The socialization of the individual, both spontaneous and
systematic, “necessarily reproduces, in its large successive phases,

[p. 124] [PDF page 143]

education of the species, both with regard to feelings and to ideas.”
Therefore, the occupations to supply to the child—“a being which
lives in the state corresponding to primitive civilisation, to the primi-
tive, manual industries, more extensive than intensive”—should not
go much further than the life of the small cottage industry or the small
manufacturing workshop. He is proud to have started in Portugal, in
his Workshop School no. 1, from 1907 onward, “a systematisation, of
integral tendency, of educational manual works” precisely in line with
this conception of civilization change.30
   And it was precisely concerning the problem of the promotion of
the Social School that he referred to the pedagogical ideas of John
Dewey in more detail. Lima used them to argue points that he consid-
ered his own. And this meant that the American entirely fulfilled his
function of conceptual personage, heteronym, intercessor, crystal or
fold. It seemed he wanted to say: It is not my everything when I state
it belongs to me; I am no longer I. This is what we find in these
passages taken from the second volume of his Metodologia:

  J. Dewey wants the manual works to be, not mere school exercises, but
  “methods of life.” They should be seen in the light of their true social
  significance. “As processes that help society to continue its forward
  march; as a means to give the child some essential notions of community
  life; as new solutions given to satisfy the needs for growing intuition and
  talent in the human being; in a word, as factors that allow the school
  itself to take on an authentic form of active social life.” Manual school
  occupations are not limited, as many claim, to “knowledge of a certain
  number of practical recipes.” They are aimed at the creation of active
  centres through the development of scientific investigation, on the
  materials and processes of manufacturing, and also establish starting
  points from where children may undertake the historical development
  of the human being. It is not surprising therefore, that Dewey intro-
  duces into the schools the “historical trades” and gives a leading role to
  “rediscovery” and “reinvention.” Indeed, Dewey argues the following
  doctrine: “the evolution of the child under the influence of education
  goes through the phases of formation that characterise humanity . . .
  The instincts of primitive men are found in the child, whose interest is
  vividly excited by viewing the facts and manipulating things in the
  environment in which our primitive ancestors lived. Occupations sensi-
  bly selected arouse children’s instincts and channel them towards
  modern aspects, making them go through phases of conscience that a
  superior race passed through to arrive at its civilised state. This is the
  purpose of the educational method through school, as states professor
  Dewey. It is the biogenetic law applied to education.31

[p. 125] [PDF page 144]

According to Lima only these educational practices could give body
to the pedagogical ideal of modernity, that “all education should be
genetic, functional, social and sociological.” With its full institutional-
ization, the principle of personal fulfillment would become universal.
On the day that the school took the states of individual conscience as
the starting point, accepting that the only valid knowledge was that
extracted from things themselves, from the fingers and hands of chil-
dren, the need for each person to perform a function in society that is
most in line with his vocation would be realized. Only this kind of cit-
izen, professionally fulfilled, can benefit without constraints “from his
rights and practise all the duties that are characteristic of the human
species.” Given that it overcame the classic distinction of the produc-
tive system between thinking and doing, only the Social School was
able to “reveal the skills,” indicate the profession, and turn every subject
into an authentic “social conscious value, eminently social and just.”
It would lead to the eradication, in one clean sweep, of “slavery” and
“parasitism” in labor relations. The manual worker would have a “clar-
ified, guiding and emancipating” brain; in turn, the intellectual would
have the “manual skill, the power to execute what he thinks, to trans-
form the idea into action.” “Liberty” and “social peace” can only be
obtained the day that education merges the manual with the intellectual
inside every individual.32


                                       Self-Government and Its
                                 Institutionalization in Portugal
The principle of self-government constitutes the natural conclusion of
the pedagogical discourse of Adolfo Lima. It also provided the organi-
zational conclusion, as these ideas connected concrete practical expe-
riences of educational practices. In several texts he reiterated the
principle that only the regime of the autonomy of learners could fully
release the pupil from the personal tutelage of the adult because it
placed him under the supervision of his own moral conscience.
Individual self-governance and independence from the social group
would have exactly the same existential context. Lima argued that it
was necessary that the school transform “into the society of children.”
The school should be organized and function in order to provide the
living exercise of “emancipation and freedom, of conscious and
convergent action,” able to make pupils, “through practice, future
participants and collaborators of a superior, more refined social life.”

[p. 126] [PDF page 145]

Of all the forms, the organization of autonomy was not reliant so
much on the domain of the psychologist, as argued in the epoch by
pedagogues such as Adolphe Ferrière, but above all, on the reproduction
of political institutions.33
   The government of the self would only be clarified in a background
of rules of government applied to the whole group. Personal virtue
would not survive without the existence of an institutional back-
ground of social self-regulation. Indeed, Lima believed it was a ques-
tion, with the formalization of self-government, of constructing an
equal democratic regime within the walls of the school, so that auton-
omy was identified with a kind of organization in which free citizens
obeyed only the laws to which they would directly or indirectly con-
tribute. The Social School would have to be organized and begin func-
tioning in order that the pupils exercised “an ideal of emancipation
and liberty.” In a “liberating education,” he clarified, “there are no
powers and each child has a social function to perform to contribute
to the overall wellbeing.”34
   Lima was directly associated to the first school experiences of self-
government in Portugal. An analysis of his biography shows that he
strove to create a regime of autonomy in all the schools he worked in
from 1910 onward. In February that year an Association of Pupils was
created in his School-Workshop no. 1, which organized school and
post-school instruction for pupils in the areas of science, art, and sport.
It was, at the time, the “only organisation of its kind” in Portugal, in
that it was “eminently humanitarian” and also “perfectly autonomous,”
because it was run by “democratically elected” pupils and teachers.
From 1911 onward this model of the School-Workshop no. 1 was
adopted. As a teacher of the Pedro Nunes Secondary School, Lima was
one of its driving forces. This School Association had the motto, “WE
EDUCATE OURSELVES,” which involved nothing other than “an
entire programme of social autonomy.” It was organized through a
federal structure, and thus there was active participation of the partners
in all the decisions and structures of the organization.35 Its various sec-
tions, not restricted to culture and sport, but also including assemblies
and social cooperatives, transformed the Pedro Nunes Secondary
School into a model that, from 1931 onward, spread to the state sec-
ondary schools in Portugal. Indeed, all Portuguese secondary schools
were now compelled by law to create a School Association that would
organize the set of activities that provided the rounded instruction of
the pupil outside the classroom.

[p. 127] [PDF page 146]

The self-government regime carried with it the most effective
technology of power in the socialization of children and the young.
This made it extremely welcome by the Portuguese educational
authorities, regardless of their politics. Without purposely setting out
to do so, Lima had imagined and tested in practice, a form of social-
ization that would reveal itself to be of the utmost utility for educators
with completely opposite views of the world. It is very important to
note that these experiences of autonomy began to be presented in the
background of the monarchic regime, which was in force in Portugal
until October 5, and continued in the succeeding political solution, a
democratic Republic, that governed the country until 1926. But it was
in the long period from that year until 1974, when the Portuguese
state was defined as conservative and authoritarian, that the experi-
ment initiated by Lima was no longer an isolated experiment. One
could therefore conclude that the principle of self-government in the
school, although linked to the democratic field, was indifferent to the
political order. It is indeed true that its institutionalization coincided
with the phase of the greatest radicalization of Portuguese authoritari-
anism, at the start of the 1930s, at a time when the Lisbon government
aligned itself politically with Berlin and Rome, and did not condemn fas-
cism. It was the same political regime that had arrested Lima in 1927
because of his sympathies with anarchism and with the working-class
movement, which saw the utility of a moral in action that Lima began to
apply in the School-Workshop no. 1. This school had been in turn the
pride of the Portuguese republican and democratic regime.
   It must be pointed out one final time that it was in Dewey that
Adolfo Lima found this promise of a solution to the social problems
using the regime of self-government:

  “When School makes each child the member of a small community,”
  states J. Dewey, “saturating him with the spirit of sacrifice, and provid-
  ing him with the tools needed for effective self-direction, we will have
  the most profound and best guarantee of one day obtaining a dignified,
  loving and harmonious society.”36


                                                Final Considerations
This chapter aimed to show how the pedagogical thinking of Adolfo
Lima incorporated the essential theses of the New Education move-
ment, and attempted to make them compatible with the dynamics of

[p. 128] [PDF page 147]

the government of men. Always based on the heritage of Dewey, his
writing began to suggest the possibility of a political subjectivation
that associated the axiom of childhood interest with the institutional
practices of framing of the school population.
    But this association between the psycho-pedagogy and the exercising
of political power in the discourse of Lima took the form of a pros-
thesis in the modern educational discourse and led him to argue for
the need for a new expert in the educational field, the sociologist. He
spoke always as someone who took the modern psy vision on board
but who wanted to radicalize and re-dimension it. The Portuguese
educator certainly (i) shared the idea that the regimes of mental activ-
ity, described by differential psychology, overcame the rationalism of
the theory of the faculties of the soul; (ii) accepted that the principle
of the psychic economy would have to lead to forms of education
adapted to the characteristics and interests of each pupil; (iii) accepted
the thesis that the whole teaching–learning process would have to be
active. But to fully overhaul the traditional model the school would
have to take on an entirely different nature than what was usual. It
would have to be an institution of social integration and as such no
longer a differentiated institution. The child would live in a miniature
society and the two major guidelines of the school of the future would
be work and civic participation. It was in the name of this vision,
which enormously widened the universe of learning, that Lima felt it
necessary to show how the research and the important solution pro-
posed by New Education were, despite everything, insufficient for the
effective undertaking of the Copernican revolution. Effectively, it
seemed to him that the pedagogical renovation was still too caught up
in the individual-genetic psychology vocabularies, in the idea that
change to the educational paradigm would only be achieved through
knowledge of the psychic processes. These regimes of mental activity,
while allowing for the meticulous description of the child’s subjectiv-
ity and claiming statistical knowledge of the psychological character-
istics of the whole school population, were not sufficient to operate
the intended structural transformation. The productivity of the col-
lective bonds and pacts would have to be added to the knowledge of
the self. Personal conscience would be of no use without a social
conscience.
    The problem was to be solved, above all, from an organizational
aspect: it was not sufficient to propose tailor-made education, adapt-
ing to the idiosyncratic characteristics of each child. He would
only occupy the center of the whole of school activity when he was

[p. 129] [PDF page 148]

effectively placed in a “free social regime.” If the alternative model
had not yet emerged in a clear form, this was due to “the need for a
social ideal and the predominance of educators who were more psy-
chologists than sociologists.” Lima accepted that it was important to
follow the advice of the “psycho-pedagogical differential,” but for
the educational regeneration to be complete “a pedagogy exclusively
based on psychology should be followed by pedagogy of sociological
preparation and ideals.”37
   Throughout the discursive formation of Adolfo Lima, John Dewey
completely fulfilled his essential mission as the indigenous foreigner,
given that, based on him, the Portuguese gradually created an invisible
fabric for an educational discourse that always claimed its systemic
organicism. As Popkewitz points out, “foreign names or concepts no
longer exist as outsiders but with an indigenous quality that erases
any alien qualities.”38 And it was as if the place and the global were
entwining and interconnecting in the development of a production
that, in the end, we learn should be a production of power. Indeed,
Lima was able to aggregate the theses of New Education to the pros-
thesis, specific to the field of the political battle, according to which
freedom was, before all else, a question of social conscience. All this
rationalization that overcame antonyms and united opposites was
present in Dewey. Whenever he tackled the topic of the moral in the
educational territory, he endeavored to destroy the opposites between
“interior and exterior,” “spiritual and material,” “body and soul,”
“ends and means,” “duty and interest,” “intelligence and character,”
or “social and moral.” If the fundamental relation was always between
the action and its consequences, then Dewey never failed to show that
“moral is all education that develops the capacity to take part effec-
tively in social life.”39 He therefore opened a new path to another
design of the spiritual “nature” of the child and to the universalization
of the forms of social exercising of political power completely based
on the principle of self-regulation.
   The pedagogical thinking of Adolfo Lima conceived, legitimized,
and demonstrated the efficacy of a logic of government, and inverted
the approach of the individual moral and civism in the school. These, in
the institutional context of self-government, were no longer presented
as a mere declaration of intent, as an ideology, to be conceived of only as
practices marked by a collective pact. The expression Social Education
described the constant need of the modern school to develop as an
organism, with various apparatus and organs, whose fabric would
be made up entirely of children. It was exactly this association from

[p. 130] [PDF page 149]

the bodies of the state to the subject that allowed Lima to build the
scenario that would operate that utopia of the modern school. In it,
the psychological domain associated itself to the social and the gov-
ernment of the self with the government of all. In fact, “The modern
school child is the person who learns to be a ‘citizen,’ who has abstract
responsibilities related to the governing of the state, who has ‘poten-
tial’ as a worker, who learns cultural skills and sensitivities for future
‘use’, and who is ‘self’ monitoring in affective and cognitive develop-
ment.”40 No political power, from the radical left to the most conser-
vative right, dispensed in the twentieth century with the temptation to
reproduce the institutions that each pupil would have to conquer, on
his own, when he entered in the society of adults.
   In these terms the most correct association to be established is not
so much between the pedagogies of autonomy and the different forms
of political power, but, essentially, between the former and the same
project of modernity, translated into the grand metaphor of the travel-
ing libraries of New Education: the never-to-be abandoned hypothesis
of a reversible dynamic of power-knowledge-want in the socialization
of children and adolescents. It was the possibility of this moral in
action that marked the appearance in Portugal of John Dewey as the
conceptual personage of Adolfo Lima, who worked tirelessly to show
that each singularity should be seen as a point of passage laden with
principles and forces of power.


Notes
1. A. Candeias, Educar de outra forma: A escola oficina n⬚ 1 de Lisboa 1905–1930
   (Lisboa, Instituto de Inovação Educacional, 1994); A. Candeias, “Adolfo Lima,”
   in Educadores Portugueses, ed. António Nóvoa (Porto: Edições Asa, 2003).
2. António Nóvoa, “Uma educação que se diz nova,” in Sobre a Educação Nova:
   Cartas de Adolfo Lima a Álvaro Viana de Lemos (1923–1941), ed. António
   Nóvoa and A. Candeias (Lisboa: Educa, 1995), 37.
3. Indeed, Dewey’s presence in Portugal was extremely shallow and sporadic until
   the end of the 1960s. This is exemplified by the following two examples. One
   of the most important pedagogical innovation journals of the time in Portugal,
   the Revista Escolar, published regularly between 1921 and 1935, made only
   eighteen references to the name of Dewey, and focused solely on him in only one
   article; the first Portuguese translation of a text from the American philosopher
   is dated 1971. Up until then only Brazilian translations had circulated.
   L. M. Carvalho and J. Cordeiro, Brasil-Portugal nos circuitos do discurso
   pedagógico especializado (1920–1935) (Lisboa: Educa, 2002).

[p. 131] [PDF page 150]

4. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, O que é filosofia? trans. Maragarida
    Barahona and António Guerreiro (Lisboa: Editorial Presença, 1992/1991), 59.
 5. Thomas S. Popkewitz, “Globalization/regionalization, knowledge, and the
    educational practices: Some notes on comparative strategies for educational
    research,” in Educational Knowledge: Changing Relationships between the
    State, Civil Society and the Educational Community, ed. Thomas S.
    Popkewitz (New York: State University of New York Press, 2000), 10.
 6. Adolfo Lima, Metodologia: Lições de metodologia professadas na Escola
    Normal Primária de Lisboa (Lisboa: Livraria Férin, 1927), 292–293.
 7. Adolfo Lima, “A autonomia dos educandos e as associações escolares: As
    solidárias,” Educação Social 31–32, no. 2 (1925): 106–107.
 8. Lima, “A autonomia dos educandos,” 108.
 9. Lima, “A autonomia dos educandos,” 108.
10. Adolfo Lima, “A escola única,” Educação Social 25–26, no. 2 (1925):
    47–48.
11. Adolfo Lima, Pedagogia sociológica (Lisboa: Couto Martins, 1936), 299.
12. Lima, Pedagogia sociológica, 298.
13. Jorge Ramos do Ó, “The disciplinary terrains of soul and self-government in
    the first map of the educational sciences,” in Beyond Empiricism: On Criteria
    for Educational Research, ed. P. Smeyers and M. Depaepe (Leuven: Leuven
    University Press, 2003), 105–116.
14. Henri Marion, “Psychologie,” in Dictionnaire de pédagogie et d’instruction
    primaire, ed. F. Buisson (Paris: Librairie Hachette, 1882), 1761.
15. G. Compayré, “Facultés de l’âme,” in Dictionnaire de pédagogie et
    d’instruction primaire, 986.
16. Lima, Metodologia, 292.
17. Lima, Metodologia, 42–47.
18. Lima, Metodologia, 290–291.
19. Lima, Metodologia, 211.
20. Lima, Metodologia, 296–299.
21. Lima, Metodologia, 308–309.
22. Adolfo Lima, Metodologia (Lisboa: Livraria Férin, 1932), 25–49.
23. Lima, Metodologia, 1932, 49–57.
24. Adolfo Lima, “John Dewey,” Educação Social 24, no. 1 (1924): 426–427.
25. Richard Rorty, Contingência, ironia e solidariedade, trans. Nuno Fonseca
    (Lisboa: Editorial Presença, 1994/1989), 15.
26. Lima, Pedagogia sociológica, 281–301.
27. Lima, Pedagogia sociológica, 281–282.
28. Lima, Metodologia, 1932: 336.
29. Lima, Metodologia, 1932: 336–341.
30. Adolfo Lima, “A escola única,” 50–53.
31. Lima, Metodologia, 330–331.
32. Lima, “A escola única,” 58.
33. A. Ferrière, L’autonomie des écoliers: L’art de former des citoyens pour la
    nation et pour l’humanité (Neuchatel: Delachaux & Niestlé, 1921).
34. Lima, Pedagogia sociológica, 307.

[p. 132] [PDF page 151]

35. When he became headmaster in 1918 of the most important teacher training
    school for primary schooling in Portugal, Adolfo Lima immediately created a
    School Association based on the same principles.
36. Lima, Pedagogia sociológica, 304.
37. Lima, Pedagogia sociológica, 303.
38. Popkewitz, “Globalization/regionalization,” 10.
39. John Dewey, Democracia e educação, trans. Godofredo Rangel and Anísio
    Teixeira (São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1936/1916), 442–439.
40. Thomas S. Popkewitz, “The production of reason and power: Curriculum
    history and intellectual traditions,” Journal of Curriculum Studies 29, no. 2
    (1997): 134–135.
