Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part III: European Spaces: The Southern Eastern Tiers
Chapter 6: Balkanizing John Dewey
Noah W. Sobe
Original print pages 135–151; PDF pages 154–170

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 135] [PDF page 154]

6
                                       Balkanizing John Dewey

                                                             Noah W. Sobe




A Yugoslav pedagogue reporting on the advanced state of schooling in
Czechoslovakia in 1934 had this to say about Czechoslovak educational
literature:

  In their reviews, books and lectures many foreign pedagogues are
  mentioned. One thing is characteristic, however: German pedagogues
  are mentioned by far the least, regardless of whether they are Austrian
  or “Reichsdeutsche.” In place of this, they emphasize Tolstoy, J. Dewey,
  Spencer, M. Montessori and others.1

   Given the concerns of this book, it will come as no surprise that the
mention of Dewey here is my foresmost interest. Salih Ljubuncin,
the Zagreb professor who included Dewey in this list of educational
thinkers, considered it extremely praiseworthy that Czechoslovaks
were turning to these thinkers and not to Germans. That they were
turning to foreign pedagogues was itself also something to be admired
about Czechoslovak educators in Ljubuncin’s view. John Dewey was
one of the foreigners who could be mentioned in this eighty-page
Yugoslav book on Czechoslovak schooling as harbingers of moder-
nity. In this brief statement that puts “J. Dewey” alongside a set of
other noted figures, one can almost literally envision a bookshelf in the
traveling library that circulated and reassembled Dewey in Yugoslavia.
   The “Balkanizing John Dewey” referred to in the title of this chapter
uses the term “balkanizing” in a deliberately ironic way. In English,
the word “balkanize” frequently refers to the unraveling of some
entity into various subparts, akin to the twentieth-century historical

[p. 136] [PDF page 155]

pattern of countries on the Balkan peninsula of Southeastern Europe
disintegrating into many smaller ethnic and religious units. Contrary
to this, however, my use of the term “balkanizing” refers to one specific
localization of Dewey’s works. It is not meant to suggest a dilution or
splintering of Dewey’s ideas but rather the particular hybridized assem-
blage of discursive practices through which Dewey traveled in part of
the Balkans, namely Yugoslavia, in the 1920s and 1930s. Instead of
being a divider, the balkanization of Dewey was actually more of an
assembling of multiple parts through which intelligibility was created.
   That Dewey was mentioned by a Yugoslav professor of pedagogy
as indicating how Czechoslovaks were wisely turning away from
Germans clearly shows how the assembling of Dewey in Yugoslavia—
or, as just outlined, his “balkanization”—took place in a field of mul-
tiple cultural relations. A Pan-Slavic solidarity with its Germanic other
was one of the major features of the grid through which Dewey was
reasoned about by Yugoslavs. The works of “J. Dewey” provide an
entry point for examining the constitution of a “Slavic modernity” in
Yugoslavia and the kinds of actions, knowledges, and reasoning that
formed modern modes of living.
   The Yugoslav balkanization of Dewey in the 1920s and 1930s engen-
dered a multiple of modernity in which—contrary to the Weberian
thesis—enchantments and disenchantments were concurrent gestures.2
Dewey entered into the making of a Slavic modernity through ideas of
action and agency that circulated with him. On the one hand, Dewey
traveled in Yugoslavia as a thinker and an actor, as the exemplary
embodiment of a modern, desacralized human agency. This disen-
chanted agency can be seen as the relocation into society of an agency
once considered to reside in transcendental, divine, or natural forces.3
This was a cultural conception of human agency that traveled in the
way that Dewey was seen not just as a thinker but as a thinker who put
thought into action. Yet, on the other hand, traveling in Yugoslavia
with Dewey was an enchantment of action and activity, namely an
enchanting of the school-based “work” activities of the child. Students’
work and activities were theorized as related to a kind of “genetics,”
which was less a physiological/biological notion than it was the deferred
location that housed the motivating, inspiring features that imbued the
inclinations, dispositions, and interests of the child with purposive-ness.
In Yugoslavia it was with the idea of the “Slavic soul” that what Weber
referred to as “mysterious, incalculable forces”4 entered into thinking
about the interests and activities of the child. The soul was the elusive
target of modern, twentieth-century progressive pedagogy,5 yet the

[p. 137] [PDF page 156]

soul never achieved the kind of calculability that Weber claimed was
modernity’s means of mastery and was responsible for giving rise to a
disenchanted world. What is worthy of note is that instead of por-
tending a counter- or antimodernity, the enchantments that traveled
with Dewey in Yugoslavia more accurately appear to have been part of
the making of a modernity.
    This chapter first discusses the circulation of Dewey as a conceptual
persona. An investigation of the various ways Dewey was positioned
allows for a discussion of how Dewey was woven into the cultural forms
of modernity in Yugoslavia. The second section of the chapter exam-
ines the translations of Dewey’s work into Serbo-Croatian in order to
specify further the particular local assemblings of this “internationally
renowned” American pragmatist and what ideas about action, knowl-
edge, and reason circulated in the libraries through which his works trav-
eled. These twinned lines of inquiry map the configuration of discourses
and practices that made Dewey comprehensible along the particular,
local enchanted and disenchanted contours taken by “modern” modes of
living and the “modern self” in interwar Yugoslavia.

                        The Persona of Dewey in Yugoslavia
The listing of Dewey seen above put him in the midst of a crowd of
thinkers of similar iconic status. In the early twentieth century and
beyond, such individuals regularly circulated as conceptual persona,
peopling various pedagogic literatures with international figures
around whom a common grounding for modernization projects could
be based. The “individuals” appearing in such lists were particular local
figures not merely simulacra of an “original.” References to thinkers
en mass as seen in the alleged Czechoslovak emphasis on “Tolstoy,
J. Dewey, Spencer, M. Montessori and others” perform a credentializ-
ing function of bringing certain global figures into particular local
relations. It would be a mistake, however, to view this phenomenon
merely as semiotic play involving only the manipulation of symbols
empty of substance. While it is likely that similar listings can be found
in numerous settings around the globe, there is a specificity to this par-
ticular listing and it proves possible to excavate historically the partic-
ular “J. Dewey” one encounters in this 1934 Yugoslav text. Tolstoy’s
presence as one of Dewey’s shelf-mates is anything but haphazard; the
Czechoslovak setting for this collection of “foreign pedagogues” is,
similarly, not accidental. Interactions with Czechoslovakia were a
central part of the modernization of the Yugoslav child, teacher, and

[p. 138] [PDF page 157]

school. This was a modernity that had a “Slavic” shape even as certain
notions of agency and personhood were globalized through it.
   Salih Ljubuncin’s book on schooling and education in Czechoslovakia
was based on a considerable amount of exposure to Czechoslovak
education, but most immediately it grew out of a two-week study-tour
of the country. In 1933 Ljubuncin led a group of thirty Yugoslav teach-
ers on an excursion that took the group from Zagreb, through Vienna,
to Bratislava and then through parts of Czechoslovakia (Olín, Brno,
Pardubica, Hradec Kralovy, and Prague) where noted educational
innovations could be met with.6 A prejudice against German educa-
tional influences pervades his text and appears in the very itinerary of
the study-tour. As they were passing through Vienna, the group visited
schools established for Czechoslovaks living in the city. In a report
published in a Slovenian language teachers’ journal one of the partici-
pants on Ljubuncin’s 1933 study-tour described visiting the Comenius
school in Vienna and noted, “to begin with we felt a Slavic hospitality
in the middle of this foreign existence, it warmed us.”7 Not only was
this school a place where the Yugoslav visitors were made to feel partic-
ularly welcome, it was a school they considered one of the most modern
educational facilities in the city. The advancedness of Czechoslovak
schools in Vienna, the former Habsburg imperial capital, was for
Yugoslavs a testament to national perseverance.
   The Viennese itinerary of this Yugoslav study-tour points to one of
the conditions that made for the particularly strong Yugoslav interest
in Czechoslovakia, which was that the two countries were understood
as sharing a similar “historical destiny.” They were newly independent
“young” nations that had partly emerged out of the dismantling of the
Austro-Hungarian empire at the end of World War I. This moment
was frequently referred to in Yugoslav literature as a restoration of the
independence that had been denied during the period of Habsburg—
and additionally for Yugoslavs Ottoman—control. In the introduction
to his Czechoslovak study Ljubuncin faulted Yugoslavs for “not look-
ing beyond the borders of Austrian and German pedagogy.” With
their liberation Yugoslavs should now be “interested in Romance
(French and Italian) and Anglo-Saxon (English and American) peda-
gogy,” he wrote.8 Czechoslovakia had successfully freed itself from
these influences and was properly enjoying its national independence
as was indicated by this particular bookshelf on which “J. Dewey”
was found in 1934.
   Alongside the shared temporality of both peoples living in a moment
of national liberation or a postcolonial present, Czechoslovaks and

[p. 139] [PDF page 158]

Yugoslavs shared a set of “Slavic” affiliations. Serbo-Croatian and
Czech and Slovak are linguistically related languages, part of a Slavic
language group that also includes Polish, Russian, Bulgarian, and
Byelorussian. Slavic commonalities helped, for example, to make
Czechoslovakia the most popular travel destination for Yugoslavs in
the interwar era. Czechoslovaks were “our northern brothers” and
Czechoslovakia was seen as the “most advanced Slavic country.”
   This cultural construction of Slavic relatedness smoothed the way
for Czechoslovakia to appear to Yugoslavs as an attainable model of
modernity. In his text on Czechoslovak education, Ljubuncin noted
the pronounced American influence on Czechoslovak pedagogues
such as Vaclav Pfihoda, Stanislav Vrána, and Jan Úher. He even
went as far as to suggest that some of the advances found in America
could be channeled to Yugoslavia by looking toward Czechoslovakia.
A review of the book in Ucitelj (Teacher), the most prominent Yugoslav
educational journal of the interwar era, noted that in his conclusion,

  once again Mr. Ljubuncin notes the “Slavic characteristics, or even more
  specifically, the Czechoslovak characteristics of this entire movement,
  which, in truth, bears the influences of American pedagogues.” In
  addition, the writer hopes that “Slavic humanism will spiritualize
  American (and Czech) practicality, and that the reformed Czechoslovak
  school will be above all else Czechoslovak.”9


   The Slavic was considered, as one can see here, to have the potential
to preserve a degree of local legitimacy and national authenticity in the
face of modern, American influences in the sphere of education. Yet,
there is the clear intimation in Ljubuncin’s comment that the Slavic
even has something to offer America itself. The enchantment that is
suggested in the idea of Slavic humanism having the potential to
“spiritualize” America is allusive to other contemporary discussions of
the Slavic “soul” or “spirit” as a guiding, motivating feature of reality.
The spiritualization of American pedagogy invoked here can be seen
as a proposal for the enchanting of educational reform; it was a ges-
ture toward ultimately grounding and enshrining the ontological and
epistemic foundations of activity and thought in spiritual enchantments
that the world offered.
   The Yugoslav channeling of “J. Dewey” through Czechoslovakia
was not an errant gesture. The bookshelf being examined here was
one on which Dewey was assembled together with a commitment to
Slavic ethnic distinctiveness. The practicality of action that Dewey’s

[p. 140] [PDF page 159]

work portended had been reworked in accordance with “Slavic
characteristics.” It should not, however, be assumed that these charac-
teristics were static cultural notions that preceded Ljubuncin’s text in
an a priori manner. It is quite evident in Ljubuncin’s writings—for
example, in the description of Slavic hospitality—that the “Slavic
relatedness” that warranted the compatibility of Czechoslovakia as a
model for Yugoslavs to study was also being culturally constructed
through these very travels, interactions, and texts. Ljubuncin’s posi-
tioning of Dewey as a meritorious influence in Czechoslovakia was
connected to the imagining of the Slavic as a form of enchantment.
This connection with the Slavic meant not only that Dewey was
assembled in relation to local/regional traditions but that the balka-
nized Dewey actually had the potential to support and sustain the
fabrication of traditions as a source of enchantment.
   The cultural importance of the Slavic in interwar Yugoslavia helps
to explain the placement of “J. Dewey” next to “Tolstoy.” The Russian
novelist and thinker Leo Tolstoy had run experimental schools in
the 1890s, the most famous of which was Yasnaya Polyana where he
developed “student-directed” programs10 that Yugoslav writers often
referred to as “free schooling.” In the interwar era, Yugoslav educa-
tors claimed Tolstoy as an important Slavic forefather. Scholars such
as Sergei Hessen (a Russian émigré who was based at various times at
German, Czech, and Polish universities and whose comparative edu-
cation works on Soviet and American schools were widely circulated
in Yugoslavia in the 1920s and 1930s) made note of the considerable
similarities between the two men.11 Beyond their shared commitment
to running experimental schools, the focus in Dewey’s writings on the
“life” of the child, and on schooling as a mode of living could be seen
as bearing a close resemblance to Tolstoy’s notion of “life.” Putting
Tolstoy on the same bookshelf as Spencer, Montessori, and Dewey
brought Tolstoy into communication with, and put him in the same
class as other persona who circulated internationally. The presence of
a Slavic hero on the bookshelf with Dewey was yet another way that a
cultural construction of the Slavic was interwoven into the assembling
of the balkanized Dewey.
   Though Dewey on Ljubuncin’s list of Czechoslovakia’s foreign
pedagogues was pointedly unaccompanied by any German writers,
this wasn’t true in every case. In other Yugoslav literature Dewey was
closely associated with Georg Kerschensteiner. Typically, however,
Dewey was presented as the senior figure in the relationship. A book
review announcing the 1935 Serbo-Croatian publication of two of

[p. 141] [PDF page 160]

Dewey’s essays in a book titled School and Society12 noted that
Dewey was,

  one of the world’s most well known and most popular writers on
  contemporary pedagogical theory. Kerschensteiner, Dewey and A. Ferrière
  are three of the most noted and most popular Euro-American writers,
  theoreticians and propagators of the active school.13

   In this linking of Kerschensteiner, Dewey, and Adolphe Ferrière
activity and agency were the key points of intersection. All three were
seen as “theoreticians and propagators,” a characterization that hints
at a modern conceptualization of agency in which thought tied to action
located in people a set of functions and responsibilities that accompa-
nied the enhanced status that individuals were able to possess as
“agents of higher principles.”14 Kerschensteiner, Dewey, and Ferrière
executed these functions and responsibilities in an exemplary manner.
A certain disenchantment can be seen to be traveling on this bookshelf
of educational reformers who were both thinkers and actors inasmuch
as an ability to act, speak, and make recommendations in the “interests”
of advancing society has been lodged in these individuals as opposed
to in a transcendental, divine, or natural site.
   However, the “activity” of the child was not solely that of a disen-
chanted modern agency. This Yugoslav text represented Dewey’s
theorization of activity and took it to be the central strand uniting him
with Kerschensteiner and Ferrière. Dewey was credited with charac-
terizing the active child’s activities as having four aspects. It was
recorded that Dewey thought of the “child’s activity” (1) as a means
for self-expression; and (2) as a way of directing the child to the satis-
faction that could come from his or her own curiosity—one can note
that these first two features theorized a modern self who was consti-
tuted through its own actions and out of a purposive-ness seen, tauto-
logically perhaps, to reside “within.” The 1935 text also recorded that
Dewey thought that the “child’s activity” was (3) a means to keep
the child constantly doing work, a desideratum because “in children,
thinking and doing were still undivided”; and (4) a means of forming
an artistic sense. In this theorization “activity” was cast as something
of a guarantee, a reliable foundation on which the individual (as well
as social institutions) could be based. “Because of this,” the Yugoslav
reviewer wrote in reference to Dewey’s characterization, “the school
must educate and direct instruction according to the principle of ‘teach-
ing through work.’ ”15 Connecting “activity” and “work” through

[p. 142] [PDF page 161]

Dewey meant that the Kerschensteiner’s arbeitsschule [work school]
ideas16 could be cast as deeply indebted to Dewey. Through this, the
child’s school “work,” particularly when that entailed manual activi-
ties, was imbued with the redemptive qualities of a “rooted,” pur-
poseful self-expression tied to an individual practical action that could
generate social progress.
   In Yugoslavia in the 1920s and 1930s, the “work school” movement
was arguably one of the most institutionally successful “New Education”
or “Progressive Education” reform currents. A Yugoslav association
published the journal Radna Ekola (The Work School),17 in which—as
in Kerschensteiner’s writings—“work” was viewed not only as voca-
tional handiwork but as a pedagogic conceptualization of independ-
ence and self-reliance.18 Dewey’s formative influence on this movement
was noted in a 1926 article from Radna Ekola. In a report on “The
Old and New School According to Dewey” the assertion appeared
that “the Pedagogic influence of Dewey is powerfully felt in England
and in Germany, particularly in Kerschensteiner.”19 In Yugoslav liter-
ature, these Dewey–Kerschensteiner attributions served to undermine
somewhat Kerschensteiner’s originality. This occurred in the two
instances just mentioned when Dewey and Kerschensteiner were
placed side by side one another. The assertion of considerable indebt-
edness also figures in a lengthy overview of Dewey’s work that appeared
in 1934 in Ucitelj. The article noted that “the great German pedagogue,
and in truth the greatest European Pedagogue, Kerschensteiner received
the inspiration for his famous Theory of Education basically from
John Dewey” [emphasis in original].20 In the flows and networks that
wove Dewey together with Kerschensteiner in Yugoslavia, the
American philosopher was consistently given the upper hand. Dewey’s
vision of activity thus appeared on the Yugoslav cultural map as it was
drawn into connection (as a formative influence) to the pedagogical
theorization of work and manual or vocational education.
   When Czechoslovak pedagogues turned to America, Yugoslav writ-
ers emphasized the extent to which “America” was indigenized and
reworked to accord with the “Czechoslovak” and the “Slavic.” This did
not occur in instances when Yugoslavs remarked on the ways that
German pedagogues turned to America. As presented by Yugoslavs, the
Dewey that traveled on the same bookshelves as Georg Kerschensteiner
had not been Germanized. Instead, the cultural representation was of a
German pedagogical movement more being beholden to America than
a reasoned appropriation of America. Nonetheless, as he circulated in
different ways in each of these orbits Dewey helped to theorize “work”

[p. 143] [PDF page 162]

for Yugoslav educators through his ideas about action and its place as
an ordering principle in educational thought and processes. As an
indigenous foreigner in Yugoslavia, Dewey appeared on the one hand as
a moderating figure whose American pragmatism could authentically
explicate certain German pedagogical theories. And, at the same time he
was a figure whose ideas about practicality and practical action were
considered extremely conducive to “indigenization,” or to what one
saw earlier described as the “spiritualization” that could be hoped
to occur when Czechoslovaks (and by extension Yugoslavs) brought
“J. Dewey” into the “Slavic” world.

                   Routes to Reading Dewey in Yugoslavia
In the 1920s and 1930s, the works of the French professor of
education, Edouard Claparède were particularly significant in the
movement of John Dewey’s writings into Yugoslavia. As with the con-
ceptual Dewey who appeared in Yugoslavia, the Dewey that appeared
in textual commentaries was also a particular local assembling.
Claparède was an important part of this assembling, as probably one
of the most widely circulated and influential of Dewey’s interlocutors
in the country. Because of his stature as a renowned professor of
psychology at the University of Geneva and the founder of the Rousseau
Institute, Claparède was a conceptual persona of international stature
in his own right. The primary concern here, however, is with Claparède’s
packaging of Dewey. Claparède was a conduit for bringing Dewey’s
writings into Yugoslavia—an “envelope” that affected how the “con-
tents” were read. What Claparède offered was a scheme for thinking
about Dewey. This was a scheme, it can be noted, that supported the
“Slavic” as a meaning-giving and action-orienting object of knowledge
in the formation of Yugoslav schooling. Claparède’s key contribution
to making the balkanized Dewey intelligible was thinking about the
enchantments and disenchantments that were caught up in the making
of modern selves, modern schools, and modern modes of living.
   In Yugoslavia Claparède was discussed as a noted child-study
advocate and a pioneer in experimental pedagogy. He saw in Dewey’s
pedagogy three primary elements: in Claparède’s scheme, Dewey’s
educational ideas were first “genetic,” which meant that the education
occurred not from outside but from within the child. Second, Dewey’s
pedagogy could be seen as “functional,” which meant that activities of
schooling were an instrument for spiritual unfolding that took account
of the present and the future. And third, it was “social,” which meant

[p. 144] [PDF page 163]

that it prepared the individual for a productive role in the larger
society. This schematization of Dewey first appeared in the introduc-
tion to a 1913 collection of Dewey’s articles translated into French.21
Claparède’s essay was then published in Serbo-Croatian in a 1918
journal and again a second time in 1920 as a pamphlet22 in a series
of publications on pedagogy edited by Milan Eevin, the head of the
faculty of pedagogy at the University of Belgrade. This same essay of
Claparède’s on Dewey reappeared in 1930 when a two-page summary
was published in the journal Ucitelj.23 Thanks to the wide circulations
and recirculations of Claparède’s texts, thinking about Dewey as offer-
ing a genetic, functional, and social pedagogy moved into Yugoslavia.
   (It can be noted that Yugoslavia was not the only Central/Eastern
European Slavic country to meet Dewey through Claparède. Claparède’s
essay was also frequently cited in Czechoslovakia. Especially in light
of the perceptions seen earlier, it is quite interesting to find that in his
1930 book on American education Jan Úher turned to explaining
Dewey’s educational ideas to his Czechoslovak readership at least partly
through the schema presented in Claparède’s essay.24 This recourse to
Claparède isn’t particularly surprising except that Úher’s book was
expressly written after and on the basis of his study-tour travels to the
United States.)
   In Claparède’s conceptual schema, the genetic aspects of Dewey’s
educational philosophy concerned his ideas about development and
how the teacher ought to respond to the desires and interests of chil-
dren. What Dewey offered, according to Claparède, was an “under-
standing of [the child’s] interests as a genetic symptom” and a way in
which “we can follow the child’s nature.”25 It can be noted in passing
that the notion of development Dewey elaborated, for example, in
Democracy and Education, differs somewhat from a concept of genetic
unfolding that could be nurtured and monitored by tracking the
expressions of the child’s interest, the main point for present pur-
poses is that the latter idea traveled in Yugoslavia as an authoritative
presentation of Dewey. Claparède’s reading of Dewey, in fact, put an
extremely strong emphasis on the centering of education in the child,
in “genetics”—an emphasis that seems to have been keenly picked up
on in Yugoslavia.
   In its Serbo-Croatian translation, Claparède’s essay was prefaced by
an introduction written by Milan Eevin that indicates how both enchant-
ments and disenchantments were present in this thinking about educa-
tion and its “genetic” dimensions. Presenting the Claparède/Dewey
concepts that his readers were about to be exposed to, Eevin opined,

[p. 145] [PDF page 164]

“everyone has a certain capital in their aspirations and impulses that
must be pursued in order to move forward.” He continued, “the prob-
lem of education is this, to discover that capital.”26 With this state-
ment Eevin tied Claparède’s “genetic” categorization to a theory of
progress, a “moving forward.” This “capital” was something as-if hid-
den inside the child. Child study could reveal something of this genetic
capital and a child-centered pedagogy could nourish it. Yet, although
“genetic capital” was something the child was considered to possess
to begin with, it was not something static. Yugoslavs read through
Claparède that for Dewey the psyche was not a static system but a
dynamic process. These “genetics” were, accordingly, not the feature
of an a priori determinism but the proper, “natural” material for
educators to work on.
   In pursuing and educating by means of the child’s aspirations and
interests, the disenchantments of a scientific mode of reasoning and act-
ing took shape. Through the research in the field of experimental ped-
agogy and at institutes such as Claparède’s Rousseau Institute, education
scientists could carefully study child interests and activities as sympto-
matic forms of the child’s nature. The “natural,” “genetic” entity so
well lodged in the child’s interior was, however, the deferred object of
the science and an elusive “thing” that could be attributed with an
enchanted purposiveness. In this regard, there appear to be certain
connections between Claparède’s ideas about the “genetic” and Henri
Bergson’s vitalism,27 with the inner, genetic nature of the child serving
as an “élan vital.” Thanks to Claparède’s categorization, the modern
approach to teaching and thinking about the child’s interests that
circulated through Yugoslavia in affiliation with Dewey was one that
constructed enchantment and disenchantment in related gestures.
   By analogy, the “Slavic” could similarly be understood as an inner,
motivating spirit that needed to be pursued by Slavs. Finding a “Slavic
soul” and properly putting it to use was a major goal of the many Pan-
Slavic meetings that were held in the 1920s and 1930s. In this period
Yugoslav educators, along with sociologists, geographers, mathemati-
cians, and even beekeepers28 attended international Pan-Slavic confer-
ences with Poles, Czechoslovaks, Bulgarians, and representatives from
other Slavic countries. Pan-Slavism could provide a key element of
the “genetics” inside the child, and, relatedly, it could provide a
“genetics” for thinking about rural villages. The Pan-Slavic literature
frequently valorized village/rural schooling as the source of something
quite like an élan vital. The above mentioned Milan Eevin was the chief
Yugoslav delegate to the 1931 Slavic Pedagogical Congress in Poland

[p. 146] [PDF page 165]

and in one of his reports he described a field-trip to a Polish village
school near Warsaw, writing that the village preserved values and
personality, “which the cities lost, not only for themselves but for
the entire nation.”29 For Yugoslavs, the “genetics” of the village, of the
child, and of the Slav were enchanted and guiding objects. They were
capital to be pursued; they were dynamic objects that allowed movement
forward. Because of its emphasis on genetics, Claparède/Deweyan
pedagogy allowed for its own indigenization, and acceded to its own
balkanization, on a theoretical and practical level.
    The functional aspects of Dewey’s pedagogy were consistent with a
functional psychology that, for Claparède, held promise for renovat-
ing associationist psychology with an understanding of consciousness
as less static and more attuned to environmental adaptability in a
Darwinian sense. As mentioned above, Claparède emphasized the
dynamic as opposed to static features of the psyche, which was an
emphasis that corresponded to viewing the human as a whole unit
with functional integrity in adapting to its needs and its environment.
The activities of the child were an important concern in this respect
and Claparède noted that educators needed to make sure that the
child’s activities and work accorded with his or her “interior needs.”30
As “functional,” the child’s activities thus had the potential to provide
a surface for pedagogic interventions.
    The connections between functional psychology, Dewey, and
Kerschensteiner’s work school movement were noted in a specially
commissioned survey of Czechoslovak education that appeared in
Serbo-Croatian in 1938. In a passage that captures many of the themes
previously discussed in this chapter, a Slovak school inspector by the
name of Franjo Musil explained to Yugoslav readers the historical
development of Czechoslovak didactics. Musil’s story was noticeably
similar to the tale that Salih Ljubuncin told through the “Tolstoy,
J. Dewey, Spencer, M. Montessori” bookshelf that this chapter began
with. According to Musil, up until 1918 German and Austrian peda-
gogies had been forced on a Czechoslovakia that with independence
post-1918 was able choose more freely what best suited its educational
needs. The free school [slobodna Ekola] movement that emphasized
“active methods” and eclipsed the “passive learning” of information
(as under the old regime) was seen by Musil as forming “under the
influence of studies in functional psychology which freed children to
proceed through a system of activities that would develop their dispo-
sitions.” This led, he noted, to the organization of schooling around
“centers of children’s interest.” Musil’s bookshelf of pedagogic leaders

[p. 147] [PDF page 166]

in this area included “Montessori, Decroly, Claparède and, in particular,
Dewey.” In the traveling of this library to Yugoslavia, it can be noted
that Dewey’s theorization of activity was taken as a key concept war-
ranting the focus on the child’s work. Musil stated that this impulse had
even led to the establishment of “educational handiwork” being estab-
lished as a required school subject for boys in Czechoslovakia.31 Once
again Dewey traveled in Yugoslavia in the company of Kerschensteiner;
here he has also been put in the company of Claparède and functional
psychology and figures as the philosopher of a social redemption promised
by pedagogic work centering on the child’s activity.
    The social aspects of Dewey’s pedagogy were, in Claparède’s view,
infused throughout Dewey’s ideas. He noted that Dewey responded to
contemporary societies (“the new conditions of our new civilization”)
when children were severed from many of the natural occupations
that were once adequate to “develop a social instinct.” In the essay
Claparède suggested a large concern with anomie by mentioning the
loss of family life, and the phenomenon of parental work outside the
home meaning that children were not kept to their work or tasks.
Claparède concluded that it was only the school that could fix con-
temporary social life. And toward this end he turned to Dewey’s con-
cept of the “the school as a small community.” He also once again
turned to Kerschensteiner and the notion of handiwork as “the best
type of work for interpersonal cooperative work” and “work in a
community”32 as educational strategies that would redeem society.
    Milan Eevin, in his introduction to Claparède’s piece, also took up
the question of what it was that would allow people to live well
together. He drew out of Claparède/Dewey the collective development
of individual self-responsibility and a healthy reason as the signature
features for productive social living in contemporary times. Related to
this, for both Eevin and Claparède, one of the things that was central
about Dewey was that not only did he think such things but that he
carried them out—an observation already discussed earlier. Practical
actions and a restructuring of human agency were offered toward the
goal of repairing and moving society forward as a successful human
enterprise.

                                                         Conclusion
Balkanizing John Dewey was a cultural phenomenon occurring in a
number of uncoordinated, overlapping ways. Dewey was circulated
and reassembled in Yugoslavia in the 1920s and 1930s as a harbinger

[p. 148] [PDF page 167]

of modernity. This modernity, however, was one that could be flexibly
molded and enchanted and disenchanted to fit local conditions. The
concepts of practical action that circulated with Dewey could be
Slavicized—something Yugoslavs considered their “northern brothers”
the Czechoslovaks to have done quite successfully, for example, “the
Czechoslovak school will be above all else Czechoslovak.” This
adaptability wasn’t only the result of contemporary thinking about
appropriation, it had also to do with the skills and dispositions neces-
sary for living in uncertain times and shifting cultural terrains. Dewey’s
localization and assembling in interwar Yugoslavia had centrally to do
with the assembling of one of the multiples of modernity.
    On the modern bookshelves and in the libraries with which Dewey
traveled he was reassembled with other conceptual persona, interna-
tional figures who too each had their specific balkanized versions.
Among these figures, however, Dewey most consistently appeared in
Yugoslav literature as a theorist of actions and activity. The theoriza-
tion of “action” attributed to Dewey was tied to a modern mode of
living organized according to individual independence, self-reliance,
and self-government. The modern self that could be glimpsed and
fabricated through the proper pedagogical use of the child’s work,
activities, and interests was one who was constituted through its own
actions. This way of acting was both a doing and way of thinking
inasmuch as action tied to interests/curiosity/dispositions generated
principles of reflection and criteria for evaluating knowledge. In the
assembling of Dewey both as persona and in textual commentary on
his work the “activity of the child” provided a sound basis for reliably
intervening on the individual and for reconstituting the social as
a domain of interaction and mutuality. Yet this activity was both
enchanted with a guiding purposiveness and disenchanted in itself and
in the educational reformer’s progress-oriented acting according to a
set of assumed functions and responsibilities.
    John Dewey’s active and acting child appeared in Yugoslavia as the
best way that true nature could be expressed and nurtured in a moder-
nity. The “genetics” of this child were offered up to the disenchanting
lenses and tactics of scientific study that would be undertaken by
psychologists and through experimental pedagogy. Yet, an enchanted
“core” remained—the seat of purposive-ness, intentionality, and voli-
tion of which interests and activities were, in Claparède’s word, only
“symptomatic.” The attribution of a spiritual mystery to the soul was
a central idea that traveled with Dewey in Yugoslavia. Whether this
was the “Deweyan” in a Hyde Park or Morningside Heights sense is

[p. 149] [PDF page 168]

less important than the possibilities this engendered for Dewey as well
as “J. Dewey” to comply with and support the importance of the
“Slavic” in forming and enchanting the modern Yugoslav child and
school.
   The balkanization of John Dewey was a feature in the creation of a
“Slavic modernity” in Yugoslavia in the 1920s and 1930s. This
modernity was distinct in one respect in being so commonly articu-
lated along a network of Yugoslav–Czechoslovak interaction and not
according to a rigidly preserved center–periphery dynamic of relations.
In other aspects, Yugoslavia’s “Slavic modernity” was distinct in bring-
ing together the educational reformer’s agency with the agentic activi-
ties of the child. Theorizing Dewey’s active and acting child through
the “Slavic” meant that purposive-ness of action could be desacralized,
disenchanted, and located within society—and, it could at the same
time be naturalized, and re-enchanted by being located within the
spiritualization of a “Slavic genetics” that was individual and social.
   Alongside this, a certain pragmatism was ensconced in the very
processes and activities of John Dewey’s balkanization. Cultural
thinking in the 1920s and 1930s about the dissolution of barriers to
the flows of knowledge and the putative “universality” of social prob-
lems and their solutions generated a progressive point of view that
meant that Yugoslavs were drawn into the project of pragmatically
creating a universe. In this world (here it has been a “Slavic world”)
actions generate their own knowledges; serialistic, repeated actions
reinforce and create a mental world in which these actions fit. The
progressive point of view in Yugoslavia in the 1920s and 1930s was a
view on a world built around doing and progressing—a world of
(pragmatic) involvement in that acting and advancing.

                                                                         Notes
1. Salih Ljubuncin, Ekolstvo i prosvjeta u Cehoslovackoj: s osobitim obzirom na
   pedagoeku i ekolsku reformu, ed. Salih Ljubuncin, Biblioteka “Ekole Rada”
   (Zagreb: Naklada A. Brusina Naslj. V. i M. Steiner, 1934), 52–53.
2. My thinking on the twinning of “disenchantment” and “enchantment” is
   indebted to Jane Bennett, “The enchanted world of modernity: Paracelsus,
   Kant and Deleuze,” Cultural Values 1, no. 1 (1997).
3. John W. Meyer and Ronald L. Jefferson, “The ‘actors’ of modern society: The cul-
   tural construction of social agency,” Sociological Theory 18, no. 1 (2000): 101.
4. Max Weber, “Science as a vocation,” in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology,
   ed. H. H. Gerth and C. W. Mills (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981), 139.

[p. 150] [PDF page 169]

5. See the discussion in Thomas S. Popkewitz, Struggling for the Soul: The
    Politics of Schooling and the Construction of the Teacher (New York:
    Teachers College Press, 1998).
 6. Salih Ljubuncin, “Naucno putovanje naeih ucitelja u Cehoslovacku,”
    Napretka i Savremena Ekole, no. 5–10 (1933).
 7. Andrej Debenak, “Vtisi iz uciteljske studijske ekskurzije po Cehoslovaeki,”
    Uciteljski tovaris 62, no. 10–11 (1933).
 8. Ljubuncin, Ekolstvo i prosvjeta u Cehoslovackoj, 5.
 9. “Salih Ljubuncin: Ekolstvo i prosvjeta u Cehoslovackoj [book review],”
    Ucitelj 44, no. 3 (1934): 235.
10. Bob Blaisdell, Tolstoy as Teacher: Leo Tolstoy’s Writings on Education
    (New York: Teachers and Writers Collaborative, 2000).
11. Tadeusz Nowacki, “Wstpp,” in Sergiusz Hessen: Filozofia — Kultura —
    Wychowanie, ed. Maria Hessenowa (Wroc2aw: Polska Adademia Nauk, 1973).
12. The book included two of Dewey’s essays, “The School and Social Progress”
    and “The Child and the Curriculum.”
13. “!on Duji: Ekola i druetvo [book review],” Ucitelj 50, no. 4 (1935).
14. Meyer and Jefferson, “The “actors” of modern society,” 105.
15. “!on Duji: Ekola i druetvo [book review].”
16. See Hermann Röhrs, “Georg Kerschensteiner,” Prospects (Paris) 23, no. 3/4
    (1993).
17. Radna Ekola was published between 1924 and 1929. In its final years the
    journal was affiliated with The New Era, the flagship publication of the
    New Educational Fellowship. Unlike The New Era’s other international asso-
    ciates in the 1920s and 1930s, however, Radna Ekola published almost no
    translations of New Era articles.
18. This position pervades most of the issues and appears in the letter from the
    editor (Jovan S. Jovanovin), which launched the first issue. Alongside stating
    that one of its goals was to have “manual work” (rucni rad) appear as a
    school subject the editor noted his hope that “work” would become a
    “principle” from which everything in pedagogy would follow. Jovan S.
    Jovanovin, “Naeim Citaocima,” Radna Ekola 1, no. 1 (1924).
19. Vlad. Spasin, “Stara i nova Ekola po !onu Duiju,” Radna Ekola 2, no. 5, 6, 7,
    8, and 9 (1926): 127.
20. Dragoljub Brankovin, “Pedagogika !ona Duja,” Ucitelj 44, no. 2 (1934): 172.
21. Edouard Claparède, “Introduction,” in L’Ecole et l’enfant ([John Dewey]
    Neuchatel, Paris: Delachaux & Niestlé; Librairie Fischbacher, 1913).
22. Edouard (Claparède) Klapared, Pedagogija !ona !uia, trans. Milan Eevin
    (Beograd: Izdanje Knjidarnice Rajkovina i Dukovina, 1920).
23. Z Dirin, “Pedagogika !ona !uia—Ed. Klapared,” Ucitelj 10, no. 6 (1930).
24. Jan Úher, Základy Americké Vynhovy (Praha: Cin, 1930), 103–106.
25. These excerpts are translated from the Serbo-Croatian. Klapared, Pedagogija
    !ona !uia, 19.
26. Milan Eevin, “Introduction,” in Edouard (Claparède) Klapared, Pedagogija
    !ona !uia (Beograd: Izdanje Knjidarnice Rajkovina i Dukovina, 1920), 4.

[p. 151] [PDF page 170]

27. Claparède was familiar with Bergson’s work Daniel Hameline, “Edouard
    Claparède,” Perspectices: revue trimestrielle d’éducation comparée 23,
    no. 1–2 (1993): 6, Even though he disputed some of Bergson’s arguments
    (Tröhler, chapter 3, this volume).
28. Noah W. Sobe, “Cultivating a ‘Slavic modern’: Yugoslav beekeeping, schooling
    and travel in the 1920s and 1930s,” Paedagogica Historica 41, no. 1–2
    (2005): 145–60.
29. Milan Eevin, Prvi Slovenski Pedagoeki Kongres (Beograd: Pedagogijska
    Knjidnica, 1932), 22.
30. Klapared, Pedagogija !ona !uia, 23.
31. Franjo Musil, “Razvoj i danaenje stanje Cehoslovacke didaktike,” in Pedagoeka
    Cehslovacka, 1918–1938, ed. M. P. Majstorovin (Beograd: Izdanje
    Jugoslovenskog Uciteljskog Udrudenja, 1938), 28.
32. Klapared, Pedagogija !ona !uia, 25.
