Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part III: European Spaces: The Southern Eastern Tiers
Chapter 7: John Dewey’s Travelings into the Project of Turkish Modernity
Sabiha Bilgi; Seçkin Özsoy
Original print pages 153–177; PDF pages 172–196

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 153] [PDF page 172]

7
          John Dewey’s Travelings into the Project of
                                 Turkish Modernity1

                                          Sabiha Bilgi and Seçkin Özsoy




                                                       Introduction
The “struggle” to catch up with, and become part of, Western
civilization in Turkey has a centuries-long history. Having a Western
future in Turkey, however, means taking on a national identity that
also sees Turkey in terms of lack (of Western qualities) and of “being
behind.” The Kemalist project of the Turkish national elite was named
after the military and civilian leader who sought to Europeanize the
nation from the 1920s. In this project, the “West” stands as the desti-
nation point for “the nation.” Turkey has been running away from a
“past” since the 1920s. There is no “present” between the “Western
future” and the “never passing” past. In Ahıska’s words, “the present
is denied in its heterogeneous experimental terms and reduced to a
permanent crisis that the Turkish national elite has ‘struggled’ to evade
from the very beginning.”2
   Unceasing numbers of educational reform proposals are released in
order to close the “gap” between the present/past and the future.
There has never been a shortage in the supply of reforms, seeking
to better the school and its pedagogical practices in/through which
the “modern/Western” way of being and living will be attained. Yet
ironically the present-day educational system is in such a pathetic
condition that nobody, even the minister of education, dares to talk of
any progress or betterment. Current reports on the condition of the
educational system testify to the fact that the school produces and

[p. 154] [PDF page 173]

reinforces the inequalities and injustices of “the present.” The release
of these reports, on the other hand, does not lead to a critical engage-
ment with the present. Instead, as mnsel notes, it gives a start to a “mass
mourning” for the condition of the educational system.3 The lament is
for the state of the “nation” despite its centuries-long struggle to become
part of modern/Western civilization. Speaking of failure, not success,
these reports are the paramount technology that breeds a peculiar way
that the collective imagination constructs Turks as “the Western” and
“the Other” at the same time. While projecting people into this collec-
tive narrative of “We,” the practices of modernity divide and exclude
people along the axis of “the West” and “the Other.” Rendering indi-
viduals the objects and subjects of intensive control and indoctrina-
tion, the practices of modernity fabricate an individual who has no
sense of the historicity of “the present,” refusing to “know the realm
of forces that produce things as they are.”4
   This chapter is about the emergence of modernity in Turkey. More
specifically, the chapter examines the role of John Dewey as an
“indigenous foreigner” in the constitution of modernity as a “fixed”
and “thing-like” future associated with “the West.” It investigates the
ways in which Dewey’s ideas of “individual,” “community,” “democ-
racy” and “education” have been assembled/reassembled and made
understandable in Turkey. The chapter aims to historicize the “pres-
ent” practices of schooling that are “reduced to a permanent crisis that
the Turkish national elite has ‘struggled’ to evade from the very begin-
ning.”5 By looking at how Dewey’s ideas were put into work “from
the very beginning” the chapter aims to attend to “the present” of
schooling that might bear no resemblance to what Dewey conceived as
a democratic and progressive school.
   There are already quite a number of studies examining the role of
Dewey in the project of Turkish modernity. These studies tend to
reduce the analysis of Dewey to a problematic of more/less successful
imitation of the original.6 This study differs from the previous analy-
ses in that it rejects the conceptualization of Dewey’s ideas as a fixed
“thing” that is applied, imitated, adapted, and/or imposed in/on/to the
“context” of Turkey.
   This chapter aims to “contextualize” Dewey in Turkey by focusing
on his role as “indigenous foreigner” in the “contextualizing” of Turkey.
In other words, first, the chapter does not treat Turkey as if it is a given
national “context” to which the “alien” ideas of Dewey were bor-
rowed from abroad and in which their application is juxtaposed to a
pre-known consequence. Rather, it pays attention to the construction
of Turkey as a national locality. It looks at why and how Dewey

[p. 155] [PDF page 174]

traveled in the production of Turkey as an “imagined community,”7
representing “an imagined state of being,”8 both individual and col-
lective. Second, as Popkewitz argues, we assert that Dewey is not a
“person” in the conventional sense.9 Rather, he personifies the ideas
of “individual,” “community,” “democracy,” and “education” into which
“diverse life worlds and conceptual horizons about being human” are
“translated.”10 As noted by Chakrabarty, the process of translation
modifies “existing archives of thought and practices.” What makes
these ideas universal is the translation process itself. The same transla-
tion process also destabilizes the universality of these ideas and pro-
duces different discursive practices.11 Instead of going after the tendency
of the existing studies to take “difference” as a “starting point” and
subscribe to some universals in the analysis of the Turkish experience
of modernity in education, in this chapter, we follow the call of Gupta
and Ferguson, take “difference” as “an end product” and go on to
explore the production of this “difference.”12
   This chapter consists of four sections. The first section delineates the
notion of “multiple modernities” upon which the analysis is built.
The second section presents a discussion of the early reform movements
in the late Ottoman Empire era in which the nationalizing/modernizing/
westernizing Kemalist movement has its roots. The third section is
devoted to the analysis of what made Dewey “travel” into the public edu-
cation discussions of Kemalist elite and what cultural purposes Dewey
was to serve. The final section focuses on the educational initiatives in the
early years of the Republic, including Turkish Hearths, the People’s
Houses, and finally Village Institutes. The significance of these three dif-
ferent reform movements is that they involve different projects of mod-
ernizing the nation through modernizing the individual within Turkey.

                                             Multiple Modernities?
In academic circles, societies other than the Western generally are seen
as coming to the question of modernity from without. These societies
are considered not just as “not-modern” but as “not yet modern.”
“Being modern” represents a way of life, reached through rationalism
in its origin, the West, and defined by a set of adjectives, such as indus-
trial economies, scientific technologies, democratic politics, secular
worldviews, and so on. “Becoming modern” is seen as a result of the
impact/influence of the West on other national locales. As a unidirec-
tional process, modernization represents a movement that stems from
the effect of the West/the global and leads people with diverse ways of
living to move towards a unitary modernity. The present disjunctures

[p. 156] [PDF page 175]

in the social, economic, political, and educational arenas of countries
across the world, then, come to be seen as a marker of an incomplete
transformation. Following this rationale, Wolf-Gazo, for example, not
surprisingly ends his analysis of Dewey in Turkey with the statement
that “the applied Enlightenment has not yet completed its task.”13
   This widespread account of modernity as a “coherent and inte-
grated whole” has been under attack recently.14 Turning its critical
gaze on the universal and evolutionary theories of historical change of
societies, poststructural and postcolonial scholarship rejects the treat-
ment of any “difference” as a marker of “incompleteness” as posited
within a Western historicity. As the idea of “multiple modernities”
implies, recent scholarship seeks to understand diverse ways of con-
temporary human experience around the world within the pluralized
notion of modern. The insistence on the pluralization of modernity
has nothing to do with the celebration of relativism. Neither does it
mean that Western discourses of modernity have no relevance any-
more. The insistence on the pluralization of modernity is concerned
with understanding how different systems of values about the self
come into play in the construction of modernity.
   Our focus on Dewey’s “travels” to Turkey is our approach to
considering the issue of multiple modernities in the construction of
modern selves as historical practices. Our concern is with understand-
ing the divergences of modernity in Turkey. This is accomplished by
viewing the way in which the political elite of Turkey bring into their
efforts to change not only the institutions of the state and society, but
also the modes of living through which individuals are to tie their
individual practices and thought to collective notions of the nation.
The following sections focus, first, on “the modernizing offensive”
that takes place in the early decades of the twentieth century in Turkey,
differentiating but also placing the reform efforts within the context of
its Ottoman legacies. This social and political context provides an
overlapping set of assumptions and cultural norms through which
Dewey travels into the project of modernity in Turkey.


A “Modernizing Offensive”: Turkish
Modernization Project and Its
Ottoman Distinctions
Turkish modernity can be characterized by what Peter Wagner calls, a
modernizing offensive “in which a small group use their power to

[p. 157] [PDF page 176]

spread modernity into society.”15 The main themes of the Turkish
project of modernity were “nation” and “Western civilization.” The
project promised to build an independent nation taking charge of its
own destiny, to lift the nation up to the level of “Western civilization,”
and to build “a perfect democracy.” What made this project of moder-
nity unique is that Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and his followers called
Kemalists were to “work for something [the Turkish nation] which did
not exist as if it existed and to make it exist.”16 Introducing new rules
and regulations for the everyday practices of people, the project aimed
to make them into a citizenry with obligations and rights vis-à-vis the
new established nation-state. The transformative capacity of the proj-
ect proved to be impressive. It produced subjects who see themselves as
part of the national community, claiming rights, such as the demands
of Kurdish population for cultural and linguistic recognition. The
other distinctive characteristic of the Kemalist modernization project
and its ironic quality was that it was never meant to be a negotiation
process. The demands were suppressed in the name of safeguarding
“the indivisible integrity of the state with its territory and nation.”
    Contrary to widespread accounts, the Kemalist project of moder-
nity does not constitute a sudden and total break with the Ottoman
past. Neither can it be seen as the importation of “alien” Western val-
ues into the society. The Kemalist project of modernity developed out
of, and built upon the centuries-old preoccupation of the Ottoman
state elite with the problem of saving the state, upon which their very
social position, legitimacy, and livelihood was dependent. As Kazancıgil
argues, Kemalism was “the last and most successful response” to this
age-old problem.17 As “an intensification, radicalization and culmina-
tion” of the late Ottoman era reform movements that developed
through a long and complex interaction between the Ottoman Empire
and the West,18 the Kemalism led to the emergence of a new political
and cultural structure. The new Republic was to be quite different
from the Ottoman Empire; yet it was not to represent a decisive break
with the past. We explore these conditions of political culture as a way
to enter into a discussion of the traveling library in which Dewey was
assembled in Turkey.
    If we look first at Ottoman political culture, it shared the character-
istics of “patrimonialism,” while still keeping its own particularities.19
The state was ruled in the name of the dynasty. Identical with the per-
sonality of the sultan, the state was absolute. The territory of the
Empire comprised a variety of ethnic, tribal, religious, and linguistic
communities, and the state was very careful not to intervene in the

[p. 158] [PDF page 177]

everyday life practices of these groups. To do otherwise, for example,
to introduce certain regulations and laws in education or in family,
would have resulted in the emergence of a space in which the formu-
lation and implementation of policies were negotiated by these various
groups. It would have led to the formation of a social existence that
would have escaped from the control of the absolute state. As mnsel
notes, the long-lasting and extended authority of the state over its sub-
jects from Balkans to the Arabic peninsula depended on the existence
of these diverse groups as homogenous entities having no relationship
with each other.20
    Hindering the development of networks among these different
groups, the relationship of the Ottoman state and these groups was
like the authoritarian relationship of father and children in a house-
hold. The state exercised its authority over the “household” through
its military and civil bureaucratic officials to whom the monopoly of
vital resources, legitimacy, and authority was reserved. What the cate-
gory “Turk” represented was a variety of peasant tribes in Anatolia.
The name “Turk,” however, meant nothing to them. The Ottoman
state was theocratic. Yet this does not mean that Islam had a unitary
concern, and the believers in Islam were the subjects with whom the
state identifies itself with and through whom it gains its justification.
Rather, through the possession of the Caliphate,21 the state was to use
Islam as a means that was beyond any societal, worldly, or human in
order to justify its absolute power.22
    The nineteenth century was a turning point for Ottoman state.
The state was losing its control over the provinces. With increasing
nationalist movements, various groups were proclaiming their inde-
pendence, and there was a population that was completely indifferent
to the dissolution of the Empire. In this period, the idea of the superi-
ority of the European societies began to gain acceptance at the state
level. Acting like an interface between the Western world and the
masses, the state elite was to come to an agreement that the imitation
of “Western ways” was essential in order to save the state.23
    On the other hand, the presumed superiority of the West and
accordingly what constituted “modern” and “backward” in the late
Ottoman Empire era was seen as institutional and administrational.24
Initiated with Tanzimat Fermanı (the Reform Edict) in 1839, the
reforms marked the nineteenth century with successive attempts to
modify the existing administrative, educational, military, and judicial
institutions to resemble Western models. These early reform move-
ments included the establishment of secular schools in the cities in

[p. 159] [PDF page 178]

which the state elite was trained for the implementation of new laws
and regulations.25 Aiming to save the Empire by polishing its “super-
structure” in accordance to “Western” ways, these reforms had a very
modest penetration into the society. These reforms were targeted for
the elites, but they embodied a particular cultural orientation that
can be associated with modernity—the organizing and planning of
the present for the future. As Mardin argues, the statesmen of the
Tanzimat were concerned with “shaping the present for future use.”26
Mass schooling was not to be an issue in the state agenda until the new
generations of state elite acquire their image of Western societies in
these secular schools, leading them to think of the existing organiza-
tion of social life in the Ottoman Lands as the reason of the dissolu-
tion of the Empire and therefore in the need of modification for the
future. Indigenized Dewey, then, was to be a reference for a cultural
regeneration project, of which the aim would be regarded as the
replacement (not even transformation) of the existing community with
a different one.
   The Kemalist generation was educated in these secular Western
schools in the city.27 In classrooms of orderly rows of desks and chairs
and segregated from Ottoman life, they studied new knowledge—
geography, physics, law, administration, and so on. What they did in
these schools was textbook learning. As Mardin writes, “life as
described in books was more real than life itself.”28 Attributing the
decline of the Empire to the “Eastern” or “Oriental” culture that pre-
vailed in the Ottoman lands, the Kemalist generation concluded that
unless the state was renovated radically in accordance with the univer-
sal principles of citizenship, nationalism, and secularism, it was doomed
to death. The Kemailists played a great role in the Orientalizing of
“Turks” as backward, ignorant, fanatic, and fatalistic. The Kemalists
fashioned a “Western civilization” that was based on the idea that it
must be implemented as quickly as possible if the state were to survive.29
   After the War of Independence, the Republic of Turkey was pro-
claimed in 1923. The borders of the new homeland were drawn, and
it was declared that the bounded place is the sacred fatherland in
which the Turkish nation of the new modern state lived. The form of
government of the new state was to be republican, and it was stated
that sovereignty belongs to the nation. By attributing the predicament
of the people to the traditional and moral standings coming from the
Islamic-Ottoman heritage, the existing life in the Ottoman Lands was
normalized. Although the past was thought to be the root cause of
its predicament, the Turkish nation also needed a “Golden Age.”

[p. 160] [PDF page 179]

Constructing the pre-Islamic Central Asian civilizations as the golden
past and locating its “other” in Arabic and Persian cultures, the
nationalist discourse postulated that the pure and glorious Turkish
people had been corrupted by the influence of these cultures. As the
true and rational will of its people, the state was now to take the
responsibility for cleansing elements that corrupted its pure and glori-
ous character and put them on track their natural drive toward being
a modern, developed, and democratic society. The successive radical
and not-so-radical reforms, ranging from the replacement of Arabic
alphabet with the Latin to the changes in the dress code were to
remove the visibility of any character that resembles the Ottoman and
Islamic past, which was seen as conflicting with the progress and
democracy.30 Through their expansion across Turkey, the secular
schools were to keep making the modern individual of/for the new
nation-state. The new Republic was to be no more the sacred repre-
sentative of God on earth but the embodiment of another sacred
cause, the modernizer of Turkish people.


Dewey’s Travels into the Project of Modernity
Dewey’s visit to Turkey was at the invitation of Ministry of Education
to offer the reports of recommendations for restructuring and reor-
ganizing the educational system, which we will discuss later. His visit
coincided with the period in which Dewey began to enjoy an interna-
tional reputation. But it would be an oversimplification to regard the
interest of the Republican elite in Dewey simply as a reflection of the
intellectual fashions of the time.

Dewey as a Modernizing Discourse
First, for the state elite, the traditional and religious moral values of
people were the main cause of their predicament. The insistence on the
link between science, morality, social order, and betterment in Dewey’s
texts were to provide the elite with an objective basis for their project
of converting the masses of Anatolia to a new secular religion. The
Republic was to be the new religion, from which all moral principles
will be drawn. As Fay Kirby Berkes argues, the elite were:
  . . . concerned primarily with the highest problems of moral transfor-
  mation. They were moralists who had noted the failure of the tradi-
  tional values, religious and ethical, to exercise effective control over the
  Faithful under the new social, economic, and political conditions. For

[p. 161] [PDF page 180]

them, new and secular conceptions of the Good, the True, and the
  Beautiful would be guides to action, the only valid creation of these
  would be individual Reason.31

    Second, Dewey’s thought that the school is the primary institution
to project the population into a citizenry sharing a set of worldly prin-
ciples and values fell on receptive ears among the Republican elite.
Dewey was to be a name invoked in the Turkish modernization dis-
course, assigning the school to the task of “teaching” the requirements
of the new regime and democracy in its sterilized environment to
transform the outside.
    Third, Dewey’s ideas of “public interest,” “common good,” and
“social organism” were captivating for the Turkish Republican elite
who imagined a national community characterized by harmony instead
of dissent and struggle. These ideas were translated into the modern-
ization discourse as “the interest of the nation,” “the common good of
the nation,” and “the nation as a social organism.” The Turkish nation
was to be a “Great Community” of the individuals who work cooper-
atively for the sake of the sublime principles and purposes of the
nation’s modernization and development. Dewey’s writings were
connected to the institutions of centralized national education that
were to be assigned to the role of making the individual conscious of
his/her capacity in regulating his/her conduct where the rights of the
individual were to conform with the founding principles and aspira-
tions of the nation-state. In other words, there was no “individual”
outside and before the realm of the nation and its sublime purposes
that linked the pursuit of individual self-realization, individual good
and perfection with the norms and values ascribed to the common
good and perfection of the nation.
    Finally, with his reports on, and recommendations for, the Turkish
education system alone, Dewey was to give the modernizing elite a jus-
tification for their intended reforms and to bless their mission to civi-
lize the uncivilized masses for the future democracy, which they would
later join. Dewey began his report by drawing attention to the neces-
sity of setting down the main aim and purpose of the Turkish schools:
  Fortunately, there is no difficulty in stating the main end to be secured
  by the education system of Turkey. It is development of Turkey as a
  vital, free, independent and lay republic in full membership in the circle
  of civilized states. To achieve this end the schools must (1) form proper
  political habits and ideas; (2) foster the various forms of political habits
  and ability, and (3) develop the traits and dispositions of character,

[p. 162] [PDF page 181]

intellectual and moral which fit men and women of self-government,
  economic self-support and industrial progress; namely initiative and
  inventiveness, independence of judgment, ability to think scientifically
  and to cooperate for common purposes socially. To realize these ends,
  the mass of citizens must be educated for intellectual participation in the
  political, economic and cultural growth of the country, and not simply
  certain leaders.32

    It should be noted that Dewey was not the only foreigner enmeshed
with the Turkish modernization discourse and getting indigenized. He
traveled with other members of a traveling library, including German
Georg Kerschensteiner and Alfred Kuhne, Belgian Omer Buyse, and
Swiss Albert Malche. All but Kerschensteiner were both literately and
literally present in Turkey during the early years of the Republic.

“An Educational Mission”?: Dewey’s Visit to
Turkey and Reports for the Ministry
A few days after the law of the unification of education was passed in
March 1924, Dewey was invited to Turkey. The law meant that all
educational institutions, including foreign schools, were to be under
the control of the Ministry of Education. Charles R. Crane,33 a close
friend of Dewey, played an important role in Dewey’s acceptance of
the invitation.34 Coming to Turkey in the summer of the same year,
Dewey was to have a touristic experience during his two-month stay,
to act the role of diplomat negotiating the status of foreign schools,
and also to work on the recommendation reports the Ministry has
asked for.
   Dewey arrived in Istanbul in mid-July. His first meeting was with
the president of Darülfünun (today’s Istanbul University), msmail
Hakkı Baltacıoqlu, in order to get general information about the edu-
cational system. After a week of sightseeing, Dewey started his school
trips and visited about ten schools in Istanbul. Since Dewey’s visit was
during the summer break, he did not have the chance to see classroom
practices. His observations were to be limited to school buildings,
classrooms, and course materials. About a month later, Dewey moved
to Ankara in order to meet the Minister of Education. He attended the
Teachers Union Meeting at which he also met Atatürk. After spending
about ten days in Ankara and visiting two or three schools, Dewey left
for Bursa, the old capital of Ottoman Empire and traveled in the coun-
tryside. In the beginning of September, he was back in Istanbul, and
about two weeks later, he left for the United States.35

[p. 163] [PDF page 182]

Dewey prepared two reports for the Ministry. His first report cov-
ered issues concerning how the national budget for education should
be appropriated. After returning to the United States, he sent his sec-
ond report which was relatively more comprehensive in comparison
with the first one. Consisting of thirty pages, it included a number of
proposals, ranging from the aims of national education to the recruit-
ment of teachers.36 Later, he published five articles on Turkey, one of
which was devoted particularly to the issue of foreign schools.37 These
articles reflected Dewey’s impressions of Turkey. For example, he
made an analogy between the frontier of America and the people of
Turkey in terms of their openness to the change. He often reiterated
the “ignorance,” “backwardness,” “fatalism,” and “docility” of the
peasants as a “fait accompli,” leading also to new rules and regulations
to be taken without resentment. He blessed the work of the Turkish
authorities, aiming to replace “dogmatic religious inculcations” with
secular nationalistic ideals and to create a “free,” “independent,” and
“modernized” Turkey. He also pointed out that although “its loyalties
are at least less dreadful than those of dogmatic religious differences,”
“nationalism has its evils” as well. He stressed the need for finding out
“terms upon which the populations could live peaceably together”
under a unified state. The closure of foreign schools, according to
Dewey, was a symptom of the evil in nationalism to which the Turks
have been suddenly converted and from which they would suffer most.
He wrote that because of “the heritage of ignorance” and “the lack
of skills, knowledge, and source for economic development,” Turkey
cannot afford to lose foreign assistance, if it wants to make the
reforms permanent and efficient. To our knowledge, none of these
articles were translated into Turkish.
    In fact, very few of Dewey’s works were translated into Turkish. He
published numerous books and articles during his lifetime. These
works dealt with many topics ranging from philosophy and ethics to
education and the prospects of democratic society. Except for “Freedom
and Culture,” the nine works by Dewey that were translated into
Turkish had to do with the theme of education. The same indifference
to the other texts is still prevalent in the Turkish intellectual circles.
This actual translation alone tells a lot about the existing discourse
in this particular “life-world” into which Dewey landed and the cultural
purposes he served. Through the process of selective translation, the
educational ideas of Dewey were extracted from the conceptual and
philosophical framework tying together his colossal number of texts
dealing with a variety of themes (including education) and developed

[p. 164] [PDF page 183]

within a particular social, political, and cultural context in/to which
Dewey produced his works. Through this extraction, Dewey became
the figure to whom participants in the modernization project that
aimed to turn the whole society into a school “pointed.” It should be
noted that we do not mean that the Turkish elite simply linked their
discourse to Dewey as an “international authority” by distorting him.
As Foucault put it, “the ‘author-function’ . . . is not formed sponta-
neously through the simple attribution of a discourse to an individual.
It results from a complex operation whose purpose is to construct the
rational entity we call an author.”38 In other words, it was this distor-
tion that made Dewey’s traveling into Turkey possible and turned him
into a “speaker of the universal.”


Reform Movements and the Reinscriptions
of Dewey: Turkish Hearths, the People’s
Houses, and Village Institutes
During the first two decades of the Republic, there were different
educational reforms that posed distinct and different problems for
the intellectual elites who wanted to create a modern mode of living
for the nation’s population. In this section, we discuss three of these
reforms. The first was the Turkish Hearths, an adult education insti-
tution that preceded the formation of the new Republic. The second
was the People’s Houses, another adult education initiative that was
to forge the Kemalist idea of the Turkish nation. The third was the
Village Institutes that trained peasant youth to become teachers. This last
project was not to forge the nation through the making of the individual
but instead to place the individual in a privileged position in the con-
struction of society. By following these different reforms, it is possible
to consider how Dewey enters into educational projects in relation to
the broader cultural and political agendas of the Turkish Kemalist
elites.

Turkish Hearths
The Turkish Hearths (Türk Ocakları) were established in 1908, before
Dewey’s visit, as well as before the establishment of the Republic, but
provided part of the context that made future reforms and understand-
ings possible. This organization had many branches around the Empire,
aiming to disseminate the ideals of Turkism. After the establishment of

[p. 165] [PDF page 184]

the Republic, the Hearths were given a semiofficial status, and they
expanded all around the new territory of Turkey with the mission of
spreading the idea of Turkish nation. The Hearths targeted especially
young people. In them, meetings were organized, classes (like instruc-
tion in the new alphabet) were taught, and libraries were established.
Atatürk followed the works of these organizations closely, attended
the meetings, and often praised them.39 Having their own journals,
the Hearths also provided a space for the state official and intellectual
to refine the idea of Turkish nation further. The Turkish Thesis on
History and the Theory of Sun Language were developed during the
era in which the Hearths had operated. It was postulated that the peo-
ple of the new territory were always Turks. All other cultures and lan-
guages, according to these theses, had descended from Turkish culture
and language. Skirting along the borders of racism, these theses were
ignoring and, in fact, working to destroy the other existing languages
and cultural practices within the new territory of Turkey.40 The same
theses, at the same time, were fashioning an ambiguous national iden-
tity without its “Other” by relating all other cultures and languages to
“Turks” as their originator.41
    The 1930s were to witness that the masses of Anatolia especially
had still a long way to go to join the ideals of Republican elite. The
successive experiments with multiparty politics, for example, proved
to be futile, leading to the unintended demonstrations against the
reforms passed under the leadership of the Republican People’s Party
(RPP). The state elite concluded that “the people were not ready” for
multiparty democracy.
    The failure of the Republican elite’s ideals in reaching the masses
was largely attributed to the Turkish Hearths because the ideals of the
Young Turks period were still dominant in these organizations.42 The
distinction between culture and civilization was still being invoked by
the intellectual circles of Hearths. The leadership of the Hearths was
talking of an “authentic” Turkish culture, representing a set of unique
but constantly modified sentiments and attitudes.43 They were in agree-
ment with the ideals of the Kemalists but they were reluctant to accept
the discontinuity in the Kemalist version of history that rejects the
Ottoman-Islamic past. Part of the existing living cultural system,
Islam, they believed, would have acted as a further unifying factor.
Accordingly, their version of history narrated that Turks had met
Islam at some point of their long historical path and accepted it as
their religion. They placed Turks at the center of Islamic civilization.
With the establishment of the Republic, the Turks were moving from

[p. 166] [PDF page 185]

Islamic civilization to that of contemporary Western civilization.
The president of the Hearths, for example, stated that their mission
was to “work for the Turkish nation passing from one civilization to
another.”44


The People’s Houses
In 1932, the Hearths were replaced with the People’s Houses (Halk
Evleri). Controlled directly by the RPP, the Houses were to forge
the idea of the Turkish nation that was in line with the ideals of the
Kemalism. Western civilization was not merely the contemporary
civilization. It was the only civilization. The nation had chosen being
civilized over being uncivilized, rather than choosing the contempo-
rary civilization over the old one. More importantly, the frustrating
experiment with multiparty politics proved that an idea of “authentic”
culture that is apart from the state and its sacred cause had led people
to mobilize in an undesirable direction. If the new regime was to
survive, it was necessary to produce and spread new sentiments and
attitudes to the masses.
   What the Turkish nation meant in the intellectual circles went
through a modification during the 1930s. More than a latent and par-
ticular pattern of beliefs and values, the idea of Turkish nation was to
represent a community that lives in a given territory, shares a sense of
common goals, and works for these goals with solidarity. The People’s
Houses were to create this national culture by amassing people into a
community with a shared desire to progress and to make this desire
remain permanent.45 Dewey’s ideas were integral to the founding
principles of the People’s Houses. As the name The People’s Houses
implied, the idea of Turkish nation was to be community, of which the
different segments come together and work collaboratively to create a
modern, developed, and democratic “We.” The only division within
the Turkish Society was between the “enlightened” and “the People.”
The Houses operated like a place for “the enlightened” to meet “the
People.” Seen as possessing certain qualifications, such as faith in the
Kemalist ideals, the enlightened were encouraged to visit the villages
in order to persuade the masses of the Anatolia of the necessity of
accepting the new regulations for their salvation. The Houses and
their small versions in the village (the People’s Rooms) were also to
deal with the welfare of “the People.” The Houses and the Rooms, for
example, organized lectures on how to increase agricultural productivity,
how to establish producer cooperatives, and the like.46

[p. 167] [PDF page 186]

At this juncture, the limited scope of the institutions of school
became a concern for the state elite.47 The existing schools were also
perceived as inadequate in teaching the new collective culture.
   As a response to mounting problems, msmet mnönü, the leader of the
RPP, wanted a report on the conditions of primary education. msmail
Hakkı Tonguç was assigned to prepare a general report. Tonguç had
studied at the graduate level in Germany. He had read Dewey, and he
was particularly interested in Kerschensteiner. Until his Köyde Eqitim
(Education in the Village) in 1938, he had published a number of
works that were not directly related to peasant education but dealt
with vocational and technical education. In his later works, Tonguç
brought together Dewey and Kerschensteiner into a conversation that
he used to outline a view of the education of peasants. In his report
for the Ministry, Tonguç proposed the establishment of a new kind of
school to be called Village Institutes (Köy Enstitüleri). After a three-year
experiment, the institutes were officially founded in 1940.
   The institutes operated only for six years in their original design.
The Village Institutes were a project to redesign the individual who
was modern. That gave them different purposes from the previous
reform projects. The institutes worked against the expectations of the
state struggling to be the only reference point through which the indi-
viduals define their “selves” and their world. Following Tonguç’s forced
resignation from the post of general director of Primary Education in
1946 and the closure of the Higher Village Institute in 1947, the dras-
tic changes in the organization and curriculum of the institutes were
introduced. After the transition into multiparty system in 1950, they
were completely closed down in 1954, under the Democrat Party (DP)
leadership.


                                                           Village Institutes
The broad objective of the Village Institutes was to train the peasant
youth as teachers. Designed as free, post-primary, and coeducational
boarding schools, the institutes were to accept only peasant children.
Following their five-year education in these schools, students were to
return to their own villages as teachers. Officially founded in 1940
with the passing of a law, the number of the institutes reached twenty,
including one higher village institution in 1946. The same year, they
enrolled more than 20,000 students, and more than 5,000 graduated.
   The act, Köy Okulları ve Enstitüleri Terkilat Kanunu, written by
Tonguç himself also included a number of regulations concerning

[p. 168] [PDF page 187]

village schools.48 For example, by introducing certain penalties, the
law was to announce the determination of the state in making primary
education compulsory. This law also made it obligatory for every vil-
lager to work at school construction and repair for a certain amount
of day every year. In other words, while the future teacher of the vil-
lage was being trained in the institute, the villager was to prepare the
school. Since the school was to be one of the assets in the village, ded-
icated to its betterment and happiness, it, according to Tonguç, was
the paramount duty of the villager to work for its construction and
repair. In the form of imece, the communal cooperation and work,
Tonguç went on to write in this act, were already part of the village
life. The obligation to work for the village school was drawing on this
tradition of imece. The school, built through the collective efforts of
villagers, Tonguç wrote, was to turn the cooperative work of the
villagers into “a conscious activity.”
    Tonguç explained what he meant by “the peasant problem” and
“the education of the peasant” in the following way.
    In opposition to what some people tend to think, the peasant issue
is not an issue of development in a mechanical sense, but an issue of
the reanimation of the village meaningfully and consciously from inside.
The peasant should be activated and brought to consciousness as
much as possible so that nobody abuses her/him in service of his own
interest. No power treats the peasant as if he/she is a slave or serf. The
peasant never becomes a service animal working unconscious and for
free. This is what is meant by the peasant problem and also includes its
educational problems.49
    Dewey was present in Tonguç’s idea that individuals are agents of
their own destinies. The notion of “reanimation of the village con-
sciously and meaningfully from inside” reflected Tonguç’s insistence
on the idea that the social change cannot be realized through the impo-
sition of a preestablished end on the social body. Rather, he believed
that social change occurs within, and develops out of, the social body
in which individuals participate in the establishment of the ends. To
say or to do otherwise, according to him, was to deny the human agency.
As we go into further discussion in the following pages, the school, in
Tonguç’s thinking, was to provide an environment that would enable
human agency and let the individuals recognize their agency, leading
change and betterment in their immediate environment.
    Within this rationale, Tonguç never spoke of a “peasant mentality”
to be eradicated through the school. In his writings, “peasanthood”
did not represent a set of preferences and dispositions that were

[p. 169] [PDF page 188]

specific to a certain group and contradicted with the idea of “progress.”
Tonguç viewed “village” and “peasanthood” as data revealing the
realities of the environment. Peasanthood, for example, was a life “in
and together with nature.” The school was to be related to and was to
deal with village life. Entering the school for peasant children should
have meant entering an environment that reflected the realities and
necessities of their village life. The school, according to Tonguç, was to
provide its students with an experience through which they realized
themselves as actors of change toward making the existing condition
of life better and more humane for themselves and for all. Dewey’s
criticism of the conceptualization of education as “preparation for
life” was inscribed in Tonguç’s vision of school. For example, he
wrote:

  If education and social life are disconnected, namely if education is
  not life itself, but is designed as a preparation for life on the word
  of some pedagogues, one day education could be rendered inept of
  grasping its own existential condition . . . . Life itself, means first and
  foremost, work.50

    The most distinctive feature of Tonguç’s writings on schooling (and
of the village institutes experience in the Turkish educational history)
was, perhaps, that “the present” was not cut off through/within the
narratives of progress. In Tonguç’s vision of social change and school-
ing, there was no vision of “the future” as a “thing” that comes
before, and guides, change. Change, according to him, occurred con-
stantly through purposeful activity in order to accomplish the aims,
which are an outgrowth of the present condition of life. As the indi-
viduals observed and attended the very immediate of their conditions
of life and worked in cooperation for the achievable aims, change
became possible. He insisted that only through their involvement in
the successful collaborative activity in/through which the individuals
see themselves as crucial actors, a sense of self-reliance and together-
ness develops in the individual, leading to the establishment of new
aims and further successful actions. To have a life in a human sense in
Tonguç’s thinking implied consciousness of the immediate and work-
ing with others cooperatively to get control over, and better, present
life conditions. The existing school, on the other hand, he argued,
“has been able to educate neither their müdavims51 nor the inhabitants
in their immediate surroundings to have a handle on the simplest
forms of occurrences among what we call natural phenomena. On the

[p. 170] [PDF page 189]

other hand, the institutions called hearths of labor and profession par-
tially achieved this end since early periods.”52 What lied under Tonguç
ideas of “work,” “work activity,” and work relations” was a strong
criticism of the schools of the Republic. He wrote:

  Even in the ages when the care of the young generation was instinctive,
  the primary interest has been to educate them for work by engaging
  them actively in a life of work. This is an obvious fact in the cultural his-
  tory of humanity. On a spectrum ranging from the most primitive type
  of work life to the highest level of culture, the picture remains the same:
  all pieces of work were created through the combination of manual
  work, intellectual activity and thinking. Human beings have been edu-
  cated by partaking in the process of creating these works. However, in
  many societies, the schools have still not gone beyond educating only a
  portion of their members, namely the privileged groups. Education
  given in the family and the workplaces is unlike this. In contrast to
  schools, these settings are not concerned with creating social layers by
  excessively developing the abilities of certain individuals in an artificial
  manner. This huge disparity between the educational institutions of
  school and family/work place stems from the fact that schools are
  unaware of the educational role and value of work, and still have not
  been able to embrace all members of the society. . . . One of the most
  important duties of our century and the ones to come will be without
  doubt to eliminate this discrepancy.53


   Tonguç wrote against the widespread tendency to assume that in
order to bring people under a set of ideals and mobilize them for a
better future, they had to first be taught a set of principles, values,
knowledge, and dispositions. By reiterating “the relation among work
activity, intellectual activity and thinking,” Tonguç rejected the idea
that all these principles, values, knowledge, and ideals existed outside
and before the actions and thinking of the individual. “The school,”
he wrote, “lost its connection, while it is turned into an institution that
deals with every single problem” and “its bookish character falls short
in being rational and did not overlap with the realities of the life.”54
Furthermore, the attribution of a special status to knowledge, accord-
ing to Tonguç, led to the fragmentation of society, creating social
layers in accordance to who posses it and who does not. Dewey was
present in Tonguç’s account of knowledge as a means. According to
Tonguç, the value of knowledge came from the extent to which it leads
to successful action. As long as it attains relevance in life and makes
the individual capable of identifying and coping with the immediate

[p. 171] [PDF page 190]

problems effectively and successfully, according to him, knowledge
had a value. He wrote:

  In the village institutes and the village schools, knowledge is an instru-
  ment. This instrument will be used to stimulate students’ intellects, to
  incite their imagination, and to teach them basic work/study methods.
  Putting stress on the acquisition of simple information will never be
  compatible with the spirit of work so fundamental to the village schools
  and the village institutes. The village institutes will bring up simple
  yet skilled (goal-getter) individuals who will be citizens deriving spiri-
  tual strength from their abilities and accomplishing tasks with their
  intellectual power.55

   Following the rationale discussed here, twenty-one institutes were
established across Turkey. Aiming to accommodate themselves to local
conditions and needs, each institute covered three or four provinces
only. five percent of the institutes’ curriculum was devoted to “culture
classes.” These classes included Turkish, history, geography, citizen-
ship, mathematic, chemistry, foreign language, physics, drawing,
physical education, folk dances, music, home economics and child
care, pedagogy, cooperatives, and agricultural economics. The remain-
ing 50 percent was divided into two. Twenty percent of the curriculum
was reserved for agriculture classes. These classes were field crops,
horticulture, industrial crops breeding, animal science, poultry produc-
tion, honey bee production, aquaculture, and fishing. The remaining
25 percent consisted of technical classes, including blacksmithing, car-
pentry, building construction, and handicrafts. Each institute had auton-
omy in defining their weekly, monthly, yearly programs in accordance
to their needs.56
   The institutes were designed as work schools. All cultural subjects
were taught within the context of and in connection with the work
activities around which the subject revolved. Each institute had lands
and its own workshop. Organized as a work community, in the insti-
tutes the students work cooperatively to cultivate crops, to construct
institute buildings and to raise animals. Using knowledge to perfect
the work skills needed in village life, the products were marketed and
used the profit to meet the other needs of the institute. The students
were involved in every step of work activities, from the establishment
of goals to evaluation. The task of the teacher was to assist the students
with her advice. “Saturday meetings” were an important part of the
institute life. Every Saturday, the members of the institute gathered to
evaluate the week and solve the problems and crisis.

[p. 172] [PDF page 191]

The village institutes embodied a notion of liberal, individualistic
society that worked against earlier Kemalist visions of the solidarity
and coherence of the nation. As discussed earlier, the village institutes
were a project that placed the individual in a privileged position in the
construction of the nation. They did not seek to create the nation
through making the individual. The distinctive feature of the Institutes
Project was that it sought to connect individuals through their rela-
tionship to each other, not through the state. This distinctive feature of
the village institution was not really discussed by Turkish academic
circles. Instead, today there is a resurgence of nostalgia for the Village
Institutes.

Concluding Thoughts
In this chapter, we have argued against the widespread tendency in the
academic circles to construing the present disjunctures in the educa-
tional arenas of countries across the world as incompleteness, devia-
tion, and so on. Drawing on the recent poststructural and postcolonial
scholarship, we rejected the examination of the encounter of the
“global” with the “particular” within the problematic of “impact,”
“influence,” and/or “importation.” Through our approach toward
Dewey as “indigenous foreigner,” we argued that ideas, discourses,
and texts are not fixed entities, and they do not drop on a tabula rasa
as they circulate across the globe. Rather, we insisted they are always
altered, manipulated and distorted by the culture into which they
penetrate and circulate.
   We also argue that Dewey as an indigenous foreigner does not stay
the same as his ideas move in different traveling libraries to embody
different notions of modernity. Dewey’s assemblage in the Turkish
Hearths, the People’s Houses, and Village Institutes, are inscribed dif-
ferently in the changing educational, political, and cultural narratives
as new problems are posed, and the concerns about the future change.
For example, we argued that during the People’s Houses Project,
Dewey was a name blessing the “enlightened elite” helping the masses
of Anatolia reach to the moral level of believing the ideals of the
regime. When the Village Institutes were constructed, Dewey was
inscribed in the narrative of the village that was reanimating from
what was viewed as bringing out in the child was innate and natural
to them.
   The transmogrifications of Dewey as he “traveled” with other sets
of ideas were “productive.” By productive, we mean the cultural and

[p. 173] [PDF page 192]

social processes in which these ideas were engaged contributed to
changes in ideas, institutions, and the patterns of social relations. As
we noted in the beginning of this chapter, individuals were produced
who made claims of rights for linguistic and cultural recognition. The
notions of individuals as actors who could made claims were predicated
on the constructions embodied in the pedagogical “child.”
   It is easy to freeze and fixate the issues of schooling and modern-
ization in contemporary Turkey as one of permanent crisis. To take
such a stance is to make their solution impossible. Our approach is to
place the issues and problems of Turkey and its education as the
deconstruction of the idea of modernity in Turkey. We have prob-
lematized the sacredness of revolution at the beginning of the century
and its imagined coherence as a march toward contemporary civiliza-
tion. By historicizing Dewey’s connections and assemblages within
Turkish education, our analysis has engaged in/with the tensions of
modernity in Turkey. We looked at the ideas of modernity in Turkey,
such as “education” as the application of a set of “universal” and
“natural” principles (sold, e.g., by Dewey). That “selling” was seen as
having no interest in the social, political, cultural context in which/to
which Dewey produced his works. Having no concern with, and no
recognition of, the social, cultural, and political dimension in his writ-
ings on education, circulated as cultural practices, the intellectual cir-
cles of Turkey continue to see Dewey merely as a pedagogue. While in
many other contexts, the interest in Dewey increasingly grew and led
to a massive amount of secondary literature on Dewey, this kind of lit-
erature does not exist in Turkey. The aim of this chapter is to provide
a corrective to this omission in Turkish educational as well as social
thought.

                                                                        Notes
1. We would like to thank Thomas Popkewitz for his very crucial comments,
   his support, and his patience, as we worked on this chapter. We are also grate-
   ful to Marianne Bloch for giving us very helpful comments. We want to thank
   members of Thursday and Wednesday reading groups at UW-Madison for
   reading and responding to earlier drafts of this chapter, including Dar
   Weyenberg, Dory Lightfoot, Ruth Peach, Barb Tarockoff, and Noah Sobe.
   We also thank Cengiz Sürücü for his comments on the earlier version of this
   chapter. Finally, we thank Dory Lightfoot, Akile Zorlu, and Kaan Durukan for
   help with English.
2. Meltem Ahıska, “Occidentalism: The historical fantasy of the modern,” The
   South Atlantic Quarterly 102, no. 3 (2003): 356.

[p. 174] [PDF page 193]

3. Ahmet mnsel, “Eqitimde positif ayrımcılık gerekli.” Radikal, September 9,
    2004.
 4. Meltem Ahıska, “Occidentalism,” 367.
 5. Meltem Ahıska, “Occidentalism,” 356.
 6. For example, see Sabri Büyükdüvenci, “John Dewey’s impact on Turkish
    education,” in The New Scholarship on Dewey, ed. Jim Garrison (Norwell,
    MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1995): 393–400; Selahattin Turan, “John
    Dewey’s report of 1924 and his recommendations on the Turkish educational
    system revisited,” History of Education 29, no. 6 (2002): 455–543; Ernest
    Wolf-Gazo, “John Dewey in Turkey: An educational mission,” Journal of
    American Studies of Turkey 3 (1996): 15–42; Huseyin Bal, 1924 raporunun
    Türk eqitimine etkileri ve John Dewey’in eqitim felsefesi (mstanbul: Kor, 1991);
    William W. Brickman, “The Turkish cultural and educational revolution:
    John Dewey’s Report of 1924,” Western European Education 16, no. 4
    (1984): 3–18.
 7. Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
    Spread of Nationalism (New York: Verso Press, 1991).
 8. Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson, “Beyond ‘culture’: Space, identity, and the
    politics of difference,” in Culture, Power, Place: Explorations in Critical
    Anthropology, ed. Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson (Durham, NC and
    London: Duke University Press, 1997), 33–51.
 9. See Thomas S. Popkewitz, chapter 1, this volume.
10. Dipesh Chakrabarty, “Universalism and belonging in the logic of capital,” in
    Cosmopolitanism, ed. Carol A. Breckenridge, Sheldon Pollock, Homi K.
    Bhabha, and Dipesh Chakrabarty (Durham, NC and London: Duke
    University Press, 2002), 106.
11. Chakrabarty, “Universalism and belonging,” 106.
12. Gupta and Ferguson, “Beyond ‘culture’: Space.”
13. Wolf-Gazo, “John Dewey in Turkey: An educational mission.”
14. Bernard Yack, The Fetishism of Modernities: Epochal Self-Consciousness in
    Contemporary Social and Political Thought (Notre Dame, IN: University of
    Notre Dame Press, 1997).
15. Peter Wagner, A Sociology of Modernity: Liberty and Discipline (New York:
    Routledge, 1994), 20.
16. Rerif Mardin, “Religion and secularism in Turkey,” in Atatürk: Founder of a
    Modern State, ed. Ali Kazancıgil and Ergun Özbudun (London: C. Hurst &
    Co. Ltd., 1981), 208–209.
17. Ali Kazancıgil, “The Ottoman-Turkish state and Kemalism,” in Atatürk:
    Founder of a Modern state, 38.
18. Ergun Özbudun and Ali Kazancıgil, “Introduction,” in Atatürk: Founder of a
    Modern State, 3.
19. mnsel and Kazancıgil use Max Weber’s notion of patrimonialism to discuss the
    political culture of the Ottoman Empire, characterized by the unquestionable
    power of the state and the lack of civil society. Ahmet mnsel, Türkiye
    Toplumunun Bunalımı, 2nd ed. (mstanbul: Birikim Yayınları, 1995); Ahmet
    mnsel, Düzen ve Kalkınma Kıskacında Türkiye (mstanbul: Ayrıntı Yayınları,
    1996), Ali Kazancıgil, “The Ottoman-Turkish state and Kemalism.” See also

[p. 175] [PDF page 194]

Kemal H. Karpat, “Historical continuity and identity change: How to be
    Modern Muslim, Ottoman and Turk,” in Ottoman Past and Today’s Turkey,
    ed. Kemal H. Karpat (Boston: Brill, 2000), 1–28.
20. mnsel, Türkiye Toplumunun Bunalımı.
21. Rulership of Islam.
22. mnsel, Türkiye Toplumunun Bunalımı.
23. In 1830, the grand admiral of the Empire, e.g., was to declare: “I am back
    from a visit to Russia. On my return, I became more than ever convinced that,
    if we are further delayed from imitating Europe, we shall be left with no alter-
    native to the obligation of going back to Asia” (cited in Ali Kazancıgil, “The
    Ottoman-Turkish state and Kemalism,” 38).
24. mnsel, Düzen ve kalkınma kıskacında Türkiye, Rerif Mardin, “Religion and
    secularism in Turkey,” and Ali Kazancıgil, “The Ottoman-Turkish state and
    Kemalism.”
25. For example, the establishment of the school of administration (Mülkiye) was
    part of this project. The secularization of higher education had started before
    1839 with the founding of the Military Academy and the School of Medicine.
    During this era of Tanzimat (1839–1876), the idea of free primary education
    for all began to be articulated by the Ottoman state elite. In 1846, the
    Ministry of Public Instruction was created, and the state converted the schools
    of the non-Muslim subjects that were financed by private support or by char-
    itable grants into a state-financed primary school. The 1850s and 1860s were
    to witness the establishment of post-primary secular state schools (Rüstiye,
    mdadi, and Sultani) in Istanbul and many provincial centers. Along with secu-
    lar state schools, the traditional Islamic schools, such as Mektep and Medrese
    continued to operate. See Mardin, “Religion and secularism in Turkey.”
26. Mardin, “Religion and secularism in Turkey,” 206.
27. Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, e.g., was born in Selonika (now, Thessaloníki,
    Greece), attended the military middle school there, entered the Manastır
    Military High School, and then progressed to the Military Academy in
    mstanbul.
28. Mardin, “Religion and secularism in Turkey,” 205.
29. Ataturk wrote, e.g.: “It is futile to try to resist the thunderous advance of civ-
    ilization, for it has no pity on those are ignorant or rebellious. . . . We cannot
    afford to hesitate any more. We have to move forward . . . Civilization is such
    a fire that it burns and destroys those who ignore it. Cited in Ahıska,
    “Occidentalism,” 379.
30. The idea of preparing people for the future democracy finds its expression in
    the following words of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk: “Turkey is going to build up
    a perfect democracy. How can there be a perfect democracy with half the
    country in bondage? In two years from now, every woman must be freed from
    this useless tyranny. Every man will wear a hat instead of a fez and every
    woman will have her face uncovered; woman’s help is absolutely necessary
    and she must have full freedom in order to take her share of her country’s
    burden.” Cited in Ertan Aydin, The peculiarities of Turkish revolutionary
    ideology in the 1930s: The Ulku version of Kemalism, 1933–1936 (Ph.D.
    dissertation, Bilkent University, Ankara, 2003).

[p. 176] [PDF page 195]

31. Fay K. Berkes, The Village Institute Movement of Turkey: An Educational
    Mobilization for Social Change (Ph.D. Dissertation, New York, Columbia
    University, 1960), 42.
32. John Dewey, The John Dewey Report (English translation from its Second
    publication in 1952) (Ankara: Milli Egitim Bakanligi, Test ve Arastirma
    Bürosu, 1939/1960), 1.
33. Chicago businessman, philanthropist, and trustee of the American College for
    Girls in Istanbul, Crane was a member of President Wilson’s Special
    Diplomatic Commission to Russia in 1917; a member of the American Section
    of the Paris Peace Conference; American Commissioner on Mandates in
    Turkey in 1919; and U.S. ambassador to China in 1920 (See Wolf-Gazo,
    “John Dewey in Turkey: An educational mission”).
34. Brickman, “The Turkish cultural and educational revolution.”
35. For detailed information on the journey of Dewey, see Bahri Ata, “1924 Türk
    basını ırıqında Amerikalı eqitimci John Dewey’nin Türkiye seyahati,” G. Ü.
    Gazi Eqitim Fakültesi Dergisi Cilt: 21, Sayı: 3 (2001): 193–207.
36. As mentioned before, as well as stressing the importance of well-stated aims
    of education and blessing the enlightening role of the elite in preparing indi-
    viduals for participating, in this report, Dewey reminded the Ministry not to
    confuse unity with uniformity and to ensure that schools accommodate them-
    selves to the varying conditions and needs of localities. He emphasized the
    necessity for improving the financial and social status of teachers. Dewey also
    wrote that “there must be distinct types of normal schools for the training of
    rural school teachers, with especially reference to the needs of those who toil
    on the soil, and are the mainstay of Turkish life.” He recommended putting
    the efforts into translating foreign educational literature, especially that of
    progressive schools, in Turkish, establishing libraries, and sending the teach-
    ers abroad, at least to the foreign schools in Turkey in order to let them learn
    about progressive teaching (see John Dewey, The John Dewey report, 18–19).
37. John Dewey, “The Problem of Turkey,” in John Dewey, The Later Works,
    1925–1953. Vol. 2, ed. Jo Ann Boydston, Bridget A. Walsh, textual ed.
    (Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press, 1925/1984),
    189–198; John Dewey, “The Turkish Traged.” In Impressions of Soviet Russia
    and the Revolutionary World: Mexico, China and Turkey (New York: New
    Repuclic Inc, 1929), 197–207. Dewey, “Angora, the New,” in Impressions of
    Soviet Russia, 208–219; Dewey, “Secularizing a Theocracy: Young Turkey
    and the Caliphate,” in Impressions of Societ Russia, 220–234; John Dewey,
    “Foreign Schools in Turkey,” New Republic, 41 (1925): 40–42.
38. Michel Foucault, “What is an author?” in Language, Counter-Memory,
    Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews, ed. Donald F. Bouchard, trans.
    Donald F. Bouchard and Sherry Simon (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
    1977), 127.
39. Holly A. Shissler, Between Two Empires: Ahmet Aqaoqlu and the New Turkey
    (New York: I. B. Tauris & Co Ltd., 2003).
40. In the congresses of Turkish Hearths, e.g., it was often stressed that cultural
    and language diversity should not be embraced. In these meetings, fees and

[p. 177] [PDF page 196]

even imprisonment were proposed for those who spoke languages other than
    Turkish. In 1928, “Citizen, Speak Turkish!” Champaign (Vatandar Türkçe
    Konur!) was also organized by these organizations. Similar works were some-
    times taken on by their successors, the People’s Houses. See Füsun Üstel, Türk
    Ocakları, 1912–1931 (mstanbul: mletirim Yayınları, 1997). See also Mustafa
    Çapar, Türk Ulusal Eqitim Sisteminde Öteki ve Ötekiye Yaklarım (Ph.D.
    dissertation, Hacettepe Üniversitesi, Ankara, 2004).
41. Sevan Niranyan, “Türk Kime Denir?” Modernlerme ve Çokkültürlülük, ed.
    Nazan Aksoy and Melek Ulagay (mstanbul: mletirim Yayınları, 2001), 198–212.
42. Aydin, The Peculiarities of Turkish Revolutionary Ideology in the 1930s.
43. Shissler, Between Two Empires: Ahmet Aqaoqlu and the New Turkey.
44. Cited in Aydin, The Peculiarities of Turkish Revolutionary Ideology in the
    1930.
45. Aydin, The Peculiarities of Turkish Revolutionary Ideology in the 1930s.
46. Asım Karaömerlioqlu, “The People’s Houses and the cult of the peasant in
    Turkey,” Middle Eastern Studies 34, no. 4 (1998), 67–91.
47. For example, according to 1935 statistics, more than 80% of the population
    was living in rural areas. Only 16% of the village children had a school to
    go to.
48. Köy Okullari ve Enstitüleri Teskilat Kanunu Izahnamesi (Ankara: Maarif
    Vekilligi Nesriyat Müdürlügü, 1943).
49. msmail H. Tonguç, Canlandırılacak Köy (mkinci Bası) (Istanbul: Remzi
    Kitabevi, 1947), 85.
50. Cited in Pakize Türkoqlu, Tonguç ve Enstitüleri (mstanbul: Yapı Kredi Kültür
    Sanat Yayınları, 1997), 158.
51. Instead of “student,” Tonguç often used the word müdavim, meaning a
    person who goes to a place regularly and implying no power hierarchy
    embedded in it.
52. msmail H. Tonguç, Köyde Eqitim (mstanbul: Kültür Bakanlıqı mlkokul Öqretmen
    Klavuzları, 1938), 165.
53. Tonguç, Köyde Eqitim, 166.
54. Tonguç, Köyde Eqitim, 178
55. Köy Okullari ve Enstitüleri Teskilat Kanunu Izahnamesi, 111.
56. Yahya Özsoy, Köy Enstitülerinde Öqretim Programları (Ankara: Köy
    Enstitüleri ve Çaqdar Eqitim Vakfı Yayınları, 1997).
