Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part IV: The Americas
Chapter 8: Discursive Inscriptions in the Fabrication of a Modern Self: Mexican Educational Appropriations of Dewey’s Writings
Rosa N. Buenfil Burgos
Original print pages 181–201; PDF pages 200–220

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 181] [PDF page 200]

8
             Discursive Inscriptions in the Fabrication
               of a Modern Self: Mexican Educational
                 Appropriations of Dewey’s Writings

                                                   Rosa N. Buenfil Burgos




Dewey’s writings, just as any other text, in their articulation with
other discourses available at a certain time and space, are resignified
in such a way that they can become just the opposite of what they
previously were.
   Dewey as an indigenous foreigner, is an interesting example of
historization that puts in operation images of intelligibility that chal-
lenge traditional logics and common sense. Paradox and aporia are the
two logics that come to my mind with such an expression. In addition,
the indigenous foreigner also brings to the fore the ceaseless circula-
tion of ideas as a globalizing feature of the beginning of the twentieth
century. Dewey’s prospects have been successively articulated in
surfaces of “global” and local discourses, which is the case in the
Mexican inscriptions that will be commented here. As ideas circulate,
they get resignified and inscribe marks into the modernizing of the nation
and the individual. These patterns may be intraceable one to one to the
original source, however, their remainders can be found in different
discursive surfaces, and this is precisely the aim of this chapter.
   My chapter does not deal with Dewey’s pragmatism as such, but
with the processes whereby it was inscribed in Mexico under specific
circumstances.1 I try to elaborate two different appropriations of
Dewey’s work that have taken place in Mexico. The first can be
located in the 1920s and is closely related to a revolutionary atmos-
phere; the second reading can be placed in the 1970s and is embedded

[p. 182] [PDF page 201]

in the increasing visibility of Marxism in Latin America. My focus on
these two moments does not amount to ignore other possible appro-
priations. Just to mention one important inscription of Dewey’s
prospect in Mexico, I can evoke that in the late 1930s, when Trotsky
came to live in Mexico running away from Stalinism, and was hosted
by the nonorthodox left-wing intellectuals, John Dewey visited him in
Mexico.2 Dewey gathered with Mexican socialist intellectuals and
activists in several international antiwar meetings in which he had a
salient role. With my decision to deal only with two inscriptions, I try
to produce an image of Dewey as an indigenous foreigner based on
two theses: His educational ideas are altered in the very process of
articulation with local discourses, and in this process they are occu-
pied and colonized thus fabricating a Dewey who is more and less than
John Dewey.
    Given the relational character of any discourse, no analysis is pos-
sible lacking the consideration of other discursive series contiguous to
the one under scrutiny.3 The normalized image to evoke this is by
means of the idea of context. This notion however, must not be
regarded as a mere background or environment, but as the very sym-
bolic structuring that enables a discourse to be such. Context in this
chapter, therefore will be understood as a condition of possibility for
the appropriation and thus iteration4 of Dewey’s pedagogical thought.
These conditions involve series different in kind such as the intellectual
atmosphere, geopolitical conditions, religious, cultural, and economic
settings, and whatever tendency may be articulating symbolic life at a
certain moment. Accordingly, I present these conditions in each spe-
cific inscription to provide the ground for a plausible interpretation.


First Inscription, Dewey in Mexico
in the 1920s
Some features can be stressed as conditions of possibility for Dewey’s
educational ideas in Mexico.
   First, the intellectual atmosphere of the second half of the nineteenth
century involved tensions between on the one hand, Enlightenment,
positivism, and political liberalism; and on the other hand, a deeply
rooted Roman Catholicism. These tensions took place within the lib-
eral government implemented by Benito Juarez who contended against
the political, economic, and intellectual empire the Catholic Church
held from the Spanish conquest onward. The reform that took place

[p. 183] [PDF page 202]

from 1856 onward precisely excluded the rule of Roman Catholicism.
The reform separated the Church from the formal institutions of the
Mexican political system, and removed its predominance over public
matters such as education and the legal system among other realms.
This process was accompanied by the rise of a positivistic intellectual
atmosphere that prevailed for many years, with the discursive scaf-
folding of values, programs, and institutions such as the Escuela
Preparatoria,5 which was created around the positivistic values of
progress and modernity. This articulation, however, did not manage
to extirpate the religious imaginary of salvation from the Mexican
population. The Catholic Church, on its part, has never accepted
this exclusion, and has fought back on different fronts; legal, reli-
gious, moral, economic, and political strategies have been displayed
in their effort to maintain prevalence over laic political and public
institutions.
   The Mexican revolution (from 1910 to the first postrevolutionary
phase of stability in 1917), rose against the thirty-year dictatorship
of a liberal government (of Porfirio Díaz) that enhanced Positivism
in intellectual terms and articulated it with a religious approach in
moral matters. The Mexican revolution was articulated around an
overdetermined6 agenda composed by heterogeneous intellectual
and political sources: liberalism, socialism, rationalism, positivism,
Enlightenment, political and social demands (posed by peasants, work-
ers, professionals, and other social sectors), amongst the most salient
sources. This revolution can be represented as a political, social, and
cultural dislocation, ripping the social fabric into threads,7 and setting
the conditions for the need of a salvation narrative (i.e., the Mexican
Revolutionary Mystique).8
   Moreover, the intellectual and political composition that emerged
from this unity of diversity was characterized by hybridity and eclecti-
cism, which permeated the national revolutionary program. It involved
social demands as expressed by its popular bases (e.g., land, justice,
and so on), the political conceptions informing specific plans of each
social sector, intellectual traditions differently rooted in geographical
areas, and last but not least, the inescapable common sense dwelling in
Mexican idiosyncrasy. The latter, in turn, combined religious fanaticism,
as well as its anticlerical counterpart, it coupled national chauvinism and
malinchismo, it united naive optimism and sour pessimism.9
   Second, the educational crusade in the context of the Mexican
revolution consisted of an Enlightenment optimist agenda revisited
and amalgamated with revolutionary hopes. In 1921 the Ministry of

[p. 184] [PDF page 203]

Education was restored after the armed movement and charged with
producing a new modern Mexican.10 J. Vasconcelos was in command
and he proposed an ambitious program to restore the nation by means
of a vigorous educational strategy. It involved the creation of an enter-
prising rural schooling scheme, the recruitment of an army of school
teachers, the creation of itinerant teams to train teachers and edu-
cate communities (called Misiones culturales trans. Cultural missions).
Vasconcelos brought together enterprising and creative educators, set
up offices, institutions, and dependencies, and built libraries in rural
sites, among other strategies. All this vitality produced an adequate
setting for the introduction of Dewey’s democratic and socializing
principles. It must be stressed, however, that Vasconcelos in his con-
frontation with the previous intellectual regime (i.e., Positivism) claimed
to adhere a “spiritualist” philosophical approach to education, thus
excluding the excessive faith in reason, science, and empiricism that
pervaded the prerevolutionary educational programs.
   A third condition of possibility of Dewey’s inscription, is related
with the contacts that took place between Dewey and Mexico by
scholars and students. There were three scholars who had direct con-
tact with John Dewey and his educational theories: Moisés Sáenz,
Manuel Gamio, and Rafael Ramírez.11 During the postrevolutionary
years, the nation had to be reconstructed and Dewey’s pedagogical
thinking was considered to be adequate to these ends. Accordingly,
Mexicans had traveled to the United States to learn from Dewey.
Whatever these scholars were able to understand from his thought was
introduced to organize the Mexican revolutionary school and to con-
tribute in the formation of the nation. Sáenz and Ramírez who occu-
pied key positions in the Ministry of Education during this decade,
were convinced that Dewey’s progressive schemes fitted nicely with
the political and intellectual hopes of the Mexican revolutionary edu-
cation. Historians of both the Mexican revolution and the educational
system agree on the point that Dewey’s precepts achieved their best
implementation in rural education,12 however, the whole educational
scheme was permeated by his principles.
   Fourth, the Mexican revolutionary mystique (MRM onward) was
produced as a promise of plenitude or a salvation narrative. This
hybrid system of signification of the Mexican revolution emerged and
operated as a mystical discourse. It came to provide a strong feeling of
belonging and transcendental union; it gave meaning to the sacrifice
and the loss, offering a horizon of compensation and an idyllic image
of the future. It provided new images of identification for indigenous

[p. 185] [PDF page 204]

groups, peasants, industrial workers, and schoolteachers, as well as
the “champions of the revolution,” whose dignity had to be restored
to its correct position. It cemented the dispersed agents and ideals
involved in the armed and political movements, and operated as the
ultimate source of legitimacy and proof of the righteousness of poli-
cies, laws, rituals, institutions, budgets, and so forth. Considering the
constitutive fanaticism of the population it is not surprising that the
symbols of this mystical discourse came to occupy the sacred positions
formerly devoted to religious emblems. It is neither surprising that the
new ruling bloc later became aware of this and has strategically bene-
fited from it. The MRM was inhabited by legendary heroes and epic
events13 being later immortalized in literature,14 murals,15 popular and
classic music, in agrarian and school rituals, in unionist agendas and
later, in the film industry.
    Finally, Dewey visited Mexico to supervise the educational
laboratory: the School of Action. By 1926 he was invited to Mexico to
observe and assess the way in which his ideas and precepts had been
actualized in Mexican schools. He gave conferences in the Faculty of
Philosophy, the Summer School, and the Society of Language Teachers.
This was his most important visit, and it took place in July. His visit
involved conferences in both the Ministry of Education and the
National University of Mexico, and visits to different school sites in
the countryside: Xocoyuca, Panotla in Veracruz, the Misión Cultural
in Santa Cruz, and a rural school in Tlaxcala.16 It was said that
Mexico was the first country in which Dewey’s ideas had been put into
practice in the Programa de Acción.
    These and many other are conditions in which a Mexican discourse
articulates Dewey’s intellectual dispositive with the horizon of plenitude
produced in and by the Mexican revolution.
    This first inscription involves an assemblage/articulation of
Dewey’s ideas and the MRM in the educational crusade, in the 1920s.
I argue that the revolution produces a social and cultural dislocation,
which is a condition for the need of a salvation narrative (i.e., the
MRM). Tracing the displacements and the flow or circulation of
ideas it is possible to study the construction of equivalencies between
Dewey’s educational program and the Mexican educational crusade
(i.e., cultural convergence and contact). This is an articulation of, on
the one hand, Enlightenment, rationalism, pragmatism, and the New
School;17 and on the other hand, Mexican liberalism, democracy, social-
ism, and republicanism thus producing the impure/overdetermined
character of the revolutionary discourse. Education is amongst the five

[p. 186] [PDF page 205]

priorities of the revolutionary program and within it the School of
Action is constructed as a key reference of the educational reform.
   The previously mentioned conditions set the symbolic structures
under which Dewey’s proposals are introduced and iterated. The
hybridity and overdetermination of the MRM, and the confronted
imaginaries competing in those days, permeated the articulations of
his ideas with the educational crusade. It is possible to find all sorts of
inscriptions producing different combinations of the native and the
foreigner. Allow me to give some examples.
   Vasconcelos, very much against empiricism, in his Antología de
textos sobre educación18 takes up against Dewey (and his Mexican
followers) in a rather invalidating manner. First of all, Dewey is
portrayed as the incarnation of Positivism which was in turn con-
structed as the universal representative of artlessness and lack of high
intellectual values. Then Vasconcelos takes all learning by doing as a
motto around which he criticizes concepts and principles on multiple
occasions, however, not from different angles. Vasconcelos especially
disapproves of the following concepts:

  ● mind as an adaptable (adjustable) faculty whose function would be to
    guide intelligent action in a changing world,
  ● learning through experience and personal interest,

  ● human beings as social beings, and

  ● the classroom as a small society, the relationship between school and

    society.


   According to Vasconcelos’s smetaphysical essentialism, Dewey’s
evolutionism would not understand the difference between animals
and human beings, and in giving too much attention to minute things
(such as “to properly wear a tie and knot his shoelaces”) he would
neglect huge transcendental issues. He also criticizes both “Rousseau
and Dewey for teaching lessons already taught three thousand years
before by the Indian Vedanta and later retrieved by the Socratics.”19
Other motives for his rejection are that Dewey’s pragmatism and
schemes address the European immigrant children living around fac-
tories in shanty towns in the United States of America, and this social
reality has nothing to do whatsoever with the Mexican child condition
This is the flavoring of his resignification of Dewey’s thinking.
   Strongly contrasting with the previous, Rafael Ramírez, a pioneer
in the Misiones Culturales, published in 1924 La escuela de la acción
en la educación rural (trans. The School of Action in Rural Education)

[p. 187] [PDF page 206]

and Escuela técnica para campesinos (trans. Technical School for
Peasants),20 to put in extremely simple words the pragmatic aspects of
a school that would start from zero and fabricate the new modern
Mexican. In its pages, there is no single reference to any theoretical
source, nonetheless, no sagacity is needed to find traces of Dewey’s
pragmatism and democratic values there. In the early 1930s how-
ever, Ramírez’s two main conceptual sources start to be visible.
In 1935, he published La escuela proletaria: Cuatro conferencias
sobre educación socialista (trans. The Proletarian School: Four
Conferences about Socialist Education),21 in which a eulogy of U.S.
progressive school is the subject of the second conference. Dewey’s
presence is more visible in the book Técnica de la enseñanza (trans.
Teaching Technique)22 published in 1937 to provide a textbook for
the students of Escuelas Regionales Campesinas (trans. Vernacular
Peasant Schools).23 These schools were established to train the rural
schoolteachers. Ramírez praises Dewey’s paper Interest in Relation
to Training of the Will24 and also A Pedagogical Experiment25
drawing from both teaching notions and recommendations such
as: the concept of experience, concrete activities in school as the out-
set for education, and the child interest as the departing point for
school activities; school activities emulating vital activities, observa-
tion, sensitive and cognitive action instead of verbal and mental
acts, motivation and encouragement as a reinforcement of child inter-
est, inter alia. Learning is understood as something that cannot be
received from someone, but something resulting from the learner’s
experience.
   Moisés Sáenz promoted indigenous education in Mexico and was
strongly convinced that Dewey’s pedagogical contributions were pre-
cisely what the Mexican revolutionary school needed if it was going to
unify the nation, socialize the children, and promote reasonable forms
of life, especially, for rural communities.26 In 1926 he gave a lecture
in the University of Chicago, sponsored by the Harris Foundation.
The lecture was about Mexican integration through education. Sáenz
presented a pragmatic approach to education that had explicit refer-
ences to Dewey’s philosophy and pedagogy. Insistently quoting School
and Society,27 he evoked key concepts such as motivation, respect
for the child personality, self-expression, vitality of school work, the
method of projects, learning by doing, and democracy through educa-
tion.28 In less academic interventions perhaps Dewey’s name would
not be written or pronounced, however, his pragmatism and educa-
tional viewpoints would permeate Sáenz’s schemes and programs for

[p. 188] [PDF page 207]

rural, and especially, indigenous schooling, and as a means to bring
modern techniques to produce the new Mexican.
   No matter how distant could Sáenz and Gamio be in anthropolog-
ical debates (e.g., “integration versus incorporation” of the indigenous
into the nation), there was always an agreement concerning their
pragmatic approach on indigenous educational programs.
   So far, some key leaders of education during the 1920s have been
paraphrased to provide an idea of the way in which Dewey’s thought
penetrated the postrevolutionary educational program. This involves a
fusion with other available educational and political discourses, with
the social basic claims for land, peace, justice, and so on, as they
were understood by intellectuals, leaders, translators, interpreters,
and other mediators. While being part of other social domains (e.g.,
agrarian, labor, ethnic, and so on) these demands circulated through-
out each of these spheres, and in this traveling they partially altered
each other, thus producing for instance, the petition for peasant or
indigenous education. To give just an example of the intellectual
fusion within the educational domain, let me mention that Ramírez
and Sáenz both studied at the Normal de Xalapa in Veracruz, where
the great pedagogical influence of the Spanish Rationalist Ferrer
Guardia had been spread. This tradition disseminated in the south of
Mexico (Campeche, Yucatán, Tabasco, and Veracruz) where it was
later articulated with the socialist experiment promoted by Carrillo
Puerto and Alvarado (in Yucatán in the early 1920s). In addition
Rebsamen, head of the Normal de Xalapa, lectured on Positivism (e.g.,
Comte and Spencer). Thus it is easy to observe the intense overdeter-
mination (i.e., circulation and fusion) of educational traditions that
were articulated with Dewey’s thought.
   A constitutive ambiguity must be stressed here. Deweyean
Pragmatism in the United States was associated with progressive ideas
(e.g., democracy, antiwar groupings, antiauthoritarianism) some of
which had been also taken up by the left wing.29 But this association
was not shared by the Mexicans since, on the one hand, the Left was
represented by Socialism and even Communism. On the other hand,
philosophical Pragmatism was linked to Positivism which was, in turn,
seen as part of the political position promoted by the prerevolutionary
ruling bloc (the liberal dictator Porfirio Diaz).
   Thus, some intellectual and political contorstions had to take place
in order to accommodate a pragmatist who at home was in the
progressive side. In Mexico his philosophical ideas were associated
with the prerevolutionary enemy (just remember Vasconcelos’s bitter

[p. 189] [PDF page 208]

rejection of Deweyean principles) and, could, however, fit the revolu-
tionary discourse by means of a series of equivalencies produced by
some educational leaders who met Dewey in his environment (i.e., as
a progressive intellectual) and managed to introduce him as part of the
revolutionary narrative.
   This first educational reading of Dewey’s writings is constitutive of
the way in which Mexican official revolutionary culture, bringing
together Enlightenment-reason-science with democratic, socialist, lib-
eral, and populist hopes of progress, produces the educational experi-
ment: Dewey á la Mexicana (in the Mexican style) which makes visible
one aspect of the regulatory discourse toward the fabrication of
another modern self in the midst of tensions between individual and
the community.

                     Second Scenario, Dewey in the 1970s
Some conditions of possibility can be distinguished that allow a
different appropriation of Dewey’s work in Mexico. This second dis-
cussion is a less enthusiastic and more critical scrutiny of both philo-
sophical and educational pragmatism. The 1970s in Mexico, as in
many other countries in the world, had witnessed too many interna-
tional political mistakes (the two world wars, the Holocaust, Stalinism,
invasions, and so on), and the hopes of progressive intellectuals, espe-
cially in Latin American countries, were leaning on socialist ideals. Let
us move to these conditions.
    First are the conditions of the political culture of Mexico, a nation
that had been ruled by a one-party political system since 1929. From
the years in which the military phase of Mexican revolution finished
(i.e., the national movement around the 1920s, and the local and
ephemeral uprisings in the 1930s), and as a sign of political advance,
in 1929 the group that managed to stabilize the country founded the
Partido Nacional Revolucionario (PNR for its initials in Spanish). It
was reformed in 1938 during the so-called Socialist regime led by
Lázaro Cárdenas, and then became the Partido de la Revolución
Mexicana (PRM for its initials in Spanish). In 1939 the world was
shaken due to World War II, conservative Mexicans had been panick-
ing because of the so-called socialist regime introduced by Cárdenas
(1934–1940). This conservative wing formed a strong front that was
paradoxically inclined to liberalism in economic management, religion,
and U.S. values in cultural terms, and against Socialism in political
terms. They also formed a party, the Partido Acción Nacional, to

[p. 190] [PDF page 209]

compete against the PRM. The latter was said to have won the 1940
elections, however, an important price was paid for this: the exclusion
of the socialist threat from the ruling party, the “rectification” of the
Mexican revolutionary course, and a reinforced subordination to U.S.
prescriptions. By 1945 the PRM became the notorious Partido
Revolucionario Institucional (PRI for its initials in Spanish) that has
won formal elections and ruled continuously from then to 2000 (for-
mally fifty-five years, and actually seventy years—from 1929 to 2000).
By the 1970s, the PRI had normalized and naturalized its forms and
means to rule the nation. However, many revolutionary social
demands had not been met. Disperse antagonistic foci had emerged
creating a conflictive scenario: peasant rebellions, railroad workers’
conflicts, a medical practitioner’s movement, industrial worker strikes,
and other movements created a explosive scenario before which the
PRI government was too unprepared to produce adequate answers.
   Second, Latin America as a geopolitical area had a remarkable vis-
ibility in domestic political terms. This visibility expressed itself in the
milieu of Mexican progressive intellectuals and people politically com-
mitted around a vigorous support to the Cuban revolution, and a
strong rejection against military regimes in Central and South
America. On the one hand, it is well known that in Mexico the Cuban
revolutionaries found support both openly and secretly, both in the
beginning and years later, both morally and politically, and to a lesser
extent, in financial aspects. Left-wing intellectuals and others who
were politically engaged and active had taken the Cuban revolution as
a motto and an emblem to their movement. On the other hand, U.S.
occupation of some strategic sites (El Canal de Panama, Guantánamo),
and the military regimes in Latin America (Nicaragua, Brasil, Paraguay,
Uruguay, Chile, Argentina, El Salvador, Guatemala, inter alia) had pro-
duced a generalized indignation for the extreme forms of repression
they had adopted, thus producing a clear enemy to fight against.
Migrations of politically prosecuted people coming especially from
Chile and Argentina, told the Mexicans about genocide, torture, miss-
ing people, inter alia, producing a narrative of horror thus easily pro-
ducing the image of the antagonist, the crystal-clear representation of
the type of regime that had to be eliminated at all costs.
   Third, there was the condition of the nearness and visibility of
Vietnam war and U.S. imperialism. Tracing back some historical line-
age, it has to be remembered that when World War II was over it
became evident that the world had changed in geopolitical terms. The
United States of America managed to occupy the site of military,

[p. 191] [PDF page 210]

economic, political, and also to some extent, cultural power, however,
not without contestation and resistance. The balance was then
inclined not to European countries but to the U.S. predominance, with
the Cold War at its center. From then onward a planetary political fron-
tier was constructed between East and West, Socialism and Capitalism,
national sovereign capacity or self-determination and non-asked for
intervention, and so on. In addition, communication media emerged
as a vigorous mean to interconnect and expose things happening all
over the world. In this scenario, the Vietnam war was doubtlessly
associated with Capitalism, interventionism, Western domination and
U.S. imperialism. Due to the geographic contiguity between the United
States and Mexico, this representation was shared by Mexican Left
intellectuals and those politically receptive and involved. This also sets
the conditions for the inclusion of Marxism as an ingredient of the
progressive imaginary.
    Fourth, the student movements in 1968 (Paris, Berkeley, Córdoba,
Essex, Colombia, inter alia) had an expression in Mexico. Closely con-
nected with the previous condition (i.e., Vietnam war), the student
movement emerged showing a strong discrepancy against the estab-
lishment in its different incarnations (e.g., imperialism, colonialism,
racism, double morals, bigotry, authoritarianism, inter alia). This move-
ment spread throughout many countries articulating itself with specific
scenarios in each site, and sharing, however, some representations of
what had to be eradicated and excluded. In Mexico and—mainly but
not only—in Mexico City, the movement was articulated initially
around public university demands, and gradually started expanding its
petitions to other democratic political questions, and thus achieved
more supporters: not only higher education students but also university
staff and even authorities, younger students, student’s relatives, worker
unions, professional associations, and even some peasant organizations.
This growing movement paid the price of a pitiless killing in the massive
demonstration that took place on October 2. Newspapers registered
that the police and army indiscriminately attacked all those who par-
ticipated in the demonstration backing up the movement (i.e., young
students and their relatives, journalists and intellectuals, scholars,
unionists, and party activists inter alia).
    Fifth, there was the intellectual background that involved, on the
one hand, tensions between Marxism and the theory of development,
and on the other, the inscription of pragmatism as the philosophical
antagonist to dialectical and historical materialism, and behaviorism
as merely a Psychology approach.

[p. 192] [PDF page 211]

Above I have held a non-reflective notion of context-dependent
text.30 Accordingly, I insist here that the conditioning form of the rela-
tionship between the four previous circumstances and the intellectual
background I describe in this paragraph, is not that of a reflection of
so-called external causes, but of an inscription, that is, a symbolic
process by means of which the meaning of something in the context is
engraved or sculpted on and penetrates a discourse thus becoming a
part of its texture and altering the system of meaning as such.
   One of the generalized forms of left-wing academic political
involvement was closely tied with Marxism (both orthodox Marxism
and its Latin American versions) since the almost nonexisting right-
wing activism was hardly linked to any literature whatsoever.31 An
interesting feature of this setting is that both so-called hard and social
scientists found in Marxism a source of inspiration for academic poli-
tics. In this context, theories of development by stages were linked
with a sort of intellectual imperialism presenting the image of some
“developed” countries as the model that were supposedly to be emu-
lated. The humanities were also divided in a polarized manner. On the
one hand, there was a radical and militant humanism, whose source of
information and values was again Marxist literature, and on the other,
Analytic Philosophy and Pragmatism. Finally, Behaviorism was inval-
idated in both the social sciences and in the few occasions discussed in
philosophical debates as a “mere” psychological approach, strongly
based on empiricist methods, structured around a highly simplistic
epistemological view, and politically linked with devious ends (such as
brainwashing).
   In speaking about Marxism as a source of inspiration for progressive
political, ethical, and epistemological values in those days, one has to
include Marx’s texts as well as many of the whole tradition that
goes from the First, Second, Third, and Fourth International, to the less
orthodox traditions; from the oversimplified handbooks and manuals
edited both in the former USSR and in other nations (in Spanish e.g.,
Cuba, Chile), to deeper and highly complex philosophical, ethical,
epistemological, and political discussions. In the 1970s, there was a
proactive, dynamic, and sometimes feverish academic appropriation of
Marxism (alternately discussing whether one should adhere to Lukacs,
Althusser, or Gramsci, and experiencing how the “organic links with the
proletariat” had to be constructed), as well as unionist interpretations in
order to get acquainted with their so-called objective interests.
   All the conditions presented above produce, among other things, a
peculiar atmosphere in which the inscription of Dewey’s ideas takes

[p. 193] [PDF page 212]

place. Differently from the first inscription commented earlier, this
second articulation of Deweyean thought is not within a revolutionary
discourse ruling the national educational system, but as the antagonistic
link with an academic discourse arranged around Marxism, operating
as a nodal point of political commitment.
   Looking for citations of Dewey’s work in the 1970s, several impor-
tant libraries in Mexico City were consulted32 and not many results
were obtained. A search in the 1980s was needed in order to include
ten more documents. From the thirty-one pieces registered,

  ● almost fifty percent were in Spanish and the rest in English;
  ● only seven dealt with education and the other twenty-four discussed
    philosophical matters;
  ● ten were written by someone other than Dewey, and twenty one by John

    Dewey himself.

   In this search I organized the documents dealing with his work in
three different types of editing formats: books and journal articles,
teaching syllabi, and educational handbooks and dissertations.
   Regarding books and articles, there were basically those written by
Dewey himself, which means that his work was openly available as a
primary source in libraries for students and scholars. Apart from this,
books about his work were scarce and mainly dealt with philosophical
issues.
   Considering syllabi, Dewey is an ineluctable name in both
Philosophy and Pedagogy; it is however, better studied and considered
in the philosophical milieu than in the educational one.
   Concerning dissertations and reference books, only a handful of
pieces were found dated in the 1970s: mainly re-editions of handbooks
of Philosophy, and the History of Pedagogy. In these it is a general rule
to find his name contiguous to other remarkable pedagogues, however
in a rather sketchy and shallow manner as is usually the case in this
type of textbooks. Not a single dissertation about Dewey was found in
the 1970s, and only three in the 1980s.
   There was however, one M. Phil. dissertation in Educational
Research dated in the late 1970s written by Adriana Puiggrós.33 It is not
about Dewey’s philosophical or pedagogical legacy but concerns impe-
rialism and education in Latin America, and mentions Dewey’s perspec-
tive as a good example of the functionalist tradition in these countries.
Because of its high academic standards, this dissertation was later
published as a book and has been reprinted more than thirteen times.

[p. 194] [PDF page 213]

This book has been acknowledged by many as a serious, well-
informed, and profoundly analyzed piece of research. It constructs the
Deweyean proposal as one of the sources of U.S. imperialist pedagog-
ical discourse introduced to Latin American educational systems dur-
ing the second half of the twentieth century as a means to ideological,
political, and pedagogical unification.
    Taking as references Democracy and Education,34 The Child and
the Curriculum,35 and Experience and Education,36 the author associ-
ates Dewey’s notion of progress as the natural and intrinsic character
of society, with the evolutionist concept permeating pedagogical
functionalism.37 She claims further in her book, that he took the
inevitability of human evolution from Charles Darwin (i.e., from a
naturalistic frame), and translated it into philosophical and educa-
tional language. In Dewey’s conception the present is the development
of past traditions, and stability amounts to the achievement of a better
degree of equilibrium, which is reached by means of an evolutionary
process. And when the time comes to make a choice between gradual
progress and radical transformation, Dewey faithful to his Darwinean
evolutionism, prefers gradual progress.38
    In dealing with education and social class, Puiggrós links Dewey’s
curriculum schemes with the capitalist attempts to control the subor-
dinate class by educational means and thus dissolve its class identity.39
This topic is further elaborated in her book, when the author deals
with the ideological role played by education and the way in which
Dewey defends his prospect of schools as laboratories toward the grad-
ual construction of a new society. Citing Democracy and Education she
makes Dewey’s logics visible as in how and why the individual judg-
ments and emotions would become homogeneous with the emotional
attitude of the group, thus legitimizing ideological unification. School
as a means to control may not be entirely the same in the progressive
tradition and in the reformist perspectives, however, similarities between
the two can be found. She argues that Dewey, backing Roosevelt’s
New Deal accepts the combination of regulated monopoly, state
prevalence, individualism, and institutional reformism. And it is in this
field where control as a key function of schools, takes its peak and
unfolds in different realms: massive ideological irradiation, the modi-
fication of behavior learned within social class and family environ-
ments, the dissolution of nefarious values that had been learned in
social institutions and may be antagonistic with those promoted by
school, and finally, the solution of political and pedagogical mediations
in the didactic field.40

[p. 195] [PDF page 214]

The Deweyean universal scientific model (understood by Puiggrós
as equivalent with the functionalist goal of a universal civilization) is
seen as a means to control the development of society toward capital-
ist progress without obstacles (i.e., the dream of theories of develop-
ment in Latin America). It is represented by teacher and school as a
means to dissolve extra school (vicious) experience. The educational
laboratory would thus consist of rules and players. Quoting Experience
and Education, Puiggrós remarks Dewey’s centrality of experience as
a means to lead the child toward knowledge already known by the
expert (i.e., the teacher). This also means that the players (i.e., the
pupils) may learn an order without noticing it is something externally
imposed. This is possible as long as this order is collectively assumed,
and does not come from an individual. School action is thus divided
into a pair of forms: consensus and coercion that characterize the
typical behavior in democratic life. Finally, the author claims, social
engineering emerges as an outcome of the universal scientific model
cherished by Dewey, however, in the imperialist imaginary, it achieves
political overtones never imagined by its creator.41
    Thus the assemblage/articulation of Dewey’s ideas with imperialism,
U.S. domination, and behaviorism is produced in the Mexican
academic world of life (Lebenswelt). John Dewey is then constructed
as a U.S. intellectual representative (ergo, he is associated with U.S.
imperialism), and Pragmatism is understood as a sociological utilitar-
ian and individualistic approach dismissive of ethical and political
principles. A Marxist essentialist reading of Dewey takes place at
this point. Puiggrós has indeed produced far more complex thinking
criticizing essentialism in its different incarnations, however, this is
another issue.
    The inscription of Dewey’s thought as an intellectual source for
the revolutionary educational crusade (in the 1920s) or his undeniable
links with the nonorthodox left wing in the late 1930s, seem to be
erased from the horizon, and instead Dewey’s project becomes an
indisputable though somehow uncomfortable spot in the history of
Mexican education.
    The second Mexican educational reading of Dewey’s writings
enables the understanding of the ways in which his notions of democ-
racy, progress, education, and the individual, no longer fit in the
Mexican educational imaginary. Dewey thus becomes part of an
antagonistic other, which through denial is excluded from the
images shaping the modern self of the second half of the twentieth
century.

[p. 196] [PDF page 215]

Last Considerations
The turn of the century at a planetary scale, marked not the beginning
but the rise of Liberalism as a feature of modern political thought in
Western countries. It was equated with a progressive move. Pragmatism
in philosophical terms, apart from Charles Sanders Peirce in the
United States and (the second) Wittgenstein in Great Britain, was not
really prevalent before Dewey’s emergence. In countries like Mexico,
Liberalism became predominant in the second half of the nineteenth
century but it was represented as a political approach (rather than a
philosophical perspective), and was articulated with Positivism, not
with Pragmatism.
    The comparison is made between two progressive discourses. In
the 1920s it is a revolutionary program designed and implemented by
the brand new power block, and in the 1970s it is a socialist academic
discourse. Concerning the appropriation of Dewey in the 1920s it was
amalgamated with the official educational program that was already
inhabited by other pedagogical sources, and in the 1970s, the knowl-
edge system does not have the same visibility compared to the politi-
cal dimension of academic life (because of the nearness of 1968). So
there is an asymmetry in the conditions in which Dewey is read and
inscribed in these two progressive imaginaries.
    I have tried to substantiate my claim that the Mexican inscriptions
of Dewey’s thought enable us to represent him as an indigenous
foreigner based on two theses: His ideas of the individual inscribed in
the fabrication of the modern democratic self in these two moments of
Mexican history, and these two versions of progressive ideals are resig-
nified in the very process of their articulation with Mexican discourses.
In this process they are reoccupied and colonized thus fabricating a
Dewey who is more and less than John Dewey.
    On the one hand, the first moment commented earlier, indicates an
inscription whereby Dewey’s pragmatism in education, his approach
to democracy, and its incarnation in the social laboratory represented
by the School of Action, come to be a constitutive part of Mexican
education in the postrevolutionary reconstructive period. Not to men-
tion that, in addition, his perspective is inscribed in the very indigenous
education schemes. The indigenous side of the inspiring expression
“indigenous foreigner” does not depend on the literality of this fact,
but rather on the complex symbolic process whereby the travelling
(i.e., displacements) of Dewey’s library (i.e., intellectual dispositive)
stops momentarily42 and gets fused with a salvation narrative

[p. 197] [PDF page 216]

(i.e., the Mexican revolutionary mystique). Dewey gets Mexicanized
in becoming part of a chain of equivalencies43 by means of which the
horizon of plenitude and fullness is represented. His library comes
to be a source without which the Mexican educational crusade is
unthinkable, and thereby the assemblage of pragmatism and the other
intellectual sources (i.e., Spanish Rationalism, Socialism, the New
School, Liberalism, inter alia), with the peculiarity of Mexican scholars,
educational officers, and schoolteachers understanding of Dewey’s
ideas, takes place.
    This Mexicanization however, does not take place in the limbo.
Rather, just like any other discursive articulation, it needs an outside,
a constitutive other setting frontiers and demarcating what “it is.” To
put it briefly, this appropriation does not take place apart from an
antagonistic other represented in this peculiar moment by Vasconcelos,
the minister of education. Beyond historical actors that may occupy
the position of antagonism, I am more interested in underlining the
role played by Dewey’s discourse in the fabrication of the modern self.
I do not overestimate the position of Pragmatism in the educational
crusade or in the promise of plenitude made by the Mexican revolution,
however, education in the Mexican history of the twentieth century
shows indelible marks, permanent indications of this inscription.
    On the other hand, the second reading of Dewey’s library presented
earlier (i.e., during the 1970s) marks an entirely different form and
quality of inscription. It is plausible to read this process as an empha-
sis on the foreigner side of the “indigenous foreigner,” the metaphor
that structures this whole book.44 The foreign character can be read in
the symbolic distance conveyed by the scarcity of research, essays, and
publications produced in that period (in spite of the fact that there had
previously occurred some positive adherence to Dewey’s approach).
This somehow means its partial exclusion from the research milieu
and its positioning in a secondary status, basically in the teaching
environment and not even as a subject in its own right, but just as one
more name in the extensive list of Western pedagogues. The alien
character can be observed also in the distance and disapproval with
which his work is treated as an alien doctrine, representative of the
very source of an academic perspective that is undervalued (i.e., func-
tionalism), an ideological assignment that is objected to, and a political
inclination that is doubtlessly rejected and denounced. In the 1970s,
one comes upon another version of modern self, the one structured by
one of the competing promises of plenitude: socialism. I am far from
meaning that this second inscription is not overdetermined. My point

[p. 198] [PDF page 217]

is that this overdetermination involves other political, intellectual, and
ideological ingredients. The expulsion of Dewey’s Pragmatism from
the cherished political and intellectual values in the progressive imagi-
nary of the 1970s does not take place in an empty horizon. Rather, just
like any other discursive articulation, it takes place in a political arena;
however, contrary to the first inscription, it is Pragmatism that is occu-
pying the position of the constitutive outside, and operates to negate
what is supposed to be the narrative of salvation for the reference
examined (i.e., Latin American socialism).
    Considering the historicity of representations, both inscriptions
lean on competing emblems of modernity (metaphysics and pragma-
tism, positivism and spiritualism, capitalism and socialism, Marxism
and functionalism), and both involve their respective salvation narra-
tives, and anticipated paradises. Accordingly both involve ingredients
of the Enlightenment myth in which school education can bring about
progress and happiness, and thus the fabrication of the modern self
can be paradoxically traced in both inscriptions.
    Dewey’s library, as any other assemblage of intellectual sources, as
any other political, ethical, and epistemic dispositive, is in turn merged
into an already overdetermined field, crisscrossed by multiple forces
and tendencies, different in kind and intensity. It eventually stops and
gets fused with some of them to get later detached from the former and
get fused into a different articulation. The political positions this
library can occupy, however, indicate a primacy of the position over the
literality of the text itself. There is no room for an essentialist reading
of this traveling library.
    Considering Dewey’s circulation from a different geopolitical
focus, the enterprise of gathering all these inscriptions in so different
environments (i.e., Finland, Serbia, Japan, Sweden, Turkey, Brazil,
Germany, the Soviet Union, Spain, China, Argentina, Switzerland,
or Mexico) invite us to contemplate the family resemblance of this
diversity, and obstinately iterate the questions: What Dewey? Why?
When? How?


Notes
1. Accordingly I am not responsible for those peculiar assemblages (oversimplifi-
   cations and politically led interpretations). Indeed I am responsible for my own
   reading of these two inscriptions.
2. Richard Rorty, Achieving Our country (Cambridge MA: Harvard University
   Press, 1998).

[p. 199] [PDF page 218]

3. I do not understand discourse as merely linguistic signification, but as open-
    ended systems of meaning that involve both linguistic and nonlinguistic prac-
    tices that structure social life (Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe, Hegemony
    and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democracy (London: Verso, 1985);
    something rather close to Wittgenstein’s language games conceived of as the
    totality of words, objects, and action gathered around meaning, and repre-
    senting forms of life, Ludwig Wittgenstein, The Philosophical Investigationsm
    (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1963).
 4. Jacques Derrida, Margins of Philosophy (London: The Harvester Press,
    1986).
 5. This three-year school level comes after secondary and before higher
    education and is equivalent to the French Baccaleaureat.
 6. Overdetermination stands as an objection to deterministic and teleological
    causality (fixated), and instead it involves a double discursive operation:
    displacement (i.e., circulation or traveling) of meaning throughout different
    signifiers, and condensation (or the temporary fusion and articulation) of
    these meanings with others at a certain point. It also entails that no identity
    is pure or uncontaminated, but rather has in it the traces of other identities
    (i.e., it is relational and not positive. See Rosa N. Buenfil Burgos, “The
    Mexican revolutionary mystique,” in Discourse Theory and Political Analysis.
    Identities, Hegemonies and Social Change, ed. D. Howarth, A. J. Norval, and
    Y. Stavrakakis (New York: Manchester University Press, 2000).
 7. Allan Knight, The Mexican Revolution (New York: Cambridge University
    Press, 1986).
 8. Buenfil Burgos, “The Mexican revolutionary mystique.”
 9. Malinchismo is a rather unfortunate Mexican word meaning the overvaluation
    of the foreign and underestimation of the native, which became a constitutive
    feature of Mexicans during the colonial period, and albeit it’s being bitterly
    criticized it has not been eradicated.
10. Modernism as an abstract value has been present and representing a desire
    and a horizon of plenitude already, at least, since the second half of the
    nineteenth century in Mexico. Thus it is not that the revolution brought it
    about, but it is reasonable to say modernism to be synonymous with a horizon
    of plenitude (if something were modern it would be good to have it).
11. Gamio and Sáenz met Dewey at the University of Columbia where both
    studied their Ph.D: Gamio in Anthropology and Saenz in Science and
    Philosophy (see Rafael Ramírez, Escuela rural mexicana [México City:
    SEP80-Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1981]).
12. See Roderic Camp, Intellectuals and the state in Twentieth-century in
    Mexico (Austin: The University of Texas, 1986); Mary Kay Vaughan, The
    state, Education and Social Class in Mexico 1880–1928 (Illinois: Northern
    Illinois University Press, 1982); Ramón E. Ruiz, Mexico. The Challenge of
    Poverty and Illiteracy (San Marino, CA: The Huntington Library, 1963);
    Rosa M. Torres Hernández, “Influencia de la teoría pedagógica de John
    Dewey en el periodo presidencial de Plutarco Elías Calles y el Maximato
    1924–1934” (Ph.D Thesis, Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
    México, 1998).

[p. 200] [PDF page 219]

13. See e.g., the splendid collection of pictures produced by the Fondo Casasola
    and Ortiz Monasterio Pablo, ed., Jefes, héroes y caudillos (Mexico: Fondo de
    Cultura Económica, 1986).
14. John Rutherford, An Annotated Bibliography of the Novels of the Mexican
    Revolution of 1910–1917 (in English and Spanish, Troy, NY: Whitston
    Publishing Co., 1972).
15. Carlos Pellicer and Rafael Carrillo Azpeitia, Mural Painting of the Mexican
    Revolution (México: Fondo Editorial de la Plástica Mexicana, 1985).
16. See Hernandez, “Influencia de la teoría pedagógica de John Dewey,” 23.
17. The New School already was a hybrid formation composed by different
    pedagogical theories and educational programs such as Abbotshome and
    Bedales, Montessory, Decroly, Kershensteiner, Parkhurst, Wirt, and Washburne,
    inter alia (See Hernandez, “Influencia de la teoría pedagógica de John Dewey,”
    195, footnote 25).
18. José Vasconcelos, Antología de textos sobre educación, ed. A. Molina
    (México City: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1981).
19. José Vasconcelos, Antología de textos, 48 my translation, see especially pages
    54 and 67.
20. Both documents by Ramírez 1924, “La Escuela de la Acción en la educación
    rural” and “La Escuela técnica para campesinos,” in Rafael Ramírez, Escuela
    rural mexicana (México City: SEP80-Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1981).
21. Rafael Ramírez, 1935 “La escuela proletaria: Cuatro conferencias sobre
    educación socialista,” in Rafael Ramírez, Escuela rural mexicana.
22. Rafael Ramírez, 1937, Técnica de la enseñanza (México City: Escuela
    Nacional de Maestros, 1970).
23. In the thirty written pieces registered by his biographers from 1928 to 1949,
    the titles of Ramírez’s texts suggest an articulation of Dewey and Kropotkine
    in dealing mainly with rural school, proletarian education, and didactics for
    specific subjects (i.e., history, reading, mathematics, inter alia).
24. John Dewey, “Interest in Relation to Training of the Will,” in The Early
    Works of John Dewey 1882–1889, Vol. V, 1895–1898, Introduction by
    William McKenzie (Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press, 1975).
25. John Dewey, “A Pedagogical Experiment,” in The Early Works of John Dewey.
26. Moisés Sáenz (1888–1941) was more focused on policy and the administra-
    tion of indigenous schooling, and his writing from 1926 to 1964 is mainly
    about indigenous education as a means to incorporating them into the
    national milieu, and integrating civilization into them.
27. John Dewey, The School and Society: Being Three Lectures by John Dewey
    Supplemented by a Statement of the University Elementary School (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 1907).
28. Moisés Sáenz, “Mexican integration through education,” Conference imparted
    in the University of Chicago, 1926 in Moisés Sáenz Antología de Moisés
    Sánez, ed. Aguirre Beltrán (México City: Ediciones Oasis, 1970), 17.
29. See Rorty, Achieving Our country.
30. Also in Rosa N. Buenfil Burgos, “Constructions of the child in the Mexican
    legislative discourse,” in Governing the Child in the New Milennium, ed. by

[p. 201] [PDF page 220]

Kenneth Hultqvist and Gunilla Dahlberg (New York and London:
    RoutledgeFalmer, 2001).
31. These few groupings consisted of front men and body guards, groups of male
    cheer leaders and in the best of cases, well-intended religious youth.
32. Ten databases were visited (three at the National University) and the rest in
    other important universities or research centers (Instituto Mora, El Colegio de
    Mexico, Departamento de Investigaciones Educativas, inter alia) and twenty-
    one texts were concentrated in one library, and none of these texts was writ-
    ten by a Mexican author. In two other databases ten documents were found
    but had been edited in the 1980s.
33. Adriana Puiggrós, Imperialismo y educación en América Latina (México City:
    Nueva Imagen, 1980).
34. John Dewey, Democracy and Education. An Introduction to the Philosophy
    of Education (New York: The Free Press, 1916).
35. John Dewey, “The child and the curriculum,” in The School and the Child;
    Being Selections from the Educational Essays of John Dewey, ed. J. J. Findlay
    Publisher (London: Blackie & Son Limited, 1906).
36. John Dewey, 1937, Experience and Education (New York: Collier Books,
    1963).
37. Puiggrós, Imperialismo, 16.
38. Puiggrós, Imperialismo, 104, 105.
39. Puiggrós, Imperialismo, 33.
40. Puiggrós, Imperialismo, 107, 150.
41. Puiggrós, Imperialismo, 228.
42. Indigenous evokes the idea of something having originated in and being
    produced, growing, living, or occurring naturally in a particular region or
    environment (innate, inborn, native), Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate
    Dictionary (Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster INC, 1990), 614
43. Laclau and Mouffe, Hegemony and Socialist Strategy.
44. Foreigner evokes the concept of a person, idea, or object belonging or owing
    allegiance to a foreign country, situated outside one’s own country; alien, not
    connected or pertinent; occurring in an abnormal situation in the living body
    and often introduced from outside (see Webster’s Ninth, 483).
