Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part IV: The Americas
Chapter 10: The Appropriation of Dewey’s Pedagogy in Colombia as a Cultural Event
Javier Sáenz-Obregón
Original print pages 231–251; PDF pages 250–270

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 231] [PDF page 250]

10
          The Appropriation of Dewey’s Pedagogy in
                      Colombia as a Cultural Event

                                                      Javier Sáenz-Obregón




                                                               Overview
The chapter focuses on the discursive, institutional, and public policy
appropriations of Dewey’s pedagogy in Colombia in the first half of the
last century. I analyze the cultural factors that explain its selective appro-
priation during this period. I also examine the national, political, and
pedagogical context that, till 1934, tended to exclude Deweyan peda-
gogy, while appropriating enthusiastically the concepts and prescriptions
of the European New School or Active Pedagogy movement. I also
describe the power/knowledge transformations that, between 1934 and
1946 led to the appropriation of the social and political dimension of
Dewey’s pedagogy by teacher-training institutions and government policy.
The nature of national, political, and cultural resistance to Deweyan
pedagogy is analyzed in some detail, such as the power of Catholic
dogma in the country, and the widely-held belief on the degeneration of
the national race. I argue that the dualist structure of Catholic thought
was particularly adverse to Deweyan pedagogy. I conclude that Dewey’s
tenuous welcome as a foreign guest, have gone hand in hand with brief
periods of consolidation of democratic practices in the country, and
have been more decisive when faith in democracy has been intensified.

                A Hostile Culture: Versions of Modernity
In the first half of the last century, pedagogy1 was viewed in the country
as the privileged practice for the attainment of the desired moral,

[p. 232] [PDF page 251]

political, and economic ends of the nation by intellectuals and political
actors with different educational agendas and versions of modernity.
In 1923 Agustín Nieto Caballero, one of the most influential educa-
tional reformists, put it succinctly: “whatever the teacher is, that will
be the nation.”2 This faith placed in schools for the attainment of
“modern progress” turned pedagogy into a field of battle over the
teacher’s and the pupil’s soul. This was not always an open battle: at
times philosophical and political differences were underplayed in an
effort to create a national consensus regarding educational policy and
pedagogy. The idea being that in a country prone to political violence
and with a people conceived as overpassionate, the sphere of educa-
tion had to be protected from conflict. In other periods, this battle vis-
ibly pitted the Church against the state, Catholic against “modern”
intellectuals, and the two dominant parties of the country: the
Conservative and the Liberal Party.
   Until the mid-1930s, the hegemonic discourse on “modernity” in
Colombia, produced a number of what we have termed3 filters of
appropriation that effected a strategic cut in available knowledges and
discourses produced in the United States and some European coun-
tries, that were linked to some of the most salient features of the
national culture of the time: the deep divisions between the elite and
the mass of the population; the great political and symbolic power of
the national Catholic Church, one of the most conservative of the con-
tinent; and the fresh memories of political violence, the Thousand Day
War (1899–1902) between the Liberal and Conservative Parties. As
López de la Roche4 has pointed out, given the extremely close relation
in the country between religion and partisan politics, political contro-
versy acquired a strongly sectarian and intolerant character. Since the
middle of the nineteenth century, religion had become the major divid-
ing line between liberals and conservatives, and was used by the two
parties for electoral purposes.
   Until the mid-1930s, there were three major filters that operated in
the strategic selection of “modern” thought and pedagogical concep-
tions and practices. In the first place, a deep-seated mistrust on the
part of the political, economic, and academic elite toward the poor
population, which was considered to be sick and degenerate. The poor
masses were viewed as a passionate, primitive, animalistic, and violent
social body, riddled with physical, moral, and intellectual abnormali-
ties. This distrust toward the poor, which constituted the great major-
ity of the population and were the almost exclusive target of public
education,5 privileged discursive appropriations that explained their

[p. 233] [PDF page 252]

“tragic” situation as well as medical and pedagogical prescriptions for
their normalization and regeneration, and for the “defense of the
race.”6
   In the second place, there was a distrust toward those dimensions of
the self, such as desires, emotions, and the imagination, considered to
be contrary to morality, social order, and economic progress. During
this period, educational reformists shared a civilizing7 purpose: a proj-
ect for the rationalization and modernization of popular culture that
excluded those dimensions of subjectivity considered dangerous both
for ecclesiastical authority and for the authority of scientific reason.
Following Foucault’s8 definition, they privileged teaching and exami-
nation practices of individualization, through which the pupil was
separated from the group so as to objectify and act upon her/him as a
separate unit, as well as dividing practices through which pupils were
led to perceive as necessary to be pitted against themselves, to suppress
or control certain dimensions of their subjectivity. The effect of this fil-
ter was the design of educational purposes and programs for the for-
mation of individuals with enough autonomy and initiative to be
productive in the creation of economic prosperity and social order, but
without opening the Pandora Box of those dimensions of the self
deemed to be “irrational.”
   Finally, there was a third filter, which colored, as it were, the other
two: the filter of ecclesiastical censorship that excluded theories, con-
cepts, and practices contrary to the dogmas of the Catholic Church. It
was a filter that beyond the defense and rejection of certain ideas,
functioned as an archaeological stratum of Christian dualism—often
invisible and not always linked explicitly to Catholic discourse—that
was specially antagonistic to Dewey’s anti-dualist philosophical and
pedagogical project: his project to do away with the dualism
mind/body, sensation/thought/action, interest/effort, child/curriculum
individual/society, instruction/formation, morality/knowledge, means/
ends, fact/value.9
   These filters of inclusion/exclusion made invisible the specificity of
Dewey’s pedagogy,10 a situation that would only change through the
relatively radical, political, and cultural transformations that took
place between 1935 and 1946. Before this period, Dewey was seldom
a single guest. Although Pragmatism was singled out by conservative
intellectuals as inimical to Catholic dogma, Dewey was generally
grouped in a section of the traveling library that tended to be read as
if written by a single author: the section of “modern,” “new,” or
“active” pedagogy. Intellectuals, public officials, and teachers who

[p. 234] [PDF page 253]

participated in the different factions of the pressing national debate
over the purposes of education and the means to attain them, tended
to overlook the differences between “modern” pedagogues. Thus, Dewey
and his fellow pragmatist William James11 tended to be grouped with
the most visible representatives of the European New School or Active
Pedagogy movement12—Montessori, Decroly, Claparéde, Ferriére—
with Lay and Meumann, the German “experimental” pedagogues, and
even, at times, with such nineteenth-century thinkers and pedagogues
as Spencer, Pestalozzi, Froebel, and Herbart.13
    The visibility/invisibility of Dewey’s pedagogy in Colombia in the
first half of the century was inversely related to that of the Belgian
medical doctor and pedagogue Ovide Decroly, the most important
methodizer of the ideas of active pedagogy, who visited the country in
1925. In the 1920s and early 1930s, Decroly’s pedagogy was domi-
nant in reformist discourse and educational reforms; a hegemony
that was displaced by Deweyan pedagogy between 1935 and 1946.
Decroly’s detailed formalization of the curriculum and teaching meth-
ods and his racist and conservative social and political conceptions
were openly welcomed in a period when national reformist discourse
focused on the technical modernization of the country and on the heal-
ing of a “degenerate” race without openly antagonizing a reactionary
Church. Within a politically conciliatory context this had the effect of
blurring the radical differences between Dewey’s and Decroly’s peda-
gogy. First Decroly’s and later Dewey’s pedagogy were used in the
country to support two radically different conceptions of modernity:
one that viewed it as an increase in the efficient use of productive
forces on the part of the poor population through the technical mod-
ernization of education and labor, while maintaining the “natural”
hierarchical order of society; and another that viewed modernity as a
process of secularization of the population, and its appropriation of
the ideals, practices, and institutional arrangements of egalitarian
democracy. In the first version, an ideological and symbolical continu-
ity operated between Church dogma and practices of examination in
schools and those for the “defense” of the race; while the second
version of modernity was radically opposed by conservative/Catholic
intellectuals and politicians.
    Only in the mid-1930s, and this more implicitly than openly,
did educational discourse distinguish between the racist foundation
of Decroly’s pedagogy, as well as the hierarchical, normalizing, and
socially adaptive ends he proposed for education, and Dewey’s political
progressivism and conception of democracy as the ideal way of life.

[p. 235] [PDF page 254]

Decroly’s political conservatism was specially visible in the
conferences he gave during his visit to Colombia in 1925. In these
conferences14 he presented his views on the need to institutionalize a
defensive school to combat the dangers of heredity and the environ-
ment, as well as a school tailored to the biological interests of children,
through a set of hygiene and individualizing practices of examination,
which included medical and psychological testing, and the hierarchi-
cal classification and selection of pupils.15 He presented a concep-
tion in which social and natural adaptation was both the means and
the end of education. Decroly believed that social order required that
each individual occupy his corresponding place in society, accord-
ing to the “imperatives” of his own nature. This individual nature
defined the precise and verifiable place that each human being occu-
pied in the evolutionary scale. Decroly held that the weight of heredity
is largely unmodifiable. While in Colombia, Decroly also emphasized
his views on geographical determinism, linking climatic conditions to
the evolutionary possibilities of the child and of society; in his words:
“the great cultures have always flowered in the plains or in the high
plateaus.”16 He also underlined a view of the hierarchical order estab-
lished by the workings of the natural law; that is, a natural selection
between a necessarily small elite and the mass of the population, argu-
ing that for the latter, a practical education based on manual activities
was sufficient.
    Five main cultural events can be discerned in relation to the appro-
priation and opposition to Dewey’s pedagogy in Colombia in the last
century. First, between 1903 and 1930 there was a relative invisibility
of Deweyan pedagogy within the debates generated by the reformist
pedagogical movement promoted by “modern” intellectuals, and oppo-
sition by conservative reformists to Pragmatism. Second, institutional
appropriations of active pedagogy in the 1920s and 1930s, based on
practices of examination and the precepts of the defensive school, and
one of the earliest institutional appropriations of Dewey’s pedagogy
in Latin America: that of the private reformist school for the elite—
the Gimnasio Moderno—founded in 1914. Third, a more open and
political appropriation of Dewey’s pedagogical concepts and precepts
in the 1930s and first half of the 1940s, in the context of partisan
liberal governments. Fourth, the educational and pedagogical counter-
reform initiated in the late 1940s under conservative governments that
attacked and effectively erased from public memory any vestiges of
Deweyan pedagogy. Finally, in the 1990s, some elements of Deweyan
pedagogy would become visible again.

[p. 236] [PDF page 255]

Pedagogical Debates and Projects of
Reform: 1903–1930
Until the mid-1930s, there were few explicit references to Deweyan
pedagogy within the national debate on educational reform. In the
country, Dewey had yet to become a singular pedagogue. The main
object of reformist discourse in this period of moderate Conservative
Party governments, was the generic active or new pedagogy that priv-
ileged appropriations from Decroly’s pedagogical conceptions and
precepts in the process of local and national educational reform.
   In the second decade of the last century, the first reform proposals
through the appropriation of the ideas and practices of European
active pedagogy were made in the context of a public educational sys-
tem dominated by a hybrid organization of elements that I term the
official confessional pedagogy of the country.17 This pedagogy was the
result of the selective appropriation of Pestalozzi’s objective lessons,18
the authoritarian disciplinary and moral educational precepts of the
Christian Brothers’ Catholic congregation,—based on La Conduite,
the pedagogical treatise of their French founder, Jean Baptiste de La
Salle—elements derived from classical or “rational” psychology and
neothomist philosophy, and the dogmatic orientation of the Catholic
Church.
   In 1903/1904, the government passed an educational law of
curriculum reform for primary and secondary schools19 that defined
the central purpose of education as the formation of a productive
individual that was hard-working, practical, healthy, and with initia-
tive: an individual conceived in the image of the German and Anglo-
Saxon “races,” thought to be the main bearers of these virtues. The
law constituted a project of individualization for the production of the
type of individuals deemed necessary for a modern organization of
labor and production. Despite these modernizing elements, the law
also gave a central place to Catholic moral and religious education
that was to be chiefly directed to the rejection of “modern” and
“revolutionary” errors, which for the Church included Protestantism,
as well as Pragmatism and other “materialist” systems of thought. The
law established the field of legitimacy and possibility for an educa-
tional system subjected to Church surveillance: the acceptance of
modern methods of instruction and sociobiological and economic pur-
poses, and the exclusion and rejection of non-Catholic moral practices
and purposes.

[p. 237] [PDF page 256]

With the creation in 1915 of the Cultura journal by a group
of relatively progressive liberal intellectuals, a systematic diffusion
of active pedagogy began through a series of articles written by
national reformists, which would later be strengthened by several new
publications—some of them relatively massive and published by the
national and some local governments—as well as by a number of
pedagogical, medical, psychological, and hygienic treatises written by
national partisans of active pedagogy. In very schematic terms, until
the mid-1930s, intellectuals, pedagogues, state officials, and politi-
cians that proposed educational reforms based on active pedagogy,
shared a set of conceptions that help to explain the relative invisibility
of Deweyan pedagogy in public debate.
    In the first place, the Progressive Liberals shared the same type of
dualist “either-or” rationality in the field of pedagogy that Dewey20 crit-
icized in the Progressive Education Movement of his own country. This
dualism was particularly evident in the dichotomy established between
“tradition” and “modernity.” Following the Enlightenment myth of
the greater value and truth of what was “new,”21 these intellectuals
critiqued anything that was “old,” under the strategic term of the “tra-
ditional.” One of the main targets of their “modern” critique was the
“traditional school.” This “traditional school” constituted a fabricated
image rather than a careful scrutiny of the existing pedagogical concep-
tions and practices in the country, and was attacked as the depositary of
all the “vices” and negations vis a vis the ideals of active pedagogy. Each
principle of active pedagogy was paired with a negative characteristic
attributed to the traditional one, thus: child/teacher, activity/passivity,
understanding/memory, freedom/ authoritarianism, interest/effort,
innovation/tradition, and observation/verbalism.
    In the second place, they shared a reductive vision of modernity,
founded on biological and positivist conceptions. Their “modern” dis-
course was based, primarily, on sociobiological speculation and strate-
gic appropriations of evolutionary theories and on an empiricist
epistemology. Modernity tended to be reduced to what was practical,
measurable, visible, useful and “natural.” Childhood, a privileged object
of knowledge for the “modern” disciplines appropriated in reform pro-
posals and teacher-training institutions in this period—“scientific”
administration, hygiene, and experimental medicine, physiology, and
psychology—had a central place in this configuration and was viewed
as the paradigmatical symbol of the future and as the “seed” of the
individuals that would modernize the country. For this “modern”

[p. 238] [PDF page 257]

discourse, the central purposes of life and education were struggle
for survival, adaptation, natural and social selection, and progress,
understood as economic growth and the “regeneration” of the
national race.
    In the third place, in general terms, these reformists had a common
view of some central pedagogical concepts and of the type of practices
that should be introduced in schools, which in some key issues were
radically different to those of Deweyan pedagogy. One of the major
differences had to do with their conception of the possibilities and
purposes of education. On the one hand, national reformers focused
on the limits rather than the possibilities of education, emphasizing a
series of factors—individual heredity, geographical and racial deter-
minism, the need to preserve social order and to regenerate the race—
that fixed within rather narrow limits what was seen as possible and
desirable. On the other hand, within reformist discourse, means and
ends were sharply separated. Following conceptions such as those of the
Swiss active pedagogue Claparéde,22 reformist pedagogy during
this period conceived its methods and techniques as “neutral” means
that were efficient and effective for the attainment of any end.
    There was also a fundamental discontinuity with Deweyan pedagogy
in their conception of what constituted a pedagogical experiment.
While for Dewey, experimentation was a form of experience with
open results through which human beings transformed their context
and reconstituted their selves,23 the conception of experimentation
of national reformers was a direct appropriation of the notion of
experiment in “scientific” psychology: the introduction by expert
knowledge of predefined modifications in a controlled context—that
is, in efficient schools that ideally would eliminate any activity foreign
to the experiment—and the measurement of their effects on pupils
through specialized techniques: anthropometric, physiological, medical,
and psychological tests.24
    A final difference between reformist discourse and Deweyan
pedagogy was regarding practices of instruction and formation. In
reformist discourse in Colombia during this period, prescriptions
for instruction and formation were separated both explicitly and
implicitly, and this was an effect of a radical differentiation between
morality and knowledge. Under the strict surveillance of the Catholic
Church, which believed it could hold on to moral sovereignty over
schools if religious instruction and Catholic ends were preserved, it
was licit to propose the modernization of methods of instruction, but
reformers were evidently cautious in relation to alternatives for the

[p. 239] [PDF page 258]

moral formation of pupils. Whereas for Dewey all human practices
were moral, the dogmatic defense by the Church of morality as its
sacred property, together with the concerns of national reformers as
to the “moral weakness” of the population, created a sharp division
between prescriptions for instruction and those for formation. In this
sense, Catholic practices of moral formation, and those of the exam-
ining and defensive school privileged by reformist discourse during
this period, shared a common mistrust toward the national popula-
tion, whether this mistrust was expressed in terms of “sinfulness” or
sickness/degeneracy.
   This common mistrust meant that moral education, in both cases,
had an authoritarian character. It was an exercise of open power on
the part of subjects of expert knowledge—theological, psychological,
or medical—on pupils, in order to produce virtuous, healthy, and
“normal” individuals. The main effect of this instruction/formation
divide was that while, until the mid-1930s, educational reformers pro-
posed unequivocally the adoption of relatively liberating methods for
the development of knowledge—learning through action, the integra-
tion of subject matter, the development of learning habits rather than
the accumulation of facts, and the introduction in schools of games,
manual work, and field trips—in terms of formation they emphasized
what in the documents of the time is referred to as “moral orthope-
dics”: the diagnosis, control, and surveillance of pupils’ morality, and
their moral correction and “straightening.”
   Concurrently with the enthusiastic diffusion of European active
pedagogy in the 1920s and 1930s, conservative educational reformists
singled out Pragmatism as contrary to Catholic dogma. In his psycho-
logical treatise for teachers, for example, Sieber,25 the director of one
of the most important teacher-training institutions of the country
attacked the pragmatist notion of the physical basis of emotions.
While the conservative reformist pedagogue Jiménez López,26 had this
to say on the effects of Pragmatism in education: “pragmatist doctrine
proscribes all knowledge that cannot be applied directly to the needs
of life, as was to be predicted . . . this led to a reduction of the spiritual
horizons of youth, that seriously weakened the highest and most
beautiful attributes of human personality.” For Jiménez López, the
greatest sin of Pragmatism was that by prescribing pedagogical prac-
tices for the unconscious formation of habits of action, it undermined
the idea of the autonomy of willpower as a separate faculty of the soul
and center of the spiritual life, thereby putting into question a central
tenant of Christianity: the dogma of free will, without which individuals

[p. 240] [PDF page 259]

could no longer be judged as sinful by teachers, priests, the Church,
and God. For Jiménez López,27 “a morality founded on the force of
habit has no merit whatsoever . . . one cannot talk about virtue where
effort and the triumphant action of will-power are missing.”


Institutional Appropriations of Active and
Deweyan Pedagogy: 1914–1930
From the early 1920s, under the orientation of medical knowledge,
practices of examination and active teaching methods were introduced
in some schools for “abnormals” and young delinquents, as well as in
regular schools. It was medicine that introduced the image of the
omnipotence of methods based on “scientific” precepts that would
dominate national discourses of pedagogical reform until the mid-
1930s. The central purposes of these institutions was the detection and
correction of the physical and psychological abnormalities of pupils;
the “economy” of pupils’ efforts by reducing the fatigue produced by
overburdened study plans, and the increase in academic productivity
and their future “social efficiency.” These institutions, through a com-
plex system for the production of information on pupils—medical,
psychological, and anthropometric examination; the study of their
hereditary history; and the observation of their personality and moral
traits—sought to predict and control pupils’ performance.
   Also in the 1920s, the most important local educational reform, in
the state of Boyacá, put into practice the precepts of the defensive
school, together with the introduction of Decroly’s teaching methods.
This reform tendency was founded on a sociobiological discourse that
appropriated evolutionary theories, as well as the notion of racial
degeneration that would dominate national, social, and educational
debate until the mid-1930s. In the 1918 Debate on the degeneration of
the national race, racial degeneration had been defined by Jiménez
López28 as a regression in the vital and productive capacities of the
national race in relation to the original European, African, and Indian
races. The national race would constitute a “sickly deviation of a
primitive type,” caused by external influences—climate, nutrition,
education—and hereditary factors. According to Jiménez López,
degenerate individuals, which would comprise the majority of the
poor population, were unable to procreate normal children. The
Boyacá reform emphasized the improvement in pupils’ nutrition and
of the hygienic conditions of schools, and the outreach of schools for

[p. 241] [PDF page 260]

the control of the biological and moral life of the rural population:
procreation, birth, nutrition, infant education in the family, and the
prevention of alcoholism and disease.
   The Gimnasio Moderno, a private school for the elite founded
in 1914, was the only institution that unequivocally appropriated
elements of Dewey’s pedagogy in the first three decades of the last
century. Its founder, Agustín Nieto Caballero, had come into direct
contact with the ideas of active pedagogy in Europe and the United
States, including Dewey’s, at Teachers’ College. The pedagogy of the
Gimnasio constituted a sharp discontinuity with the dominant reformist
movement, primarily through the appropriation of Dewey’s political
conceptions and his vision of schools as social, rather than examining
or defensive institutions. Its central purpose was the contribution to
the development of democracy, social welfare, and solidarity. The
school emphasized pupils’ social responsibility and their participation
in the resolution of the social problems of the country, and following
Dewey’s conception that moral/social education could not be a specific
instructional subject but the result of the ways schools were organized,
for Nieto: “the foundations of democracy are not in school-texts . . .
the feeling of social responsibility can never be created within a disci-
plinary régime that stifles the personality. In order to have democracy,
we must educate within democratic principles.”29
   Against the individualizing practices prevalent in the reformist
movement, the school introduced collective practices of cooperation,
as well as the Deweyan notion that teachers were to develop knowl-
edge of pupils through “sympathetic” understanding. The Gimnasio
was a hybrid pedagogy: a synthesis of Decroly’s teaching methods and
the social conceptions and political purposes of Dewey’s pedagogy.
While using the general framework of Decroly’s teaching system based
on Interest Centers, Nieto socialized the Belgian’s conception of child-
hood interest. Rather than predefined by a universal evolutionary law,
Nieto considered interests in a more Deweyan fashion, as social inter-
ests of cooperation and solidarity. But the Gimnasio was far from
being a Deweyan school: it was only for boys, it explicitly rejected a
participatory school government, and included Catholic religious edu-
cation that was not compulsory for pupils of other creeds. There were
two major reasons for this: the initial opposition of the Church hier-
archy to the school, and Nieto’s view that the Catholic religion, fol-
lowed by the great majority of the population, constituted an
important unifying factor for a nation prone to social and political
violence.

[p. 242] [PDF page 261]

From Biology to Society: Dewey and
the Politization of Education, 1930–1946
With the arrival to power of the Liberal Party in 1930, a process began
that temporarily displaced the hegemony of Catholic, biological, psy-
chological, and medical conceptions and school practices; and that,
for the first time in the century, was dominated by a secular and dem-
ocratic vision of education. Within this process the divide I have
described between instruction and formation, as well as that between
the means and the ends of education was significantly weakened, and
Deweyan pedagogy was privileged in the state’s discourse and educa-
tional reforms. Through a strategic focus on the democratic organiza-
tion, the collective nature, and the political purposes of schools, liberal
governments effectively socialized and politicized the educational sys-
tem. This process can be separated into two distinct periods. The first,
from 1930 to 1934, in the context of a moderate and politically con-
ciliatory government that gave participation to conservatives and kept
harmonious relations with the Church, in which the new political dis-
course and Deweyan practices acquired greater visibility but coexisted
with previous discourses and practices. In the second period, from
1935 to 1946, characterized by openly partisan, and at times dogmat-
ically sectarian and anticlerical governments, in which the political
dimension of Deweyan pedagogy became hegemonic. In this period,
education became, as it had been in the nineteenth century, the princi-
pal sphere of political conflict, in which the most radical elements
within the two parties battled each other, and in which the first signs
appeared of the political violence that would wreck havoc in the late
1940s and 1950s, when some 300,000 people were killed in the
context of Liberal–Conservative violence.
    Under the leadership of Nieto, now a high-ranking official at
the Ministry of Education, new programs for primary schools were
introduced experimentally in some regions of the country in 1933.
These programs, that became mandatory for all schools in 1935, were
virtually the same as the pedagogical system that Nieto had designed
in the Gimnasio Moderno. Nieto, faithful in this respect to Dewey’s
radical egalitarianism, saw no reason to modify in any substantial way
the pedagogical practices implemented with an elite student popula-
tion, which were now to be introduced for the overwhelmingly poor
population of the public education system.
    All the major transformations introduced by the government’s
programs pointed in the direction of a “socialization” of pedagogical

[p. 243] [PDF page 262]

practice that distanced it from its previous racial and examining refer-
ents, through the appropriation of Deweyan concepts and prescrip-
tions. In the first place, the exclusion of religious instruction in schools
and of medical and psychological examination practices; in the second
place, modifications in the content of Decroly’s Interest Centers, which
had been adopted as the general framework of the new study plans.
Decroly’s system emphasized the child’s relations with the natural
world and the “natural needs of humanity,” and organized the cur-
riculum around these: the need for nourishment, for shelter, of defense
against natural and social dangers and, to a lesser degree, the need to
work in solidarity.30 In the new national programs, social rather than
natural interests, became the organizing factor of subject matter and
teaching. Teachers’ and pupils’ vision and minds were directed to
social and national phenomena and problems. Social relations were
the articulating core of all content. Each year a different “interest”
was developed: life in the family and school; life in the community;
life in society, and geographical, economic, and social aspects of the
country.31 In the third place, the program’s prescriptions on formation,
school discipline, and the organization of pupils’ activities also consti-
tuted a direct appropriation of Deweyan pedagogy. In clear reference to
Catholic and classical practices of formation, the programs considered
that democratic virtues could not be formed through the simple teach-
ing of moral or civic precepts; moral/social habits were seen as the result
of a school environment in which democratic values were practiced in
everyday affairs. In discontinuity with previous discourse and practices
that viewed education as the formation of individuals, the programs
viewed schools as “small societies” and prescribed a discipline founded
on collective work. Discipline was to be a result of activities chosen by
pupils in whose direction they participated. As in the Gimnasio, the
ends of education were social and political: the purpose of schools was
no longer seen as the defense of the race or the “natural” selection of
children, but as the formation of citizens for a democratic life.
    From 1935 onward, in quite a decisive manner, the educational
purpose of democratizing and secularizing national culture and the
relations between society and the state, became paramount in educa-
tional discourse, public policy, teacher-training institutions, and schools.
The formation of citizens through democratic practices in schools,
now viewed as laboratories of democracy, became a pressing concern
for the liberal government in power; a concern that was related to a
new vision that, despite the introduction of active pedagogy reforms,
schools and teacher-training institutions in the country remained

[p. 244] [PDF page 263]

authoritarian organizations based on “perverse” Catholic and “military”
systems of discipline. This new concern was related not only to the fur-
thering of partisan goals directed to the conversion of the poor popu-
lation to liberal ideals, thereby loosening its historical political ties
with the Church, it was also linked to the urgent defense of the coun-
try’s democratic form of government against international Fascism
and Nazism and its local followers in the Conservative Party. In this
new political context, and for the first time in the century, state offi-
cials dared to criticize openly the authoritarian character of educa-
tional institutions run by Catholic congregations. The annual reports
of the now militantly liberal directors of public education at the local
level, underlined in no uncertain terms the democratic purposes of the
new liberal school that had to be created. In 1937, the director of
public education of Boyacá, one of the most conservative states in the
country, synthesized the liberal government’s task as that of “provid-
ing individuals with mental and economic freedom, in order to make
possible their self-determination, so that the impositions which arise
from privilege and social artifice do no affect them.”32 These reports
were especially critical of the “public” education provided by Catholic
congregations in Native Indian communities, through a contract with
the state that funded them, which in some regions was still operating
in the 1980s. The conclusion of the local director of education in his
report of an official visit to an Indian region in the state of Cauca33
was that these contracts, established in the first decades of the century,
had to be reformed for the education imparted by the missionaries was
a “total failure” and contrary to the government’s educational poli-
cies. In his view, the missionaries had no knowledge whatsoever of
national educational programs, and the education they imparted made
use of religious dogma in order to subject the willpower of Indian
pupils and was centered on the memorization of prayers and religious
texts, and rather than developing the pupils’ personality, had the effect
of destroying their happiness and freedom.
   A new filter of appropriation of available knowledges rapidly
replaced the previous ones: their usefulness in relation to the new
social and political ends of the party in power. Public education policy
and programs had a clear target: the integration of the rural popula-
tion to a modern and democratic culture. In 1935, in its political plat-
form, the ruling Liberal Party had offered the establishment of lay
public schools, and the rejection of “reactionary dogmatisms,”34 and
in 1936 a concstitutional reform introduced for the first time in the
country the principle of freedom of teaching and religious conscience

[p. 245] [PDF page 264]

in public education. In this period, schools began to be seen as institu-
tions for the creation of new democratic, political, and economic
habits, both in pupils and in the rural population in general. The
teachers’ gaze was redirected from the biological laws of the evolution/
degeneration of childhood and the national race, to the understand-
ing of the culture and living conditions of the rural poor. With the
appropriation by teacher-training institutions, public officials and
rural education programs of social knowledges such as sociology
and ethnology, the interdisciplinary relations of pedagogy were multi-
plied, and new objects of discourse and knowledge appeared—such as
culture, society, politics, and nationality—that displaced those of
the experimental sciences. The notion of race was displaced by the
conception of culture, and sociobiological speculation began to be
replaced by sociological and anthropological studies on the character-
istics of national culture that produced a new and positive image of the
Indian population.
    These new referents of power/knowledge made possible, for the
first time, an explicit critique of the conservative purposes and effects
of the dominant tendency of active pedagogy appropriated previously
in the country. This included a critique of the racist conceptions
that had dominated in the country since the beginning of the century.
A critique that was founded on a new trust in the potentialities of
the “people”—pueblo in Spanish, that named, above all, the poor
population—and the rejection, in words of Jorge Eliécer Gaitán,
minister of education and the most important popular leftist political
leader in the country,35 of the “pessimism” of the defenders of an
“imaginary collective decadence.”36 It also encompassed a critique of
the practices of “natural selection” in schools. In this regard, in his edu-
cational treatise, based almost completely on Deweyan ideas, a national
pedagogue stated: “the purpose of education is not the ingenious adap-
tation of the individual so that he will occupy a pre-established place in
society, but rather that of enabling him to create a place for himself.”37
    These transformations went hand in hand with a very visible shift
in the pedagogical foundation of state discourse and policy: a shift
from Decroly and the generic referents to active pedagogy to the polit-
ical dimension of Dewey’s pedagogy, which nevertheless still tended to
exclude the more complex ethical and epistemological foundations of
Deweyan thought. This appropriation was only possible under hege-
monic Liberal governments that unlike those that had preceded them,
were very not overly concerned about ecclesiastical opposition. Decroly’s
conservative pedagogy lost its appeal in the context of the political

[p. 246] [PDF page 265]

ends of the state, while, the Deweyan conception of the function of
schools in the democratization of social relations, became the new
cornerstone of educational and pedagogical reform.
   The new political discourse of the state and the secularization of
education, together with the appropriation of Dewey’s democratic
philosophy, clearly challenged the foundations and purposes of the
Church and Catholic dogma, and came increasingly under the fierce
attack of priests and conservative intellectuals. Educational reform was
attacked as atheist, materialist, and communist; as well as through a
series of tactics that sought to prevent children from attending public
schools. These included the deployment of priests and their exhorta-
tions during mass in order to convince parents to move their children
to Catholic private schools; and the excommunication, in some regions,
of those who refused. Once more, Pragmatism was singled out as one
of the central enemies of Catholic ideals. In the words of the conser-
vative pedagogue Bernal Jiménez, one of the leaders of active peda-
gogy reform in the 1920s and 1930s, and now Catholic crusader
against liberal reforms:

  Neither ethical truth, nor juridical truth, are true as a result of their
  practical efficacy, as William James’ pragmatism holds—the most
  despicable of the modern derivations of positivism—they are true
  because of the absolute content with which they are infused, due to their
  being emanations of divine law.38

   For Jiménez López39 the pragmatist foundation of the new reforms
was evident, and, in his view, were leading to class conflict, and were
supported by anti-Catholic agents and forces, such as Protestantism,
as well as by exiled Jewish intellectuals, whom he considered an
“undesirable ethnic element.” Jewish intellectuals had been welcomed
by the liberal regime and had played an important role in educational
reform. For Jimenez’ feverishly dogmatic and anti-Semitic mind, this
unholy alliance of Pragmatism, Protestantism, and progressive Jewish
intellectuals was undermining the country’s “Christian civilization.”
   One of the main effects of the state’s new social and political vision
was the transformation of teacher-training institutions. Until 1934
they had remained under the symbolic and often direct control of
ecclesiastical power. They had sought to form a “teacher-apostle”; a
teacher formed by the moral precepts of Catholicism. The teacher was
also to be an expert in the active methods of instruction, in experi-
mental psychology, in examining and hygiene practices, and in the

[p. 247] [PDF page 266]

new conceptions of childhood created by scientific psychology and
active pedagogy. By 1937, the ideal features of the “good teacher” had
been transformed. She was no longer identified with Catholic virtues
nor with medical and psychological knowledge, but with rather Deweyan
“social” capacities, such as cooperation, social action, and sympathy
for pupils.40 Between 1934 and 1946 different elements of Deweyan
pedagogy were introduced in teacher-training institutions. These included
participatory forms of government and disciplinary regimes founded
on moral self-direction and collective work. The new visibility of
Deweyan pedagogy can be attested in the graduation theses presented
by teachers during this period. They show that the newly formed
teachers had a clearer vision of the ethical and epistemological speci-
ficity of Deweyan pedagogy than the more visible reformist leaders.41


           Dewey, Democracy, and National Culture:
      Conservative Counterreform and Reemergence
                  of Deweyan Pedagogy in the 1990s
In 1946, with the return of the Conservative Party to power, one of the
most audacious periods of pedagogical reform in the country came to
an abrupt halt. In the context of the beginning of a new bloody period
of political violence, the conservative governments as well as liberal
intellectuals, attacked the pedagogical reforms of 1935–1946 as one of
the main causes for the moral and social “disorder” in the country.
Public education was once again founded on an authoritarian peda-
gogy based on Catholic dogma that defined its central purpose as the
return the country to its “traditionalist and Catholic” course, from
which it had been deviated by the “corrupting materialism” of liberal
governments.42 It was a purpose that, for the conservatives, could only
be attained by educating a ruling minority that would contain the pas-
sions of the poor population, viewed again as sick and prone to moral
and social dissolution.43 Liberal educational reforms were held responsi-
ble by conservatives for the outbreak of violence, while the Catholic
Church, engaged in a “holy crusade” against liberalism, went as far as
warning that no Catholic should vote for the Liberal Party. Liberal
political leaders and intellectuals, on the other hand, blamed the
reforms for their “mistakes” in the moral education of the poor popu-
lation that, in the words of a former reformist intellectual, had pro-
duced “impulses of atavistic resentment” amongst the poor.44 The
poor had to be defended from democracy. Only in the early 1990s

[p. 248] [PDF page 267]

would Dewey’s pedagogy be referred to again in teacher-training
institutions and public debate. Once more, its political dimension was
privileged, in the context of a renewed faith in democracy, following
the progressive constitutional reform of 1991 that sealed a peace
treaty with guerrilla organizations. Till then, a conservative political
culture and the hegemony of Marxist discourse amongst opposition
intellectuals acted as barriers to Deweyan pedagogy.
    The destiny of Deweyan pedagogy in Colombia has gone hand in
hand with the institutional possibilities for the exercise of democratic
practices and with the symbolic value placed on them. The indigeniza-
tion of Dewey in Colombia has had an almost exclusively political
character. His pedagogy has been welcomed as an instrument for the
furthering of democratic practices and institutional arrangements, and
has been made invisible or openly opposed in times when democracy
has been viewed as dangerous for morality, social order, and progress.
If within the educational debates in the United States, Dewey clarified,
modified, and contrasted his views in relation to those of his followers
and opponents;45 the precarious epistemological existence of his dis-
course in Colombia, served to blur its specificity and neutralize some
of its radical potentialities. We are only now beginning to recognize
that, in the long run, Dewey’s educational project was defeated in this
country by the same conservative forces of expert and efficient control
of the teacher, pupils, and schools that were victorious in his homeland
during his own lifetime.
    The precarious existence of Dewey’s pedagogy in Colombia can
be attributed, primarily, to Catholic/conservative opposition and
to the version of modernity that prevailed in national debates and in
the direction of the educational system. It was a version that, with the
exception of the brief democratizing period between 1935 and 1946,
emphasized the technical and economic modernization of the popula-
tion, rather than political and cultural modernity. Dewey’s intensifica-
tion of some of the more radical, political, epistemological, ethical,
and aesthetic elements of modernity could not be welcomed for long
in a country with a dominant culture whose distrust of the majority of
its population has proven to be stronger than its faith in democracy.

Notes
1. Building upon Zuluaga’s conceptualizations—O. L. Zuluaga, Pedagogía e
   historia (Bogotá: Ediciones Foro Nacional por Colombia, 1987). I define peda-
   gogy as a discipline that conceptualizes on, and applies and experiments with

[p. 249] [PDF page 268]

knowledge relative to instruction and formation in schools. Pedagogy would
    be, then, both a knowledge and a practice that includes concepts, precepts,
    and aims relative to a wide array of themes, such as study plans, teaching,
    learning, teachers, human nature, childhood, knowledge, morality, discipline,
    and examination.
 2. Caballero, A. Neito, “El problema máximo,” in Escuela Activa. Selección de
    textos (Bogotá: Presencia, 1923), 111.
 3. J. Sáenz-Obregón, O. Saldarriaga, and A. Ospina, Mirar la infancia:
    pedagogía, moral y modernidad en Colombia, 1903–1946, Vols. 1 and 2
    (Bogotá: Colciencias, Uniandes, Foro, Universidad de Antioquia, 1997).
 4. F. López de la Roche, “Tradiciones de cultura política en el siglo xx,” in
    Modernidad y sociedad política en Colombia, ed. M. E. Cárdenas (Bogotá:
    FESCOL, Foro Nacional por Colombia, IEPRI, 1993).
 5. In comparison with other Latin American countries, historically there
    has been in Colombia a marked tendency for only the poorest sectors of
    the population to send their children to public primary and secondary
    education, while, in the first half of the last century, Catholic congrega-
    tions dominated private education. In the 1920s, half of the secondary
    school population, which included very few poor pupils, went to private
    institutions.
 6. This notion of defending the “national race” as a way of protecting society
    constituted a recontextualization of the discourse on race in Europe and the
    United States. On this see Michel Foucault, Il faut défendre la societé, Cours
    au College de France, 1976 (Paris: Seuil/Gallimard, 1976); Stephen J. Gould,
    The Mismeasure of Man (New York: W.W. Norton, 1981).
 7. On the process of “civilization” in Europe since the Middle Ages and its effect
    of demanding greater control on the part of the individual over his/her
    emotions, see Norbert Elias, The Civilizing Process: The History of Manners
    and State Formation and Civilization (Oxford: Blackwell, 1977/1994).
 8. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (London:
    Penguin, 1975/1979).
 9. John Dewey, “The child and the curriculum,” in The Philosophy of John
    Dewey, ed. J. J. McDermott (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1902/1981); John Dewey, “Interest and effort in education,” in The Middle
    Works, Volume 7: 1912–1914, ed. J. A. Boydston (Carbondale and Ewardsville:
    Southern Illinois University Press, 1913/1979): John Dewey, Democracy and
    Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education (New York:
    The Free Press, 1916/1997); and John Dewey, Experience and Education
    (New York: Collier Books, 1938/1962).
10. Most of Dewey’s major pedagogical works or selections thereof were
    translated into Spanish before the 1930s, while Experience and Education
    was translated in 1939, one year after its English publication.
11. William James’s Talks to teachers on psychology and to students on some of
    life ideals (1899) had been translated and published in the 1920s in a national
    pedagogical journal and was reprinted in 1941 by the National Ministry of
    Education as: William James, Charlas pedagógicas (Bogotá: Imprenta
    Nacional, 1941).

[p. 250] [PDF page 269]

12. Active Pedagogy or the New School are terms that are used to name a
    rather heterogeneous reform tendency initiated in the first decades of the
    last century, which sought to transform existing instruction and formation
    practices in schools. Although primarily a European movement, many include
    within this tendency the Progressive Education Movement in the United
    States, which had in Dewey one of its first leaders. According to Oelkers—
    Jurgen Oelkers, “Break and continuity: observations on the modernization
    effects and traditionalization in international reform pedagogy,” Paedagogica
    Historica xxxi, no. 3 (1995): 675–713—in Europe, it was first institutional-
    ized in 1920 with the creation in London of the national New Education
    Fellowship and with its first international congress of 1921, where the
    League for the Renewal of Education was formed. By 1932, the movement
    had become an international phenomena, with the participation of repre-
    sentatives of fifty-three countries in its Nice conference. According to
    Adolphe Ferriére, editor of the French journal of the movement, its pioneers
    were Decroly, the Frenchmen Bertier and Cousinet, the Italian Lombardo-
    Radice, and Ferriére himself. Other pedagogues that are often named as part
    of this tendency are Montessori, Binet, Kerschensteiner, Claparéde, and
    Piaget.
13. The main historical source for the analysis of the appropriation of Deweyan
    pedagogy in Colombia is Sáenz-Obregón, Saldarriaga, and Ospina, Mirar la
    infancia, 1997.
14. O. Decroly, El doctor Decroly en Colombia (Bogotá: Ministerio de Educación
    Nacional, 1993).
15. Following Foucault (1975/1979, 183, 191–192) I understand examination as
    a practice through which individuals are governed and knowledge on them is
    produced. Examination objectifies and judges individuals: they are compared,
    hierachized, and excluded, thereby ensuring the disciplinary functions of dis-
    tribution, selection, classification, normalization, and the maximum extraction
    of forces and time.
16. O. Decroly, El doctor Decroly en Colombia, 119.
17. On this, see J. Sáenz-Obregón, Saldarriaga, and Ospina, Mirar la infancia.
18. Appropriated by public education in the country since the mid-nineteenth
    century, through the American teaching manuals of H. Wilson (1870),
    N. Calkins (1872), J. P. Wickersham (1882), J. Baldwin (1902), and
    J. Johonnot (1911).
19. A. J. Uribe, Instrucción pública (Bogotá: Imprenta Nacional, 1927).
20. Dewey, Experience and Education.
21. On the idealization of novelty in pedagogical discourse, see J. Sáenz-Obregón,
    Pedagogical Discourse and the Constitution of the Self (unpublished doctoral
    thesis, London: Institute of Education, University of London, 2003).
22. E. Claparéde, Psicología del niño y pedagogía experimental (México:
    Editorial Continental, 1905/1959), 100.
23. On this, see Dewey, Democracy and Education.
24. This conception of the pedagogical experiment was founded on appropria-
    tions of Claparéde’s (1905/1957) conceptions, as well as those of the German
    pedagogues,—E. Meumann, 1907/1966. Pedagogía experimental, 5th ed.

[p. 251] [PDF page 270]

(Buenos Aires: Losada, 1907/1966)—and W. A. Lay, Pedagogía experimental
    (Barcelona: Labor, 1928).
25. J. Sieber, Psicología para escuelas normales y maestros (Tunja: Facultad
    Nacional de Educación, 1933).
26. Miguel Jiménez López, La escuela y la vida (Bogotá: Banco de la República,
    1928), 115.
27. Miguel Jiménez López, “Lo inconsciente en la educación,” Cultura 1, no. 2
    (1915): 387.
28. Miguel Jiménez López, “Nuestras razas decaen: algunos signos de degen-
    eración colectiva en Colombia y en los países similares,” in Los problemas de
    la raza en Colombia (Bogotá: Biblioteca Cultura, 1928).
29. A. Nieto Caballero, Una escuela (Bogotá: Antares, 1966).
30. O. Decroly and G. Boon, Iniciación general al método Decroly y ensayo de
    aplicación a la escuela primaria (Buenos Aires: Losada, 1937/1939).
31. República de Colombia, Programas de ensayo para escuelas primarias (Bogotá:
    Imprenta Nacional, 1933).
32. Dirección de Educación Pública de Boyacá, Informe del Director de
    Educación Pública (Tunja: Imprenta del Departamento, 1937).
33. Dirección de Educación Pública del Cauca, Informe del Director de
    Educación Pública (Popayán: Imprenta del Departamento, 1935).
34. G. Molina, Las ideas liberales en Colombia (Tomo tercero. Bogotá: Tercer
    Mundo, 1987), 19.
35. Gaitán who was defeated in the 1946 presidential election was murdered in
    1948. His death led to popular uprisings and intensified political violence
    throughout the country.
36. J. E. Gaitán, La obra educativa del gobierno en 1940 (Bogotá: Ministerio de
    Educación Nacional, 1940), xi.
37. L. E. Pinto, Reflexiones de un educador (Bogotá: Editorial Kelly, 1946), 72.
38. R. Bernal Jiménez, La educación he ahí el problema (Bogotá: Ministerio de
    Educación Nacional, 1949), 281.
39. M. Jiménez López, “La actual desviación de la cultura,” in Jiménez López,
    Discursos y ensayos (Tunja: Imprenta Oficial, 1948).
40. Ministerio de Educación Nacional, “La Ficha del Maestro,” Revista del
    maestro 1, no. 3 (1937).
41. For an example of this, see, J. C. Feuillet, “La Escuela Activa: Tesis de grado
    para optar por el título de Licenciado en Ciencias de la Educación” (unpublished
    thesis, Bogotá: Escuela Normal Superior, 1937).
42. República de Colombia, Memoria del Ministro de Educación Nacional
    (Bogotá: Prensas del Ministerio, 1951), 5.
43. República de Colombia, Memoria del Ministro de Educación Nacional
    (Bogotá: Prensas del Ministerio, 1949).
44. L. López de Mesa, Perspectivas culturales (Bogotá: Universidad Nacional,
    1949), 89.
45. See, Herbert M. Kliebard, The Struggle for the American Curriculum
    1893–1958 (New York and London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1987).
