Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part V: Asia/Asia Minor
Chapter 11: A History of the Present: Chinese Intellectuals, Confucianism and Pragmatism
Jie Qi
Original print pages 255–277; PDF pages 274–296

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 255] [PDF page 274]

11
                    A History of the Present: Chinese
          Intellectuals, Confucianism and Pragmatism

                                                                  Jie Qi



  Transvaluation of all values.

    —Friedrich Nietzsche

  Transvaluation of all Chinese & foreign values.

                                    —Hu Shih


                                                          Overview
The chapter investigates the way in which the modern Chinese
intellectual has been constructed during and after the May Fourth
Movement occurring in 1919 when Dewey started his trip to China.
First, it argues that the introduction of Dewey’s pragmatism into
China was a break in modern Chinese intellectual history. It shifted
the notion of intellectuals from a model of Confucian collectivism to
one of individualism. Second, this chapter explores how the “New
Cultural Movement” brought revolutionary changes in Chinese lan-
guage, Chinese literature, Chinese culture, and educational systems
into a relationship with the reading of Dewey. For example, the main
purpose of school education was to prepare children for the govern-
mental servant examination before the New Cultural Movement.
However, it shifted to teaching children the “real” tasks that they need
in their late life after 1919. Third, the chapter demonstrates that the
interpretation and application of Dewey’s pragmatism in modern
China shifted over time and was interpreted as a traveling library and
so brought about reform in thought in a non-confrontational yet

[p. 256] [PDF page 275]

critical manner. The shifts of interpretation of Dewey’s thoughts
caution us to be aware of the “regime of truth.” The chapter concludes
by pointing out that Dewey’s pragmatism assembled into the forma-
tion of the particular Chinese modernity. The Chinese modernity is a
political issue and it is associated with multiple dimensions.
    John Dewey’s work was first translated into Chinese in 1912. For
near a century, his ideas have been read, interpreted, and applied
within changing social, cultural, and political contexts of China.
Dewey has been recognized more as a philosopher than an educator in
China. Five of the most representative Chinese intellectuals during the
twentieth century—Hu Shih, Feng You-lan, Tao Xing-zhi, Jiang
Meng-lin, and Guo Bing-wen studied under John Dewey at Columbia
University.1 For the last century, no other Western theorist was as con-
troversial as Dewey in China. Recently, many scholars in China have
started to examine how to use Dewey’s ideas to solve current Chinese
educational problems. However, this study does not try to test how
Dewey’s theory is useful for current Chinese education phenomena;
rather, it seeks to investigate the modernization in China as a cultural
process in which Dewey was both hero and antihero in the formation
of cultural patterns and modes of life for Chinese to live. My analytic
approach to Dewey in this chapter is to place Dewey within traveling
libraries, that is, I consider how Dewey has become assembled and
reassembled with other ideas, institutions, and authority structures
related to Chinese life.
    The relationship between Dewey and China is one of both a foreigner
and indigenous. Dewey is brought into Chinese discourses of modern-
ization in at least three different times, each expressing a different
assemblage of ideas and authority structures. The chapter first investi-
gates the way in which the Chinese intellectual and modernity were
constructed during and after the May Fourth Movement (also called
the New Cultural Movement), which occurred in 1919 when Dewey
started his trip to China. The introduction of Dewey’s pragmatism
into China was assembled with other authors to tell a story of the
beginning of modernity in the history of the Chinese intellectual
that shifted from Confucian collectivism to an individualism. Second,
this chapter explores how this individualism was constructed with
Dewey’s thoughts on democracy and science as the new Chinese intel-
lectuals sought revolutionary changes in Chinese language, Chinese
literature, Chinese culture, and educational systems. Third, the chapter
explores the shifting interpretation of Dewey’s pragmatism in modern

[p. 257] [PDF page 276]

China through different sets of traveling libraries as Deweyan intellec-
tuals were labeled “reformers” and “humanitarians” from the 1920s
through the 1940s, although later their roles reversed as they were
attacked for being “worshipers of America” during Mao’s regime
(1950s–1980s). In contemporary China, John Dewey’s pragmatism
once again has been reassembled in the discourses of social, cultural,
and educational reforms.


                          Dewey as the Indigenous–Foreign
                                      “Second Confucius”
China was undergoing a rapid social change in the earlier twentieth
century. The last imperial regime collapsed in 1911. During this
period, Japan and some other European countries attempted to
colonize China through military strength. An anti-Japanese and anti-
European-power movement spread throughout the whole country. At
the same time, some intellectuals urged the learning of Western phi-
losophy and theories, especially those from America. Many Western
philosophies and theories were translated into Chinese. Among them,
John Dewey’s theories of social science and education were promi-
nently acknowledged by Chinese intellectuals. John Dewey’s thoughts
were introduced into China as early as in the beginning of the twentieth
century. Hu Shih, Feng You-lan, Tao Xing-zhi, Jiang Meng-lin, and
Guo Bing-wen, well-known modern Chinese philosophers, educators,
and social reformers studied with Dewey at the Columbia University
in the early twentieth century.
   Dewey was the first modern Western theorist to visit and lecture in
China. Dewey’s twenty-six-month visit started on April 30, 1919.
Dewey lectured about philosophy, ethics, and sociology more than
education. Accordingly, Dewey has been recognized to be a philoso-
pher more than an educator in China. Dewey lectured around China
for more than two years. Dewey taught at Peking University, Peking
Coeducational Normal University, and Nanjing Normal University. In
addition, he visited fourteen provinces to give speeches. He delivered
more than 200 lectures. The topics of these lectures included politics,
philosophy, sociology, education, ethics, end so on.2 Dewey’s speeches
were translated into Chinese and published in journals and books.
Those books were reprinted 10 times in runs of 10,000 copies, and
were sold out almost immediately.3

[p. 258] [PDF page 277]

There is no doubt that there was a widespread absorption of
Dewey’s ideas during this period. His popularity and the prominence
of his presence made his ideas a widely consumed commodity. The
focus of this chapter is of course not on the direct effect of Dewey as a
public figure or the direct influence of his words as an expert—though
he was given high status in the changes that occurred. The widespread
and popular nature of Dewey’s thinking is important to note as it
implies that familiarity with Deweyan thought and therefore the
process of creating a new theory was connected through a Deweyan
influence that occurred simultaneously in a multitude of locations and
by a variety of scholars.
   Dewey’s pragmatism was quite different from the previous thoughts
such as Confucianism—which was central to the history of Chinese
thought. Confucianism, generally speaking, prescribes ethical roles for
the society, community, and family. It tells people how to do and act.
However, Dewey’s thoughts, especially, his ideas of democracy and
science enabled the Chinese intellectuals to question and problematize
the taken-for-granted Confucian logics and status quos.
   For more than 2,000 years, Confucianism has deeply fascinated the
Chinese, especially up to the end of the nineteenth century. It advo-
cates that everything can be classified into sets such as the ruling king/
ruled masses, the ruling male head of the family/ruled family members,
the ruling male/ruled female, the ruling teacher/ruled student, and so
on. It would be difficult to find the “self” in the Confucian doctrines.
The Confucian sense of the “self” is not “superordinated or individu-
ated, but is rather a complex of roles and functions associated with
one’s obligations to the various groupings to which one belongs.”4
Here the self only exists in relation to the hierarchy or as part of a
greater order. The self-determined individual is not idealized but rather
seen as a social aberration. The virtue for the ruled class is to obey the
ruling class. It has been believed that the society would be harmonious
as long as this order was obeyed. This is what Confucianism means by
humanness, human-heartedness, benevolence, and goodness. Up to
the May Fourth Movement, the Chinese intellectuals were discursively
constructed as practitioners to diffuse such Confucian beliefs with
their intellectual activities and the role of educators was to discipline
children to cultivate such Confucian virtue and to be human.
   The intellectuals assembled Dewey’s ideas into the particular
Chinese social and historical conditions and produced the Chinese-
style pragmatism—social pragmatism, that is, a social science for
social reform movements. The popularity of Dewey’s pragmatism lay

[p. 259] [PDF page 278]

in its adaptability to form a compatible relationship with the Chinese
cultural, social, and political situations. Dewey’s thoughts in China,
once assembled with other Chinese thinkers, do not appear much
Western oriented but rather related to an indigenous Chinese way of
living. Dewey’s ideas practiced in China were as the concept rather
than the origin. Unlike the Chinese communism and socialism that
advocated social revolution, the Chinese Deweyan social pragmatist
reforms aimed at patching up the Chinese social, cultural, and politi-
cal conditions instead of the destruction of the society and the over-
throw of the regime. As I discuss later in the chapter, these social
pragmatist reforms started with language since it was believed that the
classic Chinese language hindered the Chinese social progress.
    Generally speaking, the American progress is associated with the
European Enlightenment that places itself as the most civilized among
peoples with the science of modernity as its mode of change.5 However,
the notion of the Chinese progress did not embody such European
ideas of Enlightenment or civilization but revolution. The process
toward modern China involved revolutions in language, literature,
education, social system, and so on.
    At one level, the introduction of Dewey gave legitimacy to Chinese
intellectuals by linking them to modern Western theories considered as
“modern.” As Hu Shih explained: “Since America is an industrialized,
democratic and equal society, the radical social reform movement is
not necessary; however, our Chinese society needs to be reformed at all
fields. We have to adopt the pragmatism to our social reform.”6
    During this period, the notion of the intellectual shifted and a new
generation of modern Chinese intellectuals emerged. Hu Shih, repre-
sentative of this new type of Chinese intellectual, did not want to par-
ticipate in government and political affairs before he started to study
with Dewey at Columbia University. He believed that in order to be an
intellectual he had better do just as Confucius said: “busy oneself in
the classics and ignore what is going on beyond one’s immediate sur-
roundings.” However, Hu Shih argued that he gradually changed his
views when studying at Columbia University. Hu Shih assembled
Dewey’s ideas into his social reform theory: “We believe that the sin-
gle individual is constructed by multiple social factors. Therefore, in
order to reform the society, we have to first revamp those powers
which constructed the society and individuals. Thus, social reform is
individual reform.”7
    Reformist Chinese intellectuals, especially Hu Shih, modified Dewey’s
pragmatism into a theory for social reform movement. The movement

[p. 260] [PDF page 279]

was called “The May Fourth Movement.” The May Fourth Movement
was a rupture in Chinese history. It was an anti-feudal, political, and
cultural movement that appealed for social, political, and educational
reform. For Hu Shih, political activism was a way for intellectuals to
exercise power. Many other Chinese intellectuals joined with Hu Shih
immediately as they became leaders of the Movement that expressed,
meaningfully, Chinese intellectuals taking a stand together in the
political stage that sought pragmatic reforms.
   The May Fourth Movement broke out in Beijing three days after
Dewey’s arrival in 1919. Dewey’s presence in China, coincidently,
urged this movement to spread nationwide. Dewey was called the
father of science and democracy during the May Fourth period in
China. However, Dewey cautioned that his theories were not universal
and therefore some of his ideas may not fit the Chinese particular sit-
uation completely.
   While Dewey thought of the need to differentiate in the use of his
ideas, he also thought of democracy and science as universal that were
fundamental for human progress. For Dewey, as Roberto Unger has
discussed:

  The idea of a science of human nature or of morals that would lay bare
  the basic laws of mind or of behavior . . ., the idea of a set of con-
  straints rooted in practical social needs to produce, organize, and to
  exchange, . . . [and] the idea that these transformative constraints had a
  certain cumulative direction of their own.8


    The gist of this discussion is that we have to be skeptical about
truth and knowledge. There is nothing essential about human nature,
but all is historically and socially constructed. This is at odds with
Confucius and so set in motion a process of rethinking a vast number
of ideals and social structures that had been created and accepted
based on the widespread acceptance of Confucian concepts. The ear-
lier twentieth century was a turning point in China. The anti-Western
occupation movement became fierce, but at the same time Chinese
intellectuals gave a sacred status to Western philosophy and theories,
especially those from America.
    Dewey was awarded the “Second Confucius” prize by The
University of China in 1920. The word, Confucius used here, does not
mean that Dewey’s thoughts are similar to those of Confucius but
rather that he was a thinker as great as Confucius. The notion of
Dewey’s democracy and science enabled Chinese intellectuals to

[p. 261] [PDF page 280]

rethink the Confucian rationality such as the hierarchical human
relation and the harmonious spirit.
   There were also shifts in the concept of the individual. The assem-
blage of Dewey’s ideas into Chinese social reform movement went
unhindered by his identity as American or foreigner. Certainly his
ideas were derived from Western thought, but initially there was no
apparent connection made between Dewey and American imperial-
ism. It was only when a new ideology—Maoist Marxism—was intro-
duced—one at odds both with pragmatism and with the Confucian
order—that such denouncements were made. This was not led by
intellectuals, but rather by the political regime.
   The concept of the indigenous foreigner is helpful for explaining
this lack of a Cino-centric critique. Dewey is not the “great author”
for the Chinese intellectuals. The “globalized” pragmatic ideas could
be accepted since they did not form a rigid set of rules or standards
that would seek to homogenize the world and replicate American soci-
ety, but rather provided an understanding that lent itself to reapplica-
tion and adaptation. Confucianism could not be so easily introduced
to another culture as it is far too specific about roles and social order.
By thinking through Dewey’s methods, however, the Chinese began to
participate in a process that was also occurring elsewhere—acceptance
of scientific thought processes that brought a particular modernity into
China through thinking about science in organizing daily life. Dewey
provided an exemplar or icon in which to render the ideas being
formed through similar thought processes around the globe compre-
hensible to Chinese intellectuals. This paved the way for participation
in other Western discourses.

               The Shift of the Notion of the Intellectual
Chinese intellectuals were, until the introduction of Deweyan thought,
constructed according to Confucianist rationality. For a long time, the
final goal for intellectuals was to be trained as official servants to
support the regime, as in one of Confucius’s well-known proverbs,
“studying is for the purpose of being official servant.” As I discussed
in the previous section, Confucian society is a hierarchical one. What
was considered virtue was that one has to be obedient to the superior.
Hall and Ames have pointed out clearly:

  The Confucian project is to create community as an extended family.
  And family relationships are resolutely hierarchical. Ideally, the effects

[p. 262] [PDF page 281]

of hierarchy are meliorated by the processive conception of person. The
  performance of different roles and relationships enables persons to give
  and to receive comparable degrees of deference.9

   It was considered that deference is the way leading to harmony.
Harmony was very important in the Confucian society. Confucius said
in the Analects:

  ● Exemplary persons seek harmony not sameness; petty persons, then, are
    the opposite.
  ● Exemplary persons associating openly with others are not partisan; petty

    persons being partisan do not associate openly with others.
  ● Exemplary persons are self-possessed but not contentious; they gather

    with others, but do not form cliques.10

   The words, “harmony” and “self,” are not as same as Dewey’s. The
construction of such Confucian harmony and self was for the sake of
the totalistic community. It was believed that as long as those below
respected and obeyed those above (i.e., their hierarchical superiors)
society would remain in harmony. What the above said was the
absolute truth. “Confucianism taught that virtue and power come from
a single source.”11 Therefore, questioning authority and truth was
considered treason. This type of harmony was not achieved through
“mutual adjustment” but through “the appropriate focus.”12 The
individual had to have a proper understanding of his or her position
and act appropriately in order to achieve such harmony. The individ-
ual self was neither distinguished nor appreciated. Everyone belonged
to a social group, for emample, a family, a neighborhood, and a village
as Hall and Ames have pointed out: “The Chinese understanding of
the individual’s relationship to authority is distinctly non-adversarial,
rooted as it in the metaphor of family.”13 The concept of the self/
individual did not arise.
   Up to the beginning of the twentieth century, intellectuals in China
could be divided into two different types: one type succeeded in
becoming official servants and the other did not succeed in official
circles. The former worked for the regime and accumulated wealth.
The Chinese phrases, “yijin huanxing” (returning home after making
good), praises the successful Confucian intellectuals. It was under-
stood that the good learner would become an official servant and to be
a servant was to make fortune. However, the latter, those who did not
become servants tended to detach themselves from reality. They
indulged in literature. Although they were dissatisfied with reality,

[p. 263] [PDF page 282]

their voices were drowned by the Confucian authoritarianism. The
virtue for these intellectuals was considered to be “qinggao,” that is,
standing aloof from politics and worldly consideration.
    Even though the above two types of Chinese intellectuals seem to be
dissimilar, neither type was able to escape from the construction of
Confucian collectivism. Working for the regime or keeping away from
the regime, both types of intellectuals restricted themselves in the
hierarchical discourse. Tenzi’s (emperor) words were unquestionably
considered “tianjing diyi” (right and proper). It was impossible for the
Chinese intellectuals to think and question about the truth and power.
Eisenstadt has pointed: “The non-political elites tended to view them-
selves as being on a par with and even superior to the political author-
ities in the political realm, and they very often viewed the political
authorities as potentially accountable.”14 Therefore, both types of
intellectuals tended to be “mingzhe baoshen” (be worldly wise and
play safe) rather than criticizing the politics, society, economics, and
so on.
    At the beginning of his stay in China, Dewey was surprised at the
indifference of the Chinese traditional intellectual toward sociopoliti-
cal issues. Dewey often presented the following two episodes during
his speeches in China in order to encourage Chinese to pay attention
to sociopolitical issues.15 The Chinese intellectuals placed Dewey in
the critical position as agents of modernizing and social change. As the
conceptual personae, Dewey was able to speak in such a critical way
whereas the earlier Chinese intellectuals would not be able to speak
due to their indigenousness.
    In May 1919 when Dewey was in Shanghai, he asked a Chinese
scholar about the Japanese invasion upon Manchuria. The scholar
said: “Well, this is Manchurian business but nothing to do with me.”
The other episode happened in Beijing. One day when Dewey walked
back to his dwelling from Qinghua University, he saw a person who
was hit by a horse wagon and injured. However, many Chinese pedes-
trians just passed away. Finally, a foreigner took the injured person to
the hospital. These happenings made Dewey ponder about how this
Chinese nature had been constructed. As he continued his travels,
Dewey mentioned this in a lecture given in the Province of Shangxi
that the reason why the Chinese took little interest in sociopolitical
and other issues was not because they are cold-hearted or egoistic.
Dewey emphasized that the construction of the Chinese nature was asso-
ciated with mutable factors, for example, Confucianism rationalities,
agriculture, lifestyle.16

[p. 264] [PDF page 283]

John Dewey’s ideas joined with the Chinese intellectuals became a
conceptual personae during the May Fourth Movement. The intro-
duction of Dewey’s notion of science and democracy were reassembled
by Chinese intellectuals to rethink the relationships between politics,
society, and themselves. The means of this reassemblage of Dewey’s
ideas in China were clearly as traveling library through which the May
Fourth Movement made intelligible its programs. Dewey did not sug-
gest or participate in the social reform movements as it was instigated
by readers and interpreters that brought his ideas into its programs.


New Intellectuals, New Language, and
New Literature
During the social movement, Dewey was no longer merely Dewey but
was an embodiment of a cultural pattern of ideas. As China’s new intel-
lectuals started to take an active part on the sociopolitical stage, they
began to question the Chinese language. They sought to convert the
Chinese language to a tool that could be able to express modern thinking.
During the May Fourth Movement, “modern” is meant to be anti-
Confucianism and present oriented (e.g., facing the reality of the pres-
ent society and participating the social reform movements as a means
of undoing particular Chinese traditions). The term, present- oriented
society, was used to contrast with the past-oriented society, which was
conservative and retrospective. Until the language and literature reform
movements of the May Fourth Movement, the Chinese literature was
full of reminiscences and sentimentalities. It avoided talking about the
everyday life and social and cultural issues of the present.
   The major linguistic reform started from the early 1910s and the
May Fourth Movement was the climax. Up to the May Fourth
Movement, the Chinese language consisted of two forms: wen yan and
bai hua. The former, wen yan, is classical language and the latter, bai
hua, is vernacular language. Written Chinese was completely different
form spoken Chinese in grammatical structure and vocabulary.
Written Chinese, wen yan wen, was written in classical style. Wen yan
wen, the “esoteric classical writing [was] intelligible only to schol-
ars.”17 The traditional scholars not only had to be able to read but
also to write in wen yan wen. It took a long time for scholars to
become familiar with wen yan wen.
   The new intellectuals considered wen yan wen to be an obstruction
that restricted intellectuals’ thinking abilities due to its complicated

[p. 265] [PDF page 284]

sentence structure, ancient vocabulary, difficult orthography. Hu Shih
called wen yan wen a “half-dead” and “nonscientific” language:

  A dead language can never produce a living literature; if a living litera-
  ture is to be produced, there must be a living tool. . . . We must first of
  all elevate this [vernacular] tool and make it the acknowledged tool of
  Chinese literature that totally replaces that half-dead or fully dead old
  tool. Only with a new tool can we talk about such other aspects as new
  ideas and new spirit.18

   Thus, the urgent matter was to find a way to reform such a half-dead
language. New Chinese intellectuals considered Dewey’s thoughts of
science and democracy as of inseparable value. They believed that
reform needed a scientific and problem-oriented approach. This
approach is not only a means of creating and testing new methods, but
also a means of critiquing the previously accepted with an appeal far
more effective than simply advocating an alternative. Schwartz has
summarized the “scientific” method for classic language reform:

  The methods of “science” could . . . be used “to undermine the
  credibility of orthodox histories and the historical foundations of
  scripture.” One of the most effective ways of removing the dead hand of
  tradition was to dissolve the factual claims of the myths which sup-
  ported that tradition. In the end this critical liberation of historical
  studies from the burden of certain fundamentalistic and conventional
  ways of viewing the past was to be taken up by many other scholars of
  “national studies” . . .19

   Hu Shih’s advance of language reform assembled with Dewey’s idea
of science. Hu Shih believed that new and common language was a
technology of communicating new thoughts and that language could
lead to educational reform. In 1917 Hu Shih posed the following eight
detailed proposals for language reform:

  (a) Talking about the real world or substance.
  (b) Not imitating classical sayings.
  (c) Paying attention to grammar.
  (d) Not adopting a sentimental pose.
  (e) Discarding hackneyed phrases.
  (f) Not using the classical allusions.
  (g) Not using antitheses.
  (h) Using common words and sayings.20

[p. 266] [PDF page 285]

This proposal attempted to reform the unpopular and difficult
classic Chinese language to a simplified popular language. The classic
Chinese language was completely different from spoken language. It
was detached from the real life and society. It was the symbolic power.
The reform of the classic language unified the written language and
spoken language into one form and it therefore enabled the masses to
become literate easily. The proposals for language reform along with
educational reforms, which I will discuss later in the chapter, can
be viewed either in a Western or Chinese particular perspective of
“modernity.” On the one hand, these reforms articulated the idea of
freedom and democracy that assembled some of Dewey’s humanist
ideas but at the same time these proposals provided the Chinese par-
ticular “present-oriented” approach to modernity. During the late
1910s and the 1920s, “modernity” connotes the meanings of being
opposed to the past orientations of classic Confucianism, taking inter-
est in the current Chinese social issues and forward-looking search for
the future of China. Language reform, therefore, was the first step
toward to the “modernity” as the classic language was considered the
primary hindrance to the spread of education and social progress.
   Hu Shih marked a milestone in the history of the Chinese language
reform. He worked with many other leading China’s intellectuals to
give leadership to this language reform, such as Qian Hai-tong, Fu Si-
nian, Liu Ban-nian, Zhou Zuo-ren, Zhu Wo-nong, Yu Ping-bo, Zhu
Xi-zhu. These scholars took the lead in writing in the style of bai hua,
the vernacular language. Such writings have been called bai hua wen.
Simplified Chinese characters, a new way of writing, a new structure
of grammar and phonetic notation were applied to their writings.
Even the writing style changed from vertical lines to horizontal lines
since it was believed that the horizontal lines were more modern,
scientific, and convenient—for one thing, the right-handed scholar can
now rest his wrist on the page without smudging what has already
been written.21 Many novels, operas, dramas, poems, and essays
written in vernacular language sprang up. Simultaneously, the num-
ber of periodicals increased dramatically. There were nearly 200
new periodicals founded around the time of June 1919.22 These new
writings introduced and created new words that did not exist in the
classic language, for example, “liberty,” “individualism,” “democracy,”
“revolution,” “citizen,” “country,” “republic,” and so on. These words
brought new thoughts and values to Chinese people. It enabled the
emergence of the new China’s intellectuals, the new China’s youth,
and the new writers.

[p. 267] [PDF page 286]

It was the very first time that individualism and subjectivism
appeared in Chinese writings. Since the classic literatures were full of
Confucian moralizing discourse, the writer’s personality, life experi-
ence, and feeling were excluded from the classic literatures. The pur-
pose of writing for the classic writers, generally speaking, was to recite
the Confucian ethics and morality and these classics were writing for
Confucian scholars to read. However, the purpose of writing for the
new writers was to enlighten people to rescue the Chinese society. Leo
Qu-Fan Lee, a professor of Chinese Literature, has pointed out clearly
through the analyses of the work of Lu Hsun, one of the most famous
new writers:

  Lu Hsun himself acknowledges at different times that two significant
  impulses lay behind his fictional writing. He declared that its purpose
  was to enlighten his people and to reform society. . . . But he also admit-
  ted that his stories were products of personal memory: he wrote because
  he had been unable to erase from memory certain aspects of his past
  which continued to haunt him. Thus, in his fictional output he endeav-
  ored to combine artistically a private act of remembrance of things past
  with a public concern for intellectual enlightenment. He attempted to
  rearrange recollections of China’s national experience, thereby making
  it less ego-centered, as in most early May Fourth literature, and more
  significant to his readers.23


   The purpose for the new writers writing new novels is to reform
custom, politics, religion, morality, the Chinese characteristics, and
the Chinese society.
   The new Chinese intellectuals’ struggle for language reform was
crowned with great success. On January 1921, the Ministry of
Education abolished the use of wen yan wen at schools. Instead of wen
yan wen, the vernacular language, bai hua, became a national lan-
guage in both written and spoken form. The significance of this lan-
guage reform movement was that it fostered the emergence of the
national language in the 4,000-year Chinese history. It enabled the
Chinese to think, talk, and write in the same language that provided a
new sense of belonging and way of thinking of the collective identity
of the nation. It also led to educational reform in the 1920s.
   In sum, Dewey’s thoughts on science and democracy reassembled in
the discourses of language reform. The diffusion of vernacular lan-
guage produced new literature. Moreover, the new literature intro-
duced new knowledge, thoughts, custom, value, and so on. All these

[p. 268] [PDF page 287]

factors, together, provided Chinese people with a new reasoning: a
new way of understanding. A new type of the citizen emerged.

The Memento of Pragmatism in
China: Educational Reform after
the May Fourth Movement
In the 1920s, Dewey’s pragmatism reassembled in the discourse of
school reform. Especially, “child-centered education” became the
principle that enhanced educational reform after the May Fourth
Movement. The new intellectual leaders, Hu Shih, Tao Xing-zhi, Jiang
Meng-lin, and Guo Bing-wen who studied with Dewey at Columbia
University, initially were educators. The experiences of study with
Dewey provided them with a chance to think of themselves as modern
Chinese thinkers, social reformers, politicians, and so on. However,
they still did not forget the field of education.
   The call for educational reform included three aspects: educational
philosophy, educational system, and pedagogical issues. Under the
Confucian system, education is for the sake of preparing children for
the governmental servant examination. It is called ke ju zhi, which
means imperial examination system. This was a system for examina-
tion, academic degree, and governmental service. If students did well
in the examination, they would get positions in the government. The
higher the score, the better the position acquired. Therefore, learning
was the gate to pass through into official circles. The Confucian belief
regarding the relationship between the teacher and the student is that
the teacher is the sage and the student has to obey the teacher. The
child was required to be well mannered, sitting straight on the stool,
reciting the classics. The child should not show any emotional feelings.
No laughs or mutual communication were permitted in the class-
room. Cramming students with knowledge, mechanical memorizing,
and examinations, above all, were the modus operandi at Confucian
schools, which were criticized by the new intellectuals. The child is no
flesh, no blood, and “half dead.” Lu Hsun, one of the new China’s
leading intellectuals, said in his famous essay, “A Madman’s Diary”
that it is urgent to rescue the child from the Confucian educational sys-
tem. At the same time, Tao Xing-zhi, one of Dewey’s students, appealed
to free the child from the deadly Confucian educational system:

  (a) Free the child’s eyes.
  (b) Free the child’s brain.

[p. 269] [PDF page 288]

(c) Free the child’s hands.
  (d) Free the child’s mouth.
  (e) Free the child’s space.
  (f) Free the child’s time.

    He believed that in order to draw the child’s creativity and individ-
uality it is necessary to give the child autonomy.24 This educational
reform assembled some of Dewey’s ideas of child-centered education.
However, it is different from the Dewey’s approach. Dewey’s concern
is the issue of curriculum, whereas the Chinese reform does not asso-
ciate much with curriculum but mainly the physical surroundings. For
example, the chairs for students were switched from stools to chairs.
This was the first time that the Chinese intellectuals spoke for the child.
    Educators tried to find a scientific way to free the Confucian child.
They came to a scientific approach to reform language education as it
was believed that the reciting of the classics was most harmful to the
child and it was the stumbling block to the progress of the society.
Many experiments in writing and reading Chinese characters were
carried out during the later 1910s whereas experiments on language
teaching became popular after the May Fourth Movement. Ai Wei has
summarized the major results of these experiments:

  (a) Simplified Chinese characters are easier to write and memorize.
  (b) Chinese characters designated for daily use were selected for seventh
      grader to twelfth graders.
  (c) Writing or reading horizontally was faster than writing or reading
      vertically.
  (d) Children read interesting stories much faster than reading classics.
  (e) Reading silently helped understand the contents more than reading
      aloud.
  (f) Children could write better on free-writing than given-topic-writing.25

   These experiments led to later educational reforms. Simultaneously,
Dewey’s ideas on democracy and education fascinated many intellec-
tuals. Tao Xing-zhi explained: “Democracy and education is a very
important approach to reforming the Chinese society. . . . It enables
different people to enjoy democracy. . . . I will create a democratic
society with democracy and education.”26 Tao Xing-zhi was the first
one to start applying Dewey’s style of experimental school in China.
   The intellectuals’ efforts toward educational reform effected official
changes in educational systems. In 1921, the Ministry of Education
decided to abandon wen yan wen, the classic language, at schools. As
I mentioned in the previous section, this reform created the national

[p. 270] [PDF page 289]

language and it enabled the Chinese to think, talk, and write in the
same language. It also freed children from reciting classics.
   In 1922, the Ministry of Education further laid down a regulation
to introduce the American 6-3-3 system into schools.27 The Ministry
of Education prescribed the following seven guidelines for educational
reform:

  (a) Suiting the needs of the social evolution.
  (b) Bringing the ideas of the democratic education into effect.
  (c) Seeking to develop individuality.
  (d) Becoming concerned with the economy.
  (e) Becoming concerned with home economics education.
  (f) Making education universal.
  (g) Paying special attention to local needs (my translation).28


   These regulations clearly embody ideas that relate to Dewey, such
as child-centered education, learning from real life, interest in relation
to training of the will, and so on. The link to Dewey becomes indirect
here. It is not the words or suggestions of Dewey, but the general
climate of values (i.e., changeability, analysis, individuality) for the
creation of such policies. The concepts of changeability, analysis, and
individuality in the discourse of the modernity constructed the Chinese
“modern” citizen. The idea of “changeability” does not exist in the
Confucian doctrine. Confucianism regards “truth” and “knowledge”
as universal and immutable. However, the modern citizen is skeptical
about “truth” and “knowledge.” Analysis is another important aspect
that forms the modern citizen, that is, the modern citizen has the
abilities to problematize the status quo and to solve problems. The
Chinese individuality, though, does not place much emphasis on indi-
vidual freedom, but stresses the importance of the individual rights
within a group, community, and nation.
   In the Chinese discourse, the word “individual,” in the context
of “individual rights within a group” means “individual person.”
Whereas it refers to “group” when individual is used in “individual
rights within a community.” Moreover, it also means “community”
when it appears in “individual rights within a nation.” In Chinese,
“group” means small nonofficial or officially registered organizations,
for example, family, class, neighbor. On the other hand, the word
“community” in Chinese does not have the English meaning of “the
Chinese community” or “the Japanese community” that refers to a
normative sense of collective belonging. It means officially registered

[p. 271] [PDF page 290]

organizations, for example, factory, school, residential district, village,
city, prefecture.
    In 1927, the minister of education issued a command that required
all public university primary schools in the Province of Jiangsu to be
changed to experimental schools. Thus, experimental schools became
popular throughout the whole country. The purpose of this reform
was to use a scientific approach to solve some educational problems.
For example, scientific language learning and teaching experiments
were conducted in these experiment schools. The experimental school
movement became more and more popular until the end of 1940s.
    The series of educational movements were to change the Confucian
child to the Chinese version of the modern child: they are allowed to
ask the teacher questions; they can write out their own chosen topics;
they do not have to always recite the reading; they can play during the
recesses (there was no recess time before the school reform as it was
believed that the child had to study all the time when they were at
school); they can enjoy reading children’s stories at school. The child
is allowed to act like a child not a “little-adult.”
    Dewey’s thoughts on democracy and education were defined as
the scientific approach to educational reform in China from the May
Fourth Movement onward. However, the purposes of education for
Dewey and for the China’s new intellectuals were different. Lawrence
Cremin has noted:

  . . . education began as part of a vast humanitarian effort to apply the
  promise of American life—the ideal of government by, of, and for the
  people—to the puzzling new urban-industrial civilization that came into
  being during the latter half of the nineteenth century.29

    Dewey’s project of education is to suit education to life; however,
education for the new Chinese intellectuals was to reform the Chinese
society and to remold the Chinese life. Furthermore, Dewey’s idea of
the relation between the school and real life was not adopted by the
Chinese educators in the following two aspects. First, Dewey tried
to make schools like real-life conditions and let children learn the real-
life skills in the classroom, that is, the imitated environment. The
Chinese experiment school students learned outside school, for exam-
ple, in the real environment. The Chinese educators believed that the
real-life environment is the best school. Tao Xing-zhi, the famous
Deweyan educator, advocated that the living environment is the best
education, the society is the best school, and teaching and learning

[p. 272] [PDF page 291]

help each other.30 The Chinese educational reformers believed that
it was important for students to follow such a learning process—
practice, cognition, and practice. Second, Dewey thought of people
who were living in the urban environment and therefore Dewey’s
experiment school was established in the city. On the other hand, the
distinguishing characteristics of the Chinese experiment schools were
placing emphases on agricultural education. The Chinese experiment
schools were founded in the countryside as the Deweyan educators
considered China to be an agricultural country and most of the coun-
tryside people were illiterate. One purpose of the experiment schools
in China was to spread education in the rural districts. Thus, it was
believed that the rural districts were the best real-life environment for
education. Teacher and students built the experiment school buildings
by themselves. They also cultivated the fields and did their own cook-
ing. Students taught the village people reading, writing, and counting.
Students learned from whatever was around them. Here again local
discourses set in motion by Dewey were shaped by China’s specific
circumstances.


The Fickle Destiny of
the Indigenous Foreigner
Dewey was the conceptual persona for the modern Chinese intellectuals.
However, perhaps no country has treated Dewey in such a fickle way
as China has. Dewey’s work was first translated into Chinese in the
year of 1912. Hereafter, in China, he was admired as the father of
“democracy” and “science” as well as a great philosopher, humanitar-
ian, and educator. Although his ideals were completely different from
those of Confucius, he had one thing in common. Confucius and
Dewey were both criticized and denounced during Mao’s regime
(1950s–1980s). Up to the end of the 1940s, Dewey’s thoughts assem-
bled with other Chinese scholars in the changes associated with social,
language, literature, and educational reform movements. Nevertheless,
his destiny took a tragic turn with the foundation of the People’s
Republic of China in 1949.
   Since the year 1949, the new China started the nationalization of
properties. Land, factories, banks, and all other such entities became
public owned or state owned. Private ownership of production was
completely abandoned. All the people in the country were working
for the government or the public. Intellectuals were no exception.

[p. 273] [PDF page 292]

The nationalization of the intellectuals became more and more severe.
The nationalized intellectuals were expected to tell the “regime’s truth,”
that is, the “knowledge” and “truth” produced by the government.
Questioning such “knowledge” and “truth” was prohibited. Critical
thinking abilities were considered threats to the regime. The theories,
which enable people to think and question about the status quo, to
reform the society, were inevitably discounted or discarded.
   Dewey’s theories were the first target of the criticism after the foun-
dation of the new China. In May 1955, China Education, a nationwide
monthly journal, published an editorial article to criticize Dewey’s
pragmatism. Hereafter, Dewey became the symbol of capitalism and
American imperialism.31 Hu Shih was also criticized for being a servile
follower of the American imperialism. The critics blamed him for the
following mistakes:

  (a) Reactionary philosophy.
  (b) Against Marxism.
  (c) Incorrect historical view.
  (d) Incorrect thoughts toward literature.
  (e) Historical idealism.
  (f) Incorrect historical view of literature.
  (g) Wrong textural criticism.
  (h) Destroying education.32

   Dewey’s notion of science and democracy were labeled as
“pseudo-science” and “pseudo-democracy.” Up to the end of the
Mao’s regime, Dewey’s thoughts were under the attack of criticism for
over twenty years.
   However, “it grows again when the spring breeze blows,” as the
Chinese proverb goes. In the middle of the 1980s, Dewey’s thoughts
were once again to be studied by the “second generation of new China’s
intellectuals.” Since the early 1990s, the Ministry of Education of
China has emphasized the importance of the study of Dewey’s thoughts
on its guidelines for national education. Dewey continues as an indige-
nous foreigner during the turbulent twenty-first century with China
and China’s intellectuals.


                                                             In Closing
My intention in undertaking this study was not to take John Dewey’s
pragmatism as a simple substitute for Confucian discourse. I sought to

[p. 274] [PDF page 293]

examine how Dewey’s ideas have been read, interpreted, and prac-
ticed under different social and historical conditions and how multi-
ple factors engendered the new concept of the Chinese intellectual.
I first looked at the construction of Confucian intellectuals and how
Dewey’s thoughts were connected with Confucian intellectuals to
rethink their intellectual activities with relevance to their sociopolitical
world. The notion of the intellectual shifted dramatically during the
period of the late 1910s and early 1920s. Being an intellectual no
longer meant an official scholar or a person who is free from the vul-
garity of political involvement, but means the ability to criticize the
sociopolitical world and to take a leading role in various reform
movements.
    I next investigated how the new movement among intellectuals
strove to reform language and literature. Language and literature are
not a mixture of words, phrases, and grammar but the effects of all
social, political, and historical discourses. The reformed language
and literature provided the Chinese with a new possibility for reason-
ing and communication of ideas. The new intellectuals used new lan-
guage and created a new literature to tell a new story that was
different from the Confucian story. The new story told a new “truth”
and “knowledge” and such new “truth” and “knowledge” discursively
constructed the notion of the particular Chinese modernity. Note here,
that this new knowledge was not created by Dewey, but by means of
the—modified, indigenized—tools he provided.
    The new language and literature further affected a series of
educational reforms. This reform included three aspects: educational
philosophy, educational system, and teaching methodologies. The
significance of these reform movements was that it changed the
Confucian child into a modern individual. However, these educa-
tional reform movements, which were carried out after the May
Fourth Movement did not follow the principle of Dewey’s pragmatism
exactly. They were the result of multiple effects, for example, Dewey’s
thoughts, the China’s reformers’ own experiences, the particular Chinese
social, economic, and political situation.
    The particular Chinese cultural, social, and political circumstances
constructed the Chinese notion of individuality, community, progress,
and change. The Chinese individuality focuses on the individual right
rather than autonomy. In the Chinese discourse, community is an offi-
cially registered totalistic organization and therefore it is much differ-
ent from the community in the Western discourse. The notion of the
Chinese progress is not entailed in European ideas of Enlightenment

[p. 275] [PDF page 294]

and civilization but in cultural revolution that produces change and
discontinuity in the Chinese context.
   Finally, I traced the contingency of Dewey’s ideas that have been
read and interpreted in modern China. During different historical peri-
ods, Dewey’s ideas have been interpreted completely differently. The
hero is not always the hero. It is socially constructed and historically
contingent. The rise and fall of Dewey in modern Chinese history tells
us a story of the “regime of truth.” We have to be skeptical about how
the truth and knowledge have become self-evident.
   Dewey’s pragmatism assembled into the formation of the particular
Chinese modernity. The Chinese modernity is a political issue and it is
associated with multiple dimensions. On the one hand, when modernity
is articulated as a set of progressivism and conservatism, modernity
is understood as the ideas of evolutionism and progress, the negation
of the absolute power, the respects for science, technology, and indi-
viduality. However, when modernity is considered a set of Eastern and
Western, the Western modernity is seen as the adoption of the Western
civilization, governing systems, lifestyles, and so on. The Eastern
modernity is “combined with very strong anti-Western and anti-
Enlightenment ideologies . . . and attempt to appropriate modernity
on their own terms; and the total reconstruction of personality and
of individual and collective identities by conscious human, above all
political action, and the construction of new personal and collective
identities of entailing the total submergence of the individual in the
totalistic community.”33 This type of the Eastern modernity ran
amuck during Mao’s regime.


                                                                      Notes
1. The order of Chinese names, last name and first name, is used throughout the
   chapter.
2. Qing Yuan, Duwei yu zhongguo (Dewey and China) (Bejing, China: Renmin
   Chubanshe, 2001).
3. Zhong-hui Dan, Xiandai jiaoyu de tansuo—Duwei yu shiyong zhuyi jiaoyu
   sixiang (Contemporary Education: Dewey and Pragmatism) (Beijing, China:
   Renmin Jiaoyu Chubanshe, 2002); Bao-gui Zhang, Duwei yu zhongguo
   (Dewey and China) (Shijiazhuang, China: Hebei Renmin Chubanshe, 2001).
4. David H. Hall and Roger T. Ames, The Democracy of the Dead: Dewey,
   Confucius, and the Hope for Democracy in China (Chicago: Open Court
   Publishing Company, 1999), 209.
5. S. N. Eisenstadt, Comparative Civilizations and Multiple Modernities, Vol. II
   (Leiden: Brill, 2003), 493–518.

[p. 276] [PDF page 295]

6. Shih Hu, Hu Shi Jiangyan (Hu Shih’s Lectures) (Beijing, China: Zhongguo
    Guangbo Dianshi Chubanshe, 1992), 416.
 7. Shih Hu, Shiyong rensheng: Hu Shi suixianglu (Pragmatism and Life: The
    Essays of Hu Shhi) (Guangzhou, China: Huacheng, 1991), 291.
 8. Roberto M. Unger, Social Theory: Its Situation and Its Task, Vol. 1 of Politics:
    A Work in Constructive Social Theory (New York: Cambridge University
    Press, 1987), 85.
 9. Hall and Ames, The Democracy of the Dead, 160.
10. Quoted by Hall and Ames, The Democracy of the Dead, 193.
11. Charlotte Furth, “Intellectual changes: From the reform movement to the
    May Fourth Movement, 1895–1920,” in An Intellectual History of Modern
    China, ed. M. Goldman and L. O. Lee (Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press, 2002), 37.
12. Hall and Ames, The Democracy of the Dead, 194.
13. Hall and Ames, The Democracy of the Dead, 195
14. Eisenstadt, Comparative Civilizations, 291.
15. Bao-gui Zhang, Duwei yu zhongguo.
16. En-rong Song, An Yan-chu quanji (The Collected Works of An Yan-chu)
    (Changsha, China: Hunan Jiaoyu Chubanshe, 1992), 278.
17. Benjamin I. Schwartz, “Themes in intellectual history: May Fourth and
    After,” in An Intellectual History of Modern China, 97.
18. Quoted by Leo Ou-Fan Lee, “Literary trends: The quest for modernity,
    1895–1927,” in An Intellectual History of Modern China, 158.
19. Schwartz, “Themes in intellectual history: May Fourth and after,” in An
    Intellectual History of Modern China, 114.
20. Shih Hu, Hu Shi koushu zizhuan (Dictated Autobiography of Hu Shih)
    (Shanghai, China: Huadong Shifan Daxue Chubanshe, 1993), 149.
21. There were some experiments in writing and reading carried out by Deweyan
    educators during the late 1910s. The results showed that writing and reading
    horizontally was faster than writing and reading vertically.
22. Zhong-hui Dan, Xiandai jiaoyu de tansuo.
23. Leo Ou-Fan Lee, “Literary trends: The quest for modernity, 1895–1927,” in
    An Intellectual History of Modern China, 175.
24. Zhong-hui Dan, Xiandai jiaoyu de tansuo.
25. Hong-shun Cao, Yuwen jiaoxuefa mantan (Methodologies of Language
    Education) (Shenyang, China: Liaoning Daxue Chubanshe, 1992); Huang-
    chu Gu, Yuwen jiaoyu lungao (On Language Education) (Beijing, China:
    Renmin Jiaoyu Chubanshe, 1995).
26. Xing-zhi Tao, Tao Xing-zhi quanji (The Collected Works of Tao Xin-zhi)
    (Changsha, China: Hunan Jiaoyu Chubanshe, 1986), 55–56.
27. The 6-3-3 system was abolished during the period of the Great Cultural
    Revolution (the late 1960s–the late 1970s) and revived from the early 1980s.
28. Zu-yi Du, Duwei lun jiaoyu yu minzhu zhuyi (Dewey’s Thoughts on
    Education and Democracy), trans. H. Cheng and G. Hong (Beijing, China:
    Renmin Jiaoyu Chubanshe, 2003).
29. Lawrence Cremin, The Transformation of the School: The Progressivism in
    American Education 1876–1957 (New York: Vintage Books, 1961), viii.

[p. 277] [PDF page 296]

30. Xing-zhi Tao, Tao Xing-zhi quanji dierjuan (The Collected Works of Tao Xin-
    zhi, Vol. II) (Chengdu, China: Sichuan Jiaoyu Chubanshe, 1991).
31. Shu Chen, “Duwei de fandong sixiang zai xinlixue shang suo biaoxiang de
    liangge lizi (Two examples of Dewey’s reactionary thoughts on psychology),”
    Gushi Kao (Ancient Historical Review), no. 2 (1955): 385–388; Yi-han Gao,
    “Shiyong zhuyi de fandong sixiang benzhi (The reactionary thoughts
    of Pragmatism),” Gushi Kao (Ancient Historical Review), no. 2 (1955):
    541–544; Qu-yuan Hu, “Shiyong zhuyi pipan (Critique of Pragmatism),”
    Gushi Kao (Ancient Historical Review), no. 2 (1955): 287–294; Yue-ling Jin,
    “Pipan shiyong zhuyi de Duwei de shijieguan (Critique of Dewey’s pragma-
    tism),” Gushi Kao (Ancient Historical Review), no. 3 (1955): 113–136; Pei
    Zhang, “ ‘Xuezhe’—zhengzhi yinmoujia—Hu Shi zai sixiang shang he
    zhengzhi shang de fandong benzhi (‘intellectual’—political intrguer—Hu
    Shih’s reactionary philosophical and political nature),” Gushi Kao (Ancient
    Historical Review), no. 1 (1955): 391–400.
32. Peng He, “Hu Shi zai duidai woguo wenhua chuantong zhong de diguo zhuyi
    nucai mianmu (Hu Shih—servile follower of the imperialism: Destroying our
    cultural tradition),” Gushi Kao (Ancient Historical Review), no. 2 (1955):
    313–324; Te Ma, “Shiyong zhuyi—zui chenfu, zui fandong de zhuguan
    weixinlun (Pragmatism—the most commonplace and reactionary subjective
    idealism),” Gushi Kao (Ancient Historical Review), no. 2 (1955): 9–28;
    Guo-en You, “Pipang Hu Shih de zichan jieji weixinrun xueshu guandian he
    ta de sixiang fangshi (Critique of Hu Shih’s bourgeois idealist conception and
    his way of thinking),” Gushi Kao (Ancient Historical Review), no. 1 (1955):
    207–212.
33. Eisenstadt, Comparative Civilizations and Multiple Modernities, Vol. II
    (Leiden: Brill, 2003), 512.
