Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
Edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz | 2005 | New York: Palgrave Macmillan
ISBN 1-4039-6862-4

Part V: Asia/Asia Minor
Chapter 12: Dewey and the Ambivalent Modern Japan
Kentaro Ohkura
Original print pages 279–299; PDF pages 298–318

[English original. Notes and bibliographic references remain with their chapter at their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks are retained; check exact typography and diagrams against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, notes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 279] [PDF page 298]

12
            Dewey and the Ambivalent Modern Japan

                                                         Kentaro Ohkura




                                                        Introduction
This chapter illuminates the ambiguity of the Japanese identity by
reexamining Japanese studies of John Dewey conducted during the
watershed period before and after World War II. Dewey viewed as an
indigenous foreigner provides an example of the ambivalence of the
modern Japan in its struggle in coming to terms with its indigenous and
exogenous values over political, social, and educational principles. Thus,
this essay is not a case study for introducing the cultural uniqueness of
the Japanese understanding of Dewey’s ideas, but rather to indicate the
ambiguity of the modern Japanese in their understanding of Dewey. This
ambiguity played an important role in providing a rationale for the
modernization and building of a democratic Japan. Prewar and postwar
Japanese scholars constructed their image of Dewey as a kind of
traveling library that served the modern conditions of their country.
   Prewar and postwar Japan were both concerned with consolidation
of the Japanese people. It is said that Imperial Japan valued an ideal-
ism that supported and encouraged a national spirit and a type of self-
identity entwined with the state. But, both pre- and postwar Japan
embraced scientific knowledge of the West as a way for talking about,
and even “seeing” objects that encouraged a kind of social integration.
Thus, both periods can be described as being engaged in the same
modern project, that of nation building. It is this continuity of history
that suggests reconsidering the explanations for how people become
consolidated into a nationally “homogeneous” whole at different
points in time. The nation-building efforts of Japan emerged from this

[p. 280] [PDF page 299]

ambivalence of indigenous/exogenous values over modernization.
From the view of history as it persistently continues, a democratic
society (i.e., postwar Japan) cannot be simply separated from the
totalitarian state of prewar Japan.
   This historicity is discussed in terms of the “defeat” in the War and
how that impacted what people saw as “real.” Postwar Japanese fre-
quently described their experience of this time as a kind of repentance
for causing the War.1 This repentance produced counter narratives that
essentially constructed a perceived condition of postwar Japan merely
in terms of its opposition to the vales of prewar Japan. This repentant
attitude was used in postwar Japan to clearly differentiate themselves
from prewar Japanese. This constructed separation from the past
helped to produce differences in the readings of Dewey and the views
of self-realization and nation building from one period to another.
   Finally, the chapter illustrates Japan’s continued emphasis on
becoming modern a goal that has persisted since the prewar era, but
with a particular ambivalence that gives it a distinctive character.
Indeed this focus on modernization has played an important role in
structuring the public discussions of Dewey in very different ways at
different times in Japan’s history.


Historical Overview of Modern Japan
and Dewey
W. G. Beasley, the British historian, noted that “Japan had no tradition
of political theory in the European sense.”2 As he suggested, the dawn
of a new Japan (synonymous with Meiji Japan) began in 1868 with the
“unique” way in which the warriors of Japan restored the emperor to
power. The emperor was believed to represent the country’s legacy
through the lineal succession of their imperial ancestors having only
been temporarily removed from power. Unlike the United States, modern
Japan could be characterized as being born “ancient.” That antiquity
did not, however, imply a return to the ancient form of society.
Instead, it reorganized elements of tradition with modern knowledge
and modern institutions (wakon yosai). As a matter of fact, Westerners
reminded the Japanese leaders of Meiji Japan to not merely view the
modernization of Japan as a kind of “Americanization” or through
the adoption of Western systems en masse, but rather by reorganizing
antiquity and reviewing their cultural traditions in conjunction with
the process of modernization.3

[p. 281] [PDF page 300]

Although antiquity and modernity represent two opposing con-
cepts, both played similar roles in establishing acceptable conduct for
the people of Japan. For example, the concept of time was perceived in
both “old” and “new” ways because groups of people in the feudal
and Meiji Japan practiced time in two different time frames. Time was
regional and indefinite in the feudal era, and national and definite in
the modern Meiji period. In the feudal school, an indefinite time frame
was employed. Each pupil went to school when one wanted to, and
studied at one’s own speed under the close supervision of a teacher. In
the publicly funded schools of Meiji Japan, by comparison, all stu-
dents were instructed to arrive at school “ten minutes before school
begins.”4 This was not merely to reinforce the “standardization” of
schooling, but also emphasized a common understanding of time as a
form of discipline. The transition from old to new cannot be simply
defined as a process of Westernization or industrialization emphasiz-
ing “enlightenment,” “rationality,” and “accuracy.” Modernization
also involved more subtle forces, such as the manipulation of objects
and people through the concept of time, thereby promoting the devel-
opment of togetherness among the people, and thus encouraging a
sense of nationhood.
   Along with the emperor’s Oath in Five Articles, Imperial Japan
continued to seek modern forms of knowledge to strengthen the
foundations of imperial rule, and eventually inviting Dewey to Japan
in 1919. The attitude taken toward Dewey was nonetheless varied
among modern Japanese. Dewey’s work was not familiar to the aca-
demic philosophers of the Imperial University, but was more popular
among instructors of private institutions and schools. This contrast
between the Imperial University and private schools represents multiple
understandings of Japanese modernization and Dewey.5 The former
perceived the adoption of Dewey’s philosophy as an importation
of Western values, or in short, “Americanization” while the latter
characterized it as a form of secularization or democratization.
   The rise of the new education movement (which is often likened to
progressivism in the United States and the New Education Fellowship
in Europe) saw increasing numbers of translations of Dewey’s books,
essays, and research articles and the New Education movement contin-
ued until 1929. It then completely waned as the National Mobilization
Law of 1938 gave priority to military requirements for capital, indus-
trial, and trade control. Toward the end of World War II, there
remained a view held by some Japanese that learning from Dewey was
merely a strategy to make Japan more capitalistic or Americanized.

[p. 282] [PDF page 301]

The postwar period between 1945 and 1969 was the most prosper-
ous time for studying Dewey in Japan than any other historical period.
Major reasons for this were the Allied occupation (1945–1952) and
the power shift to democracy that pressed for intellectual exchanges
between the two countries. In 1952, the John Dewey Society of Japan
was established for the purpose of better understanding Dewey as well
as American philosophy. It is generally recognized that Japanese edu-
cators, who understood Dewey in terms of experimentalism, a learn-
ing style based on individual practice, popularized Dewey’s approach
during this same time period.6
    As a result, postwar schools were encouraged to address democra-
tization in school and to focus more on the individual student than
was the case in prewar schools. This child-centered approach was in
large part based on the notion that students gained knowledge
through self-reflection and consideration of their individual circum-
stances in life. With this focus on the student and his/her own life, an
experimental, problem-solving approach became the chief tool for
structuring learning. Educators were told that learning materials
should not be designed with ready-made solutions, but rather should
encourage each student to see things in a problematic way “through
living and in relation to living,” and thereby solve problems in one’s
own manner.7
    This experimental approach was also used as a tool for responding
to postwar Japan’s interest in promoting Japan as a democratic society
by encouraging a common understanding that could be reflected
through individual practice and natural inquiry. Nonetheless, these
scientific tools were employed primarily to reinforce the general values
and universal rules that governed the population, rather than the varied
individual solutions that Japanese followers of Dewey had intended.
Thus, the concept of science in postwar Japan suggested only natura-
listic procedures for teleological purposes with little consideration of
the way in which it was applied. Postwar Japanese perceived the
practice and process of individual learning separately.
    A few Japanese scholars of Dewey viewed science in a slightly
different way. The problem-solving approach they perceived to be
advocated by Dewey enabled them to argue that all pupils were capa-
ble of learning independently without reliance on some set of general
rules. In this view of science, every individual was believed to possess
reasoning as a “scientific” tool (i.e., the five senses) that could lead
individuals to correct, yet individualized answers. As this scientific
attitude became better known among educators of postwar Japan it

[p. 283] [PDF page 302]

represented a perspective suggesting that while answers found via the
problem-solving approach could be varied, they were based on a rea-
soning faculty shared by all. As Japanese scholars of Dewey realized,
the problem-solving approach to learning was therefore democratic
insofar as individuals were expected to find their own answers. But, it
was at the same time compatible with a meritocracy in a democratic
society (where every individual found the shared answer in a compet-
itive environment). This educational perspective and influence thus
offered another valuable tool for nationalization.


                                     Deweyan Approach to the
                                      Self in Science Education
As suggested in the previous section, science education functioned as a
system of knowledge that served to mobilize and integrate the people
as a nation. It was not just a methodology for examining objects for
practical purposes, but also provided a vision of a modern society
where everyone could participate as a productive citizen.
   Thus, science education proceeded in prewar Japan under the
assumption that every member of society was equally endowed with a
natural faculty for understanding others and the universe. Japanese
scholars of Dewey were however ambivalent in discussing scientific
education. They referred to scientific knowing as exercised by two
different approaches or processes more often than as completed by the
individualistic use of the natural faculty. This was partially reflected by
the way in which the Japanese viewed themselves as being connected to
other members of society.
   Science education became available to all students in primary school
in 1908. In the beginning the Ministry of Education encouraged teachers
to employ observation and experimentation, thereby fostering an
individual style of learning that was opposed to the more collective,
traditional approach to Japanese education (i.e., whereby the student
was expected to learn the same content and to deductively “achieve
truth”). However, the Ministry standardized the national science text-
book as a collection of objective facts in 1911. As soon as it was pub-
lished, science education came to be seen as an “encyclopedic” type of
learning that expected all pupils to share the same view and under-
standing of the scientific body of knowledge. For example, looking at
a page on “sprouts” in the sixth-grade textbook, one finds a common
view expressed as a scientific truth that “When it gets warm in the

[p. 284] [PDF page 303]

spring, the roots of trees takes nourishment from the soil that holds
water. . . .”8 The normal and primary schools later criticized this
approach to truth, and accordingly, condemned selected sections of
the textbooks (such as the example above) by arguing that such
knowledge was too bureaucratically centralized and too conceptually
oriented. As a result, the argument continued, the information pre-
sented in these texts would not be familiar to some people in particular
regions.9 In other words, schools during the prewar period disagreed
about the specific sections of the science text, and whether they were
relevant to all, or should be restricted to certain groups of people.
A Japanese scholar, upon returning to Japan after touring Germany
and the United States, claimed that Japanese classrooms should adapt
the experimental approach to science.10 The Ministry responded to
these calls by attempting to reedit the national textbook, but it was
never successfully revised and as a result many primary schools never
fully introduced the experimental method.
   While primary education extended to nearly a 100 percent of
Japanese students by the time of World War I, the school curriculum
was not consistent for all pupils. This was a public form of education
that began as an institutional system based on merit despite including
nearly the entire population. Indeed, the ratio of students who went
onto the upper schools remained at less than 20 percent of the primary
school graduates during the prewar period.11 Toward the end of World
War II the gap between advancement based on merit and individual
mastery through science education actually widened. Science educa-
tion, during this time, tended to be viewed as “harmful” to the national
project and social integration.
   Science education had not only been associated with the social/
economic success of individuals of merit, it also facilitated a particular
way of establishing relationships between the self and others. Some
scientists of education, for example, made critical comments such as:
“natural science is a product of human beings. But, once it becomes
public, science becomes self-sufficient eventually controlling the
people.”12 Such critics were skeptical of a “science” that treated every-
thing (including emotion and spirituality) as inherently operational
and controllable.
   The “objective” approach to science requires the observer to frame
one object in relation to another, to analyze and abstract them in order
to extract the substance or find the general rule that results from the
process. We can see examples of this in textbooks of secondary educa-
tion of the period (e.g., “compare differences between the plants

[p. 285] [PDF page 304]

placed under [natural conditions and those placed] under other
conditions”). Another textbook asks the question, “which golden fish
would be most enfeebled [by lack of oxygen] if it were put in three
different sizes of aquariums.” The observer was then requested to shift
his/her objective view into the “subjective” or sentimental point of
view that enabled him or her to relate to “the pain of golden fish suf-
focating.”13 This observation process was incorporated over concerns
that if the “subjective” viewpoint were dismissed in scientific learning,
it would ignore the “educational” and ethical qualities of human nature
(e.g., the sense of togetherness and solidarity). The subjective point of
view, as the science reformists suggested, was the primary means for a
person to relate to other people. These reformists considered the
inclusion of a subjective view of science as a way to enable students to
see themselves as part of larger whole. This reformist approach there-
fore recommended that science education introduce the experimental
and subjective approaches simultaneously in order to promote
national solidarity. Though these ideas were actively discussed, they
were not widely introduced into science education until the end of
World War II.
   The manner in which science education was discussed (either sub-
jective or objective) thus represented the way in which one should
view the self in relation to the universe. The subjective approach to sci-
ence education, it was argued, provided the best way to ensure seeing
one another as organically linked. This approach is called “ecological”
in the more recent terminology of the Japanese school curricula. Many
of the arguments, at that time, admitted that science education needed
to be conducted by the subjective approach because education required
that people not only to be individually skilled, but socially ethical.
From the opposing perspective, science education was to understand
natural phenomena as an external reality for operational and manu-
facturing purposes. This latter approach enabled one to perceive other
objects as controllable and producible. The approach was reasonable
and moreover, was accepted by school scientists, who considered sci-
ence education to be the foundation for technological development as
the nation was preparing to enter the War.
   Even after the War, these two competing views of science education
remained. American influences were obvious in postwar Japan, yet
these influences tended only to support one of the two scientific views
of prewar Japan. Adopting the problem-solving method, postwar
scholars of Dewey seemed to emphasize science education as a way to
see one ecologically tied to the rest of the world (i.e., the subjective

[p. 286] [PDF page 305]

approach) rather than as a method employed by each individual to
discover his/her own answers (i.e., the independent style of learning).
    Dr. Vivian Edmiston, who helped the Ministry of Education create
the Course of Study of Science, suggested that the preferred method for
achieving scientific “rationality” was to introduce it in terms of the
interests, concerns, and “desires” of the child, derived from his/her own
daily experiences. “The good science teacher will be alert to student
progress in using science in the problems that confront him from day to
day.”14 Along with these recommendations, science education came to be
redefined as being primarily concerned with development of the child’s
life and experience based on the academic disciplines of natural science
and technology.15 Both approaches to science education thus agreed on
the point that learning was best accomplished by the “problem-solving”
method as a tool for building a democratic society.16
    One way to promote a democratic society was to acquire, through
science education, the use of the problem-solving approach in the
child-centered classroom. This approach de-emphasized contempla-
tion of one’s own nature as the starting point of learning, emphasizing
instead a more integrated approach to knowledge and understanding.
This approach, as applied to the child-centered classroom, relied
heavily on Dewey’s statement: “I believe that . . . the true center of
correlation on the school subjects is not science, nor literature, nor
history, nor geography, but the child’s own social activities.”17 From
this perspective, to teach science was not to teach a finite set of aca-
demic topics, but rather to recognize and be a reflection of the child’s
everyday social world. Thus, the school curriculum was supposed to
reflect all areas of the social world of the child, and science is one way
of engaging that social world. The problem-solving approach to learn-
ing was considered the most appropriate way to achieve this type of
integrated curriculum, and best suited to the individual student.
Umene was one educator who argued the academic boundary between
natural and social sciences was unnecessary and therefore combined
natural and social sciences into “social studies.”
    In postwar Japan, the scientific way of knowing was thus redefined
to promote the integration of the curricula and to restructure class-
room management, whereas the independent style of problem solving
in science education as initially conceived was given little attention.
The Japanese concept of social studies arose partially from the critique
against science education as an isolated academic discipline.18 Science
education was to be reformed by being incorporated into social studies
as an integrated area of academic study. For these critics, the

[p. 287] [PDF page 306]

traditional view of science education as an isolated disciplined seemed
to represent a premodern version of humanity that differentiated
“arts” from “technology.” Schooling based on this form of scientism
had the tendency to differentiate theory from application, and thus
encouraged teachers to cover the basics (theory) before teaching the
practical applications to students. It was suggested that if scientism
were maintained, it would have a negative impact on all areas of the
school curriculum including the humanities and art. Academic knowl-
edge based on scientism served as a system of knowledge that served
to perpetuate the division of theory and practice. To avoid this, the
reformers argued that one should begin to study what happens in life
and the function of the community in facilitating the collaboration of
various labors. Referring to Dewey, Umene argued that the “school
must not be a studious, but a living place.”19 For Umene, science could
be integrated into “social studies” in order to derive knowledge from
the practice of life.
    Nonetheless, the postwar approach often treated science as a single
area of study. Here, science education became the place where the stu-
dent learned the methods and the legacy of natural science. Schools
thus had a responsibility to disseminate the knowledge of science to
all. In the study of natural science, the problem-solving method was
not a means to satisfy one’s own interests and concerns, but a means
to understanding the order of physical nature and to utilize it for social
wealth and well-being.
    This natural science approach emerged from a strong criticism of
the Ministry’s position that “students raise the quality of life through
the acquisition of a scientific way of thinking and acting.”20 The
Ministry’s goal was to democratize the curricula in order to improve
the chances of individual success (in contrast to the traditional merit-
base practice of selecting the elite from the student population). This
criticism against the Ministry’s position was consistent with the criti-
cism of Japanese scholars of Soviet education who saw the curricula
promoted by the Ministry as ideologically aligned with the American
liberalism represented by Dewey.21 They could not accept a curricu-
lum based on “individual experiences” because the curricula they pre-
ferred regarded the child as a mere unit of the larger whole, a
“homo-social.” Those scholars who defended science education as a
single academic discipline desired to emphasize its utility for the entire
society, not for the profit of individuals.
    The “Sputnik shock” of 1957 strengthened this natural science
approach. This event provided some scientists the opportunities to

[p. 288] [PDF page 307]

argue that “science education needed to be modernized” and the
advanced study of science should be promoted among elite students to
improve national competitiveness in the Cold War environment.22
   Education was severely constrained in both pre- and postwar Japan
in the sense that the people were included into different types of the
collective formation (i.e., totalitarianism and democracy), but were
often excluded within the social system (social strata and positions).
Saying that both periods of Japan were ideologically different is legit-
imate, but it is just as legitimate to say that postwar Japan democracy
was still restricted in the form of totality or homogeneity as a nation.
This can be called the modern condition in which each individual is
connected with others in being immersed in certain types of knowledge
(e.g., scientific) in the state. As a result, the manner in which science was
taught continued to vary in terms of subjective and objective approaches
to inquiry or in terms of specialized versus integrated areas of study.
These different approaches to inquiry were responsive to the levels of
social mobility that allowed the individual to move within the social
system.


Discussing the Individual Governance
over Dewey
Dewey was characterized as a great philosopher, psychologist, and
educationist, rather than as a “political” thinker in Japan until only
recently. But, drawing from the thinking of German social theorist,
Jürgen Habermas, Dewey today is being reexamined and discussed
in rebuilding the “public sphere” (i.e., community) and public mind
of modern Japan.23 Dewey’s pragmatism is viewed in contrast to
Cartesian dualism (which has contributed to the production of different
types of knowledge that served to maintain the social divisions of
labor found in Japanese society). His philosophy of action and experi-
ence was, therefore, designed to overcome these Cartesian dualisms.
Dewey’s approach to develop the individual for the general social well-
being is placed in a different cultural system of Japan for collective
self-regulation. The individual’s problem-solving approach to the
world was cast as a governing practice of the self in producing social
order. This way of viewing the problem-solving approach to pedagogy
advocated by Dewey has recently been used by some Japanese scholars
to recast Dewey as a “political” advocate of liberalism.

[p. 289] [PDF page 308]

Recall that Dewey visited prewar Japan while the Japanese version
of the progressive movement was taking place. School textbooks also
represented a significant shift in the education of children at the time.
Textbooks fundamentally changed to emphasizing an “education-
adjusted to a child’s life” or a child-centered curriculum. This child-
centered curriculum’s appearance eventually brought the appearance
of concern over the depictions of “daily life” in the textbooks. Daily-
life portrayals in education were typically associated with a pedagogy
that stressed a curriculum that included scenes of daily activity, and
further promoted the child as the chief agent of learning. This system
of reason shifted the focus of education onto the daily life of the child
effectively serving to establish the subjectivity of learning, ensuring
that all can learn in their own manner.
    Oikawa Heiji was a well-known educator of the time who argued
for a governing structure for the classroom that recognized the subjec-
tivity of the child, drawing from Dewey’s ideas of child centeredness
and daily experiences. Oikawa developed his argument by first asserting
that the curriculum should consist of a set of continuous activities for
fulfilling the nature of a student’s learning. Second, it requires well-
prepared pedagogical settings, and third, it should be organized and
developed around themes focusing upon the common experiences of
life (e.g., lifestyle and culture). Each of these features was seen as com-
plementing the other. It was this philosophy of experience that was to
form the basis for learning by encouraging a self-learning attitude
among children. When the classroom was based on one’s daily experi-
ences, teaching and learning could be integrated into the classroom,
encouraging the child’s own self-directed activity using the child-
centered approach. The uniqueness of this experience-based curriculum,
according to Oikawa, consisted of both “pragmatic” and “artistic ele-
ments.”24 For him, the pragmatic element included opportunities to
engage in problem-solving activities that were connected with familiar
aspects of living, providing practical opportunities to practice thinking
and reasoning.

  The artistic element of the curriculum provided a valuable complement
  to the pragmatic: There is a different element in life, sentiment, which
  is not covered by the pragmatic Element . . . [The sentiment appears
  in the attitudes of] serene contemplation, meditation, peace of mind
  which is separated from fear, and the joy of a merciful heart toward
  others, and these attitudes cannot perfectly cognizant by the dualistic
  view of “theory and practice.” Rather, the conceptual position of

[p. 290] [PDF page 309]

“education-as-a-whole” which represents the total view of the individual
  actions and the whole personality reveals these attitudes.25

   According to Oikawa, the experienced-based curriculum supported
by Dewey’s writings includes the “artistic” element of life. The artistic
element of life is intended to make the curriculum more extensive by
covering the emotional and sentimental aspects of life. Oikawa devel-
oped the notion of the “artistic sublime” that integrates emotion and
pragmatics. When subject matter consisted of “the legacy of society,”
the curriculum represented both the sentimental and pragmatic life of
the child. He was unique among critics of the dominant approach to
education in his denial of the efficacy of teaching directly from tradi-
tional textbooks using the customary sequence, preferring instead to
restructure the curriculum around the phases of “life” that children
pass through.
   To be fair, Oikawa credits Eduard Spranger’s26 term, Gesamtunterricht,
or “whole learning” as an additional source to his idea of the child-
centered curriculum largely because Oikawa could not ignore the
commitment to German idealism found among many Japanese scholars.
Studying the work of Spranger, Oikawa came to see the curriculum as
representing the integration of all human conduct, or the totality of
human action and experience. This included (indeed presumed) the
integration of sentimental elements in life with that of the more aca-
demic subjects. The subject matter of the textbooks in use at the time
were adapted and integrated into activities based on common (i.e.,
national) life experiences. The textbooks were useful for this type of
learning, particularly since much of the subject matter was already
embodied in common depictions of daily life. Oikawa was the primary
advocate for incorporating the self-governing aspect of pragmatism to
reflect life in terms of collective self-regulation. His major argument
was that the self-governance of liberalism was compatible with the
need for social control through the use of a problem-solving form of
pedagogy.
   For some contemporary critics of prewar Japanese education,
Oikawa’s discussion of a child-centered education was seen as a product
of Western influence. They argued that the integration of the curricu-
lum was simply the borrowing and combining elements from both
German and American philosophies of education and thus, were not
intrinsically Japanese. Others criticized Oikawa for not giving suffi-
cient detail and direction on how to organize the curriculum.27 Oikawa
was challenged to describe more fully the notion of “educated-for-life”

[p. 291] [PDF page 310]

and the educative experiences that needed to be provided to students.
This challenge was based on the concern for a kind of laissez-faire
dependence on the whims of the student. Oikawa was criticized
because his student-centered approach to the curriculum did not
define the essential elements of “Japanese life.” Oikawa’s explanation
of the child-centered curriculum lacked a focus on the history and
geography of one’s own native land and culture. This view reflects
schooling as a socialization process whether it was the American use
of “democracy” or the Soviet use of “industry and fraternity” as
organizing features of the curriculum. Similarly, it was argued that the
Japanese needed something to uniquely identify their own culture and
curriculum.28 Most of criticisms were, as a result, leveled against the
lack of a “national” character that made the curricula uniquely
Japanese. Making the curriculum unique means making it “national,”
an integral part the image of modern Japan. In this respect, Dewey’s
approach to education was seen as antinational. But, it is fair to say
that Oikawa also represented a blending of the Japanese American
(Dewey) and German (Spranger) influences.
   In prewar Japan, the recognition of the Japanese culture and legacy
were considered a major goal for Japanese education. For Oikawa,
this recognition of society was realized through the learning process.
Even though the pragmatic approach supported a total approach to
learning, he sensed the limitation of the pragmatic approach in defin-
ing concrete activities and clear procedures. Oikawa argued it was not
preferable to think that:

  “Life” could be teachable if it is concerned with the living of the child
  and adult. [Math] quizzes how much it costs if you buy three pencils for
  two yen each could be related to living. But, is this type of questioning
  truly educational? . . . It is not an “education based on life experiences”
  because the question is not directed by a specific culture of life.29


    For the recognition of Japanese culture, it was not enough for
Oikawa to teach academic subjects along with the “practical” side of
living. He eventually called for a “spirit of national independence”
that made the goal of education clearer in selecting the learning mate-
rials for students.
    Oikawa appreciated the idea that students’ own interests and needs
served as a basis for governing practice. The child’s nature was the origin
for all activities with which students were to be concerned. But, the
argument was always limited insofar as the child-centered curriculum

[p. 292] [PDF page 311]

argued that only the interests and concerns of students should form
the basis of educative experiences without regard to specific academic
content or cultural norms. Although these ideas reflected the essential
principles of liberal democracy for Dewey, Oikawa saw them directed
toward the preservation of a collective identity. Thus, the child’s own
nature and interests were to serve as an important means for children
to acquire the collective identity of being Japanese. The legacy and cul-
ture of Japan, which is equivalent to “Japanese life,” were to be trans-
mitted through textbooks in order to maintain Japanese identity and
society. This is somewhat different from Dewey’s approach to culture
and legacy, which was that knowledge can be learned by the individual
child through careful scrutiny of the daily activities of ordinary
people.30 Dewey’s approach was not, from the beginning, intended to
create community as a whole, but to illustrate constructive models of
citizenship. Oikawa’s approach was to rid the curriculum of a sense of
nationalism while realizing some form of collectivism that Japanese
people shared. Thus, Dewey’s and Oikawa’s approaches differed in the
manner by which the governing of social identity was created and
maintained. These identities were understood in the form of self-
regulation for Dewey, and that of individual independence for
Oikawa. While the former sought to order the self organically through
a transformation in association with the environment, the latter
required one to look for the essential individuality of each student.
    The postwar democratization of education reaffirmed the will to
learn among all children, but was strengthened by the employment of
an educational psychology that recognized potential, and more
precisely, the desires and goals that each individual may posses.
A postwar historian of education noted that “the postwar edition of the
Reader was [designed] . . . to take learning and developmental psy-
chology into consideration [as this kind of psychology was] particu-
larly helpful in reorganizing the contents and locations in materials.”31
The use of psychology in postwar Japan was a great help in rearrang-
ing textbooks to promote a child-centered curriculum that better
reflected the developmental processes of the child. The introduction of
psychology into the classroom was therefore intended to help all chil-
dren participate in learning in the new postwar Japan. This signified a
shift in the locus of control from the teacher to the student and thereby
transformed the governing structure of the classroom environment.
    Postwar Japanese saw Dewey as a sort of traveling library in their
postwar efforts to establish democracy. An American researcher,
impressed by the way in which the Japanese enthusiastically embraced

[p. 293] [PDF page 312]

Dewey as an icon of democracy, wrote: “(T)he Japanese themselves
spoke of a ‘Dewey’s boom’ in their country . . . Books on Dewey had
brisk sales. A ‘John Dewey Night’ was celebrated . . . at the University
of Hokkaido.”32 But, the way in which Dewey became understood
was ambiguous by the way postwar Japanese reconciled themselves
with the defeat of the War. For many educators in postwar Japan,
Dewey represented educational ideals from the prewar era that could
not be fully realized due to the ideological interference of totalitarian-
ism and ultranationalism brought by the imperial regime. Thus, the
American ideology was overpowered by the imperial ideology of
prewar Japan, and a dictatorial government interrupted the autonomy
of the people. However, as with others that have studied and attempted
to understand the philosophy of Dewey, the postwar Japanese elabo-
rated multiple interpretations of his work by trying to inject his ideas
of the “modern” (i.e., new and advanced) into the premodern system
of Japanese education. For some, a Deweyan approach stressed
education for citizenship, based on individualism and liberalism. For
others, studying Dewey became an opportunity to make Japanese
more aware of the differences between Japanese and Western traditions
and values.
   Dewey was also influential in the process by which Japanese
intellectuals implemented the recommendations of the Report of the
American Education Mission to Japan of 1946. A group of twenty-six
intellectuals presented what they thought the Japanese people most
needed to learn from the Report in 1950. The group concluded that it
was urgent and practical to focus attention on how the education sys-
tem needed to be developed and modernized, rather than on how edu-
cation’s political and administrative system was to be transformed.33
Thus, the twenty-six Japanese intellectuals agreed to address the needs
of education rather than the supra-structure (i.e., political and ideo-
logical structure) of education. The majority of the members firmly
believed that the “modernization” of education involved allowing
individuals to explore their potential and to become “independent” in
order to change the country in the desired direction. Hence, teaching
needed to move from a focus on what students should learn to what
they wanted to learn in order to make the country democratic.
Founded upon Dewey’s theory of individual differences of needs and
interests, this child-centered approach required an individual to know
oneself as independent (i.e., different) from others. Nonetheless, the
child-centered approach was largely perceived as a pedagogical
approach primarily intended to simply encourage an appreciation

[p. 294] [PDF page 313]

of the unique nature of each child. As a result, many considered
the child-centered approach as merely a strategy for promoting indi-
vidual growth rather than a political strategy for promoting social
reform.34
    Among educators, the child-centered approach was understood as
a method for “learning from experiences.” Social studies in postwar
Japan represented a particular field of study to convey a set of knowl-
edge drawn from an experimental approach to classroom activity. The
“experimental-based curriculum” was designed to utilize the “project
method,” a familiar pedagogical approach that had been used in prewar
Japan. The project method and experience-based approach were
largely attributed to Dewey, though its implementation in Japanese
schools often looked quite different than the original examples offered
by Dewey. Nor were the Japanese themselves in complete agreement
on what an experience-based approach should look like.
    The Japanese social studies program was intended to stress the
development of a student’s disposition and attitude that would con-
tribute to the construction of a new society. According to the program,
students were expected to “expand social experiences” through social
studies rather than gain abstract knowledge based primarily on mem-
orization, as was common in prewar subjects such as History and
Ethics.35 The new program encouraged teachers to develop an aware-
ness of concrete themes surrounding the lives of students and stimulate
their creativity in addressing those themes.36 These themes were to
focus on real-world problems. The program defined this “principle of
‘learning-by-doing’ as the most important aspect of studying social
studies.” In general, the phrase of “learning-by-doing” was taken as
an example of Dewey’s approach to education.
    The task of developing the details of the social studies curriculum
fell to a group of Japanese educators (selected as the members of the
Core-Curriculum Association). In attempting to work out the details
of the social studies curriculum, a debate soon emerged over just what
the “core” of the social studies curriculum should consist of. For
some, the core represented a “learning by living” approach, where the
subject matter content was based on the stage of development and
normal activities of life that students should be engaged in. This was
seen as an education focused on developing primarily an individual
sense of identity. For others, it was believed that social studies should
first and foremost be about the development of a collective identity.
For these educators, the curriculum needed to focus primarily on the
rights and responsibilities arising from “citizenship.” It should be

[p. 295] [PDF page 314]

noted however that both groups struggled over the concept of identity
formation—whether individual or collective—in a similar manner to
that debated in prewar Japan. A good example of this modern influ-
ence is the persistent continuity of history that continually evokes the
same framework for targeting the “problems” discussed by members
of the society. Very few examined Dewey’s pedagogy as a self-governing
system designed to integrate the collective and individual regulation of
society. Instead, most of Dewey’s supporters among the Japanese
(whether pre- or postwar) treated pedagogy as a means for promoting
independence.
   In the ensuing debates, Dewey was interpreted by various groups in
a manner supportive of their positions. Umene, for instance, who
regarded “daily living” as the core of social studies, legitimized this
way of thinking by defining the curriculum using Dewey’s phrase,
“learning through, and in relation to living.”37 By such references to
Dewey, Umene and other members of the Association attempted to
bring back much of the prewar “experience-based” curriculum. For
proponents of a more citizenship-based approach to social studies
(e.g., Mori Akira), the importance of a collective identity and common
knowledge were highlighted as key elements of Dewey’s thought.
They also explained the key differences in the positions taken toward
social studies by referring to Dewey: “The difficult course we have to
pursue is to recognize education as generating ‘genuine learning’ and
purposeful activities simultaneously.”38 “Genuine learning” is com-
pleted by the individual adopting the experienced-based approach,
while purposeful activities were realized through a focus on learning
for citizenship. Mori interpreted “learning from experiences” as a
situation where the learner understands the external conditions in
an individualistic sense, which he called “subjective reality.” But,
he argued that there also exists another reality, which he characterized
as “objective reality.” This sort of reality could be different from
the subjective reality understood by the learner. Education, Mori
argued, was supposed to bridge the chasm between these two differ-
ent realities. Education had to create a way for the learner to assimilate a
common set of knowledge into one’s own personal understanding.
Therefore, problem solving was seen as a powerful pedagogical
approach for this connecting of the learner’s individualistic understand-
ing with “objective” reality. Mori’s approach was to define “experience”
as consisting of both a personal and collective component. However,
once he pointed out this collective aspect to experience, historical and
traditional knowledge could no longer be ignored.

[p. 296] [PDF page 315]

Mori’s view of education suggested that education was viewed as a
major production of modernity and served to function as a bridge
between two different worlds, private and public, or self and other, in
post-feudal societies. The boundary between private and public was
not explicitly clear in the feudal system of Japan. Education was, thus,
burdened with the role of sublimating the two worlds. The problem-
solving approach as a scientific rationale seemed beneficial for the sub-
limation of the two, but the discussants varied in their opinions of just
what problems were to be worked on.

Some Concluding Thoughts
Although Dewey’s ideas were critically examined, he was often posi-
tioned on one or the other side of the dualistic views advocated by the
Japanese, depending upon the perspective of the person interpreting
Dewey. He was regarded as nonscientific from the hard-science
viewpoint, but extremely practical from the traditional viewpoint. The
varied ways in which he was characterized were largely the result of
the social and historical perspectives of the Japanese. Dewey as an
indigenous foreigner, however, contributed to the constant discussions
surrounding Japanese nation building and the mobilization of the
population toward the modern/global project. Dewey was thus useful
as a traveling library for discussing both inclusion (i.e., to consolidate
as the people) and exclusion (i.e., to socially divide into labors) among
the Japanese. As another example, the problem-solving approach (the
pragmatic way of learning) was influential in discussions designed to
unify the way people live or individualize their unique way of being.
Japanese scholars and educators not only read his works, but also
obtained the chance to revise the national and social formation of their
own country through the use of Dewey’s ideas.
   The problem-solving, child-centered, and experience-based approaches
are all related to Dewey’s pragmatism. These approaches enabled the
learning of democracy by all. This democratic ideal is reflected by the
fact that every member of society has the opportunity to join the learn-
ing community (school), and learn by problem-solving strategies
applied to individual experience and thereby find solutions for one’s
own understanding. However, this approach was not widely adopted
in Japanese schools, though it had been defined as ideal during both
periods of Japanese education. While the democratic approach to
learning utilizes positivistic procedures through the natural inquiries
of individuals, it also contains the risks that learning may become

[p. 297] [PDF page 316]

individually isolated and independent from the understanding of
others. This binary sense of benefit and risk through learning is related
to the points made in Popkewitz’s introduction regarding the idealism
of bringing together Calvinist themes of redemption and the political
forms of a participatory democracy. Dewey was convinced of the
value of participatory democracy through the exercising of individual
acts, though the Japanese often saw this as merely an ideal.
   Because the individual act was endorsed by problem solving and a
scientific attitude, “science” was not viewed as the technology for pro-
duction but rather as the technology by which to govern oneself in
society. Those Japanese who discussed Dewey’s pragmatism seemed
not to realize the scientific sublime in Dewey’s thoughts that embodied
individual acts in concert with a participatory society. For the Japanese,
science was an “advanced” form of knowledge that was “disen-
chanted” from the traditional approach to knowledge and thus unbur-
dened the Japanese from the past (especially with respect to the defeat
of the War). The memory of the past caused the Japanese to perceive
science in a manner different from pragmatists like Dewey. They con-
sidered science to be mostly a means to enter the world stage as a
modern society.
   As demonstrated in this chapter, the Japanese pursued the “modern”
through their own ambiguous and contradictory understanding of
Dewey. His thought contributed to mobilizing the population toward
democracy, and helped to rid them of the totalitarian bondage of
Imperial Japan. Through the eyes of the Japanese, the modern was
extremely ambivalent in its implications for nation building and self-
realization. This ambivalence of the modern as problematic was con-
sistently repeated in both prewar and postwar Japan, while the country
itself transformed its national ideology from imperialism to democ-
racy. Ideologically speaking, Japan had changed in many profound
ways, but its mentality maintained the same dualistic and ambivalent
sense of identity.


                                                                      Notes
* Japanese names throughout this chapter, except those of Japanese Americans,
  appear in order of family name first.
1. Saburo Ienaga, “The historical significance of the Tokyo trial,” in The Tokyo
   War Crimes Trial: An International Symposium, ed. C. Hosoya et al. (Tokyo:
   Kodansha Ltd. and Kodansha International Ltd., 1986); Masao Maruyama,
   Koei no ichikara (Tokyo: Miraisha, 1982).

[p. 298] [PDF page 317]

2. William G. Beasley, The Rise of Modern Japan (New York: St. Martin’s Press,
    1990).
 3. Robert S. Schwantes, Japanese and Americans: A Century of Cultural
    Relations (Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1976).
 4. Monbusho, Shogakuseito-kokoroe (Tokyo: Normal School, 1873).
    http://www.tulips.tsukuba.ac.jp/exhibition/bakumatu/sihan/seitokokoroe.
    html (accessed July 22, 2004).
 5. See the discussion in Victor N. Kobayashi, John Dewey in Japanese
    Educational Thought (Ann Arbor: Malloy Lithoprinting, Inc., 1964), 37–50.
 6. Akihiro Mori, “Dyui kyoikugaku kenkyu no kadai” Kiyo (October 1961):
    59–65.
 7. John Dewey, School and Society / Child and Curriculum (Chicago: The
    University of Chicago Press, 1990); Satoru Umene, “Seikatsu tangen to
    Mondai tangen,” Karikyuram (April 1950): 1–6.
 8. Monbusho, “Jinjo shogaku rikasho,” in Rika kyouiku-shi shiryo, vol. 2,
    ed. Kiyonobu Itakura (Tokyo: Toho, 1911).
 9. Monbusho “Shogaku rikasho ni taisuru iken hokoku,” in Nihon no rika
    kyoikushi, ed. S. Hori (Tokyo: Fukumura, 1913).
10. Gentaro Tanahasi, “Kaitei shinrika kyoujyu-ho,” in Rika kyouiku-shi shiryo,
    vol. 1, ed. Kiyonobu Itakura (Tokyo: Toho, 1918).
11. Monbu-Kagakusho, Wagakuni no kyouiku tokei (Tokyo: Zaimusho Insatsu
    kyoku, 2001).
12. Isaburo Kanbe, “Wagakuni genji no rika kyouiku toumen no jissai mondai,”
    in Rika kyouiku-shi shiryo, vol. 1, ed. Kiyonobu Itakura (Tokyo: Toho, 1936).
13. Eiji Sato, Senjiki no kyoukasho ni okeru rekishisei no mondai, paper pre-
    sented at the meeting of Japan Society for Curriculum Studies, Aichi (2004).
14. Vivian Edmiston, “Newer methods of science teaching,” Kagaku to kyouiku
    (October 8, 1947): 1–3.
15. Kiyonobu Itakura, Nihon rika kyouikushi (Tokyo: Dai’ichi houki shuppan
    1968); Satoru Umene, “Seikatsu gakko to koa-karikyuram,” Karikyuramu
    (January 1949): 5–8.
16. Kiyonobu Itakura, Nihon rika kyouikushi (1968); Nisseiren, Kodomo no
    seikatsu wo hiraku kyouiku (Tokyo: Gakubunsha, 1988).
17. John Dewey, “My pedagogical creed,” in John Dewey on Education: Selected
    Writings, ed. R. D. Archambault (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1964); Hiroshi Usami, “Dyui no kyouiku houhou-ron to sono eikyo,” in
    Nihon no sengo kyouiku to Dyui, ed. S. Hiroshi (Tokyo: Sekai Shiso sha,
    1988).
18. Satoru Umene, “Shin kyouiku to konpon mondai,” in Umene Satoru kyouiku
    chosakushu (Tokyo: Meiji Tosho, 1948).
19. Satoru Umene, “Shin kyouiku to konpon mondai.”
20. Monbusho, “Gakushu shido youryo / Ippan hen: Shian,” in Rika kyouiku-shi
    shiryo, vol.1, ed. Kiyonobu Itakura (Tokyo: Toho, 1951).
21. Koji Tanaka, “Sengo kyouiku no mondai to Dyui no eikyo,” in Nihon no
    sengo kyouiku to Dyui, ed. H. Sugiura (Kyoto: Sekai shiso sha, 1998).
22. Kiyonobu Itakura, “Minshu shugi no hata wo takaku kakageyou,” in Rika
    kyouiku-shi shiryo, vol. 1, ed. Kiyonobu Itakura (Tokyo: Toho, 1963).

[p. 299] [PDF page 318]

23. Manabu Sato, “Kokyoken no seijigaku,” Shiso, (January 2000): 18–40.
24. Heiji Oikawa, “Shogakko karikyuramu no kaikakuan,” Kyoiku 3, no. 9
    (1935): 57–67.
25. Heiji Oikawa, “Shogakko karikyuramu no kaikakuan.”
26. Spranger was a student of Wilhelm Dilthey and visited Japan with a cultural
    mission from Germany in 1936.
27. Yonekichi Akai, “Karikyuramu no kaikakuan wo yomite,” Kyoiku 3, no. 9
    (1935): 50–53.
28. Chikuji Kinoshita, “Shogakko karikyuramu no kaikakuan ni tsuite,” Kyoiku
    3, no. 9 (1935): 46–49.
29. Heiji Oikawa, Kyoiku (1935): 30.
30. John Dewey, School and Society / Child and Curriculum.
31. Tomitaro Karasawa, Kyokasho no rekishi (Tokyo: Sobunsha, 1956).
32. Victor Kobayashi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought (1964): 1–3.
33. Sei’ichi Miyahara, “Kako no nihon no kyouiku no kekkan” in Amerika
    kyouiku shisetsudan hokokusho yokai, ed. H. Sugo et al. (Tokyo: Kokumin
    Tosho Kankokai, 1950).
34. Hajime Tamaki, “kyouiku to nihon no seiji taisei,” in Amerika kyouiku
    shisetsudan hokokusho yokai.
35. Monbusho, “Gakushu shido yoryo shakaika-hen: Shian,” in Shakaika
    kyouikushi shiryo, vol. 1, ed. K. Ueda (Tokyo: Horei Shuppansha, 1947).
36. Monbusho, “Gakushu shido yoryo shakaika-hen: Shian,” 199.
37. Satoru Umene, Karikyuram (April 1950): 1–6.
38. Akira Mori, “Keiken to kyouiku,” Karikyuramu (August 1950): 11–14.
