The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Afterword
Afterword: Intersections, Oppositions, and Configurations in the Transnational Readings of Dewey
James Scott Johnston
Original print pages 215–228; PDF pages 233–246

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Afterword text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 215] [PDF page 233]

Afterword
       Intersections, Oppositions, and
       Configurations in the Transnational
       Readings of Dewey
       James Scott Johnston


I am grateful to have had the opportunity to examine these important his-
torical and comparative essays on Dewey and the transnational uptake of his
ideas. From a philosophical point of view, interesting questions are raised
about this uptake: what happened to Dewey’s texts when they were read by
transnationals whose experiences were of a different place and in some cases,
time; in a different language; in a different set of political-social-economic
realities? What happened to Dewey’s texts when these readings were put
into practice against these realities? And, given Dewey’s steadfast insistence
on the importance of democracy as the need for publics rather than isolated
governmental institutions to take hold of the intellectual and institutional
reins of (democratic) power, what happens to democracy as Dewey conceives
it in these readings and in these practices? Can we come to any conclusions
regarding the reading of Dewey’s texts against his initial claims without
devolving into the veiled cynicism of recent comparative scholarship—a cyni-
cism that furtively critiques Dewey as somehow responsible for offering us a
flawed uptake of democratic principles and practices?!
    I will examine these questions under three headings: Intersections,
Oppositions, and Configurations. | will then bring the results of this analy-
sis to bear on the question of Dewey’s conception of democracy. What is
viable and what not, of Dewey’s notion of democracy in the taking up of
Dewey’s texts? Dewey claims a democracy is a ground-up affair, arising
out of shared experiences, communicated in and through publics, through
“associated living” and “conjoint, communicated experiences,” with the
schools as both models and catalysts *; just what was made of Dewey’s
notions of democracy and democratic education in their taking up and dis-
semination? A brief discussion of Dewey’s understanding of democracy, its
relation to education, and what can be made of the transnationalization of
democracy in light of the foregoing chapters, rounds out this Afterword.


INTERSECTIONS

By intersections, I understand the convergence of Dewey’s and readers’
interpretative statements. Is the understanding of Dewey’s claims by his

[p. 216] [PDF page 234]

readers consistent with Dewey’s own statements? This of course is a herme-
neutical problem, for it is clear that we cannot read Dewey off the text in a
straightforward, unproblematic, and unambiguous manner. As I see it, the
question, ‘What did Dewey mean when he stated x?’ is one that must be
addressed prior to (or at least alongside of) successive readings of Dewey.
Furthermore, the questions of how and why the readers understood Dewey
as they did must be addressed, and one of the goals of several of these chap-
ters is to ascertain the how and why of these readings. There are of course
many interpretative “solutions” to this problematic set of affairs, and in
the final section of this Afterword I will draw on one (albeit very briefly)
regarding the relationship of the various readings of Dewey to Dewey’s
own statements regarding democracy. Here, I will limit myself to discus-
sion of selected chapters.
    When we examine the chapters in this volume closely, we find the authors
note only superficial resemblances between readings of Dewey and Dewey’s
own statements. Often enough, the authors view these surface resemblances
as peeling away (or able to be peeled away) to reveal deeper differences. In
all cases, the authors make the point that Dewey was taken up in a context
far removed from his own and for dissimilar social, political, religious, and
philosophical purposes. Thus, while there is some contiguity between Dew-
ey’s statements and the later statements of his readers, the authors claim
that in all cases, Dewey’s claims are reconstituted in the varying contexts
in which they are taken up and practiced. Nevertheless, there are multiple
examples of readings superficially consistent with Dewey’s self-understand-
ing, three of which I will mention in brief.
    Ana Madeira’s chapter, entitled, “Diffusion-Reception Networks of
Pedagogical Knowledge: The Circulation of John Dewey’s Educational
Discourse in the Luso-Afro-Brazilian Space” provides an examination of
the uptake of Dewey in Africa that draws a broad parallel between the
Protestant missionaries that brought Dewey’s claims and ideas with them,
their understanding and use of the curricula, and Dewey’s progressivist
themes. Madeira claims there is contiguity between Dewey’s statements
and the statements of his readers, in her assertion that “As a rule, Protes-
tant missions cared more for religious social practice than for theological
speculation, organising their activity around local specificities (language,
culture, natural environment). It ensued that the secularisation of the cur-
ricula posed no problems, even more so since for Protestants, science and
religion were not mutually exclusive.” Madeira goes on to claim that “This
view was shared by Dewey. He believed that social reform to be obtained
through the democratic school should rely upon a unification of the lan-
guages of the ideal and of the real world’.”
    Another broad intersection between Dewey and his readers is found
in the case of the Soviet uptake of Dewey’s educational writings. Irina
Mchitarjan’s chapter, “John Dewey and the Development of Education
in Russia before 1930: Report on a Forgotten Reception,” discusses the

[p. 217] [PDF page 235]

broad appeal of Dewey’s progressivist educational theory on Soviet edu-
cators in the early part of the 1920s. Mchitarjan notes, “Soviet Russia’s
leading educational administrators studied his teachings and declared
him to be the best existing example for the projected unified and poly-
technical Soviet production school. In the 1920s Dewey became the most
popular Western educator in Soviet Russia—something that was all but
obvious given the critical attitude of the Soviet regime towards all “bour-
geois” models.” Mchitarjan further claims, “The decisive reasons for the
extensive reception of Dewey’s ideas in the first half of the 1920s were
educational rather than political. It was mainly because of its educational
quality that Dewey’s approach was seen to be the best school concept in
international educational theory.”
   Finally, there is convergence noted between Dewey’s educational claims
and those of his Chinese readers. Barbara Schulte’s chapter, “The Chinese
Dewey: Friend, Fiend, or Flagship?” discusses the context of China at the
time of Dewey’s arrival in 1919. “Republican China was remarkably recep-
tive to Dewey's ideas. Interestingly, Dewey was able to satisfy the needs
of both progressive and moderately conservative forces. His democratic
convictions made him attractive for supporters of the May Fourth Move-
ment, but at the same time his objections to revolution and to using violence
rendered him digestible for those who wanted to reform and transform
China through education.” Schulte notes that Dewey had specific quali-
ties making him a suitable match for the nascent transformation of China:
“With his views on child-centered pedagogy, his theories on human intelli-
gence, and his practical experiences through the laboratory schools, Dewey
was the ideal representative of this new trend in education; the high posi-
tions that his former students attained after their return to China certainly
strengthened this view.” Beyond this, Dewey’s former students at Columbia
University, most notably Hu Shi, held charismatic sway over other Chi-
nese intellectuals. “Hu Shi’s personality was one of the reasons why Dewey
could reach such a wide audience. Hu Shi and Dewey's other mediators
in China were all well-known for their intellectual wit and rhetorical tal-
ent. The educated population took much pleasure in listening to them and
flocked to their lectures as if they were featuring a pop star.”
    Outwardly then, Dewey’s progressivist dicta of democracy, attention
to the child, and revision of the curriculum away from traditional forms
of pedagogy and toward group and active learning, were established or
attempted by those that took Dewey up. This uptake in turn was often con-
nected to a broader set of social and political goals, goals that (in terms of
their establishment) were very dependent upon the wherewithal of his inter-
preters. In the case of Soviet Russia, educators using Dewey largely had the
imprimatur of the state; this was not the case in most contexts, however.
Often enough, those using Dewey did so holding minority opinions, and
worked against the tide of governing bodies and social and political ideolo-
gies and circumstances to which they were opposed.

[p. 218] [PDF page 236]

In the broadest terms, then, Dewey’s statements on progressive educa-
tion and in some cases (such as the Soviet Union and China) democracy,
were enthusiastically supported and translated into varying contexts. How-
ever, this is, to judge by the conclusions of the chapters in this volume, as
far as Dewey’s own statements got. It was much more the case that Dewey’s
statements were taken up in a manner distinct from Dewey’s own self-
understandings, as I shall discuss at more length in the following section.
The intersections we can map concern only the taking-up of the overall
agenda, and not the minutiae of Dewey’s texts. Dewey’s readers took him
only in the broadest terms: that he was a philosopher of democracy, and
that he was an educator that believed in experimentalism and a pedagogy
and curriculum centered less on tradition and rote and more on the growth,
development, needs, and interests of the child. However, these intersections
did not extend beyond these superficial contiguities. In no cases were there
attempts to understand Dewey in his own context; that is to say, his sys-
tematic and interrelated accounts of democracy, philosophy, and pedagogy.
Generally speaking, his pedagogy was detached from the other accounts
and presented as a stand-alone to the intellectual public. Even in the best
of cases, it was pressed into rhetorical service for various social, political,
and ideological ends: this is the case for Dewey’s reception and reading
in China, the Soviet Union, and Africa (the three contexts discussed with
respect to Intersections). In no case is there a smooth translation of Dewey’s
statements on pedagogy, philosophy, or democracy into any of these dif-
fering contexts. All taking up of Dewey’s texts is rife with opposition, as
I shall further discuss. Perhaps Dewey’s interpreters in the Soviet Union
came closest in bringing Dewey’s works to a favorable social-political cli-
mate in a manner consistent with both Dewey’s aspirations, yet by the end
of the 1920s, this project had failed. As a result of these limiting factors, we
can therefore conclude that the intersections noted by the authors are only |
superficial; they give way to profound differences on further examination.


OPPOSITIONS

By oppositions, I understand the divergence of Dewey’s statements from
subsequent readings.   Not surprisingly, there are many more instances of
divergences than intersections. These can conveniently be placed into sub-
categories, three of which I will note and discuss. The first is an outright
mis-reading, made for particular social or political ends that do not comport
with a Deweyan notion of democracy and education. In these instances,
Dewey’s texts are taken up, but they are interpreted (or mis-interpreted, as
the case may be) in such a way that they bear little resemblance to Dewey’s
self-understood claims for democracy and democratic education. The sec-
ond is a more nuanced mis-reading that involves selective articulation of
Dewey’s position through reading certain texts and/or statements while

[p. 219] [PDF page 237]

omitting or passing over others. In these instances, Dewey’s claims are read
in concert with his own claims, but other claims that lend context and/
or inhibit a particular reading are glossed or omitted. The third is a mis-
reading that occurs through no fault of the interpreter, as a result of Dewey
being taken up in a differing social, political, and linguistic context. Here,
the attempt at interpreting Dewey correctly is in earnest; however, the
understanding that emerges is foreign to Dewey’s self-understanding. I will
provide an example of each of these. (There is obvious overlap with respect
to these three mis-readings; however, there are enough instances of each
to warrant separate descriptions.) As I shall discuss in the Configurations
section, each of these mis-readings becomes a shape in a larger iteration of
the authors’ understandings.
   Marcelo Caruso and Inés Dussel’s chapter is entitled “Dewey in Argen-
tina (1916-1946): Tradition, Intention, and Situation in the Production of
a Selective Reading.” Caruso and Dussel’s depiction of Dewey’s uptake in
Argentina offers a good general example of the first instance of mis-read-
ing. Here, Caruso and Dussel speak of the overall attempt at understanding
Dewey in the context of a very different social/political climate;

    Argentinean educationalists did not create an “Argentinized” Dewey
    by attaching new meanings to his work. As displayed in the teacher’s
    press, they rather selected strongly legitimated texts and readings in
    order to fit him into their professional and political strategies. They did
    so in line with the official educational tradition, their own purposes
    of ‘technical’ legitimacy, and the changing political situations. These
    selections, indeed, are not original enough to speak about any true
    “variation” of Dewey’s ideas. Beyond [Lorenzo] Luzuriaga’s efforts
    in publishing Dewey’s works . . . and Dewey’s educational principles
    related to democracy had little impact in defining Argentinean educa-
    tional policies.

If we are to believe Caruso and Dussel, Dewey was profoundly mis-inter-
preted in the act of taking up his texts in the social-political climate of early
twentieth century Argentina.
   A somewhat more nuanced mis-reading of Dewey occurs in the settings
of Argentina, Chile, and Spain. In each of these cases, Dewey is misread
through exclusive attention to his educational, as opposed to philosophi-
cal and political, texts. We turn again to Caruso and Dussel, who say of
Dewey’s educational interpreters “All of them privileged exclusively educa-
tional texts and discarded his works on philosophical and political issues.
Argentineans perceived Dewey mainly as an educator, and his philosophi-
cal background of pragmatism played a minor role in the knowledge of
American models.”
   The case of Mexico is also revelatory in another example of this sec-
ond sort of mis-reading. In Rosa Bruno-Jofré’s and Carlos Martinez Valle’s

[p. 220] [PDF page 238]

chapter, “Ruralizing Dewey: The American Friend, Internal Colonization,
and the Action School in Post-Revolutionary Mexico (1921-1940),” claim
a similar mis-reading on the part of Dewey’s interpreters. “The reference
to Dewey as a professor of pedagogy and not of philosophy, may be read as
the first filter and in line with traditional disciplinary divisions in Mexico
(and in the Francophone world). More important is the erroneous attribu-
tion to Dewey that Ramirez made, using [Omer] Buyse as the source, of
the recapitulation theory and, specifically, of the theory of culture-epochs
in the sense that child evolution reproduces human evolution.” It is also
noted that, “John Dewey’s thought, rooted in his own historical time, had
elements that could appeal to Mexican leaders. Both shared the language
of reconstructionsim and redemptionism, dominant among social melior-
ists and American social gospelers, that conceived school as the main force
of social change.” However, Dewey’s interpreters engaged in “ . . . selective
adoption . . .” of Dewey’s texts. Bruno-Jofré and Martinez continue:

      In this process of selective adoption, the Mexican educators separated,
      following [Edouard] Claparéde (see in this volume Bruno-Jofré and
      Jover), Dewey’s pedagogy from his philosophy and with the latter they
      left aside the reflections on democracy. They were interested in those
      ideas from Dewey that could be operationalized in the regeneration of
      the country and the redemption of the rural and indigenous popula-
      tion. That is to say that the Mexican leaders understood and trans-
      formed Dewey as an educator for the construction of the Mexicanidad
      and the social incorporation/integration of the rural and indigenous
      people. The aspect which clearly reveals the existence of a filter that
      accommodated and adapted the Deweyan pedagogy to Mexican needs
      was the ruralization of an educational model that had been designed in
      American social conditions. There the process of industrialization had_
      removed the means of production from the families and with that the
      space where they socialized and educated their children and this task
      was transferred to the school.

The third sort of mis-reading is a result of the profoundly differing social,
cultural, and political contexts Dewey’s interpreters find themselves in.
We might go so far as to say that this sort of mis-reading applies, though
unevenly, to all readers of Dewey having the task of making him under-
stood to an audience with differing linguistic, religious, cultural, social,
and political backgrounds, to which the interpreters themselves belong. The
mis-reading is not the result of a misunderstanding on the part of the inter-
preter; rather, it concerns the exigencies of translation and interpretation
for a non-English-speaking and non-American audience. While this is not
to say that the readings produced are incorrect, they are distinct from the
claims Dewey would have understood himself to have made, and distinct
from the understandings common to his English-speaking (but particularly

[p. 221] [PDF page 239]

secularized American) audience. Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Gonzalo Jover, in
their chapter entitled “The Readings of John Dewey’s Work and the Inter-
section of Catholicism: The Cases of the Institucién Libre de Ensefianza
and the Thesis of Father Alberto Hurtado, S.J. on Dewey,” capture some
of the difficulties inherent in this third sort of mis-reading when, regarding
the case of Alberto Hurtado, they claim:

    Dewey’s philosophical position centered on the inevitability of uncer-
    tainty conflicted with the notion of the Church as the depository of
    truth even as freedom of conscience was central to Hurtado’s argu-
    ment. Dewey’s rejection of dualism was no less problematic given its
    centrality to the Catholic theology of the time and often expressed in
    the dualistic understanding of body and soul. This conception was
    problematic for him because it embraced a notion of growth that
    excluded creation and transcendental authority. It did not leave room
    for a morality that was different from the idea of the autonomous
    individual and the only measure of the consequences of our acts was
    the pragmatic criterion. Hurtado could not accept this conception of
    democracy because it was based on a purely human conception of
    society, on human work, and inserted into the social contract with
    no reference to the character of natural law which was, in his view,
    intrinsic to social life. Furthermore, he said that it ignored the true
    aim of human life, which was to serve God.

Norbert Grube’s chapter, “A ‘New Republic’? The Debate between John
Dewey and Walter Lippmann and its Reception in Pre-and Postwar Ger-
many” provides a depiction of German intellectuals’ reading of Dewey that
can also be characterized by this third sort of mis-reading. Grube notes,
 “Similarly German intellectuals like [Friedrich] Schonemann, [Elisabeth]
Noelle, and [Eduard] Baumgarten mixed the pragmatist meaning of com-
munity, that implicates common shared experiences and common solved
problems, with the nationalist notions of [Herbert] Croly and [Walter]
Lippmann, dissociated it from the American context and converted it par-
tially into the German context of “Gemeinschaft” (community).” In the
case of the German (mis) appropriation of Dewey, the matter is extremely
complex, as Grube notes: in intellectual circles, Dewey was yoked to the
reading of Walter Lipmann, his arch-nemesis in matters of the public dur-
ing the 1920s. This led to a sort of hybrid reading of the American intel-
lectual scene involving both Dewey and Lipmann but assimilating to each,
views neither of them would have understood themselves to hold.
    The oppositions we find on examination of the various readings of
Dewey suggest mis-readings, though of differing sorts, abound, and they
penetrate to the core of all the attempts at taking Dewey up into novel con-
texts. All intersections, in other words, reveal deeper oppositions. We note
oppositions at the level of total understanding, in which Dewey is coerced

[p. 222] [PDF page 240]

into a program or set of practices that were inexorably at odds with his
democratic understanding of education. The obvious contradictory nature
of these mis-readings with what Dewey claimed for a democratic educa-
tion seems to need no further comment. In the cases of more subtle and
unavoidable misreadings, differences between Dewey’s self-understanding
of democracy in education and democratic practices more generally, are
revealed in examination of the claims, themes, and topics that are over-
looked or glossed, or are revealed in the results of the taking up of Dewey’s
text (through translation and commentary) into different linguistic, reli-
gious, social, cultural, and political contexts. In the case of Argentina,
willful mis-readings of Dewey’s texts took place against a very different
set of social and political circumstances; in the case of Spain, Mexico,
and of Alberto Hurtado in Chile, though an attempt to render Dewey’s
educational texts faithfully to the public and lay parishioners respectively
was made, other texts and claims of Dewey’s were ignored or glossed. In
the case of the intellectual scene in Germany, a hybrid reading of Dewey
and Walter Lipmann emerged, in which aspects of the one were grafted
onto the other.


CONFIGURATIONS

By configurations, I understand the “shape” or “form” a novel understand-
ing of Dewey’s text(s) takes. Configurations, as I am using the term here,
has a storied existence, and relates back to the post-Kantian idealist tradi-
tion of “Gestalten” as “shapes” of spirit. This is a term also having histori-
cal connections to the “human sciences” tradition of Wilhelm Dilthey, the
Gestalt psychologists of the early twentieth century, and sociologists such
as Norbert Elias, among others. A configuration, as I construe it, is a com-
posite figuration in which the original reading (Dewey’s text and the various
meanings that were self-understood by Dewey and his American English-
speaking audiences) is brought together with later readings (the interpreters
of Dewey, together with the personal, social, cultural, religious, and politi-
cal contexts they brought to bear on the understanding of his text(s)), that
then takes on a further shape in the readings given here (these particular
readers of the uptake of Dewey). There is thus a unified reading represented
here, but that reading itself is a composite of other readings, themselves
products of the various intersections and oppositions made manifest by the
interpretations. The heuristic conception of configurations allows me to
juxtapose the various levels of readings (including Dewey’s self-understood
statements) while preserving the sense ofunity.
    I choose Jeremy Rappleye’s chapter, “Re-Contextualizing Foreign Influ-
ence in Japan’s Educational History: The (Re)Reception of John Dewey”
for evaluation, here. Rappleye’s discussion of Dewey in Japan shares simi-
larities with the other discussions in that, though Dewey was taken up in a

[p. 223] [PDF page 241]

purposeful manner against a backdrop that was foreign to the one Dewey
wrote in, intersections between Dewey’s interlocutors and translators, and
Dewey’s statements themselves, were evident. In Japan, “there was a small
progressive ‘middle’ where Dewey’s ideas were afforded a warm reception.
Most members of this group had two distinguishing characteristics: they
had studied in America and they were predominantly Protestant Chris-
tians.” Furthermore, this reading of Dewey deliberately emphasized certain
of his claims against others. “Here we find that despite their affinities for
Dewey they [the progressive “middle”] nonetheless remolded Dewey’s ideas
according to the logic of the Japanese situation in several distinct ways...
they prioritized the individual far more than Dewey himself did, in a direct
critique of the political atmosphere of rigid conformity.”
    The readings of Dewey were also characterized by oppositions. Of the
latter, each of the three sorts of oppositions discussed in the previous sec-
tions was notable. The first was outright hostility to Dewey, which is attrib-
uted in part to the strong presence of German idealism in Japan at the
time of Dewey’s visit. “Further support for this assertion are comments by
Japan’s foremost educational historian to the effect that “philosophies like
that of Dewey are too practical, too uncomplicated to fascinate either Ger-
mans or Japanese.” The un-receptiveness to pragmatism by this dominant
mainstream then must ultimately be viewed as the persistence of indigenous
forms of knowledge, but also a window on how German philosophy func-
tioned as a means of indigenous knowledge articulation.” The second is a
more nuanced misreading of Dewey, manifest through stressing one ele-
ment or tendency in his thought over another. Thus Rappleye says, “[Odo]
Tanaka accented individualism even more than did Dewey who stressed the
need for cooperation and social engineering in industrial America. In his
view, the first task of the democratic movement in Japan was the achieve-
ment of individual freedom in thought, law and custom.” Rappleye notes
also “A second way in which Dewey’s ideas were transformed was a subtle,
but unmistakable scrubbing off of the optimism and peaceful inevitability
of social progress in Dewey’s speech and writings.”
   In what might plausibly be considered a third form of opposition, Rap-
pleye notes that

    there is much evidence to show that Dewey’s ideas on education, once
    translated into the Japanese context became disconnected from the under-
    lying logic of pragmatism. This could have either happened because of
    the inability of educators to understand the complexity of Dewey’s ideas
    (especially when delivered without interpreters) or because of the repres-
    sive political environment. . . . This reversal of Dewey can be attributed
    to the political climate, but also to the ways these nationalist ideas reso-
    nated with indigenous traditions and Japanese history. This is even more
    apparent in intellectuals who explicitly identified with pragmatism but
    still altered it to fit the Japanese situation.

[p. 224] [PDF page 242]

We thus have basic intersections between Dewey’s Japanese interlocutors
and the claims of Dewey and his texts, as well as variants of mis-readings.
Distinguishing these intersections and mis-readings provides us with the
wherewithal to construct certain configurations—forms or shapes of dis-
tinctive readings of Dewey. The configuration consists in Dewey’s claims,
the claims of his readers, and in the case of the authors here, the further
analysis and discussion of the state of affairs leading to the various read-
ings of Dewey’s claims. Bringing these figurations of Dewey’s readings
together allows us to fruitfully contrast one with another. So for example,
the intersection of interests in re-making Japanese society in a progres-
sive mould contrasts with the legacy of German idealism and Japanese
nationalism at the time of Dewey’s arrival. The more willful misreading
of Dewey as an ardent individualist against the other claims in his texts
contrasts with both German idealism and the collective spirit of Japanese
nationalism. When we add to these figurations the claims of Rappleye’s
analysis and descriptions of these events and the giving of reasons for
them, we have a configuration which serves to both highlight the contrast
between the previous figurations and yet assembles them into a larger
and more unified understanding. The configuration Rappleye offers here
provides a new shape to the understanding of the readings and mis-read-
ings of Dewey. Indeed, absent this configuring heuristic, it is doubtful
we could understand the relationships between Dewey’s claims and their
subsequent uptake in a non-linear fashion.
    A caveat: there is an interpretive limit which we reach when we under-
stand the analysis and description of various readings and mis-readings
of Dewey as configurations. We cannot without qualification draw a con-
clusion that these readers were wrong to draw the conclusions they did,
given that their circumstances and contexts very often precluded them
from doing otherwise. To be sure, we can draw conclusions about what is.
nearer and what is further from Dewey’s own claims, together with why
certain readings of Dewey do or do not work (which I will broach in the
upcoming section). But we certainly cannot conclude (as some comparative
scholars unfortunately have suggested) that the readings and mis-readings
of Dewey, and therefore Dewey himself, have had a deleterious effect on
politics and society in these various nations and should not, therefore, have
taken place.


DEMOCRACY        AND EDUCATION

My final category concerns the relationship between Dewey’s understand-
ing of the role of democracy in education and the role of education in a
democracy, and whether and to what extent Dewey’s statements are in con-
cert with the various readings of Dewey (including the eventual putting into
practice of his ideas). If, as I will argue, Dewey’s efforts in this regard must

[p. 225] [PDF page 243]

be seen as a “ground up” rather than “top down” implementation of demo-
cratic principles and practices and the education necessary for these, certain
interesting convergences and oppositions arise, which, when considered in
light of the present configurations, can help us to determine what is and
what is not viable in respect to the concern of importing democracy.
    For Dewey, democracy was “a mode of associated living,” of “conjoint,
communicated experiences,” that took place between persons.° It was less
a set of political and social institutions (though these followed upon demo-
cratic experiences) than a process whereby genuine problems were solved in
conjunction with others. Democracy, in other words, begins and ends with
the sharing of experiences. It is obvious, from Dewey’s own statements and
the claims of the various chapters, that in no sense can a “top down” impo-
sition of democratic principles and practices be drawn from Dewey’s texts
without contradiction. For example:

    We cannot set up, out of our heads, something we regard as an ideal
    society. We must base our conception upon societies which actually
    exist, in order to have any assurance that our ideal is a practicable one.
    But . . . the ideal cannot simply repeat the traits which are actually
    found. The problem is to extract the desirable traits of forms of com-
    munity life which actually exist, and employ them to criticize undesir-
    able features and suggest improvement.*

However, it is also clear that the interpretations made on behalf of Dewey’s
claims were taken up into contexts that could not readily accommodate
the context that Dewey was himself working in, that of early twentieth
century America, complete with its peculiar social and political tradi-
tions and institutions. This would—as all interpreters of Dewey knew
very well—require drastic changes in the means by which the democratic
principles and practices Dewey articulated were to be both understood
(by other academics) and implemented. Dewey’s call was clearly for a
“round up” version of democracy, but this alone could not answer to the
many and sometimes insurmountable social and political differences of
the contexts in which he would be read and implemented by the various
publics. Indeed, no clear solution to this problem could ever be forthcom-
ing, as democratic principles and practices depended on the shared expe-
riences and problems of those composing the public to whom and for the
democracy operates.
    In saying this, it seems clear to me that the only establishment of demo-
cratic principles and practices that can take effect is one in which the public
decides (not acquiesces or capitulates). This suggests in turn that democ-
racy both begins in and continuously reaches down to the elemental level
of all relationships—the face-to-face. Furthermore, only democratic means
or methods can net democratic institutions and practices. As Dewey once
put it:

[p. 226] [PDF page 244]

If there is one conclusion to which human experience unmistakably
      points it is that democratic ends demand democratic methods for their
      realization. .. . Our first defense [against absolutism] is to realize that
      democracy can be served only by the slow day by day adoption and
      contagious diffusion in every phase of our common life of methods that
      are identical with the ends to be reached and that recourse to monistic,
      wholesale, absolutist procedures is a betrayal of human freedom no
      matter in what guise it presents itself .°

If this is the case, a paradox is evident in all cases of the establishment
of democratic principles and practices in contexts distinct from Dewey’s.
Whereas all those reading Dewey began by setting out programs and poll-
cies designed to foster (or implement) democratic practices in educational
systems and more broadly, in societies, the requirement for real democracy
was to be located in the experiences of persons, sharing problems. Instead
of beginning where Dewey thought democracy begins and ends—with the
face-to-face associations where lived experiences are had and undergone,
and the methods that arise out of solving the problems intrinsic to these
are developed—those interpreters of Dewey that envisioned and established
social and political programs in Dewey’s name chose to begin in the middle
of the democratic circle, with social and political institutions.
    If we follow Dewey, beginning with top-down reconstruction of social
and political institutions prevents democratic principles and practices from
gaining a foothold. If the implementation of Dewey’s democratic principles
and practices failed, on Dewey’s reading it is not because they were not ear-
nestly attempted. Rather, it is because the conditions in which democracy
must spring forth were overlooked. The proper place to begin to develop
democratic institutions and democratic living is not with large-scale politi-
cal institutions; it is on the ground, with the shared experiences and prob- .
lems of peoples and in particular, the means and methods by which these
problems are solved. These problems have to be genuine ones, as Dewey
once maintained; they must be felt, experienced.° Only when communi-
cation is fostered, and the problems of the few are made manifest to the
many, can a public that is democratic, form. This can only happen if a rich
network of associated communities in which reciprocal sharing and solving
of problems takes root. Political institutions arise out of these communi-
ties; they are supposed by them. Top-down implementation of purportedly
democratic practices can perhaps effect policies that make communities
more likely to share their problems (and break down certain political bar-
riers to this communication), but they cannot supply the problems them-
selves; nor can the communication so necessary to solve them do so on its
own. Problems have to be experienced as genuine before shared problem
solving can begin.                          .
    Cast in this light, it is doubtful that any importation of Deweyan demo-
cratic principles could plausibly take root and thrive. Beginning with top-

[p. 227] [PDF page 245]

down implementation of principles and institutions would be tantamount
to implementing policy and practice in accordance with “monistic, absolut-
ist procedures.”’ As these chapters make clear, some interpreters of Dewey
(especially in the Soviet Union) came closer than others to effecting this
importation. None of them, however, was able to transform the conditions
crucial to democratic practices: the face-to-face transactions of persons;
the reciprocal sharing and solving of one another’s problems; the satisfac-
tions of shared and enriched experiences had and undergone. No amount
of importation, no matter how well-conceived, can accomplish this. This
transformation can only be accomplished by those that share the experi-
ences and the problems, and while it is of great importance to commu-
nication that political barriers be removed to help accommodate this, no
guarantee of the basic conditions of democracy can be given from outside.
    The case of the American context is a valuable one to talk about at this
point. While it is certainly the case that Dewey recommended social and
political changes in the United States (teachers’ unions; a third national
party; a more flexible and less constrained court), and often commented
favorably on social and political programs abroad (the Soviet Union; Mex-
ico; China), he did not think that these could be effected if the publics to
whom these programs were directed were opposed or indifferent to them.
If the publics did not choose to change the realities of their day-to-day exis-
tences, and specifically, if they did not choose to work together to solve gen-
uine problems, these programs were useless at best and dangerous at worst.
Though Dewey seemed pessimistic in making this claim, he did think the
varied publics in America were ready for social and political change, and
thought that certain social institutions were required to solve the problems
of the public. However, this did not extend to other nations, who, in any
event, had differing publics with differing problems to contend. This is
the case with respect to Mexico, China, and the Soviet Union; these were
nations that Dewey commented favorably upon in regards to their nascent
attempts at developing democratic practices, and though Dewey vigorously
applauded these attempts, he was well aware of the obstacles to a fully
democratized (and democratizing) populace.
    In conclusion, I believe these chapters demonstrate that the best strategy
for democratic theory and practice (including systems of education) with
respect to the importation of social and political practices to non-democratic
contexts, is to support the conditions that allow “associated living” and
“conjoint, communicated experiences” to flourish, and resist the temptation
to order sweeping political and social changes—whether from without or
within. The implementation of democratic institutions and practices needs
to be up to those that have genuine problems and concerns to lead the way.
In my opinion, this is the only position that preserves what is good and right
about Dewey’s theory of democracy while avoiding the skeptical conclusions
of certain comparative scholars who would jettison Dewey, along with the
failed uptakes, in their quest for a truly transnational democracy.

[p. 228] [PDF page 246]

NOTES

      1.     1am referring to Thomas Popkewitz’s recent edited volume, Inventing the
           Modern Self. In the introduction penned for that volume, Popkewitz comes
           within a hair’s breadth of condemning Dewey for the uptake of his demo-
           cratic theory. While we may fairly criticize Dewey for this or that aspect of
           his theory of democracy, Popkewitz goes further than this to extend his cri-
           tique of the uptakes to Dewey himself. Dewey’s faith in and claims on behalf
           of science are said to be a telling factor in the development of the “modern
           self;” a self which was the product of a “normative pedagogy for making the
           future citizen,” and a factor as well in “practices to order thought and action
           related to future actions tied to a particular sublime that were embodied the
           notions of American democracy secularized Protestant notions of salvation
           and redemption.” Characteristically, Popkewitz offers no textual support for
           this claim. Popkewitz’s thesis is in marked contrast to Dewey’s own claims
           for democratic practices and democratic living in texts such as Democracy
           and Education and Freedom and Culture. See Thomas Popkewitz, “Intro-
           duction,” in Inventing the Modern Self: Modernities and the Traveling of
           Pragmatism in Education (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2005), esp. 25.
  2. John Dewey, “Democracy and Education,” in The Middle Works of John
     Dewey Vol. 9, ed. Jo Ann Boydston (Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern
           Illinois University Press, 1980), 91.
  3. Ibid.
  4. Ibid., 88-89.
  5. John Dewey, “Freedom and Culture,” in The Later Works of John Dewey
     Vol. 13, eds. Jo Ann Boydston and Barbara Levine (Carbondale: Southern
           Illinois University Press, 1988), 187.
  6. John Dewey. “How We Think,” in The Middle Works of John Dewey Vol. 6,
     ed. Jo Ann Boydston (Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois Uni-
          versity Press, 1985), 236.
      Jel bids


========================================================================
Book-level appendix: Contributors
========================================================================

[p. 229] [PDF page 247]

Contributors




EDITORS

Dr. Rosa Bruno-Jofré is Professor and former Dean (2000-2010) at the
   Faculty of Education, Queen’s University, Canada. Her area of exper-
   tise is the history of education in Canada and beyond. She is founding
   co-editor of Encounters/Encuentros/Rencontres on Education, pub-
   lished jointly by the Faculty of Education at Queen’s and the Depart-
   ment of Theory and History of Education, Universidad Complutense
   de Madrid. She also serves as senior co-editor of Historical Studies
   in Education/Revue d’histoire de l'éducation. One of her most recent
   books, The Missionary Oblate Sisters: Vision and Mission (McGill-
   Queen’s University Press) was translated into French. She has also
   published Methodist Education in Peru, 1888-1930 (Wilfrid Laurier
   University Press) in 1988 and edited other books and monographs,
   including Educating Citizens fora Pluralistic Society, with Natalia Apo-
   niuk, published by the Canadian Ethnic Studies Association in 2001.
   She coordinates the Theory and History of Education International
   Research Group at Queen’s. She has published articles and chapters
   of books in various languages. Her most recent article is forthcoming
  in Educational   Theory (with Skip Hills) and is entitled “Visions of
  Excellence in Ontario: The case of the Hall-Dennis Report (1968) and
  For the Love of Learning (1994).” Her most recent work is the book
  co-authored with Trohler, Jover, and Johnston entitled Democracy
  and the Intersection of Religion and Traditions: The Readings of John
  Dewey’s Understanding of Democracy and Education, published by
  McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2010.
     In 2004, Bruno-Jofré received the Lamp of Learning Award presented
  by the Ontario Secondary School Teachers’ Federation in recognition of
  her contribution to public education in Ontario. She has recently been a
  Distinguished Visiting Professor for three months, at the Department of
  Theory and History of Education, Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
  as a recipient of a Group Santander Award.

[p. 230] [PDF page 248]

Dr. Jiirgen Schriewer is Professor of Comparative Education and Head of
   the Comparative Education Centre at Humboldt University, Berlin. Dr.
   Schriewer served as President of the Comparative Education Society in
   Europe (CESE), from 1992 to 1996, and, since 1995, has been a mem-
   ber and co-coordinator of interdisciplinary research networks on cross-
   cultural studies in history and the social sciences established at Humboldt
   University under substantial grants by the German Research Agency. In
   1999, he was awarded the German-Japanese Research Award and, in
   2001, the Swedish Research Award. Dr. Schriewer’s particular research
   interests include the comparative social history of education, issues related
   to the intertwining of an emerging world culture and culture-specific
   structural elaboration, as well as the history and methodology of compar-
   ative research in education and the social sciences. His most recent books
   include Discourse Formation in Comparative Education (Frankfurt, 2"¢
   edition, 2003, published also in Spanish [2002] and Chinese [2005]); Ver-
   gleich und Transfer, co-edited with Hartmut Kaelble (Frankfurt and New
   York, 2003), and Transnational Intellectual Networks, co-edited with
   Christophe Charle and Peter Wagner (Frankfurt and New York, 2004),
   with a Spanish edition published in Barcelona and Mexico City, 2006.


AUTHORS

Dr. Marcelo Caruso is Senior Lecturer at the Centre for Comparative
   Education, Humboldt University (Berlin). He received his degree in
   educational sciences from the University of Buenos Aires, his PhD from
   the University in Munich, and his “Habilitation” from Humboldt Uni-
   versity in Berlin. He has authored and edited six books and has pub-
   lished more than fifty research articles and book chapters in Spanish, .
   German, English, and French. His research focuses on international
   dynamics of the technological transformations of elementary schooling
   in the nineteenth century.

Dr. Inés Dussel is a Senior Researcher at the Latin American School for the
   Social Sciences (FLACSO), Argentina. She received her PhD from the
   University of Wisconsin-Madison.      She has authored six books, edited
   three, and has published more than sixty research articles and book
   chapters in Spanish, English, French, German, and Portuguese. Her
   interests include the history of pedagogical theory, and more recently
   the relationships between education and visual culture.

Dr. Norbert Grube received a PhD in History, on the history of elementary
   schools in northern Germany 1730-1830, in 1997 from the University of
   Hamburg. Since 2006, he has been a research associate at the Pestaloz-
   zianum Research Institute for the History of Education and a member

[p. 231] [PDF page 249]

of the editorial board of the critical edition of letters to Pestalozzi. His
  habilitation project was about the governmental application of survey
  research in West Germany in the Cold War.

ANA JOFRE (frontispiece) is a self-taught artist who has been hand build-
  ing ceramic sculptures and making artful crockery since 1995. Ana is
  compelled by form, ranging from abstract geometry to the human form,
  exploring elements of universal aesthetics. She also produces conceptu-
  ally driven works inspired by a range of interests and influences, some of
  which are documented in her diverse travels and formal studies. Born to
  refugees in Lima in 1976, Ana grew up in Canada, and lived in Calgary,
  Winnipeg, and Toronto, completing her PhD at the University of Toronto
  in 2004, before her nomadic restlessness led her south through Washing-
  ton, DC and into North Carolina. She currently teaches physics at the
  University of North Carolina at Charlotte, with a research program in
  biophysics, where she verifies small elements of empirical truths.

Dr. James Scott Johnston is Associate Professor of Philosophy and Educa-
   tion, Faculty of Education, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Can-
   ada. He is cross-appointed to the Department of Philosophy at Queen’s
   University. Dr. Johnston has published recently in journals such as the
   Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society, Educational Theory, Edu-
   cational Studies, Studies in Philosophy and Education, and the Jour-
   nal of Philosophy of Education. He has single-authored three books:
   Inquiry and Education: John Dewey and the Quest for Democracy
   (2006); Regaining Consciousness: Self-Consciousness and Self-Cultiva-
   tion from 1781—Present (2008); Deweyan Inquiry: from Educational
   Theory to Practice (2009); and co-authored Democracy and the Inter-
   section of Religion and Tradition: the Reading of John Dewey’s Under-
   standing of Democracy and Education (with R. Bruno-Jofré, G. Jover,
  and D. Trohler) (2010).

Dr. Gonzalo Jover is Professor at the Department of Theory and His-
   tory of Education, Faculty of Education, Universidad Complutense de
   Madrid. Gonzalo Jover is the author of Relacion Educativa y Rela-
   ciones Humanas {Teaching Human Rights] (Barcelona, 1991); co-
   editor and author of a chapter, “Education in Europe: Policies and
   Politics” (Dordrecht, 2002); co-author of La Escuela de la Ciudada-
   nia: Educacion, Etica, y Politica [Schooling for Citizenship: Educa-
   tion, Ethics, and Politics] (Bilbao 2006), among others. He is founding
  co-editor of Encounters/Encuentros/Rencontres on Education and a
  co-author of, with Bruno-Jofré, Tréhler, and Johnston, Democracy
  and the Intersection of Religion and Traditions: The Readings of John
  Dewey’s Understanding of Democracy and Education, published by
  McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2010.

[p. 232] [PDF page 250]

Dr. Ana Isabel da Camera        Dias Madeira      is a Professor in Education,
  Institute of Education, University of Lisbon, Portugal with an MSc
  Sociology, London School of Economics, University of London, United
  Kingdom. She is presently working at Pontificia Universidade Catolica
  do Rio de Janeiro, PUC-Rio, Brasil. She has been a member of the
  Comparative Education Society in Europe (CESE) since 1997, and
  is a founding member of the Mediterranean Society of Comparative
  Education (MESCE), which was established in 2005. She has par-
  ticipated in several international projects in the History of Education
  and Comparative Education fields. Some late publications include: A
  Construcao A Construcao do Saber Comparado em Educagao: uma
  andlise socio-historica, Lisboa: Fundagao Calouste Gulbenkian/FCT
  (in press). “Popular Education and Republican Ideals: The Portuguese
  Lay Missions in Colonial Africa, 1917-1927,” Paedagogica Historica,
  2011 (in press); and “O campo da educagao comparada: do simbolismo
  fundacional a renovacao das ldégicas de investigacgao,” in Educagao
  Comparada Brasil-Portugal: Rotas do “Além-mar,” eds. D. Bello de
  Souza & S. A. Martinez, Xama        Editora (2010).

Dr. Carlos Martinez Valle, a Lecturer at the Universidad Complutense de
  Madrid, holds a PhD in Political Science and Sociology from the Uni-
  versidad Complutense de Madrid (Anatomy of Freedom, Madrid: Pub-
  licaciones de la Universidad     Complutense,    2007). As TMR     researcher
  of the European Union and research fellow and Assistant Professor at
  Humboldt University, Berlin, he researched and lectured about global-
  ization in education (World-Level Ideology or Nation-Specific System-
  Reflection? Reference Horizons in Educational Discourse, co-authored
  with Jurgen Schriewer, Lisboa: Educa, 2003); the Spanish educational
  system; and fundamentalism and history of Spanish and Mexican educa-.
  tion from a comparative perspective. In his work he combines history of
  ideas and philosophy, comparative education, and history of education.
  He has published, among others, in Comparativ, Zeitschrift fiir Global-
  geschichte und Vergleichende Gesellschaftforschung, and chapters in
  collections published by Columbia Teachers College.

Dr. Irina Mchitarjan studied German and Education at the State Univer-
      sity Jaroslav Mudryi in Velikii Novgorod, Russia. In 1998, she com-
      pleted her PhD in Education at the University of Bielefeld, Germany.
      In 2005, she received her habilitation in Education at the University of
      Greifswald Ernst-Moritz-Arndt, Germany. She has been the recipient of
      a grant from the Heisenberg Programof the German Research Founda-
      tin (DFG). Her areas of research include historical and contemporary
      analysis of progressive education; immigration processes in Europe and
      their implications for educational policy; theory of cultural transmis-
      sion; and history of educational research. She has published books on

[p. 233] [PDF page 251]

the reception of German Proressive Education in Russia (Der russische
  Blick auf die deutsche Reformpadagogik, 1998) and on the Russian emi-
  grants’ school system in the European exile (Das russische Schulwesen
  1m europaischen Exil, 2006), as well as some 25 boko chapters and jour-
  nal articles, including articles in the journals Paedagogica Historica,
  Studies in Philosophy and Education, Zeitschrift fur Padagogik, Ter-
  tium Comparationis and Zeritschrift fur Soziologie der Erziehung und
  Sozilisation/Journal for Sociology of Education and Socialization.

Dr. Jeremy Rappleye received his PhD from the University of Oxford and
   is now a JSPS special post-doctoral research fellow at the University of
   Tokyo. He has previously worked as a lecturer in Comparative and Inter-
  national Education at the International     Christian University (Tokyo),
  one of the top centers for comparative educational research in Japan, as
  well as lectured on Japanese education in both Europe and North Amer-
  ica. His work focuses primarily on situating Japan within wider debates
  over educational politics and policy-making processes, globalization,
  and the dynamics of educational transfer. His recent book Exploring
  Cross-nation Attraction in Education (2007) compared American and
  Chinese attraction to Japanese education historically as a means of fur-
  ther theorizing educational policy attraction and transfer dynamics in
  the East Asia region.

Dr. Barbara Schulte is a research fellow at the Centre for East and South-
   East Asian Studies, Lund University, Sweden. Her research focuses on
   issues of transfer and transnational phenomena in education, with a
   particular interest in the East-Asian region. Her publications include an
   edited volume on transfer issues around the world (Locating Transfer:
  Concepts,   Actors,   Concepts,   Leipzig, 2006;   in German),   a co-edited
  volume on European educational systems in crisis (European Educa-
  tional Systems: Crisis or Transformation?, Barcelona, 2005; in Spanish),
  a monograph on the emergence and transformation of the concept of
  vocational education in China (“Saving the Country”: Education and
  Profession in Republican China, Frankfurt/New York, 2008; in Ger-
  man, with an English version in preparation) as well as several articles
  on German and Chinese education and culture.


========================================================================
Book-level appendix: Complete bibliography (shared by all chapters)
========================================================================

[p. 235] [PDF page 253]

Bibliography




Abelleyra, Emilio. “Fundamentos de la Escuela Renovada escritos” El Monitor de
   la Educacion Comtn LI: 707/708 (1932).
Abellan, José Luis. Historia   Critica del Pensamiento   Espanol Vol. IV. Madrid:
   Espasa-Calpe, 1984.
Acevedo Rodrigo, Ariadna. “Struggles for Citizenship? Peasant Negotiation of
   Schooling in the Sierra Norte de Puebla, Mexico, 1921-1933.” Bulletin of Latin
   American Research 23, no. 2 (2004).
Adorno, Theodor. “Meinung, Wahn, Gesellschaft.” Der Monat 14, no. 159 (1961):
    17-26.
Agulla, Juan Carlos. “La Escuela Nueva.” El Monitor de la Educacion Comtin
   LX: 815 (1940): 20-25.
Albrow, Martin, and Elizabeth King, eds. Globalization, Knowledge and Society.
   Readings from International Sociology. London: Sage Publications, 1990.
Alfredo Miranda, Roberto, and Osvaldo Miguel Iazzetta. Proyectos Politicos y
   Escuela, 1890-1920. Rosario: Matética, 1982.
Altbach, Philip. The Knowledge Context. Comparative Perspectives on the Distri-
   bution of Knowledge. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1987.
Alvarez, Primitivo. “Informe del Jefe de la Mision, Villa Jiménez, Michoacan.”
   AHSEP, Direccion de Misiones Culturales, Caja 42, Exp. 10. (1928).
Ansaldi, Waldo, Alfredo Pucciarelli, and José C. Villarruel, eds. Argentina en la
   Paz de Dos Guerras, 1914-1945. Buenos Aires: Biblos, 1993.
Anweiler, O. Geschichte der Schule und Padagogik in Rufland vom Ende des
   Zarenreiches bis zum Beginn der Stalin-Ara [History of Education and School
    in Russia from the End of the Zarist Empire to the Beginning of the Stalin Era].
    Berlin: Osteuropa-Institut, 1978.
Arancibia C., Violeta, ed. Una Verdadera Educacion: Escritos sobre Educacion y
    Psicologia del Padre Alberto Hurtado, S.J. Santiago, Chile: Ediciones Universi-
    dad Catoélica de Chile, 2005.
Arce Gurza, Francisco. “En busca de una educacion revolucionaria: 1924-1934.”
   In Ensayos sobre historia de la educacion en México, edited by Josefina Zoraida
   Vasquez, Dorothy Tanck de Estrada, Anne Staples, and Francisco Arce Gurza.
   México: El Colegio de México, 1981.
Aust, Martin, and Daniel Schénpflug, eds. Vom Gegner lernen. Feindschaften
   und Kulturtransfers im Europa des 19. und 20. Jahrhunderts. Frankfurt/Main:
   Campus, 2007.
Badie, Bertrand. “Analyse comparative et sociologie historique.” Revue interna-
   tionale des sciences sociales, no. 133 (August 1992): 363-72.
        . L’Etat importé. Essai sur Voccidentalisation de Vordre politique. Paris :
   Fayard, 1992.

[p. 236] [PDF page 254]

Baeza Ruz, Andrés. “La Dimensién Educacional de la Crisis del Centenario en
   Chile: Modernizaci6n, Nacionalismo y Reforma.” Licenciado en Historia the-
   sis, Facultad de Historia, Geografia y Ciencia Politica, Instituto de Historia,
   Pontificia Universidad Catdlica de Chile, Santiago, Chile, May 3, 2006.
Barnés, Domingo. “Un Aspecto de la Filosofia de los Valores y la Pedagogia.” in
   Ensayos de Pedagogia y Filosofia. Madrid: La Lectura, 1920/n.d., 45-46.
        . “La Pedagogia de J. Dewey.” Boletin de la Institucin Libre de Ensenanza
   L, no. 797 (1926): 238-47.
Barranco, Manuel. “Mexico, Its Educational Problems—Suggestions for Their
   Solution.” Columbia University Teachers College Contributions to Education,
   n. 73. New York: Teachers College, 1915.
Bartholomew, J. “Japanese Modernization and the Imperial Universities, 1876—
    1920.” The Journal of Asian Studies 37, no. 2 (1978): 251-71.
Bassols, Narciso. “Memoria del Ramo de Educacién Publica. Ano de 1932.” In
   Debates y propuestas de Narciso Bassols. Toluca: Ediciones del Estado de Méx-
   NEO, WV.
Bastian, Jean-Pierre. Breve Historia del Protestantismo en América Latina. Méx-
   ico: Casa Unida de Publicaciones, 1986.
       . Los disidentes: Soctedades protestantes y revolucion en México, 1872-1911.
   México D.F.: Fondo de Cultura Economica y El Colegio de México, 1989.
Beauchamp, E. “The Development of Japanese Educational Policy, 1945-1985,”
   History of Education Quarterly 27, no. 3 (1987): 299-324.
       . “The Development of Japanese Educational Policy.” In Windows on Japa-
   nese Education, edited by E. Beauchamp. New York: Greenwood Press, 1991,
   27-S0.
Becker, Carl Heinrich. Carl Heinrich Becker in China. Reisebriefe des ehemaligen
   preufischen Kultusministers 1931/32, edited by Susanne Kuf. Berliner China-
   Studien/Quellen und Dokumente, Miinster: LIT, 2004.
Bellmann, Johannes. “Der Pragmatismus als Philosophie von PISA? Anmerkun-
   gen zur Plausibilitat eines Deutungsmusters.” Zeitschrift fiir Erziehungswissen-
   schaft 10, no. 3 (2007): 421-37.
Bernstein, Basil. The Structuring of Pedagogic Discourse. Class, Codes and Con-
   trol, Vol. 1V. London and New York: Routledge, 1990.
Biagini, Hugo. Filosofia Americana e Identidad. El Conflictivo Caso Argentino.
      Buenos Aires: EUDEBA, 1989.                                                     :
Biesta, Gert, and Siebren Miedema. “Dewey in Europe: A Case Study on the Inter-
    national Dimensions of the Turn-of-the-Century Educational Reform.” Ameri-
    can Journal of Education 105 (1996).
Bittner, Stefan. “German Readers of Dewey—Before 1933 and After 1945.” Stud-
    tes in Philosophy and Education 19, nos. 1-2 (2000): 83-108.
         . “Die Wahrnehmung des Pragmatismus nach 1945.” In Pragmatismus und
    Padagogik, edited by Daniel Trohler and Jiirgen Oelkers. Zurich: Pestaloz-
      zianum, 2005, 227-50.
Blonskii, P.P. Pedagogika [Pedagogy]. Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1924.
        . Novye programmy GUS‘a i uchitel’ [New Programs of the National Coun-
      cil of Scholars, and the Teachers]. Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1925.
           . Die Arbeitsschule |The-Production School]. Paderborn: Sch6ningh, 1973.
Bohnsack, F. Erziehung zur Demokratie. John Deweys Padagogik und ihre Bedeu-
   tung ftir die Reform unserer Schule {Education for Democracy. John Dewey’s
   Pedagogy and Its Relevance forthe Reform of Our Schools]. Ravensburg: Otto
      Maier, 1976.
Boli, John, and George M. Thomas, eds. Constructing World Culture. Interna-
    tional Nongovernmental Organizations since 1875. Stanford, CA: Stanford
      University Press, 1999.

[p. 237] [PDF page 255]

Bourdieu, Pierre. “Les conditions sociales de la circulation internationale des
   idées.” Romamistische Zeitschrift fuer Literaturgeschichte/Cahiers d’Histoire
   des Littératures romanes 14, nos. 1-2 (1990): 1-10.
Borruat, Luis. “Orientaciones y Organizacion de la Escuela Moderna.” La Obra
   I: 38 (1922): 4-6. Brickman, Walter. “John Dewey’s Foreign Reputation as an
   Educator.” School and Society 70 (October 22, 1949): 261.
       . “La Escuela Activa” La Obra IV:77 (1924): 433-34.
Brickman, William W. “John Dewey’s Foreign Reputation as an Educator.” In
   School and Society 70 (1949): 257-65.
       - “The Turkish Cultural and Educational Revolution: John Dewey’s Report
   of 1924.” Western European     Education 16, no. 5 (1984): 3-18.
       ., and Stanley Lehrer, eds. John Dewey Master Educator. New York: John
   Wiley, 1975.
Bruno-Jofré, Rosa. Methodist Education in Peru: Social Gospel, Politics, and Amer-
   tcan Ideological and Economic Penetration, 1888-1930. Waterloo, ON: Cana-
   dian Corporation for Studies in Religion, Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1988.
       . “To those in ‘heathen darkness’: Deweyan Democracy and Education in the
   American Interdenominational Configuration: The Case of the Committee on
   Cooperation in Latin America.” In Democracy and the Intersection of Religion
   and Traditions: The Readings of John Dewey’s Understanding of Democracy
   and Education, Rosa Bruno-Jofré, James Scott Johnston,        Gonzalo Jover, and
   Daniel Trohler. Montreal,     QC and  Kingston,  ON:  McGill-Queen’s University
   Press, 2010.
        , and Martin Schiralli. “Teaching History: A Discussion of Contemporary
   Challenges.” Encounters/Encuentros/Recontres on Education 3 (Fall 2002):
    117-28.
Bunge, Carlos O. Nuestra América. Barcelona: s.n., 1903.
Burks, A. “The Yatoi Phenomenon: An Early Experiment in Technical Assistance.”
   In Foreign Employees in Nineteenth-century Japan, edited by E. Beauchamp
   and A. Iriya. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990.
Buruma, I. Inventing Japan, 1853-1964. New York: Random House, 2003.
Bustos, Pedro W. “Renovar la Escuela Desde la Escuela.” La Obra XI: 196 (1931):
   201.
Buyse, Omer. Méthodes Américaines d’Education Générale et Technique, 2 ed.
   Presses de L’Etablissement Litographique de Charleroi, 1909.
       . Métodos Americanos de Educagao Geral e Técnica (trad. especial para
   a revista de Estudos Pedag6gicos por Luiz Ribeiro de Senna). Bahia: Imprensa
   Oficial do Estado, 1927.
Caiceo Escudero, Jaime. El P. Alberto Hurtado y John Dewey: Presencta Educa-
   tiva de su Pensamiento en Chile. Santiago, Chile: Faculty of Education, Pontifi-
   cia Universidad Catolica de Chile, 1986.
        . Dios y el Hombre en el Pensamiento Catolico Chileno: 1900-1950. Santiago,
   Chile: Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Facultad de Educacion, 1992.
        . Maritain, La Politica y el Social Cristianismo en Chile. Santiago, Chile:
   Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, 1994.
        . “La escuela nueva y activa en América Latina. Influencia de Dewey en
   las reformas educacionales de Chile 1927 y 1945.” In Sociedad y educacton.
   Ensayos sobre historia de la educacién en América Latina. Bogota: Universi-
   dad Pedagégica Nacional, 1995.
Campbell, Jack K. Colonel Francis W. Parker: The Children’s Crusader. New
   York: John Wiley, 1968.
Cappai, Gabriele. Modernisierung, Wissenschaft, Demokratie: Untersuchungen
   zur italienischen Rezeption des Werkes von Max Weber. Baden-Baden: Nomos,
   1994.

[p. 238] [PDF page 256]

Cao, Fu. “Duwei pipan yinlun (shangpian) [An Introduction to the Criticism of
   Dewey (first part)].” Renmin Jiaoyu 1, no. 6 (1950): 21.
         . “Duwei pipan yinlun (xiapian) [An Introduction to the Criticism of Dewey
   (last part)].” Renmin Jiaoyu 2, no. 1 (1950): 23.
Caruso, Marcelo. “El Afio que Vivimos en Peligro. Izquierda, Politica y Pedagogia.”
   In Discursos Pedagogicos e Imaginario Social en el Peronismo (1945-1955),
   edited by Adriana Puiggrés. Buenos Aires: Galerna, 1995.
       . “Zweideutige Verweise. PreuBen als Vorbild argentinischer Schulrefor-
   men unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung des Projekts von Carlos Saavedra
   Lamas.” in Preufen und Lateinamerika, edited by Sandra Carreras. Munster:
   Litt, 2004.
        . “John Dewey   und Jean Piaget: Weltklassiker im lateinamerikanischen
   Kontext.” In Weltkultur und kulturelle Bedeutungswelten, edited by Jiirgen
   Schriewer. Frankfurt/M.: Campus, 2007.
Carvalho, Luis M. Nos Através da Escrita: Revistas, Especialistas e Conhectmento
   Pedagogico (1920-1936).Cadernos Prestige (3). Lisboa: Educa, 2000.
       ., and Jaime Cordeiro. Brasil—Portugal nos circuitos do discurso ped-
   agogico especializado (1920-1935). Cadernos Prestige 9 (Lisboa: Educa,
   2002).
Carvalho, Marta C. “O debate sobre a identidade da cultura brasileira nos anos 20:
   O americanismo de Anisio.” In Anisio Tetxetra,      1990-2000.    Provocacoes em
   Educacao, edited by A. L. Smolka and M. C. Menezes. Campinas, SP: Autores
      Associados/Braganga Paulista, SP: Universidade de S. Francisco, 2000.
César Jovet, Julio. Doctrina y Praxis de los Educadores Representativos Chilenos.
    Santiago, Chile: Editorial Andrés Bello, 1962.
Chabbott, Colette. Instructing Education for Development. New York and Lon-
    don: RoutledgeFalmer, 2003.
Chan, Hoiman. “Modernity and Revolution in Chinese Education: Towards an
    Analytical Agenda of the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution.” In
    Education and Modernization, The Chinese Experience, edited by Ruth Hay-
    hoe and Zhu Weizheng. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1992, 73-99.
Chapoutot, Johann. Le National-Socialisme et ’'Antiquité. Paris: Presses Universi-
      taires de France, 2008.
Charle, Christophe, Jurgen Schriewer, and Peter Wagner, eds. Transnational Intel-
   lectual Networks. Forms of Academic Knowledge and the Search for Cultural:
      Identities. Frankfurt am Main and New York: Campus, 2004.
Chartier, Roger. A Historia Cultural, entre Praticas e Representacées.        Lisboa:
      Ditelwi990:
Che, Wenbo. “Pipan Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyuxue fan kexue fan geming de ben-
   zhi—Dui Duwei Mingri zhi Xuextao yi shu de pipan [Criticizing the Anti-Sci-
   ence and Anti-Revolution Essence of Dewey’s Pragmatist Pedagogy].” Rerwen
   Kexue Xuebao 2 (1956): 105-28.
Chekhov, N.V. Svobodnaya shkola. Opyt organizatsii shkoly novogo tipa [A Free
   School: The Experience of Organizing a New Type of High School]. Moscow:
   Ih IDY, Syst, EXO
Chen, Hancai. “Qianxi Tao Xingzhi yu Duwei jiaoyu sixiang de benzhi qubie
   [A Shallow Analysis of the Qualitative Differences between the Educational
   Thought of Tao Xingzhi and Dewey].” Huanan Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Shehui
   Kexueban) 4 (1981): 44.
Chisholm, Linda, and Gita       Steiner-Khamsi,   eds. South-South   Cooperation    in
      Education and Development. New York and London: Teachers College Press;
      Cape Town: HSRC Press, 2009.
Christmann, Gabriela. Robert FE. Park. Konstanz: UVK, 2007.

[p. 239] [PDF page 257]

Claparéde, Edouard. “La pedagogia de J. Dewey.” Boletin de la Institucion Libre
   de Ensenanza X1NV1, no. 753 (1922): 353-61.
       ~ “Introduction.” In John Dewey, L’école et l'enfant. Trans. L. §. Pidoux,
   Paris: Editions Delachaux & Niestlé, 1931.
Coe, George A. A Social Theory of Religious Education. New York: Charles Scrib-
   ner’s Sons, 1927. First edition in 1917.
Collier, Simon, and W. F. Sater. A History of Chile 1808-2002. Cambridge: Cam-
   bridge University Press, 2004.
Conze, Vanessa. Das Europa der Deutschen zwischen Reichstradition und Westo-
   rientierung 1920-1970. Miinchen: Oldenbourg, 2005.
Cordova, Arnaldo. La ideologia de la Revolucién Mexicana: La Formacion del
    Nuevo Régimen. México, D.F.: ERA, 1972.
Corona Morfin, Enrique. Al Servicio de la Escuela Popular, 2 edition. México:
   SEP, 1963:
Correia, Antonio C., and Rita de Cassia Gallego. Escolas Publicas Primdrias
   em Portugal e em S. Paulo: Olhares sobre a Organizacao do Tempo Escolar
   (1880-1920). Cadernos Prestige (21). Lisboa: Educa, 2004.
       , and Vivian B. Silva. Manuais Pedagdégicos—Portugal e Brasil, 1930 a
   1971—Produgdao e Circulagao Internacional de Saberes Pedagogicos. Cader-
   nos Prestige (13). Lisboa: Educa, 2002.
       , and Vera Gaspar da Silva. A Let da Escola: Os Sentidos da Construcao
   da Escolaridade Popular Através dos Textos Legtslativos em Portugal e Santa
   Catarina—Brasil (1880-1920). Cadernos Prestige (16). Lisboa: Educa, 2003.
Cosio Villegas, Daniel to John Dewey. Number: 10567 in John Dewey, The Cor-
   respondence of John Dewey, 1871-1952 (II). Carbondale: Southern Illinois
   University Press, 1999-2004.
Cremin, Lawrence. “What Happened to Progressive Education?.” Teachers Col-
   lege Record 61, no. 1 (1959): 23-29. http://www.tcrecord.org [Accessed on June
   20, 2006].
Cummings, W., and P. Altbach, eds. The Challenge of Eastern Asian Education:
   Implications for America. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1997.
Dale, P. The Myth of Japanese Uniqueness. London: Routledge, 1988.
Dan Zhonghui. “Lun Duwei de xin de zhiye jiaoyuguan [Discussing Dewey’s New
   View on Vocational Education].” Zhijiao Luntan 7 (2002): 11.
Davila, Pauli, and Luis Maria Naya, eds. Infancia, Derechos y Educacton en
   América Latina. Donostia: Erein, 2010.
DeCoster, Tom, Marc Depaepe, Frank Simon, and Angelo Van Gorp. “Dewey in
   Belgium: A Libation for Modernity?” in Inventing the Modern Self and John
   Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education, edited by
   Thomas S. Popkewitz. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, 86-109.
Dello-Iacovo, Belinda. “Curriculum Reform and ‘Quality Education’ in China:
   An Overview.” International Journal of Educational Development 29 (2009):
   241-49.
Depaepe, Marc. “The Practical Professional Relevance of Educational Research
   and Pedagogical Knowledge from the Perspective of History: Reflections on
   the Belgian Case in its International Background.” European International
   Research Journal 1, no. 2 (2002).
        , and Simon, Frank. “La diseminacién de ideas deweyanas en Bélgica a
   través de los manuales de pedagogia.” Historia Caribe 10 (2005S).
Dewey, E. Dal’tonskii laboratornyi plan [The Dalton Laboratory Plan}. Translated
   by R. Langsberg, preface by N. K. Krupskaia. Moscow: Novaia Moskva, 1923.
Dewey, John. The School and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1899.
       _ Shkola i obschestvo [The School and Society]. Moscow: I.D. Sytin, 1907.

[p. 240] [PDF page 258]

. “The Influence of Darwinism on Philosophy.” In James and Dewey on
  Belief and Experience, edited by J.M. Capps and D. Capps. Urbana and Chi-
  cago: University of Illinois Press, 1909/2005, 188.
      . “La Escuela y el Progreso Social.” Boletin de la Institucion Libre de Ense-
  flanza XXXIX, no. 662-63 (1915): 129-34 and 161-65.
          . Psikhologtia i pedagogika myshleniia [How We Think]. Moscow:          Mir,
   1S),
      . Reconstruction in Philosophy. New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1920.
      . La escuela y la sociedad, tranlsation and introduction by Domingo Barnés.
  Madrid: Tip. Artistica, 1921?.
      . Wedenie v filosofiiu vospitantta [Democracy and Education: An Intro-
  duction to the Philosophy of Education], preface by S.T. Shatskii. Moscow:
  Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1921.
      . Psikhologiia i pedagogika myshlentia [How We Think], translated by N.M.
  Nikol’skaia, Red. N. D. Vinogradov. Berlin: Gosizdat RSFSR, 1922.
      . Shkola i obschestvo |The School and Society]. Moscow: Rabotnik Prosve-
  scheniia, 1922.
          . Shkola i rebenok [The Child and the Curriculum], translated by L. Azare-
  vich. Moscow: Gosizdat, 1922.
       . Shkola i rebenok [The Child and the Curriculum], translated by L. Azare-
  vich. Moscow/Petrograd: Gosizdat, 1923.
       . Shkola i obschestvo [The School and Society]. Moscow: Gosizdat, 1924.
       . “De la Oposicién entre el Programa Escolar y el Nino.” La Obra V: 94
   (1925): 297,
        . “Practical Democracy.” The New Republic (December 2, 1925): 52-54.
        . Shkolat obschestvo [The School and Society], translated by G.A. Luchin-
   skii. Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1925.
        . “El Consejo Nacional de Educacion Rearfirma la Orientacién Nacionalista
   de la Ensenanza.” El Monitor de la educaci6n comun L: 704 (1931): 119-20.
          . “Mi Credo Pedagégico.” La Obra XI: 196 (1931): 198-99 and XI:197
      (IOSNe BIOS2,
          . Lécole et V'enfant.Antroduction by E. Claparéde. Paris: Editions Delachaux
      & Nestlé, 1931, 10. (translated by L.S. Pidoux).
          . “Algunos Aspectos de la Educaci6n Moderna.”       El Monitor de la Edu-
   cacion Comun LI: 712 (1932): 39.
          . “La Educacion y los Problemas Sociales Actuales.” Revista de Pedagogia
   XII, no. 140 (1933): 327-44,
       . “¢Por qué Tener Escuelas Progresivas?,” La Obra XIII: 233 (1933): 436.
———.     “iPor qué Tener Escuelas Progresivas?,” La Obra XIII: 254 (1933).
       . “El Futuro del Liberalismo.” Revista de Pedagogia XIV, no. 157 (1935):
   126-31.
       . The Correspondence of John Dewey, 1871-1952. Electronic edition. Note
  to the letter August 28, 1942 (09852). Checked at the Center for Dewey Studies,
   Carbondale, IL, on July 26, 2006.
       . “La Escuela, Puntal de la Democracia,” La Obra XXIV:410 (1944): 423.
——.. “La Escuela en Accion. La Escuela Activa.” La Obra XXIV (1944): 469.
———.. Democracy and Education. New York: The Free Press, 1944.
       . “Pueblo Demécrata.” La Obra XXV: 418 (1945): 90.
          . “Principios Liberales.” La Obra XXV: 419 (1945): 138.
          . Experience & Education. London and New York: Collier MacMillan Pub-
      lishers, 1963.
           . “Mexico‘s Educational Renaissance.” In John Dewey, The Later Works,
      1925-1953, Vol. 2, edited by Jo Ann Boydston and Bridget A. Walsh. Carbon-
      dale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984.

[p. 241] [PDF page 259]

. “The Public and its Problems (1927).” In John Dewey: The Later Works,
   1925-1953, vol. 2, edited by Jo Ann Boydston and Bridget A. Walsh. Carbon-
   dale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984, 235-374.
        . Leningrad Gives the Clue. Impressions of Soviet Russia (1928). In John
   Dewey: The Later Works, 1925-1953, vol. 3, edited by Jo Ann Boydston. Car-
   bondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984, 203-07.
        - “A New World in the Making. Impressions of Soviet Russia.” In John
   Dewey: The Later Works, 1925-1953, vol. 3, edited by Jo Ann Boydston. Car-
   bondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984.
       . “How We Think.”     In Essays on Education and Politics, 1916. The Mid-
   dle Works of John Dewey, 1899-1924, Vol. 6, 1910-11: Essays and How We
   Think, edited by Jo Ann Boydston. Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern
   Illinois University Press, 1985.
        . “Schools of To-morrow.” In The Middle Works of John Dewey, 1899-
   1924, edited by Jo Ann Boydston, Vol. 8, 1915: Essays, German Philosophy and
   Politics, and Schools of To-Morrow.     Carbondale   and Edwardsville: Southern
   Illinois University Press, 1985.
         . “Democracy and Education.” In The Middle Works of John Dewey, 1899-
   1924, Vol. 9, 1916: Democracy and Education, edited by Jo Ann Boydston.
   Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press, 1985.
        . Demokratie und Erziehung. Eine Einleitung in die philosophische Pada-
   gogik [Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Edu-
   cation], edited by Jurgen Oelkers. Weinheim: Beltz, 2000.
        . Freedom and Culture (1939). In John Dewey: The Later Works 1925-
   1953, vol. 13, edited by Jo Ann Boydston and Barbara Levine. Carbondale:
   Southern Illinois University Press, 1988, 63-188.
        .A Escola e a Sociedade e A Crianga e 0 Curriculo. Lisboa: Reldgio d’Agua,
   2002 [1900 and 1902].
        , and E. Dewey. “Shkoly buduschego [Schools of Tomorrow],” translated by
   R. Langsberg. Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] (1916/1917):1, 21-48; 2,
   55-74; 3, 21-42; 4/5, 17-40; 6, 19-34; 7/8, 25-40; 9/10, 67-94; 11/12, 21-40.
       , and E. Dewey. Letters from China and Japan. New York: E.P. Dutton &
   Company, 1920.
       , and E. Dewey. Shkoly buduschego [Schools of Tomorrow], translated by
   R. Langsberg. Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1922.
Diaz, Elias. La Filosofia Social del Krausismo. Madrid: Edicusa, 1973.
       . “The Influence of Darwinism on Philosophy.” In James and Dewey on
   Belief and Experience, edited by J.M. Capps and D. Capps. Urbana and Chi-
   cago, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1909/2005, 188.
Diaz, Raul B. Ideales y Esperanzas en Educact6n Comun. Buenos Aires: Talleres
   Graficos de L. J. Roso y Cia., 1913.
Diaz-Briquets, $., and C. C. Cheney. Biomedical Globalization: The International
   Migration ofScientists. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 2002.
Dnevnik pervogo Vserosstiskogo s-ezda po voprosam narodnogo obrazovanita
   [Journal of the First All-Russian Congress on National Education]. St. Peters-
   burg: Ulei, 1913.
Doklady, preniia i postanovleniia vtorot sektsii Pervogo Vserossitskogo s-ezda po
   voprosam narodnogo obrazovaniia [Lectures, Discussions and Resolutions of
   the Second Section of the First All-Russian Congress on National Education).
   Petrograd: no publisher, 1915.
Donoso, Anton. “John Dewey in Spain and Spanish America.” International Phil-
   osophical Quarterly 41, no. 3 (2001): 357.
D’Ors, Eugenio. “Comment on the book of Emile Boutroux, William James (Paris:
   A. Colin, 1911).” Arxius de l'Institut de Ciencies 1, no. 1 (1911): 151-S2.

[p. 242] [PDF page 260]

. La Filosofia del Hombre que Trabaja y que Juega. Madrid: Libertarias/
  Prodhufi, 1995.
Dower, J. Embracing Defeat: Japan in the wake of World War II. New York: W.W.
   Norton, 2000.
Drori, Gili $., John W. Meyer, Francisco O. Ramirez, and Evan Schofer. Science
   in the Modern World Polity. Institutionalization and Globalization. Stanford,
  CA: Stanford University Press, 2003.
Dussel, Inés, and Marcelo Caruso. “Specters of Dewey in Latin America: Some
   Notes on the Reception of Educational Theories.” Paedagogica Historica Sup-
   plementary Series III (1998): 380-86.
“Editorial.” In The New Republic. A Journal of Opinion 1, no. 1 (November 14,
   1914):1.
Eisenstadt, $. “Some Observations on the Transformation of Confucianism (and
    Buddhism) in Japan.” In Confucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity: Moral
    Education and Economic Culture in Japan and the Four Mini-Dragons, edited
    by T. Wei-Ming. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1966, 175-85.
        . Japanese Civilization: A Comparative View Chicago: University of Chi-
    cago Press, 1996.
Elias, Norbert. Uber den Prozess der Zivilisation. Soziogenetische und psychoge-
    netische Untersuchungen, 15th edition. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1990.
Escudé, Carlos. 1942-1949. Gran Bretana, Estados Unidos y la Declinacion
    Argentina. Buenos Aires, Ed. de Belgrano, 1988.
        . El Fracaso del Proyecto Argentino. Educacién e Ideologia. Buenos Aires:
   Tesis, 1990.
Espagne, Michel. Les transferts culturels franco-allemands. Paris: Pressses Univer-
   sitaires-de France, 1999.
        , and Michael Werner, eds. Philologiques I. Contribution a l'histoire des
   disciplines littéraires en France et en Allemagne au XIXe siécle. Paris : Editions
   de la Maison des Sciences de |!’ Homme, 1990.
Eslander, J.F. La escuela nueva. Bosquejo de una educacion basada sobre las leyes
   de la evoluct6n humana. Barcelona: La Escuela Moderna, 1909.
“Europa ruft.” In Deutsche Lehrerbriefe 1, no. 2 (1953): 13-36.
Fang, Yan. “‘Sirenbang’ de ‘renwu dai jiaoxue’ yu Duwei de ‘cong zuo zhong
   xue’ [The ‘Gang of Four’’s ‘Teaching Mission’ and Dewey’s ‘Learning by
   Doing’].” Shandong Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Renwen Shehui Kexueban) 4-
      (1977) 6165        a
          . “Sirenbang’ de ‘wenmang jia yeniu’ yu Duwei de ‘jiaoyu ji shenghuo’ [The
      ‘Gang of Four’’s ,Illiterates Are Wild Oxen’ and Dewey’s ‘Education Is Life’].”
      Shandong Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Renwen Shehui Kexueban) 6 (1977): 11-13.
          . “Sirenbang’ de ‘xuesheng zhizhi’ yu Duwei de ‘ertong zhongxin’ [The
      ‘Students’ Self-Organization’ of the ‘Gang of Four’ and Dewey‘s ‘Child as the
      Center’].” Shandong Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Renwen Shehui Kexueban) Z1
      (197710921000          an
Faria de Vasconcelos, Anténio de Sena. Une Ecole Nouvelle en Belgique, preface
    by Adolphe Ferriére. Paris: Neuchatel & Niestlé S. A. Editeurs, 1915.
Feffer, Andrew. “The Presence of Democracy: Deweyan Exceptionalism and Com-
    munist Teachers in the 1930s.” Journal of the History of Ideas 66, no. 1 (2005):
      79-97.                        :
Fell, Claude. José Vasconcelos: Los anos del aguila. México: UNAM, 1989.
Fernandez, Samuel. “Reformar al Individuo o Reformar la Sociedad? Un Punto
      Central en el Desarrollo Cronolégico del Pensamiento Social de San Alberto
      Hurtado.” Teologia y Vida XLIX (2008): 515-44.
          . “Los Primeros Conflictos del Padre Hurtado y ‘el Espiritu de Lovaina.’”
      Teologia y Vida LI (2010): 609-26.

[p. 243] [PDF page 261]

Fernandez Eyzaguirre, Samuel. “El Padre Alberto Hurtado, S. J. y la Pontificia
   Universidad Catélica de Chile: Un Santo Universitario.” Humanitas X, no. 39
   (Winter 2005): 458-54.
Ferriere, Adolphe. Lécole active, Les origines (Ginebra: Forum, 1922)
Feuer, L. “John Dewey’s Sojourn in Japan.” Teachers College Record 71, no. 1
    (1969): 123-45.
Fiala, Robert and Audri Gordon Lanford. “Educational Ideology and the World
   Educational Revolution, 1950-1970.”      Comparative Education Review 31, no.
    3 (1987): 315-32.
Filho, Lourengo. “Principios Fundamentales de la Educacion Activa 0 Funcional.”
   La Obra XIII: 229 (1933): 243-46.
Finkel, I. Dal’tonplan v shkole fabzavucha: Sbornik statei i materialov [The Dal-
    ton Plan in Factory Schools. A Collection of Articles and Materials]. Moscow:
   Novaia Moskva, 1925.
Fortunatov, A. “Bor’ba za trudovoi printsip v Zapadnoi Evrope i Amerike [The
   Struggle for the Work Principle in Western Europe and the US].” In Trudovaia
   shkola v svete istorii i sovremennosti |The Production School in the Past and in
   the Present], ed. M.M.   Rubinstein. Leningrad: Seiatel’, 192.5: 54-74.
       . Teortia trudovot shkoly v ee istoricheskom razvitit [The Theory ofthe Pro-
   duction School in its Historical Development], Part 1. Moscow: Mir, 1926.
Foucault, Michel. Geschichte der Gouvernementalitat. Bd. 2: Die Geburt der Bio-
   politik. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 2004.
Freitag, Barbara, ed. Piaget:100 anos. Sao Paulo: Cortez Editora, 1997.
Froese, L. Ideengeschichtliche Triebkrafte der russischen und sowjetischen Pada-
   gogtk [Intellectual Springs of Russian and Soviet Pedagogy). Heidelberg: Quelle
    & Meyer, 1963.
Galdames, Luis. “Algunos Aspectos de la Educacion Primaria en Norte América.”
   El Monitor de la Educacion Comun LI: 712 (1932): 39.
Gansberg, F. “Nauka v narodnoi shkole [Science in Elementary School],” translated
   by V. Koshevich. Svobodnoe vospitante [Free Education] 8 (1907/08): 73-92.
       . “Shkola buduschego [School of Tomorrow],” translated by V. Koshevich.
   Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 1 (1915/16): 21-36.
Gaos, José. “Prélogo del Traductor.” In La Experiencia y la Naturaleza, edited by
   John Dewey. México: F.C.E., 1948, XIX-XXXV.
Gassert, Philipp. Amerika im Dritten Retch. Ideologie, Propaganda und Volks-
    meinung 1933-1945. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1997.
Geist, Beate. Die Modernisierung der chinesischen Kultur: Kulturdebatte und kul-
    tureller Wandel im China der 80er Jahre. Hamburg: Institut fiir Asienkunde,
   1996.
Genov, Nikolai, ed. National Traditions in Sociology. London: Sage Publications,
   1989.
Gentsov, I.A., A.I. Dzens-Litovskii, and N.V. Kazmin. Da‘tonplan na rabfake |The
    Dalton Plan at Workers’ Faculties]. Leningrad: Priboi, 1925.
Gerit, A., and A. Gotalov-Gottlieb. Sovremennye pedagogicheskie techentia |Cur-
    rent Trends in Education]. Cherson: Gosudarstvennoe izdatel’stvo Ukrainy,
   1925"
Gille, Arthur. “Raymond Buyse, Promoteur de la Pédagogie Expérimentale.” in
    L’Oeuvre Pedagogique de Raymond Buyse, edited by Anna Bonboir, 19-358.
  Louvain/Brussels: Vander, 1969.                                              com
Gong, Chushu. “Zai tan xiaoxue kecheng zhong de zhiye zhidao [Reconsidering
   Vocational Guidance in the Primary School Curriculum].” Jiaoyu yu Zhiye 98
   (1928): 521-26.
Goodenow, Ronald K. “The Progressive Educator and the Third World: a First
   Look at John Dewey.” History ofEducation 19, no. 1 (1990): 23-40.

[p. 244] [PDF page 262]

Goodman, R. “The Why, What and How of Education Reform in Japan.” In Can
   the Japanese Change their Education System?, edited by R. Goodman and D.
   Phillips. Oxford: Symposium Books, 2003.
Gordon, A. Labor and Imperial Democracy in Prewar Japan. Berkeley: University
   of California Press, 1991.
Grube, Norbert. “Begrenztes Maf aller Dinge’. Zum Griindungskonzept [der
   Zeitschrift “Die politische Meinung*] von Erich Peter Neumann.” Die poli-
   tische Meinung, no. 439 (2006), S. 9-10.
        . “Das Institut fiir Demoskopie Allensbach und die ‘Deutschen Lehrerbriefe’
   als Instrumente staatsbiirgerlicher Erziehung? Anspriche und Umsetzungen 1947
   bis 1969.” In Jahrbuch fiir Historische Bildungsforschung 13 (2007), 267-88.
Guzman Traversa, Andrés, and Cecilia Ramirez Venegas. “El Pensamiento Edu-
   cational del Padre Hurtado en el Contexto de las Ideas Educacionales en Chile
   Durante la Primera Mitad del Siglo XX.” Un Primer Avance B. Inv. Educ. 16,
   Faculty of Education, Santiago, Chile (2001): 15-52.
Gvirtz, Silvina. El Discurso Escolar a Través de los Cuadernos de Clase (1930-
   1970). Buenos Aires: Eudeba, 1999.
Hale, Charles. “Political and Social Ideas in Latin America, 1870-1930.” In The
   Cambridge History of Latin America, edited by Leslie Bethell, Vol.5. Cam-
   bridge/UK: Cambridge University Press, 414.
Halperin Donghi, Tulio. El Espejo de la Historia. Problemas Argentinos y Per-
   spectivas Latinoamericanas. Buenos Aires: Sudamericana, 1987, 160ff.
Hochgeschwender, Michael. Freiheit in der Offensive? Der Kongress fiir Kulturelle
   Fretheit und die Deutschen. Minchen: Oldenbourg, 1998.
Holub, Robert C. Crossing Borders—Reception Theory, Poststructuralism, Decon-
   struction. Madison, Wisconsin: The University of Wisconsin Press, 1992.
Holzinger, Katharina, Helge Jorgens, and Christoph Knill, eds. Transfer, Diffusion
   und Konvergenz von Politiken. Wiesbaden: Verlag fiir Sozialwissenschaften,
   2007.
Horner, Brita L. El caracter mexicano revelado por su literatura. México: SEP,
   192335
Hoston, G. “The State, Modernity, and the Fate of Liberalism in Prewar Japan.”
   The Journal of Asian Studies 51, no. 2 (1992): 287-316.
Howard, Jennie. Ex Otros Aftos y Climas Distantes. Buenos Aires: Raigal, 1951.
Hu, Shi. Hu Shi Koushu Zichuan [Hu Shi’s Oral Autobiography]. Translated by -
   Tang Degang. Beijing: Huawen Chubanshe, 1989, 107-08.
Huang Lizhi. “Duwei: Ziyouzhuyi zhi ming yu shi [Dewey: Name and Reality of
   Liberalism].” Shuwu 3 (2002): 44-46.
Huang Xiaoyan, and Zhang Quanxin. “Makesizhuyi zhexue shi Duwei ‘Minzhu
   gongtongti’ de lilun latyuan [Marxist Philosophy Is the Theoretical Source for
   Dewey’s ‘Democratic Community’].” Shandong Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Ren-
   wen Shehui Kexueban) | (2009): 10-14.
Huang, Yanpei. “Xuexiao jiaoyu caiyong shiyongzhuyi zhi shangque [Discussion
   about Using Pragmatism-in School Education].” Jiaoyu Zazhi 5, no. 7 (1913)
   (supplement): 55-82.
       . “Zhiye jiaoyu [Vocational Education].” Jiaoyu Zazhi 13, no. 11 (1921): 61-63.
Huguenin, Elisabeth. “La Practica de la Escuela Activa.” La Obra XIII: 230
   (L983) s2948
Hurtado, Alberto. Le systéme pédagogique de Dewey devant les exigences de la
   doctrine catholique. Belgium: Université de Louvain, 1935.
       . Curriculum Vitae. [1936], APH s62y053.
       . “Psicologia Pedagogica: La Educacién Nueva.” Revista Catoélica (Chile)
   71, no. 814 (August 1936): 111-21.

[p. 245] [PDF page 263]

. “Psicologia Pedagégica: La Educacién Nueva.” Revista Catoélica (Chile) 71
   no. 815 (August 1936): 160-69.
        . “Psicologia Pedagogica: La Escuela Nueva y el Aspecto Social de la Edu-
    cacion.” Revista Catolica (Chile) 71, no. 816 (September 1936): 217-26.
      a “Psicologia Pedagogica: La Formaci6n Intelectual Segtin Dewey.” Revista
    Catolica (Chile) 71, no. 818 (October 1936).
         . “Psicologia Pedagégica: Formacién de un Plan de Vida.” Revista Catolica
    (Chile) 71, no. 821 (November 1936): 529-33.
         . “Psicologia Pedagégica: Psico-Pedagogia de la Afectividad en la Adoles-
    cencia.” Revista Catolica (Chile) 71, no. 822 (December 1936): 578-87.
         . “Psico-pedagogia de la Afectividad en la Adolescencia.” Revista Catélica
    (Chile) 72, no. 825 (February 1937): 87-97.
         . “Psicologia Pedagogica: El Verdadero Concepto del Amor.” Revista
    Catolica (Chile) 72, no. 826 (March 1937): 100-06.
         . Puntos de Educacion. Santiago, Chile: Editorial Splendor, 1942.
         . “La Ensenanza de la Religién en el Segundo Ciclo de Humanidades.”
    Revista Catolica (Chile) 932 (May—June 1947).
         . Escritos de San Alberto Hurtado. Centro de Estudios San Alberto Hur-
    tado de la Pontificia Universidad Catodlica de Chile, CD-ROM. Chile, Santiago,
    Centro de Estudios San Alberto Hurtado, 2007.
Ignatiev, B.V. Dal’tonplan 1 noveishie techentia russkoi pedagogicheskoi mysli
    [The Dalton Plan and the Newest Educational Trends in Russia]. Moscow:
    Mir, 1925.
Ignatiev, P.N., D.M. Odinetz, and P.J. Novgorotsev. Russian Schools and Universi-
    ties in the World War. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1929.
Igo, Sarah E. The Averaged American. Surveys, Citizens, and the Making of a
    Mass Public. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007.
Iser, Wolfgang. Der Akt des Lesens: Theorie aesthetischer Wirkung, 4th edition.
    Minchen: Fink, 1994.
Jafella, Sara. “Universidad Nacional de La Plata: Dos Concepciones en su Periodo
    Fundacional.” Amales de la Educacion Comun (2006): 196.
Jager, Friedrich. Amerikanischer Liberalismus und zivile Gesellschaft. Perspek-
    tiven sozialer Reform zu Beginn des 20. Jahrhunderts. Gottingen: Vanden-
    hoeck & Ruprecht, 2001.
James, William. Pragmatism, a New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking. Popu-
    lar Lectures on Philosophy. New York: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1908.
          . Der Pragmatismus. Ein neuer Name fiir alte Denkmethoden, edited by
    Klaus Oehler, translated by Wilhelm Jerusalem. Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag,
     1997.
Jauss, Hans-Robert. Die Theorie der Rezeption—Riickschau auf ihre unerkannte
    Vorgeschichte. Konstanzer Universitatsreden, no. 166. Konstanz: Universitats-
    verlag Konstanz, 1987.
Jesualdo. Los Fundamentos de la Nueva Pedagogia. Buenos Aires: Ed. Ameri-
    calee, 1943.
         . Diecisiete Educadores de América. Los Constructores, los Reformadores.
    Montevideo: Ed. Pueblos Unidos, 1945.
Jiang, Qi. “Zhiye jiaoyu de benzhi zhi yanjiu [An Investigation of the Basic Charac-
    ter of Vocational Education].” Jiaoyu yu Zhiye 136 (1932): 241-67.
Jiménez Alarcon, Concepcion. “Prdlogo.” In Rafael Ramirez y la escuela Rural
   Mexicana, Rafael Ramirez. México, DF.: SEP, 1986.
Jin, Yuelin. “Pipan shiyongzhuyizhe Duwei de shijieguan [Criticizing the World
    View of the Pragmatist Dewey].” Zhexue Yanjiu 2 (1955): 13.
J. M. “El Nifio y el Programa Escolar, de John Dewey.” La Obra 95 (1925)2 324.

[p. 246] [PDF page 264]

Joas, Hans. “Amerikanischer Pragmatismus und deutsches Denken. Zur Geschichte
eines Missverstandnisses.” In Pragmatismus und Gesellschaftstheorie, ed. id.
    Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1999, 114-45.
        . “Von der Philosophie des Pragmatismus zu einer soziologischen Forschun-
    estradition.” In Pragmatismus und Gesellschaftstheorie. 2. Auflage, edited by
    Hans Joas. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1999.
        . “Die unterschatzte Alternative. Amerika und die Grenzen der ‘Kritischen
   Theorie’.” In Pragmatismus und Gesellschaftstheorie, edited by Hans Joas.
    Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1999, 96-113.
“John Dewey,” El maestro rural. (June 1, 1933): 31.
Johnson, W. H. E. Russia‘s Educational Heritage. New            York: Ostagon     Books,
   1969.
Johnston, James Scott. Inquiry and Education: John Dewey and the Quest for
   Democracy. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2006.
       . “Can Democratic Inquiry Be Exported? Dewey and the Globalization of
   Education.” In Democracy as Culture: Deweyan Pragmatism in a Globalizing
   World, edited by Sor-hoon Tan and John Whalen-Bridge. Albany, NY: SUNY
   Press, 2008.
Jorkle, Dirk. Demokratie als Erfabrung. John Dewey und die politische Philoso-
    phie der Gegenwart. Wiesbaden: Westdeutscher Verlag, 2003.
Jovin, Estelle Louise. “La Educaci6n       Progresiva en Estados Unidos.”     La Obra
    XIV:254 (1934): 707.
Juan, Zhi. “Shei shuo kaimen banxue shi ,shiyongzhuyi‘ [Who Says that Open-
   Door Education Is ,Pragmatism‘|?.” Renmin Jiaoyu 11 (1974): 41-42.
KPSS v rezoliutsiiakh s-ezdov, konferentstit plenumov TsK |The Communist Party
   of the USSR in Congresses, Conferences, and Plenary Sessions of the Central
      Committee], Vol. 2. Moscow, 1954.
Kaelble, Hartmut, and Jurgen Schriewer, eds. Vergleich und Transfer. Frankfurt
   am Main and New York: Campus, 2003.
Kamenev, S.A. Sovetskaia trudovata shkola |The Soviet Production School]. Ros-
   tov-na-Donu: Sevkavkniga, 1925.
Kamidera, H. “Nihon ni okeru Dewey kenkyu” [Dewey Studies in Japan]. In
   Dewey kyotku-ron no sho-mondat: Dewey tanjo hyaku-nen sai no kinnen
   shite [Fundamental Issues in the Philosophy and Educational Theory ofJohn
   Dewey: Contributions in Commemoration of the Hundredth Anniversary of-
   the Birth ofJohn Dewey], edited by The John Dewey Society of Japan. Tokyo:
   Tokyo Shoin, 1959.
Kamphausen,       Georg.   “Gemeinschaft   und   Kulturprotestantismus.   Oder:   warum
   der Pragmatismus in Deutschland nicht viele Freunde hat.” In Pragmatismus
   und Padagogtk, ed. Daniel Trohler and Jiirgen Oelkers. Zurich: Pestalozzianum,
   2005, 159-78.
Kandel, Isaac L. “The Influence of Dewey Abroad.” Teachers College Record 31,
   Momo (LID) 24Ox
Kantowsky, Detlef. “Die Rezeption der Hinduismus/ Buddhismus-Studie Max
      Webers in Stidasien. Ein Missverstandnis.” Archives Européennes de Sociologie
      MEV iNO 2 (NERVE Sil V/A.
Kapterev, P.F. “Organizatsiia avtonomnoi shkoly [Organization of the Autonomous
      School].” Pedagogicheskaia mysl’ [Pedagogical Thought] 9-12 (1918): 147-49.
Kariya, T. Katsoka Nihon to Kyoiku Kiki: fubyodo saiseisan kara tyoku kakusa
   shakai he |Education in Crisis and Stratified Japan: From Reproduction of
   Inequality to Incentive Divide). Tokyo: Yushind6é, 2000.
Keenan, Barry. The Dewey Experiment in China. Educational Reform and Political
   Power in the Early Republic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1977.

[p. 247] [PDF page 265]

Keiner, Edwin, and Jiirgen Schriewer. “Erneuerung aus dem Geist der eigenen
   Tradition? Uber Kontinuitat und Wandel nationaler Denkstile in der Erziehun-
   gswissenschaft.” In Weltkultur und kulturelle Bedeutungswelten. Zur Glo-
   balisierung von Bildungsdiskursen, edited by Jiirgen Schriewer. Frankfurt am
   Main and New York: Campus, 2007.
Kerschensteiner, Georg. Der Begriff der staatsbiirgerlichen Erziehung. 6. Auflage.
   Leipzig and Berlin: Teubner, 1929.
Kim, Bong-Ki. Das Problem der interkulturellen Kommunikation am Beispiel der
   Rezeption Deweys in China [The Problem of Intercultural Communication
   Through the Example of the Reception of Dewey in China]. Duisburg Working
   Papers on East Asian Studies no. 19. Duisburg: Institute for East Asian Studies,
   Gerhard-Mercator-Universitat GH Duisburg, 1999.
Kitagawa, J. “The Japanese Kokutai: History and Myth.” History of Religions 13,
   no. 3 (1974): 214-25.
Klafki, W. “Die Aktualitat der Padagogik von John Dewey [The Continuing Rel-
   evance of Dewey’s Education].” Zeitschrift fiir Padagogik 24 (1978): 781-93.
Klaniczay, Gabor, Michael Werner, and Otto Gécser, eds. Multiple Antiquities—
   Multiple Modernities. Ancient History in Nineteenth-Century European Cul-
   tures. Frankfurt am Main and New York: Campus, 2011.
Kliebard, Herbert. The Struggle for the American Curriculum, 1896-1958. New
   York: Routledge, 1986.
Kobayshi, Victor. John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought. Ann Arbor, MI:
   University of Michigan School of Education, 1964.
Komarovskil, B.B. Pedagogika Dewey |[Dewey’s Education], Part 1. Baku: no pub-
   lisher, 1926.
Konstantinov, N.A. Ocherki po tstorit srednet shkoly (Sketches on the History of
   the High School]. Moscow: Uchpedgiz, 1947.
Koselleck, Reinhart. Vergangene Zukunft. Zur Semantik geschichtlicher Zeiten,
   2nd edition. Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1992.
Krone, Heinrich. Tagebticher. Bd. 1: 1945-1961, edited by Hans-Otto Kleinmann.
   Diisseldorf: Droste, 1995.
Kronish, Ronald. “John Dewey’s Influence on Jewish Educators: The Case of Alex-
   ander M. Dushkin.” Teachers College Record 83, no.3 (1982): 419-33.
Kriicken, Georg and Gili S. Drori, eds. World Society. The Writings of John W.
   Meyer. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Krupskaia, N.K. Sozialistische Padagogik     [Socialist Education],   Vol. 1. Berlin:
   Volk und Wissen, 1919 in 1972.
        . “Evelyne Dewey. Dal’tonskii plan laboratornoi raboty v shkole. Helen
   Parkhurst. Vospitanie pri pomoschi Dal’tonskogo plana [Evelyn Dewey. The
   Dalton Laboratory Plan. Helen Parkhurst. Education on the Dalton Plan].” Na
   putiakh k novoi shkole [Towards the New School] 2-3 (1922): 163-68.
        . “Metod proektov v politprosvetrabote [The Project Method in Political
   Education].” Kommunisticheskoe Prosveschenie [Communist Education] 3, no.
   9:(1923)225=31).
Kuhn, Michael, and Doris Weidemann, eds. Internationalization of the Social Sct-
   ences. Asia-Latin America—Middle East—Africa—Eurasia. Bielefeld: tran-
   script, 2010.                                                        _
Larroyo, Francisco. Historia comparada de la educacion en México. México: Por-
   rua, 1947.                                                             pais
Le Bon, Gustave. Leyes psicoldgicas de la evolucion de los pueblos. Madrid: Esco-
   bar, 1912.
Lechner, Frank J., and John Boli. World Culture. Origins and Consequences.
   Oxford: Blackwell, 2005.

[p. 248] [PDF page 266]

Levin, L. Novye puti shkol’noi raboty (metod proektov) [New Ways in School
    Work (The Project Method)|. Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1925.
Levitin, $.A. “Trudovaia shkola—shkola buduschego [The Production School—
    School of the Future].” Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 4 (1912/13):
  23-32.
      . “Trudovoi printsip vospitaniia. Doklady, chitannye na Vserossiiskom
  s-ezde po narodnomu obrazovaniiu [The Work Principle. Lectures Held at the
  First Congress on National Education].” Svobodnoe        vospitanie [Free Educa-
  tion] 3 (1914/15): 25-40.
         . “Trudovaia shkola i professionalizm [Production School and Professional-
  ism].” Russkaia shkola [Russian School] 4 (1915): 71-89.
        . Trudovaia shkola—shkola buduschego [The Production School—School
    of the Future]. Moscow: Prakticheskie znaniia, 1916.
Levy, David W. Herbert Croly of The New Republic. The Life and Thought of an
   American Progressive. Princeton: University Press, 1985.
Lewis, Stephen E. The Ambivalent Revolution. Albuquerque: University of New
   Mexico Press, 2005.
Li, Hongzhang. “Jiangsu xunfu Li Hongzhang yuanhan [The Original Letter by
    Li Hongzhang, Provincial Governor of Jiangsu]” [1864], Chouban Yiwu Shimo:
    Tongzhichao [Chronicle of Barbarian Matters from the Beginning to the End
    [of the Qing-Dynasty]: Tongzhi-Period| 5, section 25. Taibei: Guofeng Chu-
    banshe, 1963, (originally 4-12), 624.
Li, Sanfu. “Shilun Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyu sixiang yu Zhongguo jiaoyuxue
    kexuehua [A Tentative Discussion of Dewey’s Pragmatist Educational Thought
    and the Scientification of Chinese Educational Science].” Yunnan Shifan Daxue
  Xuebao 4 (2001): 13-17.
Li, Yaling. “Duwei lun fazhan xuesheng de siwei nengli [Dewey Discusses Developing
   the Students’ Capability to Think].” Heilongjiang Gaojiao Yanjiu 1 (1988): 71.
Liang, Si. “‘Si Ren Bang’ weishenme haipa pouxi shiyongzhuyi [Why is the ‘Gang
   of Four’ Afraid of Analyzing Pragmatism]?.” Renmin Jiaoyu 2 (1977): S.
Lima, Salvador M., and Marcelino Renteria. “La Escuela de la accién II.” Edu-
      cacion 2, no. 5 (September 1923).
Lincicome, M. “The Historical Context of Japanese Education to 1945.” In Win-
   dows on Japanese Education, edited by E. Beauchamp. New York: Greenwood
      Presson oleae
Lipp, Solomon. Francisco Giner de los Rios: A Spanish Socrates. Waterloo, ON:
   Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1985.
Lippmann, Walter. “Insiders and Outsiders.” The New Republic, November 13,
      1915, 35-6.
        . The Phantom Public. A Sequel to “Public Opinion.” New York: Mac-
    millan, 1925.
        . Public Opinion. New York: Free Press, 1965.
Liu, Zhiju. Tao Xingzhi jiaoyu sixiang bu tong yu Duwei sanlun [Three Points
      Where the Educational Thought of Tao Xingzhi Is Different from Dewey].“
      Anhui Shifan Daxuebao (Zhexue Shehui Kexueban) 4 (1981): 16-22, 29.
Loyo, Engracia. Gobiernos       Revolucionarios   y Educacién   Popular en México
      1911-1928. México, D.F.: El Colegio de México, 1998.
Lu, Guogi. Lun Duwei dui Mao Zedong zaoqi jiaoyu sixiang de yingxiang [Dis-
   cussing Dewey’s Influence on the Early Educational Thought of Mao Zedong].“
   Xue Lilun 5 (2009): 137.
Luhmann, Niklas. Politische Theorie im Woblfabrtsstaat. Munich and Vienna:
   Olzog, 1981.
       . The Differentiation of Society, translated by Stephen Holmes and Charles
   Larmore. New York: Columbia University Press, 1982.

[p. 249] [PDF page 267]

Lunacharskii, A.V. Na novykh putiakh [Breaking New Ground]. Samara: Gub-
   izdat, 1924.
        - “Die Ziele der Sowjetschule  [Goals of the Soviet School].” In Kommis-
   sion fiir deutsche Erziehungs- und Schulgeschichte der Akademie der Padagogi-
   schen Wissenschaften der DDR, ed. Monumenta Paedagogica. Dokumente und
   Matertalien zu den deutsch-sowjetischen Beziehungen auf bildungspolitischem
   und pddagogischem Gebiet 1917-1933 [Monumenta Paedagogica. Documents
   and materials concerning German-Soviet relations in the areas of educational
   ie in pedagogy, 1917-1933], vol. XXII. Berlin: Volk und Wissen, 1984:
      O-15.
Lunazzi, José Maria. Reconstruccién Educacional. Buenos Aires: Claridad, 1935.
Luzuriaga, Lorenzo. “La Pedagogia de Dewey,” La Obra II: 42 (1922): 12.
        . “La Escuela Activa,” La Obra V: 105 (1925): 828-29.
       . “La Pedagogia de John Dewey.” in John Dewey: El Nino y el Programa
   Escolar. Madrid: Publicaciones de la Revista de Pedagogia, 1925, 14.
       . Historia de la Educacion publica. Buenos Aires: Losada, [1946] 1964.
Madeira, Ana Isabel. “Portuguese, French and British Discourses on Colonial Edu-
   cation: Church-State Relations, School Expansion and Missionary Competition
   in Africa, 1890-1930.”     Paedagogica Historica 41, no. 1/2 (2005): 31-60.
        . “Framing Concepts in Colonial Education: A Comparative Analysis of
   Educational Discourses at the Turn of the Nineteenth to the Twentieth Cen-
   tury.” In Identity, Education and Citizenship—Multiple Interrelations, edited
   by Jonas Sprogee and Thyge Winther-Jensen. Frankfurt am Main/Berlin/Bern/
   Bruxelles/New York/Oxford/Wien: Peter Lang, 2006, 225-38.
        . “Ler, Escrever e Orar: Uma Analise Historica e Comparada dos Discursos
   sobre a Educagao, 0 Ensino e a Escola em Mogambique, 1850-1950.” Doctoral
   diss. (in Educational Sciences [Comparative Education]), Universidade de Lis-
   boa, 2007.
       . “Comparing Colonial Education Discourses in the French and Portuguese
   African Empires: An Essay on Hybridization.” In International Handbook of
   Comparative Education, edited by Robert Cowen and A. M. Kazamias. Lon-
   don & New York: Springer, 2009, 165-78.
Magyar-Haas, Veronika, and Norbert Grube. “Sicherheit. Anspruch—Verspre-
   chen—Utopie.” Soziale Passagen 1 (2009): 35-48.
Makino, Y. Research on Dewey’s Educational Perspectives. Tokyo: Fuuma Shobo,
    4977.
Malamud, Margaret. Ancient Rome and Modern America. Malden, MA: Wiley-
   Blackwell, 2009.
Malherbe, E.G., J.J.G. Carson, I. Jones, and D. Rheinallt eds., Educational Adap-
   tations in a Changing Society. Report of the South African Education Confer-
   ence held in Capetown and Johannesburg in July, 1934, under the auspices of
   The New Education Fellowship. Capetown and Johannesburg: Juta and Co.,
   1937.
Mamontovy, J. Khrestomatiia sovremennykh pedagogicheskikh techenu [Chres-
   tomathy of Current Educational Trends], preface V. Arnautov. Ekaterinoslav:
   Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo Ukrainy, 1924.
Marshall, B. “Professors and Politics: The Meiji Academic Elite.” Journal of Japa-
   nese Studies 3, no. 1 (1977): 71-97.                                           .
        . Learning to Be Modern: Japanese Political Discourse on Education. Boul-
   der, CO: Westview, 1994.                                                               .
Martin,   Jay.  The   Education   of John   Dewey:   A  Biography.  New   York:   Columbia
   University Press, 2003,                                                  .
Mchitarjan,    I. Der  russische Blick  auf  die deutsche  Reformpdada gogik.   Zur Rezep-
   tion deutscher Schulreformideen in Rufland zwischen 1900 und 1917 [The

[p. 250] [PDF page 268]

Russian View of German Progressive Education. The Reception of German
   Ideas on Progressive Education in Russia between 1900 and 1917]. Hamburg:
   Kovac, 1998.
Medynskii, E.D. “Pedagogicheskie techeniia v Rossii kontsa 19—nachala 20 veka
   [The Educational Trends in Russia at the End of the 19th and the Beginning of
   the 20th Century].” In Pedagogicheskaia Entsiklopediia [Pedagogical Enzyk-
   lopaedia|, Vol. 1, edited by A.G. Kalashnikov. Moscow: Rabotnik Prosve-
   scheniia, 1927, 392-95.
       . Istoriia pedagogiki v sviazi s ekonomicheskim razvitiem obschestva [His-
   tory of Pedagogy in Relation to Economic Social Development], Vol. 2. Mos-
   cow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1929.
        . Istoriia russkoi pedagogiki do Velikoi Oktiabr’skoi sotsialisticheskoi revo-
   liutsii [History of Russian Education up to the Great Socialist October Revolu-
   tion]. Moscow: Gosuchpedgiz Narkomprosa RSFSR, 1938.
Meneses Morales, Ernesto, et al. Tendencias educativas oficiales en México:
   1911-1934. México: Centro de Estudios Educativos—Universidad Iberoameri-
   Caine, 2S,
Mercante, Victor. Charlas Pedagoégicas. Buenos Aires: R. Gleizer, 1927.
Merzon. “Opyt primenenia Dal’ton-plana v trudovoi shkole [Using the Dalton
   Plan in the Production School].” Narodnoe Prosveschente [National Educa-
   tion] 10/11 (1925): 128-32.
Meuris, George. “Looking Back: The Beginnings of a Scientific Outlook in Psy-
   chology and Education Theory.” International Review of Applied Psychology
   34 (1985): 7-16.
Meyer, Donald. The Protestant Search for Political Realism: 1919-1941. Middle-
   town, CT: Wesleyan University Press, second edition, 1988.
Meyer, J., and F. Ramirez. “The World Institutionalization of Education.” In
   Discourse Formation in Comparative Education, edited by J. Schriewer.
   Frankfurt/M: Peter Lang, 2000.
Meyer, John W., and David Tyack. “Public Education as Nation-Building in Amer-
   ica: Enrollments and Bureaucratization in the American States, 1870-1930.”
   American Journal of Sociology 85, no. 3 (1979): 591-613.
Meyer, Lorenzo, Rafael Segovia, and Alejandra Lajous. Historia de la Revolu-
   cion Mexicana, 1928-1934, tomo 12. Los inicios de la institucionalizacion.
    Mexico: El Colegio de México, 1995.
Middell, Matthias, ed. Kulturtransfer und Vergleich. Leipzig: Leipziger Univer-
   sitatsverlag, 2000.
         . “Kulturtransfer und Historische Komparatistik-Thesen zu ihrem Ver-
    haltnis.” Comparativ—Leipziger Beitrage zur Universalgeschichte und vergle-
   ichenden Gesellschaftsforschung 10, no. 1 (2000): 7-41.
Miller, Daniel R. “Protestantism and Radicalism in Mexico from the 1860s to the
      1930s.” Fides et Historia 40, no. 1 (Winter/Spring 2008).
Miranda Rebeco, Patricio. “Un Conflicto de Interpretaciones: La Figura Intelec-
   tual de Alberto Hurtado.” Humanitas X, no. 39 (Winter 2005): 522-35.
Mirel, Jeffrey. “Old Educational Ideas, New American Schools: Progressivism
   and the Rhetoric of Educational Revolution.” Paedagogica Historica 39, no. 4
      (August, 2003): 478-79.
Moiseev, L.V., and M.A. Beskin. Dal’tonplan v shkolach uchenichestva. Opyt
   raboty Moskouskoi shkoly uchenichestva [The Dalton Plan in Apprentice
   Schools. Work Experience in the Moscow Apprentice School]. Moscow: Trans-
   pechat’? NKPS91927,
Mori, A. Nihon nt okeru John Dewey shiso kenkyu-no seiri [A Review of Dewey
   Studies in Japan|. Tokyo: Shuo Sha, 1992.                                :

[p. 251] [PDF page 269]

Mort, S. The Relationship Between Japan’s Education Reform Movement and
   Research on Dewey. Tokyo: The Bulletin of the Dewey Society, 1971.
Munizaga, A. Roberto. “John Dewey, Filosofo de America.” Ediciones de los
   Anales de la Universidad de Chile 9 (1960).
Munsterberg, Hugo. Psychologie und Wirtschaftsleben. Ein Beitrag zur angewandten
   Expertmental-Psychologte. Leipzig: Verlag Johann Ambrosius Barth, 1912.
Nelson, Ernesto. The Spanish Reader. Boston: DC Heath and Com OG:
       - “Introduccion a la Edicién Espafola.” In Psicologia del Pensamiento,
   edited by John Dewey. Boston: D. C. Health and Co., 1917, xii.
       . Las Bibliotecas en los EE.UU. Washington: Dotacion Carnegie para la Paz
   Internacional, 1929.
       . La Salud del Nino, su Protecci6n Social en la Legislacion y en las Obras.
   New York: La Nueva Democracia, 1929.
        . “La Educacion en las Obras de Previsi6n y de Proteccion a la Infancia.” El
   Monitor de la Educaci6n Comin LI:710 (1932): 73-88.
        . “Significado, Finalidades y Formas de la Acci6n Social Popular.” El Monti-
   tor de la Educacion Comun LI:712 (1932): 9-19.
Ni, Zhuhua. “Zhonghua Zhiye Xuexiao gaikuang [The General Situation of the
   Chinese Vocational School].” Jiaoyu yu Zhiye 20 (1920): 1-6.
        .’Xiaoxue gongyike jiaoxue he shebei de shangque [A Discussion of the
   Didactics and Facilities of Craftsmanship Instruction at Primary Schools].”
   Jiaoyu yu Zhtye 26 (1921): 1-6.
Nitobe, I. Bushido: The Soul ofJapan. Tokyo: Shokobo, 1901.
Noelle, Elisabeth. Meinungs- und Massenforschung in U.S.A. Umfragen iiber
   Politik und Presse. Frankfurt/Main: Verlag Moritz Diesterweg, 1940.
Nolte, Paul. Die Ordnung der deutschen Gesellschaft. Selbstentwurf     und Selbstbe-
   schreibung 1m 20. Jahrhundert. Minchen: C.H. Beck, 2000.
Nolte, S. “Individualism in Taisho Japan.” The Journal of Asian Studies 43, no. 4
   (1984).
       . “Industrial Democracy for Japan: Tanaka Odo and John Dewey.” Journal
   of the History of Ideas 45, no. 2 (1984): 280.
Nosco, P. Confucianism and Tokugawa Culture. Princeton: Princeton University
   Press, 1988.
Novack, George.    Pragmatism   Versus Marxism.    An Appratsal of John Dewey‘s
   Philosophy. New York: Pathfinder, 1975.
Novoa, Antonio. Le Temps des Professeurs. Analyse S6cto-Historique de la Pro-
   fession Enseignante au Portugal (X VIII-XX stécle) Vol. 1. Lisboa: Instituto
   Nacional de Investigagao Cientifica, 1987.
       . “A Republica e a Escola: Das Intengdes Generosas ao Desengano das Reali-
   dades,” Revista Portuguesa de Educagao 1, no. 3 (1988): 75.
——. “Tempos da Escola no Espago Portugal-Brasil-Mogambique: dez Digressoes
  sobre um Programa de Investigagao.” In A Difuséo Mundial da Escola, edited
  by A.Novoa and J. Schriewer. Lisboa: Educa, 2000, 127.
      . “Etats des Lieux de L’Education Comparée, Paradigmes, Avancées et
  Impasses. In Autour du Comparatisme en Education, edited by Régine Sirota.
  Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2001, 41-68.
       , Luis M. Carvalho, Antonio C. Correia, Ana I. Madeira, and Jorge do
  O. “Flows of Educational Knowledge: The Space-Time of Portuguese-Speak-
  ing Countries.” In Internationalisation, Comparing Educational Systems and
  Semantics, edited by Marcelo Caruso. Frankfurt am Main/Berlin/Bern/New
  York/Oxford/Wien: Peter Lang, 2002.
      , Luis M. Carvalho, Antonio C. Correia, Ana I. Madeira, and Jorge do
  O. Educational Knowledge and its Circulation: Historical and Comparative

[p. 252] [PDF page 270]

Approaches of Portuguese-Speaking Countries. Cadernos Prestige, Final series
   (5/7): Lisboas Bduea, 2003.
        , Mare Depaepe, Erwin V. Johanningmeier, and Diana S. Arango, eds. Para
   uma Historia da Educagao Colonial/Hacia una Historia de la Educacion Colo-
   nial. Porto: Sociedade Portuguesa de Ciéncias da Educacao y Educa, 1966.
        , and Thomas S. Popkewitz, eds., Reformas Educativas e Formacao de Pro-
   fessores. Lisboa: Educa, 1992.
——, and Jiilio Ruiz Berrio, eds. A Hist6ria da Educagao em Espanha e Portu-
   gal: Investigacoes e Actividades. Lisboa: Sociedade Portuguesa de Ciencias da
   Educagao, 1993.
        , and Jiirgen Schriewer, eds. A Difuséo Mundial da Escola: Alunos, Profes-
   sores, Curriculo, Pedagogia. Lisboa: Educa, 2000.
        , and Tali Yariv-Mashal. “Comparative Research in Education: A Mode
   of Governance or a Historical Journey?.” Comparative Education 39, no. 4
   (2003): 423-38.
Nubiola, Jaime, and Beatriz Sierra. “La recepcién de Dewey en Espana y Latinoa-
   mérica.” Utopia y praxis latinoamericana 6 (2001).
Nunez Prieto, Ivan. “El Pensamiento de un Actor Colectivo: Los Profesores Reformis-
   tas de 1928.” Pensamiento Educativo 34 (June 2004): 162-78 and 213.
Oelkers, Jiirgen. “Dewey in Deutschland—ein Missverstandnis. Nachwort zur
   Neuausgabe.” In John Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung. Eine Einleitung in
   die philosophische Padagogik, translated by Erich Hylla, edited by Jiirgen Oel-
   kers. Weinheim: Beltz, 2000.
         . Wie man Schule entwickelt. Eine bildungspolitische Analyse nach PISA.
   Weinheim: Beltz, 2003.
       . “Remarks on the Conceptualization of John Dewey’s Democracy and Edu-
   cation.” Lecture for the Annual John Dewey Society Symposium April 11, 2005
   AREA Meeting in Montreal.
        , and Heinz Rhyn, eds. Dewey and European Education—General Prob-
   lems and Case Studies. Special issue of Studies in Philosophy and Education
      19, nos. 1-2 (2000).
Oetinger, Friedrich. Partnerschaft. Die Aufgabe der politischen Erziehung, 3.
   Auflage. Stuttgart: Metzlersche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1953.
Ohkura, K. “Dewey and the Ambivalent Modern Japan.” In Inventing the Modern
   Self  and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Educa-
   tion, edited by T. Popkewitz New York: PalgraveMacmillan, 2005, 290.
“Open letter to all friends of The New Republic.” The New Republic (November
      ienioik:
Otchet o deiatel’nosti pedagogicheskogo obschestva [Report on the Activities of
   the Pedagogical Society]. Moscow: no publisher, 1899.
Pabst, A. “Prakticheskoe vospitanie [Practical Education],” translated by V.
   Koshevich. Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 1 (1909/10): 63-88.
Palacios, Guillermo. La Pluma y el Arado. México, D.F.: El Colegio de México,
      1992:
Pal’chinskii, V.O. Protiv kompleksnot sistemy i 0 metodach prepodavaniia voob-
   sche [Against the Complex System and on Instructional Methods in General].
   Odessa: Kabinet NOT pri sektsii gigieny Odesskoi nauchno-issledovatel’skoi
   kafedry profelakticheskoi meditsiny, 1928.
Pang, Dan. “Jin shi nian lai wo guo xuejie Duwei sixiang yanjiu pingshu [A Critical
    Account of my Country’s Scholars’ Research of the Past Ten Years on Dewey’s
   Thought].” Lilun Tantao 1 (2008): 53-57.
Passow, A. Harry. “John Dewey’s Influence on Education Around the World.”
      Teachers College Record 83, no. 3 (1982): 401-18.
Patri, Angelo. La Escuela del Porvenir. Madrid: Imprenta Ciudad Lineal, 1928.

[p. 253] [PDF page 271]

Pei Changlin., “Gexing yu chuangzaoxing—Duwei jiaoyu sixiang gei women
   de qishi [Individuality and Creativity—Insight from Dewey’s Educational
   Thought].” Qinghai Shizhuan Xuebao (Shehui Kexue) 2 (2001): 86-87.
Penaloza, Rosario Vera. “Los Jardines de Infantes y las Escuelas Nuevas.” El Mon-
    itor de la Educaci6n Comun LI:713 (1932): 86.
Pervyt Vserosstiskii s-ezd po Prosvescheniiu. Zasedanie 26-go avgusta 1918 g.
    [The First All-Russian Congress on Education. Session of August 26, 1918].
    No date, no publisher.
Pinkevich, A.P. Kratkii ocherk istorii pedagogiki [A Short Sketch of the History of
    Pedagogy]. Char’kov: Proletarii, 1930.
         . Pedagogtka. Trudovaia shkola [Pedagogy. The Production School], Part 2.
   Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1925.
Platt, B. Burning and Building: Schooling and State Formation in Japan, 1750-
    1890. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center, 2004.
         . “Japanese Childhood, Modern Childhood: The Nation-State, the School,
    and 19th Century Globalization. ” Journal of Social History 38, no. 4 (2005):
    965-85.
Pollak, Michael. “Die Rezeption Max Webers in Frankreich. Fallstudie eines Theo-
    rietransfers in den Sozialwissenschaften.” Kélner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie und
    Sozialpsychologte 38, no. 4 (1986): 670-84.
Polozhenie o edinoi trudovoi shkole Rosstiskoi Sotsialisticheskoi Federativnoi
    Sovetskot Respubliki [Decree on the Unified Production School of the Rus-
    stan Socialist Federal Soviet Republic]. Moscow: Vserossiiskii Tsentral’nyi
    Ispolnitel’nyi komitet, Narkompros po prosvescheniiu, 1918.
Ponce, Anibal. Educacton y lucha de clases. Buenos Aires: Cartago, 1984.
Popkewitz, Thomas S. Struggling for the Soul. The Politics of Schooling and the
    Construction of the Teacher. New York and London: Teachers College/Colum-
    bia University, 1998.
        ., ed. Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the
    Traveling of Pragmatism in Education. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2005.
        ., ed. “Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the
    Traveling of Pragmatism in Education—an Introduction.” In Inventing the
    Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism
    in Education, edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz. New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
   2005, 3-35.
       . “National Imaginaries, the Indigenous Foreigner, and Power: Comparative
   Educational Research.” In Discourse Formation in Comparative Education,
   edited by J. Schriewer. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 2003, 261-94.
Puig Casauranc, José Manuel. “Address delivered by Dr. José Manuel Puig Casaur-
   anc, Secretary of Public Education of Mexico, March 23, 1926, at Teachers Col-
   lege, Columbia University, New York.” México: SEP, 1926. SEP, Memoria dela
   Secretaria de Educacion Publica 1934, vol. Il. México: SEP, 1934, 539-40.
Puiggros, Adriana. Sujetos, Disciplina y Curriculum en los Origenes del Sistema
   Educativo Argentino, 1884-1916. Buenos Aires: Galerna, 1990.
        . “La Educacién Argentina Desde la Reforma Saavedra Lamcas Hasta el
   Final de la Década Infame.” In Escuela, Democracia y Orden (1916-1943),
   edited by Adriana Puiggrés. Buenos Aires: Galerna, 1992, 95.
Qi, Xingui. “Duwei dui Zhongguo de yingxiang: yi zhong pipanxing pingjia [Dew-
   ey’s Influence on China: A Critical Evaluation].” Chongqing Shizhuan Xuebao
  (Shehui Kexueban) 3 (1997): 17.                         AN       +   Beh      _
Qiao, Youhua. “Guanyu Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyu sixiang zai pingjia de ji ge
   wenti [Some Questions Concerning the Re-Evaluation of Dewey’s Pragmatist
   Educational Thought].” Dongbei Shida Xuebao (Zhexue Shehut Kexueban) 3
  (1983): 66-70.

[p. 254] [PDF page 272]

Ramirez, Rafael. “El gran periodo constructivo del movimiento educacional de
   México surgido de la revolucion.” In Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez, tomo
   VIII, parte 2. Jalapa, Veracruz: Gobierno del Estado de Veracruz, Direccion
   general de educaci6n popular, 1968.
       _ Los nuevos rumbos de la diddctica, Rafael Ramirez y la Escuela Rural
   Mexicana. México: SEP, 1986.
Rappleye, Jeremy. Educational Policy Transfer in an Era of Globalization: The-
   ory—-History-Comparison. Frankfurt am Main, Berlin: Peter Lang, forthcom-
   ing 2011.
PReocma srednei shkoly [The Reform of the High School],” (author unknown).
   Russkaia shkola [Russian School] 5/6 (1915): 78-85.
Rezoliutsiia Pervogo Vserossiiskogo s-ezda po voprosam narodnogo obrazovaniia
   s 22 dekabriia 1913 po 3 ianvaria 1914 goda [Resolution of the First All-Rus-
   sian Congress on National Education from December 22, 1913 through Janu-
   ary 3, 1914]. St. Petersburg: Kommercheskaia skoropechatnia, 1914.
Rockwell, Elsie. “Schools of the Revolution: Enacting and Contesting State Forms
   in Tlaxcala, 1910-1930.” In Everyday Forms of State Formation: Revolution
   and the Negotiation of Rule in Modern Mexico, edited by Gilbert Joseph and
   Daniel Nugent. Durham and London: Duke University Press, 1994.
         . Hacer Escuela, Hacer Estado: Las Reformas Posrevolucionarias Vistas
   desde Tlaxcala. Zamora: El Colegio de Michoacan, 2007.
Roldan Vera, Eugenia. The British Book Trade and Spanish American Indepen-
   dence—Education and Knowledge Transmission in Transcontinental Perspec-
    tive. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003.
Rorty, Richard. Esperanza o Conocimiento. Una Introduccion al Pragmatismo.
   México: F.C.E., 2001.
Ross, Dorothy. “American Social Science and the Idea of Progress.” In The Author-
    ity of Experts. Studies in History and Theory, edited by Thomas L. Haskell.
    Indiana: University Press, 1984, 157-78.
Rubinstein, M.M. “Da’ltonskii plan i trudovaia shkola [Dalton Plan and the Pro-
    duction School].” In Trudovaia shkola v svete istorii t sovremennosti [The Pro-
    duction School in the Past and in the Present], edited by M.M. Rubenstein.
    Leningrad: Seiatel’, 1925, 182-202.
Rittenauer, I. and B. Schiff. S. T. Schatzkij: Ausgewahlte padagogische Schriften
    [S.T. Shatskit: Selected Educational Writings]. Heidelberg: Quelle & Meyer, °
    LOZA0%
Ryan, Alan. John Dewey and the High Tide of American Liberalism. New York
    and London: W.W. Norton & Co, 1995.
Saenz, Moisés. Carapan. Morelia: Talleres Linotipograficos, 1969.
          . Antologia de Moisés Saenz. México: Oasis, 1970.
Sahlin-Andersson, Kerstin, and Lars Engwall. The Expansion of Management
    Knowledge. Carriers, Flows, and Sources. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
    Press, 2002.
Saito, N. “Education for Global Understanding: Learning From Dewey’s Visit to
   Japan.” Teachers College Record 105, no. 9 (2003): 1753-73.
          ., and Y. Imai. “In Search of the Public and Private: Philosophy of Education
    in Post-War Japan.” Comparative Education 40, no. 4 (2004): 584.
Salas Neumann, Emma S. El Pensamiento de Dario Salas a Través de Algunos de
   sus Escritos. Santiago, Chile: Ediciones de la Universidad de Chile, 1987.
Sanchez Correa, Elena. Padre Alberto Hurtado, S.J. La Riqueza de su Pensamiento.
  Chile, Santiago: Ediciones de la Universidad Catolica de Chile, 2005.
——., and Lucia Diaz del Valle. “El Padre Hurtado: Su Contribucién al Forta-
  lecimiento de la Educaci6n Nacional.” Pensamiento Educativo 34 (June 2004):
  321-54.

[p. 255] [PDF page 273]

Sauer, Thomas. “Der Kronberger Kreis.” In Gesellschaftspolitische Neuori-
   entierungen des Protestantismus in der Nachkriegszeit, edited by Norbert
   Friedrich and Traugott Jahnichen. Miinster: LIT, 2002, 39-62.
sae Udo. Geschichte der Vereinigten Staaten von Amerika. Stuttgart: Kroner,

Schafer, Hans Dieter. “Amerikanismus im Dritten Reich.” In Nationalsozialismus
   und Modernisierung, edited by Michael Prinz and Rainer Zitelmann. Darm-
   stadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1994.
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. Entfernte Verwandtschaft. Faschismus, Nationalsozial-
   ismus, New Deal 1933-1939. Miinchen: Hanser, 2005.
Schoenhals, Michael. “Demonising Discourse in Mao Zedong’s China: People
   vs Non-People.” Totalitartan Movements and Political Religions 8, nos. 3-4
    (2007): 465-82.
Schlaack, Susanne. Walter Lippmann und Deutschland. Realpolitische Betrach-
    tungen 1m 20. Jahrhundert. Frankfurt/Main u.a.: Peter Lang, 2004.
Schlander, Otto. “Der Einfluss von John Dewey und Hans Morgenthau auf die
    Formulierung der Re-Educationpolitik.” In Umerziehung und Wiederaufbau.
    Die Bildungspolitik der Besatzungsmdachte in Deutschland und Osterreich,
   edited by Manfred Heinemann. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1981.
Schlichte, Klaus. Der Staat in der Weltgesellschaft. Politische Herrschaft in Asien,
   Afrika und Lateinamertka. Frankfurt am Main and New York: Campus,
   2005.
Schmiederer, Rolf. Zwischen Affirmation und Reformismus. Politische Bildung in
   Westdeutschland seit 1945. Frankfurt/Main: Europaische Verlagsanstalt, 1972.
Schmitt, Carl. Der Begriff des Politischen. Text von 1932 mit einem Vorwort und
   dret Corollarien, 7. Auflage. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 2002.
Schénemann, Friedrich. Die Kunst der Massenbeeinflussung in den Vereinigten
    Staaten von Amertka. Stuttgart/Berlin/Leipzig: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt, 1924.
Schriewer, Jiirgen. “The Method of Comparison and the Need for Externalization:
    Methodological Criteria and Sociological Concepts.” In Theories and Methods
    of Comparative Education, edited by J. Schriewer in cooperation with B. Hol-
    mes. Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 1990.
          . “The Method of Comparison and the Need for Externalization.” In Theo-
   ries and Methods in Comparative Education, edited by Jiirgen Schriewer, 3"
   edition. Frankfurt am Main, Berlin: Peter Lang, 1992, 25-83.
         . “Sistema Mundial e Inter-Relacionamento de Redes: A Internacionaliza-
   cao da Educagao e o Papel da Pesquisa Comparativa.” Revista Brasileira de
   Estudos Pedagogicos 76, nos. 182/183 (1995): 241-304.
         . “Estados-Modelos e Sociedades de Referéncia: Externalizagao em Proces-
   sos de Modernizacao,” in A Difusdo Mundial da Escola, edited by A. Novoa
   and J. Schriewer. Lisboa: Educa, 2000.
         . “World-System and Interrelationship Networks: The Internationalization
   of Education and the Role of Comparative Inquiry.” In Educational Knowledge:
   Changing Relationships between the State, Civil Society, and the Educational
   Community, edited by T. Popkewitz. New York: SUNY Press, 2000, 305-43.
        . Formas de Externalizagdo no Conhecimento Educactonal. Cadernos Pres-
   tige (5). Lisboa: Educa, 2001.                                          ;
        . “Comparative Education Methodology in Transition: Towards a Science of
   Complexity?.” In Discourse Formation in Comparative Education, edited by J.
   Schriewer. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 2003, 3-52.
        . “Multiple Internationalities: The Emergence of a World-Level Ideology
   and the Persistence of Idiosyncratic World-Views.” In Transnational Intellec-
   tual Networks: Forms of Academic Knowledge and the Search for Cultural
   Identities. Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 2004, 473-533.

[p. 256] [PDF page 274]

. “Wie global ist institutionalisierte Weltbildungsprogrammatik? Neo-insti-
  tutionalistische Thesen im Licht kulturvergleichender Analysen.” In Bettina
  Heintz, Richard Miinch, and Hartmann Tyrell, eds. Weltgesellschaft—Theo-
  retische Zuginge und empirische Problemlagen. Stuttgart: Lucius and Lucius,
  2005, 415-41.
      , ed. Comparative Methodologies in the Social Sciences—Cross-Disciplinary
  Inspirations. Special issue (32) of Comparative Education 42, no. 3 (2006).
       . “ Les Mondes Multiples de l’Education: Rhétoriques Educatives Mon-
  dialisées et Cadres Socio-Culturels de la Réflexion.” In Identity, Education
  and Citizenship—Multiple Interrelations, edited by Jonas Sprogee and Thyge
  Winther-Jensen. Frankfurt am Main/Berlin/Bern/Bruxelles/New York/Oxford/
  Wien: Peter Lang, 2006, 139-63.
      . “Reference Societies and Model Constructions.” In The Public Sector in
  Transition. East Asia and the European Union Compared, edited by Joachim
  Jens Hesse, Jan-Erik Lane, and Yoichi Nishikawa. Baden-Baden: Nomos, 2007,
   85-102.
       ., and Marcelo Caruso, eds. Nationalerziehung und Universalmethode—
  friihe Formen schulorganisatorischer Globalisierung. Leipzig: Leipziger Uni-
  versitatsverlag, 2005.
       ., and Edwin Keiner. “Communication Patterns and Intellectual traditions
  in Educational Sciences: France and Germany.” Comparative Education Review
   Bommenii1992 005.518
      ., and Carlos Martinez. “Constructions of Internationality in Education.”
  In The Global Politics of Educational Borrowing and Lending, edited by Gita
  Steiner-Khamsi. New York: Teachers College Press, Columbia University,
  2004.
Schulte, Barbara, ed. Transfer Lokalisiert: Konzepte, Akteure, Kontexte. Leipzig:
   Leipziger Universitatsverlag, 2006.
Schumacher, Frank. Kalter Krieg und Propaganda. Die USA, der Kampf um die
    Weltmeinung und die ideelle Westbindung der Bundesrepublik Deutschland,
    1945-1955. Trier: Wissenschaftliche Verlag, 2000.
Schwentker, Wolfgang. Max Weber in Japan—Eine Untersuchung zur Wirkungs-
   geschichte 1905-1995. Tiibingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1998.
Seideman, David. The New Republic. A Voice of Modern Liberalism. New York:
   Praeger Publishers, 1984.
Shatskii, $.T. “Detskii trud i novye puti [Child Labour and new Approaches].”
   Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education| 6 (1907/08): 47-56.
        . “Opyt primeneniia programm GUS v shkolach pervoi stupeni [The Appli-
   cation of the GUS-Programs in Primary Schools].” Narodnoe Prosveschenie
    [National Education] 10/11 (1925): 121-23.
        .. A.U. Zelenko, and N.J. Kazimirov. “Deti—rabotniki buduschego [Chil-
    dren—Working People of Tomorrow].” Moscow: no publisher, 1906.
Shibata, M. Japan and Germany under the US Occupation: A Comparative Analy-
   sis of Post-war Education Reform. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2005. —
Shimizu, K. Research on John Dewey (J. Dyuui Kenkyuu]. Tokyo: Bundou Shobo,
      170:
Shinya, Y. Ji#jo Chugakko no Seiritsu [The Formation of Secondary Schools in the
   Meri Era]. Fukuoka: Kyushu Daigaku Shuppankai, 1997.
Shu, Xincheng. “Zhongxue zhiye zhidao de xianjue wenti [Preconditions for Voca-
   tional Guidance at the Middle School].” Jiaoyu Zazhi 17, no. 1 (1925): 1-6.
Shul’gin, V.N. “Detskaia Kommuna [The Children’s Commune].” Narodnoe Pros-
      veschenie [National Education| 23-25 (1918): 6.
         . “Shkoly buduschego [Schools of Tomorrow] by J. Dewey & E. Dewey.”
      Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 19 (1918): 15-16.

[p. 257] [PDF page 275]

: “Obschestvennaia rabota v shkole [Public Work in School].” Narodnoe
   Prosveschenie |National Education| 10/11 (1925): 125-27.
       - Osnounye voprosy sotsia’nogo vospitania [The Main Questions of Social
 ; Education]. Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1925.
Silva, Vivian B. Historia das Leituras para Professores: Um Estudo da Producdo e
    Circulagdo de Saberes Especializados nos “Manuais Pedagogicos” Brasileiros
   (1930-1971). Sao Paulo: Dissert. (Mest.) Feusp., 2001.
       - “Saberes em Viagem nos Manuais Pedagogicos: Construgdes da Escola em
   Portugal e no Brasil (1870-1970).” Revista Brasileira de Educacao 12, no. 35
   (2007): 268-76.
       ., and Antonio C. Correia, “Saberes em viagem nos manuais pedagdogicos
   (Portugal-Brasil),” Cadernos de Pesquisa 34, no. 123 (2004): 613-32.
Simonoy, I.S., and N.V. Chekhov. Dal’tonplan v russkoi shkole [The Daltan Plan
   in the Russian School]. Leningrad: Brockhaus-Ethron, 1924.
Smelser, Neil J. “Internationalization of Social Science Knowledge.” American
   Behavioral Scientist 35, no. 1 (1991): 65-91.
Smith, W. Confucianism in Modern Japan: A Study of Conservatism in Japanese
   Intellectual History. Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1959.
Sokolov, P. Istoriia pedagogicheskikh sistem [History of Pedagogical Systems]. St.
   Petersburg: O.V. Bogdanova, 1913.
Song Zhirun, and Chen Xiaoping. “Cong Duwei de jiaoyu sixiang kan woguo de
   jiaoyu gaige [On the Reform of Education in China from the Angle of Dewey‘s
   Thought of Education].” Chuangxin 4 (2009): 13-15; 31.
Stegewerns,   D. “Yoshino   Sakuzo: The Isolated Figurehead of the Taisho Gener-
    ation.” In Nationalism and Internationalism in Imperial Japan: Autonomy,
    Asian Brotherhood, or World Citizenship?, edited by D. Stegewerns. London
    and New York: Routledge Curzon, 2003.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. “Transferring Education, Displacing Reforms,” 5) in Discourse
    Formation in Comparative Education, edited by J. Schriewer. Frankfurt/M:
    Peter Lang, 2000, 158.
         ., ed. The Global Politics of Educational Borrowing and Lending. New
    York: Teachers College Press, Columbia University, 2004.
         ., and Ines Stolpe. Educational Import: Local Encounters with Global
    Forces in Mongolia. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
Stephan, Nancy Leys. The Hour of Eugenics: Race, Gender, and Nation tn Latin
    America. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1991.
Stern, Alexandra Minna. “From Mestizophilia to Biotypology: Racialization and
   Science in Mexico 1920-1960.” In Race and Nation in Modern Latin-America,
   edited by N. Applebaum, et al. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
   2003, 187-210.
Stichweh, Rudolf. Die Weltgesellschaft. Soziologische Analysen. Frankfurt am
   Main: Suhrkamp, 2000.
Strang, David, and John W. Meyer. “Institutional Conditions for Diffusion,” The-
   ory and Society 22 (1993): 487-S11.
Sugiura, H. ed. Nihon no sengo kyoiku to Dewey [Dewey and Postwar Japanese
   Education]. Tokyo: Sekai Shiso Sha, 1998.
Sun, Jianjiang. “Duwei ‘Ertong Benweilun’ jiqi yu Zhongguo ertong wenxue de
   guanxi [Dewey’s ‘The Child as the Center’ and Its Relationship with Chinese
   Children’s Literature].” Yurrtan Shehut Kexue (1995): 89-94.
Sun, Yuecai. “Duwei de duoyuanlun ziyouguan—Jian lun dui shiyongzhuyi de
   pingjia wenti [Dewey’s View on Pluralistic Freedom—Discussing Critical Ques-
   tions of Pragmatism].” Shehui Kexue 4 (1985): 52-54, 13.                 .
Swale, A. The Political Thought of Mort Arinori: A Study in Mert Conservatism.
   Surrey: Curazon Press, 2000.

[p. 258] [PDF page 276]

Tan, Sor-hoon. “China’s Pragmatist Experiment in Democracy: Hu Shih‘s Pragma-
   tism and Dewey‘s Influence in China.” Metaphilosophy 1/2 (2004): 51-52.
         . Confucian Democracy:          A Deweyan     Reconstruction.   Albany, NY: State
   University of New York Press, 2004.
       ed. Challenging Citizenship: Group Membership and Cultural Identity in
   a Global Age. Hampshire, UK: Ashgate Publishing, 2005S.
       , and John Whalen-Bridge, eds. Democracy as Culture: Deweyan Pragma-
   tism in a Globalizing World. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
   2008.
Taylor, Charles.       A Secular Age. Cambridge and London: The Belknap Press of
   Harvard University Press, 2007.
 Tedesco, Juan Carlos. Educacién y Sociedad en la Argentina (1880-1945). Bue-
   nos Aires: Solar, 1986.
Teran, Juan B. Espiritualizar Nuestra Escuela. La Instrucci6n Primaria Argentina
   en 1931. Buenos Aires: Libreria del Colegio, 1932.
Teran,    Oscar.     “Anibal   Ponce   o el Marxismo    sin Nacion.”     In En    Busca   de la
   Ideologia Argentina, edited by O. Teran. Buenos Aires: Catalogos, 1986.
Terasaki, Masao, et al. Oyatot Kyoshi Emil Hausknecht no Keukyu. Tokyo: Uni-
   versity of Tokyo Press, 1989.
Terrén de Ferro, Maria Delia. Historia de la Instruccit6n Publica en la Argentina,
    1916-1930. Formas Institucionalizadas de Ensenanza. Buenos Aires: Ediciones
   Universidad del Salvador, 1996.
Thomas, George M., John W. Meyer, Francisco O. Ramirez, and John Boli. Instt-
   tutional Structure—Constituting State, Society, and the Individual. Newbury
   Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1987.
Thompson, Martyn P. “Reception Theory and the Interpretation of Historical
   Meaning.” History and Theory 32 (1993): 248-72.
Time. “Dewey Stands Firm.” (21 August 1944).
Time. “Readers” Letters.” (11 September 1944).
Tong Dezhi. “Xin jiu ziyouzhuyi-Duwei yu ziyouzhuyi de lilun zhuanxing [Old
   and New Liberalism—Dewey and the Transformation of Liberalist Theory].”
   Zhejiang Xuekan 5 (2005): 116-20.
Tonnies, Ferdinand. Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft. Grundbegriffe der reinen
      Soztologie. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft,          1979.
Torres Hernandez, Rosa Maria. “Influencia de la teoria pedagégica de John Dewey
   en los periodos presidenciales de Plutarco Elias Calles y el Maximato, 1924-
      1934.” (Doctoral diss., UNAM,        México, 1997).
Trohler, Daniel. “The Global Community, Religion, and Education: The Moder-
   nity of Dewey’s Social Philosophy.” Studies in Philosophy of Education 19
      (2000): 179.
        . “The Discourse of German Geisteswissenschaftliche Padagogik—A Con-
   textual Reconstruction.” Paedagogica Historica 39, no. 6 (2003): 759-78.
        . “Langue as Homeland: The Genevan Reception of Dewey in the Challenge
   of Modernity.” in Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities
   and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education, edited by Thomas S. Popkewitz.
   New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, 68.
        . “The ‘Kingdom of God on Earth’ and Early Chicago Pragmatism.” Educa-
   tional Theory 56, no. 1 (2006): 98.
Tschurenev, Jana. Imperial Experiments in Education: Monitorial Schooling in
   India, 1789-1835. PhD diss., Humboldt University, Berlin, 2009.
Tsuchimochi, G. Education Reform in Postwar Japan: The 1946 U.S. Education
   Mission, Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1993.
Tsurumi, Kazuko. Amerika kokumiset no kenkyu—Dyui no Amerkia kokumin-
   set hithan no hitotsu sokumen |Research on American National Character: An

[p. 259] [PDF page 277]

Aspect of Dewey's Criticism of American National Character]. Tokyo: Taiheiy
   Kyokai Shuppanbu, 1944.
Vander wood, Paul J. “Explaining the Mexican Revolution.” In The Revolutionary
   Process in Mexico: Essays on Political and Social Change, 1880-1940, edited
   by O. Rodriguez and E. Jaime. Los Angeles: UCLA Latin American Center,
   1990, 97-114.
Vasconcelos, José. De Robinson a Odiseo: Pedagogia estructurativa. Madrid:
   Aguilar, 1935.
       - “Historia del pensamiento filos6fico” (1935). In Obras completas 4. Méx-
   ico: Libreros Mexicanos Unidos, 1957.
       . “Examen de algunas doctrinas pedagégicas contemporaneas: El peligro de
   Dewey.” In Politica Educativa de la Revolucion (1910-1940, edited by Guada-
    lupe Montroy Huitr6én. México: SEP, 1985, 71-78.
Velasco, Jesus. “Reading Mexico, Understanding the United States: American
    Transnational Intellectuals in the 1920s and 1990s.” Journal of American His-
    tory 86, no. 2 (1999): 641-67.
Ventsel’, K.N. Bor’ba za svobodnuiu shkolu [The Struggle for a Free School]. Mos-
    cow: A. P. Pechkovskogo, 1906.
        . “Rol truda v shkole buduschego [The Function of Work in the School of
    the Future].” Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 1 (1907/1908): 44-52.
        . Kak sozdat’ svobodnuiu shkolu (Dom svobodnogo rebenka). [How to
    Found a Free School (House of the Free Child)]. Moscow: I. N. Kushnerev i K°,
   1908.
       . “Ideal’naia shkola buduschego i sposoby ee osuschestvleniia [The Ideal
   School of the Future and the Means for its Realization].” Svobodnoe vospitanie
   [Free Education] 8 (1908/1909): 1-28; 9: 19-44.
         . Personal archive, including the memoirs of his work of 1912-1915. Archi-
    val fond 23, opis’ [file] 1. edinitsa khranentia [depository] 13. Moscow: Scien-
   tific Archive of the Russian Academy of Education (SARAE).
         . “Otdelenie shkoly ot gosudarstva [The Separation of School and State].”
   Svobodnoe vospitante |Free Education] 6 (1916/17): 1-18.
         . “Sovremennyi moment i svobodnoe vospitanie [The Current Moment and
    Free Education].” Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 1-3 (1918): 13-18.
Vogt, Peter. Pragmatismus und Faschismus. Kreativitat und Kontingenz in der
   Moderne. Weilerswist: Velbriick Wissenschaft, 2002.
Wallas, Graham. The Great Society. A Psychological Analysis. New York: Mac-
   millan, 1914.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. World Systems Analysis. Durham and London: Duke Uni-
   versity Press, 2004.
Wang, (Jessica) Ching-Sze. John Dewey in China. To Teach and to Learn. Albany,
   NY: State University of New York Press, 2007.
Wang, Maozu. “Jiaoyu shang shiyongzhuyi zhi weizhi [The Position of Pragmatism
   in Education].” Jiaoyu Zazhi 12, no. 7 (1920): 4.
Wang, Peixiong. “Duwei zhiye jiaoyu sixiang shuping [Comments on Dewey’s
   Vocational Education Thinking].” Byjiao Jiaoyu Yanjiu 5S (1984): 45.
        . “Duwei jiaoyu gaigeguan fawei [Some Small Points about Dewey’s View on
   Educational Reform].” Bryjiao Jiaoyu Yanjiu 5 (1986): 44-49.
Wang, Tianyi. “Duwei jiaoyu sixiang tanjiu [Exploring Dewey’s Educational
   Thought].” Beijing Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Shehui Kexueban) 3 (1982): 74.
Wang, Y. C. “Intellectuals and Society in China 1860-1949.” Comparative Studies
   in Society and History 3, no. 4 (1961): 410.
Watnabe, H. “‘They are Almost the Same as the Ancient Three Dynasties’: The
   West as Seen Through Confucian Eyes in Nineteenth-Century Japan.” In Cov-
   fucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity, edited by Wei-Ming, 119-31.

[p. 260] [PDF page 278]

Watanabe, Yasuhiro. Natorupu to Dyui [Natrop or Dewey?]. Tokyo: Bunkyo
   Shoin, 1924.
Wei-ming. Confucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity: Moral Education and
   Economic Culture in Japan and the Four Mini-Dragons. Cambridge: Harvard
   University Press, 1996.
Wei Cai. “Duwei bixia de ‘jingyan’ dui youeryuan jiaoxue de qishi [Inspiration
   from Dewey’s ‘Experience’ for Kindergarten Pedagogy].” Kejiao Wenhut
   (Zhongxunkan) 1 (2009): 124-25.
Wei Xuefang. “Cong Duwei zhiye jiaoyu sixiang fansi wo guo dangqian zhiye
   jiaoyu [Reflecting on Our Country’s Present Vocational Education through
   Dewey’s Vocational Educational Thought].” Guangxi Jiaoyu Xueyuan Xuebao
   6 (2007): 156.
Werner, Michael, and Bénédicte Zimmermann, eds. De la comparaison a l’histotre
   crotsée. Paris: Seuil, 2004.
Westbrook, Robert. John Dewey and American Democracy. Ithaca: Cornell Uni-
   versity Press, 1991.
Whipple, Mark. “The Dewey-Lippmann Debate Today: Communication Distor-
   tions, Reflective Agency, and Participatory Democracy,” Sociological Theory
   23, no. 2 (2005): 156-78.
Wilson, Woodrow. The New Freedom. A Call for the Emancipation of the Gener-
   ous Energies of the People. New York: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1913.
Xia Dongjie, and Guo Xu. “Shilun Duwei de jiaocaiguan jiqi dui xin kecheng gaige
   de qishi [A Tentative Discussion of Dewey’s View on Teaching Material and Its
   Inspiration for the New Curriculum Reform].” Nei Mengu Shifan Daxue Xue-
   bao (Jiaoyu Kexueban) 8 (2007): 63.
Xia, Jun. “Duwei shiyongzhuyi lilun yu Zhongguo xiangcun jianshe yundong
   [Dewey’s Theory of Pragmatism and the Movement to Construct the Country-
   side in China].” Minguo Dang’an 3, 1998: 63-68.
Xirau, Joaquin. “Julian Sanz del Rio y el Krausismo Espanol.” Cuadernos Ameri-
   canos XVI (1944): 62.
Xu Bangguan. “Lun Duwei de jiaoyu jiazhi quxiang [Discussing Dewey’s Educa-
   tional Value Orientation].” Jiaoyu Yanjiu yu Shiyan 2 (1990): 38.
Xu, Chongwen. “Makesizhuyi he shiyongzhuyi: Duili haishi tiaohe?—Ping Nuo-
   fanke: ‘Dui Duwei zhexue yi ge pingjia: shtyongzhuyi tong makesizhuyi de duili’
   [Marxism and Pragmatism: Opposition or Harmony?—Reviewing Novack: ‘An -
   Appraisal of John Dewey’s Philosophy. Pragmatism versus Marxism’].” Guowat
   Shehut Kexue 2 (1978): 90-93.
Yamashita, S. “Confucianism and the Japanese State, 1904-1945.” In Confucian
   Traditions in East Asian Modernity, edited by Wei-Ming, 132-54.
Yao Jun. “Qiantan Duwei de deyu fangfa [A Preliminary Investigation of Dewey’s
   Moral Education Methods].” Xtandai Jiaoyu Kexue 1 (2009): 71.
Yu Jie. “Duwei deyu sixiang dui wo guo xiandai deyu de qishi [An Inspiration
   from Dewey’s Moral Education Thought for my Country’s Present Moral Edu-
   cation].” Kejiao Wenhui 7 (2008): 279.
Yu Kangping. “Duwei yu suzhi jiaoyu [Dewey and Quality Education].” Wenjiao
   Ziliao 3 (2008): 122-24.
Yang, Fengyin. “Duwei he Luosu de Zhongguo jindaihua fang’an [Dewey’s and
   Russell’s Programs for China’s Modernization].” Jianghuai Luntan 4 (2002):
   68-72.
Yuan, Qing. “Duwei de Zhongguo zhi xing jiqi yingxiang [Dewey in China and
      His Influence].” Jindaishi Yanjiu 2 (2001): 149.
Zhang, Fakun. “Duwei ‘Minzhuzhuyi yu Jiaoyw’ zhong de pipan jicheng wenti
   [Critical Succeeding Questions in Dewey’s ‘Democracy and Education’].” Jiaoyu
   Yanyjiu yu Shiyan 2 (1984): 89-95.

[p. 261] [PDF page 279]

Zhang Wenhai. “Duwei jiaoyu sixiang dui woguo dangdai hexie jiaoyu de qishi
   [The Implications of Dewey’s Educational Ideas for China’s Modern Harmony
   cela       a Yancheng Gongxueyuan Xuebao (Shehui Kexueban) 4 (2008):

Zhang Wu. “Xunzhao xinyang de shuguang—Kongzi yu Duwei yishu shehuixue
   sixiang bijiao [Dawn in the Search for Belief—Comparing the Art and Social
   Science Thought of Confucius and Dewey].” Kongzi Yanjiu 4 (1998): 47-56.
Zhao, Yichen. “Shiyan xiaoxue huo fushu xiaoxue yinggai zenmeyang [What
   Should Laboratory Primary Schools or Attached Primary Schools Be Like]?.”
  Jiaoyu Zazhi 21, no. 5 (1929): 1-7.
Zhong, Chengzhang. “Fandui shiyongzhuyi guandian [Against the Pragmatist Per-
   spective].” Jianghuai Luntan 5S (1963): 16-22.
Zhou Hailing. “Cong renshilun jiaodu kan Heerbate yu Duwei jiaoyu sixiang de
   fenqi [Looking at the Differences in Herbart’s and Dewey’s Educational Thought
   from an Epistemological Perspective].” Huabei Shuili Shuidian Xueyuan Xue-
   bao (Shekeban) 2 (2006): 33.
Zhou, Ye. “‘Xin Jiaoyu’ yu Zhongguo jiaoyu jindaihua [The Journal Progressive
   Education and the Modernization of Chinese Education].” Gaodeng Jiaoyu
   Yanjiu 26, no. 1 (2005): 83-84.
Zhou Zhichao, and Zhang Wenchao. “Xunqiu shehui xuyao yu ren de fazhan bing-
   zhong de jiaoyu jiazhiguan [Searching for Educational Values that Put Equal
   Stress on Society’s Needs and Individual Development].” Jiaoyu Pinglun 3
   (1990): 28-29.
Zhu Guohui, and Luo Yaocheng. “Duwei de ‘Jiaoyu wu mudi lun’ pingxi-jian tan
   woguo gaodeng jiaoyu mudi ying chuli hao de ji dui guanxi [A Critical Analy-
   sis of Dewey’s ‘Theory of Aimless Education’-—Discussing Some Relationships
   with How to Deal Well with Our Country’s Higher Education Aims].” Jilin
   Gongxueyuan Xuebao 4 (2001): 8.
Zhu Yingxue. “Mao Zedong yu Duwei deyu sixiang bijiao [A Comparison of the
   Ideas on Moral Education of Mao Zedong and Dewey].” Sanxia Xueyuan Xue-
   bao 1 (2002): 94-97.
Zhuang, Yu. “Lun jiaoyu fangzhen [Discussing the Principles of Education].”
   Jiaoyu Zazhi 4, no. 1 (1912): 1-11.
Zimmermann, Bénédicte, Claude Didry, and Peter Wagner, eds. Le travail et la
   nation. Histoire croisée de la France et de l’Allemagne. Paris: Editions de la
   Maison des Sciences de |’Homme, 1999.
Zolotarev, S.A., A.V. Golubev, and S.T. Shatskii. Trudovaia shkola [The Produc-
   tion School]. Moscow: K. L. Men’shova, 1918.
