The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Introduction
Chapter 1: Deweyan Thought Refracted Through Time and Space: Studies on the Trans-Continental Dissemination and Culture-Specific Re-Contextualization of Educational Knowledge
Jürgen Schriewer
Original print pages 1–19; PDF pages 19–37

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Book-level supplement: Foreword
========================================================================

[p. xi] [PDF page 15]

Foreword




This edition is published to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Fac-
ulty of Education at Queen’s University. A Faculty of Education at Queen’s
University was founded in 1907 and closed in 1920, but re-opened in 1966
with classes starting in 1968. Forty years later, we celebrate the position it
has attained in Canada and the world. On behalf of the Alumni Commit-
tee, friends of the Faculty and members of the education community, we are
proud to present this anniversary volume to you.
    Dr. Rosa Bruno-Jofré, former dean of the Faculty worked to cultivate
and maintain an international community of educators as part of the mis-
sion of the Faculty. The planning for this commemorative edition began
in 2007 with an invitation to a number of leading researchers to attend a
symposium about the relevance of the thought of John Dewey to education.
Queen’s University welcomed these investigators in sessions and round
tables on the subject at the beginning of 2008. The articles that are included
in this volume are based on the reflections developed at these meetings. The
contributions portray a broad geographic and cultural scope, and offer a
detailed analysis of the international circulation of the educative ideas, con-
necting well with the international dimension of the academic work.

                                     Yours in Education,
                                     Joan Jardin and John Olson
                                     Alumni Committee, Queen’s University


========================================================================
Book-level supplement: Acknowledgments and original-publication information
========================================================================

[p. xiii] [PDF page 17]

Acknowledgments
Rosa Bruno-]ofré




This volume honors the fortieth anniversary of the second founding of the
Faculty of Education at Queen’s University, which started classes in 1968
as a College of Education. It had a short life as a Faculty between 1907
and 1920, a time when the reading of Dewey was listed in the program.! In
1920, the “training” of teachers was centralized in the Ontario College of
Education affiliated with the University of Toronto. After a forty-eight-year
hiatus, the College of Education received the first cohorts of future teach-
ers in 1968. In 1971, the College became the Queen’s Faculty of Education
under the leadership of Vernon Ready. The same year, the new building for
the Faculty was named after Duncan McArthur, a historian, lawyer, and
Queen’s graduate. He chose to serve as a public intellectual who contrib-
uted in a variety of ways, from his editorship of the Queen’s Quarterly, to
his scholarly involvement with the teaching of history, to his role as Deputy
Minister of Education (1934-1940), and then Minister of Education until
his death in 1943.* As Deputy Minister of Education, and later on as Min-
ister of Education, Duncan McArthur was seen as a radical innovator who
had an understanding of the various currents in progressive education and
embraced progressive pedagogical ideas.’ Under his leadership as Deputy
Minister, the curriculum in Ontario experienced profound changes, char-
acterized by Patrice Milewski as a rupture with previous educational dis-
courses. It is then suitable to celebrate the second founding of the Faculty
evoking the work of John Dewey.
   As part of the festivities, on 27 March    2008, the Education    Alumni
Committee and the Office of the Dean organized an international panel dis-
cussion entitled “International Diffusion of Educational Ideas.” It explored
the reception of John Dewey’s ideas in various settings in Latin America,
Asia, Africa, Europe, and North America. The panelists were Rosa Bruno-
Jofré, Dean of the Faculty of Education at Queen’s University; Ana Isabel
da Camera Dias Madeira, University of Lisbon; Jeremy Rappleye, Univer-
sity of Oxford; and Jiirgen Schriewer, Humboldt University, Berlin. James
Scott Johnston, Queen’s University, served as moderator. The editors of this
volume decided to devote it to a celebration of the fortieth anniversary of
the second founding of the Faculty of Education at Queen’s University.

[p. xiv] [PDF page 18]

xiv     Acknowledgments
The Foreword, Chapters 2-7, and Chapter 9 were originally published in
Spanish in Encounters on Education/Encuentros sobre Educacion/Ren-
contres sur l’Education, 10 (Fall 2009).

Chapter 8 was originally published in Studies in Philosophy and Educa-
tion 19, 2000: 109-31. Reprinted with kind permission from Springer
Science+Business Media B.V.


NOTES

      1. See Faculty of Education, Courses of Instruction, 1907. For a history of
         Queen’s University, see Hilda Neatby, Queen’s University, vol. 1, (Kingston
         and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1978, reprinted 1986). For
         the history of the first founding see ibid., 278-80.
      2. Reginald G. Trotter, “Duncan McArthur, 1885-1943,” Proceedings of the
         Royal Society of Canada, 1944, pp. 107-09; James Kenney, “Duncan McAr-
         thur (1885-1943),” The Canadian Historical Review, 24 (1943), 449-50.
      3. See Theodore Michael Christou, “Parallel Progressivist Orientations: Explor-
         ing the Meanings of Progressive Education in Two Ontario Journals, The
         School and the Canadian School Journal, 1919-1942 (PhD diss., Queen’s
         University, Faculty of Education, 2009), Ch. viii.


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 1] [PDF page 19]

Through Time and Space
        Studies on the Trans-Continental
        Dissemination and Culture-Specific
        Re-Contextualization of Educational
        Knowledge
       Jurgen Schriewer




The international circulation of knowledge has become a prominent topic
of research over the last few decades. This prominence is certainly more
than just the outcome of disinterested research concerns. Rather, interest
 in this topic has been considerably fostered by present-day conditions of
world-societal interconnection and the concomitant motivation for investi-
gating the underlying forces, social as well as cultural, that fuel processes
of globalization.! One of the most productive strands of research in this
respect is neo-institutionalist sociology. Insistently it has emphasized the
particular role that the global diffusion of knowledge—knowledge under-
stood in a broad sense, including philosophical ideas on education, prog-
ress, and democracy as elaborated by scholars like John Dewey—has played
as a basic mechanism contributing to the construction of what authors such
as John W. Meyer have called the modern “world culture” or “world soci-
ety.”” Corresponding research, carried out in the form of cross-national and
cross-temporal analyses alike, has focused as much on the trans-national
diffusion of rules and principles making claims to universal validity—such
as ideas of progress and development, the principles of human rights and
scientific rationality, or conceptions of childhood and the individual’—as
on the cross-border   circulation   of experts,   professionals, and scholars.‘
Likewise, there are growing bodies of research devoted to investigating the
impact, by way of imitation, competition, or normative pressure, of the
models and policies, as well as the standards, rankings, and league tables
that are developed and effectively disseminated at the world level by interna-
tional organizations, be these governmental or non-governmental.’ More-
over, many of these studies—and specifically those produced by historians
and philosophers—also focus on the supporters, contents, and vehicles of
past trans-national knowledge circulation in order to elucidate the multiple

[p. 2] [PDF page 20]

interconnections between intellectual currents, national societies, or whole
civilizations that researchers have come to grasp by terms such as “nested
configurations,”® “entangled histories,”’ or “histoire croisée.”*
   From the vantage point of these bodies of research, the trans-continental
circulation of John Dewey’s philosophical-cum-educational ideas should
make for a particularly rewarding subject of study.’ In the light of neo-insti-
tutionalist assumptions,'” John Dewey does indeed represent the perfect
personification of a “traveling expert” (in view of his legendary voyages
to Japan, China, Turkey, Mexico, Russia, and South Africa) who provided
knowledge in the form of “theorized models” (regarding, in particular, the
connections between education and development and between education
and democracy). In so doing, he fully complied with essential prerequisites
for the worldwide dissemination of his ideas. Not without reason, there-
fore, have his major works been translated into numerous languages, while
he attracted students and followers from many countries to his courses at
Columbia University. Unsurprisingly, then, cross-cultural studies designed
to examine the degree and dimensions of the internationalization of edu-
cational knowledge—both academic and policy-related—have shown on
the basis of statistical analyses that John Dewey has figured, from the
1920s onwards and with renewed weight in the post-World War II era,
among the educationalist authors most frequently quoted not only in the
education journals which had the largest impact in the societies analyzed
in depth—i.e. Spain, Russia (or the Soviet Union), and China—but also
in quite definitely international reference works such as The International
Encyclopedia of Education. This is a finding which is largely borne out by
more focused analyses of the international orientation of educational stud-
ies in Western Europe and the United States."'
    Yet, by the same token, these and related studies have also shown that
trans-national flows of knowledge do not per se lead to a world-level har-
monization either of epistemic structures and conceptions of science or of |
world-views, ideologies, and attendant reform policies. In other words,
the international circulation of knowledge would be misunderstood if it
were seen as spontaneously contributing to the “semantic construction”
of world society. On the contrary, even when spanning long historical
time periods and broad regional distances, studies tracing the circulation
of bodies of theorized knowledge and corresponding models of educa-
tional organization have stimulated insights into the very interlocking of
“the dynamics of global diffusion and the mechanisms of context-specific
appropriation.”'* Insights of this kind have been facilitated by analytical
approaches that did not draw mainly—let alone exclusively—on diffusion-
ist concepts and models. Rather, the aforementioned investigations were
informed by more sophisticated sociology-of-knowledge models which
allow the comparative-historical researcher to highlight the adoptive mech-
anisms supposed to be operative in different national or cultural spaces
of discourse.   In particular,   the “externalization”   concept—which     will

[p. 3] [PDF page 21]

be taken up in some detail below—is designed to shed light on the selec-
tive reception, interpretive transformation, and subsequent appropriation,
within the educational discourses of each of the societies under study, of
those bodies of knowledge, educational models, and policy ideas that have
taken shape and have circulated at the international level. Significantly,
then, these investigations have revealed considerable fluctuations, within
each nation-specific discursive trajectory, between periods of international
openness towards, and periods of socio-centric seclusion from, interna-
tional knowledge flows. And they have also revealed—with regard to the
major reference societies, “world-views” or “world classics” constructed
by educationalists in the recipient countries—no less remarkable differ-
ences between these trajectories. Taken together, these intra-societal fluc-
tuations and cross-societal differences are revealed to be far greater than
would be compatible with neo-institutionalist assumptions of world-level
convergence or “isomorphism.” Not even the explicit inclusion of histori-
cal time-series in the aforementioned investigations showed unambiguous
trends towards trans-national convergence. What the findings did empha-
size, instead, is the fact that developmental trends, models of educational
organization, reform options and bodies of knowledge that have taken
shape at an inter- or trans-national level are refracted through frameworks
of selection and needs for interpretation that are themselves the product of,
and have been determined by, cultural, religious, political, and ideologi-
cal forces and traditions intrinsic to each of the societies—Spain, Russia
(or the Soviet Union), and China—included in the aforementioned studies.
In contrast to the potentialities offered by a merely diffusionist approach,
the sociology-of-knowledge concept of “externalization” is able not only
to reconstruct the meanings processed in educational reflection but also
to account for the linkages—mediated by changing needs for legitimiza-
tion, forward-looking orientation, and collective self-assurance—between
educational reflection theories (including the references to the international
level or classical authors embedded in these theories) and distinctive his-
torical and political settings."
    Such analyses, and the insight they generate, are echoed to some extent
by vivid debates opposing the proponents of “indigenous sociologies” to
the harbingers of a “universal social science” or, in post-colonial terms,
the supporters of the concept of “indigenous knowledge” to those accused
of “Eurocentrism”.'* Put in more general terms, analyses that, on the one
hand, emphasize the “internationalisation of social science knowledge”
quite rightly point out that all national or regional societies increasingly
experience processes of social change fuelled by scientific progress, technol-
ogy, and market-driven economic activity; that they face largely compara-
ble social, political, and ecological problems attendant on these processes;
and that, consequently, they share a similar demand for utilizable knowl-
edge and “rational” explanation.'’ On the other hand, however, historical-
comparative research on modernisation processes has convincingly shown

[p. 4] [PDF page 22]

that comparable challenges have been taken up and responded to, in differ-
ent societies, in idiosyncratic ways as a consequence of differing contextual
conditions. Likewise, one has to systematically take into account the fact
that processes of the discursive self-reflection of societal settings in general,
as well as of specific fields of social action or sub-systems of society in par-
ticular, always proceed from specific initial conditions, idiosyncratic inter-
pretations of the problems encountered, and from intellectual resources that
have developed their own self-evolutive momentum. Accordingly, while the
global diffusion of social science knowledge is increasingly fostered, to be
sure, by international science associations and institutionalized possibili-
ties of co-operation, it is at the same time a well-confirmed fact that, due
to idiosyncratic problem interpretations and semantic resources, the pro-
cesses of the reception and adoption of such knowledge are tantamount to
its transformation, appropriation, and re-contextualisation within specific
socio-cultural settings. This is all the more the case as social science knowl-
edge, unlike the knowledge generated by mathematics or the natural sci-
ences, is closely linked with vernacular or national language and the layers
of meaning embedded in, and the world views conveyed by, this language.
    It is against the foil of such findings and insights that the real scope of
this volume’s significance manifests itself. First of all, in terms of the /is-
tory of education, it carries on a line of study that has emerged in recent
years and sought to investigate the circulation of Dewey’s ideas not only
across a variety of countries with different historical, philosophical, and
political backgrounds but also in intersection with currents of thought and
related institutions such as Catholicism, Protestantism, and Confucianism.
Research has thus focused on how Dewey’s ideas were taken up and recon-
figured idiosyncratically in the building of new notions of polity and educa-
tion.'° Moreover, metaphors such as “traveling libraries,” and the phrase
“indigenous foreigner” developed by Tom Popkewitz to examine modernity
and how Dewey’s ideas have traveled trans-nationally have inspired works
by educational historians and comparativists including authors of this vol-
ume." Finally, Bruno-Jofré, Johnston, Jover, and Tréhler have advanced
the notion of “configuration” as a heuristic rather than an explanatory
tool, that “allows us to articulate spaces within which there are multiple
connections between discourses and... many of which are contradictory
but form other configurations within a larger heuristic. New configura-
tions arise out of older ones; within a configuration, new configurations
form.”'* As a concept intended to designate the result of the intersection
of multiple historical forces specific to particular spaces, the term “con-
figuration” has also been used by some of the authors of this volume to
distinguish, relate and understand various historical reception processes
and their consequences.
   In systematic terms, the aim of this volume nevertheless is not an inter-
pretation of Dewey’s multifaceted—philosophical, psychological, and edu-
cational—thought per se. Rather, by taking the international circulation,

[p. 5] [PDF page 23]

adoption, and re-contextualization of Deweyan thought as a particularly
 fruitful case, the volume deliberately concentrates on the comparative-cum-
 historical study of the highly diverse cultural traditions, socio-political
conditions, and involved intellectuals that have channeled the adoption,
 interpretation, and appropriation of Dewey’s ideas in largely different
 national and socio-economic settings. Taken together, these settings—His-
 panic America, East Asia, Lusophone Africa, as well as Western and East-
 ern Europe—provide a unique range of areas of observation and analysis.
The following chapters thus make it possible to pursue further the afore-
 mentioned comparative investigations of the degree and dimensions of the
 internationalization of educational knowledge and, in so doing, to take
 up and explore at the micro-level of one particular case a problematique
 which has emerged from broader strands of comparative and international
 research. As discussed elsewhere, this problematique follows from the very
 “interweaving of contrary currents” characteristic of contemporary world
conditions.” This means both the reiterated “local encounters with global
 forces” even at the level of everyday social life 2° and also, in more abstract
terms, the interactive simultaneity of the increasing world-level intercon-
 nection of all kinds of communication and exchange relations, on the one
 hand, and, on the other, the ongoing persistence of culture-specific adop-
tions, interpretations, and re-contextualizations of world-level forces and
challenges. Comparative-historical investigations into the extremely var-
ied reading and comprehension, in diverse socio-political and ideological
settings, of an educationalist-philosopher legitimately considered a “world
classic” are well suited to lay bare the mechanisms that again and again
give rise to this simultaneity of contrary currents.
    In methodological terms, finally, the volume links up with far-reaching
re-orientations of comparative and international research in the social and
human sciences. These imply, on the one hand, the relativization and histo-
ricization of the social scientific mainstream of comparative inquiry.*! On
the other, they imply a broadening of comparative inquiry by deliberately
taking into consideration the increasing focus, in history and the social sci-
ences alike, on the analysis of ubiquitous processes of cross-cultural trans-
fer as well as research approaches that emphasize definitely trans-societal
structures such as mega-regions, world cities, trans-national networks,
cosmopolitan elites or, in Wallersteinian terms, globally interconnected
“historical systems.”?? In all of these trans-societal movements and con-
stellations—abundant bodies of research inform us—processes of context-
bound selection and adoption have exerted a far-reaching impact. It ts
therefore a salient feature of the more comprehensive research approaches
that combine comparative inquiry proper with the perspectives of trans-
cultural relations and transfer analysis that they pay particular attention
to these processes. In so doing, numerous studies have shown that, and in
what forms, the trans-cultural transfer both of knowledge, ideas and intel-
lectual currents, and of particular organization models and problem-solving

[p. 6] [PDF page 24]

patterns is met, by the recipient cultural or national groups, with specific
reinterpretation and adaptation procedures. As a consequence, models
offered trans-culturally are, in the new environment, selected according to
prevailing interests, adapted to specific situations and needs, reinterpreted
along cultural lines, and—to historically varying degrees—transmuted into
structural re-formations.
   The world-wide dissemination of European-style institutions, the his-
tory of philosophy and the social sciences, or the spread of Western prin-
ciples of political order and state organization all provide a multitude
of examples of these adaptive procedures. Even a summary overview of
corresponding research—from the spread of nineteenth-century German
philosophy and philology throughout western Europe;* via the adoption
of Weberian sociology in different academic communities such as those
of Italy, France, the United States, Japan, or Southeast Asia;** to the gen-
esis of modern pedagogy in Japan (introduced by a Herbartian theorist
since forgotten in Germany)*>~shows that the reception of philosophical
and social theories and innovations forms an endless series of interpreta-
tions and re-interpretations, filtered by prevailing interests and channeled
into pre-existing discourse configurations. Quite the same holds true for
the selective reception, appropriation and transmutation into political-
cum-ideological arguments of Greek and Roman antiquity performed in
close connection with the divergent state- and nation-building processes of
European and North American societies. Recent research has traced these
“Multiple Antiquities—Multiple Modernities” links—as a recent book title
nicely coins it—from the eighteenth century up to the revitalization of
ancient Greek imagery in Nazi Germany.*° Likewise, the dissemination of
Western political principles and institutions throughout non-Western coun-
tries is subject to analogous processes of re-appropriation.*’ The merely for-
mally adopted institutions are interwoven with previous layers of political
behavior, social meanings, and culture-specific patterns of the exercise of°
authority and, in resultant processes of re-contextualization, change their
significance and functioning. As these and many other examples illustrate,
the researcher interested in the mechanisms of trans-cultural transfer and
reception processes has to systematically take into consideration a multi-
tude of “adaptation logics” as well as an underlying multitude of cultural
deep structures, differing styles of meaning processing, historical semantics
couched in different languages, and collective experiences sedimented in
the course of history.** Taken together, these varying adaptation logics and
culture-specific pre-conditions will inevitably result in an intricate inter-
weaving of hybridized theorizing, deviation-generating refractions, and
multiform structural re-contextualizations.
   Do theories exist that would be suited to explain such processes and
thereby provide the conceptual tools that would enable unravelment and
systematic analysis of their complexities? This question is not easy to
answer since the authoritative theory of reception does not exist. But some

[p. 7] [PDF page 25]

promising approaches certainly do which have been formulated in the con-
text of various theoretical frameworks and on the basis of diverse strands
of research. At least some of these approaches are outlined below.
    (1) One of the most prominent of these approaches is the “reception
theory” which was developed from the 1970s onwards in the field of liter-
ary studies, particularly in German-speaking Europe.” A group of leading
literary critics and literary historians—who later came to be known as the
“Constance School”—maintained that a specifically “literary history” can-
not be developed but in terms of “a history based on the aesthetics of recep-
tion.” Accordingly, from this vantage point it is the reader who is seen as
the “creator” of textual meaning in accordance with his or her individual
dispositions and who therefore occupies a central position in literary stud-
ies. This stance is based in turn on a “pragmatic” text theory as opposed
to a “substantialist” one. As Martyn P. Thomson explains, “pragmatic
theory focuses on a text as read by various readers. [ . . . ]The meaning
of a text is literally created in the act of its being read. Different readers at
the same time, the same reader at different times, and different readers at
different times will understand apparently the ‘same’ text differently. The
text has simply a potentiality for meaning. Specific meanings arise through
the text being read. And these specific meanings (Konkretisationen) will
vary according to who does the reading, at what time, where, with what
expectations, and for what purposes. The theory is pragmatic in that it
posits that the meaning of any given text varies according to the practical
circumstances in which it is read.”*° A literary “work” is therefore more
than just a written “text”; rather, it is virtually realized by a reader and the
complex interactions which the reader engenders between the text and his
individual dispositions, horizons of expectations, and these expectations’
dependency on changing historical circumstances. Accordingly, “literary
history” is conceived as the history of the successive receptions—i.e. inter-
pretive realizations of literary “works”—that take place over time.
    (ii) Another conceptual framework for a theory of reception is incorpo-
rated, albeit more implicitly, in the theory of self-referential social systems
postulated in general terms by Niklas Luhmann and developed, in his suc-
cessive works, with a view to analyzing each of the clusters of functionally
specialized communication that crystallize into specific subsystems of soct-
ety.2! Itis a basic feature of these systems that they can only continue to exist
in the form of “self-contacts.” “Self-reference” therefore implies circularity.
This also holds true for higher forms of self-reference such as intra-systemic
self-descriptions and self-interpretations which ultimately develop into
reflection theories, which are formulated within a specialized subsystem’s
communicational universe and are intended to foster its self-understanding
and self-steering. Like any form of self-reference, therefore, reflection theo-
ries developed in the context of particular sub-systems are in need of inter-
ruptions of the relations of interdependence caused by the circular nature of
the self-referential discursive process. Such interruptions typically take the

[p. 8] [PDF page 26]

form of the reflective and communicational process opening up in relation
to its external environment; for it is through the incorporation of “supple-
mentary meaning” as extractable from external points of reference that
circular self-reference becomes amenable to specification. As explicated
elsewhere with regard to the status of comparative and historical study in
the systemic self-reflection of fields such as law, politics, and education,”
typical patterns of “externalization” are the recourse to “model states”
and “world class countries,” to “world situations” or a supposed level of
“internationality” as well as, complementary to this, the recourse to “his-
torical traditions,” the “classics” of philosophical, political, or educational
thinking, and the “unfulfilled promises” purportedly embodied by the lat-
ter. Such “externalizations” and “traditionalizations,” respectively, are not
devised to produce social-scientific knowledge by means of comparative
inquiry into, or the detached historicization of, distinct cultural configura-
tions. They rather involve the evaluative interpretation of either interna-
tional or historical data, structures, figures, and issues—interpretations, in
other words, that are thought to yield arguments considered as “relevant”
in order to cope with social necessities or legitimize particular policies and
policy decisions. It is therefore not the mental attitudes of “detachment”
and “perspectivism”—which are characteristic of comparative inquiry and
historical research proper—that determine the references to tradition or to
world situations. Rather, both forms of externalization remain, in spite of
their making reference to and opening systemic self-reflection towards an
external environment,—as Luhmann once put it—“system-internal inter-
pretative acts which fail to provide reliable information on what historical
processes were really like or what is actually going on in the world. [Exter-
nalizations instead function] as floodgates which a system is induced to
open or shut according to internal necessities.”
    (iii) Valuable information on the forms and phenomena of reception is
also offered by the analyses of processes of trans-cultural transfer which ”
have increasingly emerged over the past two decades in the field of his-
tory in particular,** but also in other disciplines such as political science,
management and organization theory®’ as well as in educational studies.*°
While the considerations associated with such inquiries do not yet, as a rule,
take on the form of elaborate theories, they nevertheless include models of
processes of trans-cultural transfer which arrange and systematize them in
terms of phases and aspects: according to initial and contextual conditions
as well as mediators, media and forms of acquisition and appropriation and
ultimately also according to their historico-political effects.
   (iv) Highly instructive, finally, is the systematization of the presuppo-
sitions, social conditions, and mechanisms for the “international circula-
tion of ideas” which Pierre Bourdieu developed and elaborated in much
more specific arguments on the occasion of giving an outline of a theory of
international cultural relations.*” This model’s greater specificity lies in its
consistent pointing up of both the selectivity and the self-referential nature

[p. 9] [PDF page 27]

of the operations successively enacted in processes of reception. This holds
true, first of all, for the so-called “operations of selection.” In other words,
not every author of country “x” attracts interest in country “y”; not every
novel, book, or scholarly treatise will be translated into other languages;
and not every philosophical strand or fashion heavily acclaimed in one set-
ting will meet with much attention in another. Rather, particular texts,
authors, or philosophical strands are noted, adopted, translated, and trans-
formed into carriers of argumentative strategies suitable for legitimation of
their recipients or to strengthen their position vis-a-vis internal Opponents
and conflicting groups only to the degree that they correspond—or seem
to correspond—with intellectual-cum-political affinities and coincide—or
appear to coincide—with particular interests, prevailing paradigms, cur-
rent fashions, or ideological groups and parties in power. Likewise, the
“operations of reading and interpreting” do not, as a rule, consist in just
faithfully duplicating the original meaning of the text, book, or intellectual
group being adopted. These operations rather proceed from the potential
“multivalency” of a text;** and they actively re-create an understanding of
a text, author, or philosophy which is shaped by the recipient’s categories of
perception and appreciation, frames of thinking and criteria of evaluation,
all of which are in turn the outcome of culturally specific educational and
academic institutions, historical semantics couched in national language,
the recipient’s prior experiences and changing horizons of expectation, and
his spatio-temporal conditions, institutional constraints, and specific char-
acteristics. Between both series of operations, finally, Bourdieu posits a
third category which he terms the “operations of marking.” As indicated
by this term (marquage in French), it is operations that contribute to the
original text’s or author’s material trans-formation. In other words, they
point up the activities of social networks and institutions, mediators and
disciples, publishers and sponsors as well as the effects of the concrete pre-
sentation of translated texts or authors (in terms of formats, prices, dis-
tribution outlets, and so on). They highlight material aspects that play a
significant role in channelling the reception process and thus predetermine
the degree of its success or failure.
   Their differing disciplinary foundations and analytic scope notwith-
standing, the four approaches which seek to conceptualize the complex
process of reception have in common a series of key ideas. First of all, in
contrast to older studies assuming a purported “influence” or “impact”
upon other societies, institutional settings, or socio-cultural configura-
tions of specific organization patterns, intellectual currents or outstanding
authors, reception and adoption analyses deliberately take as their start-
ing point not the context in which the patterns or currents in question
originated, but rather the recipient’s context and this context’s willingness
or even overt need to adopt novel models and ideas.*’ Second, in parallel
with this general shift away from conventional notions of “influence” to the
more discriminating concepts of “reception” and “adoption”, a similar shift

[p. 10] [PDF page 28]

has been accomplished in the more specific field of cross-border or cross-
temporal intellectual relations. This shift has its roots in an altered under-
standing of the “text”—whether Deweyan, Weberian, or that of any other
author—and refers to a move from “substantialist” text theories to more
“pragmatic” conceptions of the text. This altered understanding implies in
turn a transition from concerns with authorial intended meanings to those
relating to the meanings created, as it were, by the reader, the adopter or
the recipient. Thirdly, at the level of social theory the emergence of the
paradigm of “self-organization” has facilitated elaboration of the theory
of self-referential social systems and has thus opened up a deeper under-
standing of the intrinsically self-referential nature of the workings of intel-
lectual networks, academic cultures, or intra-systemic reflection processes,
as well as of the deviation-generating intricacies characteristic of exchange
relations between those networks, communities, or system reflections.
Finally, one should not fail to mention the graphic metaphors that have
been coined in the framework of different models, and by different authors,
in order to highlight both the selectivity—in terms of “floodgates” (Luh-
mann) or “filters” (Schriewer and Martinez)—and the deviation-generating
power—in terms of “prism” (Bourdieu) or “refraction” (Schriewer)—of the
closely intertwined processes of reception, adoption, appropriation, and
re-contextualization.
     It is not without reason, therefore, that the comparative-historical studies
assembled in this volume are arranged under the title of “Deweyan thought
refracted through time and space.” As far as possible, these chapters seek
to make     use of the considerations of, and accumulated       insight into, the
trans-cultural transfer and reception processes summarized above. They
are definitely intended to go beyond a merely diffusionist stance and to
examine the culture-specific reception and appropriation processes in rela-
tion to an author considered a “world classic.” This means moving beyond
the macro-perspective of cross-national or cross-civilizational inquiry
and adopting the micro-perspective of investigating the workings of the
meaning-processing schemata involved in each specific reception process.
Historians and philosophers of education informed by developments in
comparative inquiry join comparative scholars proper in analysing the pro-
cess and characteristic forms by and in which Dewey’s ideas have gained
acceptance in different political, cultural, and social contexts. Some of the
authors also focus their interpretative tools on Dewey’s text and histori-
cally contextualize inter-textual inquiry while exploring readings of his
work through various lenses. Accordingly, the following research questions
arise and inform our studies: Why were Dewey’s works so appealing to
such different historical regions as Argentina in the inter-war period and
Russia between 1900 and 1930, among many others? How and why did
Dewey’s ideas travel the world? How did the uptake of Dewey’s ideas and
their subsequent reconfiguration relate to Dewey’s projects and ideas on
philosophy and educational theory? What was the relationship between

[p. 11] [PDF page 29]

the needs created by the expansion of capitalism across the world and what
progressive education (and Dewey’s version of it in particular) had to offer?
What was the role played by Protestant schools in the dissemination of
Dewey’s ideas? Why did oppressive regimes embrace Dewey’s pedagogical
ideas even as they were wrenched from their philosophical bearings? Why
were certain issues—such as the treatment of gender and diversity, which
might have led to a critical discussion of Dewey and of progressive edu-
cation, as well as the limits to the democratic process’s self-correction as
envisioned by Dewey—neglected in almost all recipient contexts? How and
why was Dewey’s thought “mutilated” from its foundations in pragmatism
or interpreted in various ways? What were the intellectual and ideological
configurations that mediated these readings?
    Part I of this collection is entitled “Reading Dewey in The Hispanic
American World: Legitimizing Modernization.” It opens with “The Read-
ings of John Dewey’s Work and the Intersection of Catholicism: The Cases
of the Instituci6n Libre de Ensefanza and the Thesis of Father Alberto Hur-
tado, S.J. on Dewey,” authored by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Gonzalo Jover.
The authors analyzed the international flows and the intersections and
mediations in the formation of locally rooted configurations of ideas. The
intersection of Catholicism was relevant in the two scenarios, although the
mediations were substantially different. Father Hurtado, a Chilean Jesuit
priest and graduate from Louvain University in 1935, who had an impor-
tant educational presence in Chile, did a Catholic reading to articulate
Dewey’s pedagogical thinking with transcendence. Hurtado’s reading of
Dewey, whose work was rejected by the hierarchy of the Catholic Church,
provided a way for Catholics to incorporate progressive ideas in education
in a country where those ideas were part of the secular political imagery (p.
36). The members of the Spanish Institucién Libre de Ensenanza performed
an Anti-Catholic reading of Dewey and wanted to liberate education from
religious dogmatism, but still kept a transcendental vision of the humane.
The debate on religion and the power of the Catholic Church over educa-
tion was in the background. Bruno-Jofré and Jover, who take care to create
a “dialogue” among the texts while delving into the specific political and
cultural backgrounds, argue that the pedagogical and political readings
led to “mutilated” but living readings of Dewey’s work that generated new
variants of progressive education.
   The second chapter in this part, entitled “Dewey in Argentina (1916—
1946): Tradition, Intention, and Situation in the Production of a Selec-
tive Reading,” is authored by Marcelo Caruso from Humboldt University,
Berlin, and Inés Dussel from the Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias
Sociales, Argentina. The chapter engages in a rich analysis of the political
and cultural context and its internal conflicts and tensions. The intellectual!
and political journey of the supporters of the New Education Movement,
which led to what the authors refer to as a depoliticized version of Dewey
as an educational reformer, resulted in the relationship between democracy

[p. 12] [PDF page 30]

and education being reduced to a form of “didactics.” The chapter brings
to the readers sources of the time and the teachers’ press, and also a careful
examination of the role played by the liberal and Catholic traditions in the
reading of foreign models and works. Caruso and Dussel concluded that
“tradition, intention, and situation were key determinants in configuring
a pattern of reading that marginalized Dewey’s work and, when it was
considered in educational discussions, reduced its complexity to technical
aspects of renewed pedagogies and active schools” (p. 54).
   The third chapter in Part I, entitled “Ruralizing Dewey: The American
Friend, Internal Colonization and the Action School in Post-Revolutionary
Mexico (1921-1940),” is authored by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Carlos Mar-
tinez Valle. The chapter focuses on how and to what extent Dewey’s ideas
were adopted by, and adapted to, the political and educational elite of post-
revolutionary Mexico. It provides a careful political, cultural, and socio-
economic context of reception and an examination of the various points of
entry of Dewey’s ideas, and leads the reader to a discussion of the political
and educational debates of the time that mediated the reception of inter-
national ideas. An important starting point is the notion taken from Luh-
mann that the school system is not a closed one, and that the inter-relation
among education, politics, and society transforms the meaning of the edu-
cational projects and proposals in contexts which are different from those
in which the ideas were conceived. The authors strongly relate the building
of Mexicanidad (nation building) to the incorporation, or integration, of
the rural and indigenous population within a contradictory and eclectic
modernizing project. Although the analysis of the pattern of educational
discourse moves the discussion to the various tendencies inside the Mexi-
can Secretaria de Educacion Publica, the last part of the chapter centers on
the analysis of the work of Rafael Ramirez. He was a progressive educator
within the contextual understanding of progressive education, a long-time
officer at the Ministry of Education who devoted his life to rural education’
as a Civilizing mission to develop a rural civilization.
   Part II, entitled “Reception and Appropriation Of Dewey’s Ideas In East
Asia,” includes two chapters. The first is “The Chinese Dewey: Friend,
Fiend, and Flagship” by Barbara Schulte from Lund University, Sweden.
This is a sophisticated analysis of the way Dewey was adopted, interpreted,
and transformed throughout four time periods in China: during the Repub-
lican era (1912-1949), after the Communist take-over in 1949, after Deng
Xiao-ping’s launch of the “Four Modernizations” in the 1980s, and in
present-day China. This chapter pays attention not only to the dissemina-
tion of Dewey’s ideas through his presence, his students, and his transla-
tors, but also to his public persona and his networks. As in other spaces
of reception, his ideas, the author writes, were received through a prism of
collective experiences (old and new) and through Dewey’s alliances with
Chinese friends involved in the processes of change. Schulte also points
out that Dewey was convinced that his ideas were transferrable to other

[p. 13] [PDF page 31]

cultures. This belief was in line with the desire on the part of some Chinese
to embrace something different from their own tradition, mainly democ-
racy and science. Schulte makes clear that it was not only the case of the
American philosopher loved or detested, but that the writings on Dewey
had in mind the Chinese Duwei in the ways in which his thinking had been
appropriated or critiqued. As expected, Dewey was not well accepted dur-
ing the Marxist era, on political and epistemological grounds. Of course,
Dewey’s “aimless education” was not only a wrong theory, but it was con-
strued as one that aimed at keeping workers ignorant. In the last part of the
chapter, Schulte explores the comeback of Dewey’s ideas in the 1980s and
in recent debates focusing on individuality, creativity, and talent as well as
on the slippery discourse of “quality education.”
    The second chapter is “Re-Contextualizing Foreign Influence in Japan’s
Educational History: The (Re)Reception of John Dewey,” by Jeremy Rap-
pleye of Tokyo University. The author makes a significant contribution to
the understanding of the reception in the early twentieth century and the
enthusiastic re-reception of Dewey’s ideas in the period from the end of
World War II until the early 1960s. Dewey’s visit to Japan in the spring
of 1919 at the time of the Taisho democracy movement did not then have
a major impact. The educational and intellectual scene was dominated by
traditional neo-Confucian, nativist, and German ideas. Rappleye carefully
analyzes how Dewey’s ideas were interpreted and transformed by his Japa-
nese audience and how they interacted with pre-existing knowledge tradi-
tions. Again, as happened in other recipient contexts, Dewey’s pedagogy
was separated from its pragmatic roots, not, Rappleye argues, for the sake
of the individual but rather for the sake of the nation. The chapter walks
the reader through the ideological context of World War II and moves on
to unravel what the author calls the post-war Dewey “boom” through the
examination of the intellectual, political, and ideological changes that led
to a re-definition of educational knowledge. It was a time when the liberals
emerged strong and able to promote liberal ideas, while the pre-eminence
of American ideas, including educational ones, in the post-war era is a topic
to consider. One of the fascinating arguments Rappleye follows throughout
the chapter is that Japan’s traditions regrouped and reasserted themselves
after a cultural opening. In fact, the author writes that Japan is displaying
today one of the most aggressive reassertions of traditional forces at any
time since the end of World War II.
   Part III, entitled “Dewey in the Luso-Afro-Brazilian Space,” contains one
chapter, “Diffusion-Reception Networks of Pedagogical Knowledge: The
Circulation of John Dewey’s Educational Discourse in the Luso-A fro-Brazil-
ian Space,” authored by Ana Isabel Madeira from the University of Lisbon.
The originality of this chapter resides in its attempt to clarify John Dewey’s
contribution while setting an axis for a historical-comparative approach in
the lusophone space by identifying some of the distinctive components of
the educational transfers between Portugal, Africa, and Brasil. The author

[p. 14] [PDF page 32]

acknowledges Antonio Novoa’s vision of the lusophone space as a theoreti-
cal field with its own specificity. The overall interpretation is influenced by
Thomas Popkewitz’s theoretical stand on pragmatism, particularly by his
notion of pragmatism as a cultural thesis with a rationality and articulated
conditions of possibilities that could be applied to the invention of the mod-
ern self as well as to social change. The chapter uses Popkewitz’s metaphor of
“traveling libraries” to signify, in the author’s words, “the combination and
adjustment of different pedagogical and ideological standpointss, and the
resulting intelligibility conferred onthe changing processes” (p. 152).
    Part IV, “Political and Social Contours Framing the Uptaking Of Dew-
ey’s Ideas in Western and Eastern Europe,” includes two chapters. The
first, “John Dewey and the Development of Education in Russia before
1930: Report on a Forgotten Reception” is authored by Irina Mchitarjan
from Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University, Greisfswald, Germany. The chap-
ter was originally published in Studies in Philosophy of Education and
is reprinted with permission. It examines the reception of Dewey’s work
in Russia between 1900 and 1930 and the place of his work in the peda-
gogical discussion in Russia and in the processes of educational reform.
The author provides a rich understanding of the historical and social con-
text framing of the period she analyses, including a helpful understand-
ing of the positions of A.V. Lunacharskii and N.K. Krupskaia, two Soviet
pedagogues who had great influence in various parts of the world and,
in particular, among Latin American progressive educators of the 1920s
and 1930s. Mchitarjan discusses the specificity of the reception of Dew-
ey’s ideas before 1917, at a time when his pedagogical ideas attracted the
attention of different tendencies within pedagogical reformism. In fact, the
reception of his pedagogy started in 1907. The author makes the case that
Dewey had a role as important as Kerschensteiner in the development of
the Russian educational system, by analyzing both the reception of Dewey
by the advocates of “free education” and those of a “realistic education”
and the plans of Minister of Education Pavel Ignatiev. The author explains
on philosophical and political grounds how and why after 1917 the official
pedagogues of Soviet Russia incorporated Dewey’s ideas in the construc-
tion of integrated, polytechnic work schools. Finally, the chapter provides
a crafted discussion of the political and ideological environment after 1928
that led to a rejection of Dewey’s pedagogical ideas. The alleged political
intentionality of Dewey’s writings became the lens filtering the reading
of his work. The imposition of freedom by authoritarian means was far
beyond Dewey’s understanding of education.
    The second chapter in this part is “A ‘New Republic’? The Debate
between John Dewey and Walter Lippman and its Reception in Pre-and
Postwar Germany,” authored by Norbert Grube from Zurich University
of Teacher Education. The author diligently examines through a histori-
cal lens the German reception of two different concepts of education,
people’s instruction developed by Walter Lippmann, and public education,

[p. 15] [PDF page 33]

advocated by John Dewey. The chapter leads the reader by an examination
of Lippmann’s books such as Public Opinion (1922) and The Phantom
Public (1925) and Dewey’s The Public and Its Problems (1927) and Free-
dom and Culture (1939) to explore two different concepts of democracy
that share a similar perception of modernity. The New Republic was the
stage where the Dewey-Lippmann debate was displayed. German national-
ism and Nazism, fascism in other parts of Europe, and the perceived power
of mass media and rapid social change framed the debate and influenced
the reception of their ideas before and after 1945. Both authors were con-
cerned with decreasing engagements in the ability of people to participate
in political affairs. The author discusses the proclivity to devaluate pragma-
tism in the 1920s and 1930s and the fear of American supremacy as well as
the relevance of German notions of national communities and their inter-
section with the ideas of Dewey and Lippmann. Grube then engages the
reader in a vigorous analysis of the intellectual and ideological interactions
with Dewey’s and Lippman’s views, and carefully examines the historical
context to explain how their concepts of democracy and education were
transformed and intermingled after 1945 in Germany.
   The volume closes with an Afterword entitled “Intersections, Opposi-
tions, and Configurations in the Transnational Readings of Dewey” written
by philosopher of education James Scott Johnston from Queen’s University.
Johnston makes the connection between Dewey’s texts and the texts pro-
duced by the authors. As a philosopher he responds to the questions: “What
happened to Dewey’s texts when they were read by transnationals whose
experiences were of a different place and in some cases, time; in a different
language; ina different set of political-socio-economic realities? What hap-
pened to Dewey’s texts when these readings were put into practice against
these realities?” This is a hermeneutical undertaking using three ideal types
to understand the connections: intersection (the convergence of Dewey’s
and readers’ interpretative statements posed as a hermeneutical problem),
oppositions (divergence of Dewey’s statements from subsequent readings),
and configurations (a novel understanding that Dewey’s text(s) takes). Each
of the contributing authors to this volume delineates one or other aspects of
these ideal types. In so doing, they help us to see the connections between
Dewey’s texts and subsequent uptakes.


NOTES

   1. Cf. Philip Altbach, The Knowledge Context. Comparative Perspectives on
      the Distribution of Knowledge (Albany: State University of New York Press,
     1987), or, with a special focus on education, Gita Steiner-Khamsi, ed., The
     Global Politics of Educational Borrowing and Lending (New York: Teach-
     ers College Press, Columbia University, 2004).
  2. Georg Kriicken and Gili $. Drori, eds., World Society. The Writings of John
     W. Meyer (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009).

[p. 16] [PDF page 34]

3) Cf., among others, George M. Thomas, John W. Meyer, Francisco O.
  Ramirez, and John Boli, Institutional Structure—Constituting state, soct-
  ety, and the individual (Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1987); Rob-
  ert Fiala and Audri Gordon Lanford, “Educational Ideology and the World
  Educational Revolution, 1950-1970,” Comparative Education Review 31,
  no. 3 (1987): 315-32; Colette Chabbott, Instructing Education for Devel-
  opment (New York and London: RoutledgeFalmer, 2003); Gili S.Drori,
  John W. Meyer, Francisco O. Ramirez, and Evan Schofer, Science in the
  Modern World Polity. Institutionalization and Globalization (Stanford,
  CA: Stanford University Press, 2003); and Pauli Davila and Luis Maria
  Naya, eds., Infancia, Derechos y Educacion en América Latina (Donostia:
  Erein, 2010).
 . See e.g., Kerstin Sahlin-Andersson and Lars Engwall, The Expansion of
   Management Knowledge. Carriers, Flows, and Sources (Stanford, CA: Stan-
   ford University Press, 2002); $. Diaz-Briquets and C. C. Cheney, Biomedical
   Globalization: The International Migration of Scientists (New Brunswick,
  NJ: Transaction, 2002); and Christophe Charle, Jiirgen Schriewer, and Peter
    Wagner, eds, Transnational Intellectual Networks. Forms of Academic
    Knowledge and the Search for Cultural Identities (Frankfurt am Main and
    New York: Campus, 2004).
Os John Boli and George M. Thomas, eds, Constructing World Culture. Inter-
    national Nongovernmental Organizations since 1875 (Stanford, CA: Stan-
    ford University Press, 1999).
  . See Rosa Bruno-Jofré, James Scott Johnston, Gonzalo Jover, and Daniel
    Trohler, Democracy and the Intersection of Philosophy and Traditions: The
    Readings of John Dewey’s Understanding of Democracy and Education
  (Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2010), 3-15; and
  James Scott Johnston, Afterword in this volume.
I See, e.g., Eugenia Roldan Vera, The British Book Trade and Spanish Ameri-
  can Independence—Education and Knowledge Transmission in Transconti-
  nental Perspective (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003), and Jana Tschureney, Imperial
  Experiments in Education: Monitorial Schooling in India, 1789-1835 (PhD
  diss., Humboldt University, Berlin, 2009).
 . Cf. in particular Bénédicte Zimmermann, Claude Didry and Peter Wagner,
   eds, Le travail et la nation. Histoire croisée de la France et de l’'Allemagne.
  (Paris: Editionsde la Maison des Sciences de ’Homme, 1999), as well as
  Michael Werner and Bénédicte Zimmermann, eds, De la comparaison a
  Vhistoire croisée (Paris: Seuil, 2004).
 . As demonstrated, among others, by Thomas S. Popkewitz, ed., Inventing the
  Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism
  in Education (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005)
 . We refer here to the model of “diffusion” processes outlined by David Strang
   and John W. Meyer, “Institutional conditions for diffusion,” Theory and
  Society 22 (1993), 487-511.                                             :
 . Cf. Jiirgen Schriewer and Carlos Martinez, “Constructions of Interna-
   tionality in Education,” in The Global Politics of Educational Borrowing
   and Lending, ed. Gita Steiner-Khamsi (New York: Teachers College Press,
   Columbia University, 2004), 29-53, and Edwin Keiner and Jiirgen Schriewer,
   “Erneuerung aus dem Geist der eigenen Tradition? Uber Kontinuitat und
   Wandel nationaler Denkstile in der Erziehungswissenschaft,” in Weltkultur
   und kulturelle Bedeutungswelten. Zur Globalisierung von Bildungsdts-
   kursen, ed. Jiirgen Schriewer (Frankfurt am Main and New York, Campus,
  2007), 321-348.

[p. 17] [PDF page 35]

12: Jurgen Schriewer and Marcelo Caruso, eds, Nationalerziehung und Univer-
    salmethode—friihe Formen schulorganisatorischer Globalisierung (Leipzig:
    Leipziger Universitatsverlag, 2005), in particular 7-30.
133 Cf. the analyses by Jiirgen Schriewer, “Multiple Internationalities: The Emer-
    gence of a World-Level Ideology and the Persistence of Idiosyncratic World-
    Views,” in Transnational Intellectual Networks, ed. Charle et. al., 473-533;
    as well as “Wie global ist institutionalisierte Weltbildungsprogrammatik?
    Neo-institutionalistische Thesen im Licht kulturvergleichender Analysen,”
    in Weltgesellschaft—Theoretische Zugdnge und empirische Problemlagen,
    eds. Bettina Heintz, Richard Miinch, and Hartmann Tyrell (Stuttgart: Lucius
    and Lucius, 2005), 415-41.
14. Cf., among others, Martin Albrow and Elizabeth King, eds, Globaliza-
     tion, Knowledge and Society. Readings from International Sociology
     (London etc., Sage Publications, 1990); Nikolai Genov, ed., National
     Traditions in Soctology (London etc., Sage Publications, 1989), as well
     as Michael Kuhn and Doris Weidemann, eds., Internationalization of
     the Social Sciences. Asia-Latin America—Middle East-Africa—Eurasia
     (Bielefeld: transcript, 2010).
ily. See in this sense Neil J. Smelser, “Internationalization of Social Science
     Knowledge,” American Behavioral Scientist 35, no. 1 (1991), 65-91.
16. See, e.g., Jiirgen Oelkers and Heinz Rhyn, eds., Dewey and European
     Education—General Problems and Case Studies, special issue of Studies
    in Philosophy and Education 19, nos. 1-2 (2000), as well as Rosa Bruno-
    Jofré, James Scott Johnston, Gonzalo Jover and Daniel Trohler, Democracy
    and the Intersection of Philosophy and Traditions: The Readings of John
     Dewey’s Understanding of Democracy and Education (Kingston and Mon-
    treal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2010). For the Asian context, see in
    particular Sor-hoon Tan and John Whalen-Bridge, eds, Democracy as Cul-
    ture: Deweyan Pragmatism in a Globalizing World (Albany, NY: State Uni-
    versity of New York Press, 2008); Sor-hoon Tan, Confucian Democracy: A
    Deweyan Reconstruction (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
    2004); Sor-hoon Tan, ed., Challenging Citizenship: group membership and
    cultural identity in a global age (Hampshire, UK: Ashgate Publishing, 2005)
    as well as Ching-Sze (Jessica) Wang, John Dewey in China: to Teach and to
    Learn (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2007).
 We Tom Popkewitz, ed., “Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Moder-
    nities and the traveling of pragmatism in education—an introduction,” in
    Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling
    of Pragmatism in Education, ed. Thomas S. Popkewitz (New York: Palgrave
    Macmillan, 2005), 3-35, quote p. 9.
18. Bruno-Jofré, Johnston, Jover, and Trohler, Democracy and the Intersection
    of Religion and Traditions, 4.
19: Jiirgen Schriewer, “World System and Interrelationship Networks,” in Edu-
    cational Knowledge: Changing Relationships between the State, Civil Soct-
    ety, and the Educational Community, ed. Thomas S. Popkewitz (Albany:
    State University of New York Press, 2000), 305-43.
20. As couched by Gita Steiner-Khamsi and Ines Stolpe, Educational Import:
    Local Encounters with Global Forces in Mongolia (New York: Palgrave
    Macmillan, 2006).
2 See, e.g., Comparative Methodologies in the Social Sctences—Cross-Dis-
    ciplinary Inspirations, ed. Jiirgen Schriewer, special issue (32) of Compara-
    tiveEducation 42, no. 3 (2006), especially the articles by Schriewer, Mjoset,
    Siegrist and Sachsenmaier.

[p. 18] [PDF page 36]

2m Cf. the pioneering works by Michel Espagne, Les transferts culturels franco-
       allemands (Paris: Pressses Universitaires de France, 1999) as well as, among
       others, Immanuel Wallerstein, World Systems Analysis (Durham and Lon-
       don: Duke University Press, 2004); Rudolf Stichweh, Dre Weltgesellschaft.
     Soziologische Analysen (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 2000), and Frank J.
     Lechner and John Boli, World Culture. Origins and Consequences (Oxford:
     Blackwell, 2005).
U3). See for example Michel Espagne and Michael Werner, eds, Philologiques I.
     Contribution a Uhistoire des disciplines littéraires en France et en Allemagne
       au XIXe    siécle (Paris: Editions   de la Maison    des Sciences   de Homme,
       EEX).
    24. Gabriele Cappai, Modernisierung, Wissenschaft, Demokratie: Untersu-
        chungen zur italienischen Rezeption des Werkes von Max Weber (Baden-
        Baden: Nomos, 1994); Michael Pollak, “Die Rezeption Max Webers in
        Frankreich. Fallstudie eines Theorietransfers in den Sozialwissenschaften,”
        K6élner Zeitschrift fiir Soziologie und Sozialpsychologte 38, no. 4 (1986),
        670-84; Wolfgang Schwentker, Max Weber in Japan—Eine Untersuchung
       zur Wirkungsgeschichte 1905-1995 (Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1998), and
       Detlef Kantowsky, “Die Rezeption der Hinduismus/ Buddhismus-Studie
       Max Webers in Siidasien. Ein Missverstandnis,” Archives Européennes de
       Soctologie 23, no. 2 (1982), 317-55.
    PSS Masao Terasaki and others, Oyatoi Kyoshi Emil Hausknecht no Keukyu
        (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1989). Equally informative are, e.g.,
        the essays addressing the theoretical and political adoption of Jean Piaget
        during different periods of time in France, Argentina, and Brazil, which
        are assembled in Barbara Freitag, ed., Piaget: 100 anos (Sao Paulo: Cortez
        Editoran 1997)
    26. Gabor Klaniczay, Michael Werner and Otto Gécser, eds, Multiple Antiq-
        uities—Multiple Modernities. Ancient History in Nineteenth-Century
        European Cultures (Frankfurt am Main and New York: Campus, 2011);
        Margaret Malamud, Ancient Rome and Modern America (Malden, Mass.:
        Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), and Johann Chapoutot, Le National-Socialisme et
        l’Antiquité (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2008).
    Pa. See, e.g., Bertrand Badie, L’Etat importé. Essai sur l’occidentalisation de
        l’ordre politique (Paris : Fayard, 1992), as well as Klaus Schlichte, Der Staat .
        in der Weltgesellschaft. Politische Herrschaft in Asien, Afrika und Latein-
        amerika (Frankfurt am Main and New York: Campus, 2005).
    28. Cf. Bertrand Badie, “Analyse comparative et sociologie historique,” Revue
        internationale des sciences sociales, no. 133 (August 1992), 363-72.
    BD: Cf., among others, Hans-Robert Jauss, Die Theorie der Rezeption—Riick-
        schau auf thre unerkannte Vorgeschichte. Konstanzer Universitatsreden, no.
        166 (Konstanz: Universitatsverlag Konstanz, 1987); Wolfgang Iser, Der Akt
        des Lesens: Theorie aesthetischer Wirkung (Miinchen, Fink, 4th ed. 1994),
        and Robert C. Holub, Crossing Borders—Reception Theory, Poststructur-
        alism, Deconstruction   (Madison,     Wisconsin:   The University of Wisconsin
        IP,    U2).
       - Martyn P. Thompson, “Reception Theory and the Interpretation of Histori-
         cal Meaning“, History and Theory 32 (1993), 248-272, quote p. 251.
    obi Niklas Luhmann, The Differentiation of Society, translated by Stephen Hol-
         mes and Charles Larmore (New York: Columbia University Press, 1982).
    32h Jiirgen Schriewer, “The Method of Comparison and the Need for External-
         ization,” in Theories and Methods in Comparative Education, ed. Jurgen
         Schriewer (Frankfurt am Main, Berlin: Peter Lang, 3“ edition 1992), 25-83
         as well as Jiirgen Schriewer, “Reference Societies and Model Constructions,”

[p. 19] [PDF page 37]

in The Public Sector in Transition. East Asia and the European Union Com-
   pared, eds, Joachim Jens Hesse, Jan-Erik Lane and Yoichi Nishikawa (Baden-
    Baden: Nomos, 2007), 85-102.
33. Niklas Luhmann, Politische Theorie im Wohlfabrtsstaat (Munich and
     Vienna: Olzog, 1981), quotes on p. 40 and 68.
   . Cf., among others, Michel Espagne, Les transferts culturels franco-alle-
    mands   (Paris: Presses Universitaires   de France,   1999); Matthias Middell,
    ed., Kulturtransfer und Vergleich (Leipzig: Leipziger Universitatsverlag,
    2000); Hartmut Kaelble and Jiirgen Schriewer, eds, Vergletch und Transfer
    (Frankfurt am Main and New York: Campus, 2003), and Barbara Schulte,
    ed., Transfer Lokalisiert: Konzepte, Akteure, Kontexte (Leipzig: Leipziger
    Universitatsverlag, 2006).
3). Katharina Holzinger, Helge Jorgens and Christoph Knill, eds, Transfer, Dif-
    fusion und Konvergenz von Politiken (Wiesbaden: Verlag fiir Sozialwissen-
    schaften, 2007).
BG; Gita Steiner-Khamsi, ed., The Global Politics of Educational Borrowing
    and Lending (New York and London: Teachers College Press, 2004); Linda
    Chisholm and Gita Steiner-Khamsi, eds, South-South Cooperation in Edu-
    cation and Development (New York and London: Teachers College Press;
     Cape Town: HSRC Press, 2009), and Jeremy Rappleye, Educational Policy
     Transfer in an Era of Globalization: Theory—History-Comparison (Frank-
     furt am Main, Berlin: Peter Lang, forthcoming 2011).
Bike Pierre Bourdieu, “Les conditions sociales de la circulation internationale
     des idées,” Romanistische Zeitschrift fuer Literaturgeschichte/ Cahiers
    d’Histoire des Littératures romanes 14, nos. 1-2 (1990), 1-10.
38. See for this term Martyn P. Thompson, “Reception Theory and the Interpre-
    tation of Historical Meaning,” History and Theory 32 (1993), 252.
32) This general shift has well been traced by an examination of the relevant
    research literature by Matthias Middell, “Kulturtransfer und Historische
    Komparatistik-Thesen zu ihrem Verhaltnis,” Comparativ-Letpziger Beitrage
    zur Universalgeschichte und vergleichenden Gesellschaftsforschung 10, no.
    1 (2000), 7-41.
