The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Part I
Chapter 2: The Readings of John Dewey’s Work and the Intersection of Catholicism: The Cases of the Institución Libre de Enseñanza and the Thesis of Father Alberto Hurtado, S.J. on Dewey
Rosa Bruno-Jofré; Gonzalo Jover
Original print pages 23–42; PDF pages 41–60

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 23] [PDF page 41]

2      The Readings of John Dewey’s Work
       and the Intersection of Catholicism
       The Cases of the Instituci6n Libre de
       Ensenanza and the Thesis of Father
       Alberto Hurtado, S.J. on Dewey
       Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Gonzalo Jover




In his study of the reception of John Dewey’s ideas in Spain and Spanish
America, Donoso made the point that “Dewey attracted those educators in
Latin America, as well as in Spain, who were anti-traditional in their edu-
cational practices, mostly liberal in politico-social reforms, and advocates
of secular traditions (which in many cases, meant      being anti-clerical).”!
This was to a great extent the case of the Institucién Libre de Ensenanza
(ILE) (Free Teaching Institute). The ILE was an educational organization
 which, founded by Francisco Giner de los Rios in 1876 with the aim of free-
 ing education from the state and the Catholic Church, embraced political
 liberalism, the philosophy of Karl Christian Friedrich Krause (1781-1832),
and the pedagogical ideas of Friedrich Wilhelm Froebel. At the beginning
of the twentieth century, the Institucion turned to Dewey as an inspiring
source for educational innovation and social transformation. However, the
dissemination and articulation of Dewey’s ideas in various historical spaces
did not follow a simple trajectory. The reading that Chilean Jesuit Priest
Alberto Hurtado (1901-1952) made of John Dewey in his doctoral thesis,
defended at the Catholic University of Louvain (Belgium) in 1935, provides
a compelling example. Father Hurtado read Dewey through the lenses of
the doctrine of the Catholic Church and neo-Thomism tinted by the “spirit
of Louvain” and his own vision of Catholic spirituality, his search for a
vision of the humane, and his passionate commitment to social change.*
The actual presence on the Chilean political scene of new educational
ideas and of John Dewey’s writings in the midst of social and political
upheaval provided Hurtado with a motivation for his alternative reading
of Dewey, whose ideas were not acceptable to the ecclesiastical hierarchy.’
By the same token, the Ecole de Pedagogie et de Psychologie Appliqué a

[p. 24] [PDF page 42]

Education of the Catholic University of Louvain that had been founded in
1923 provided the intellectual Catholic context.* Hurtado’s interpretation
of Dewey’s ideas reached a large audience through the articles he wrote,
public seminars, classes, and his involvement with the Colegio San Ignacio
in Santiago and the Pontificia Catholic University. Father Hurtado was a
public figure.°
   In this chapter, we explore the reading of Dewey’s work by those related
to the Institucién Libre de Ensefanza (Spain) and by Father Hurtado (Chile).
We situate the readings in relation to the political, educational, and reli-
gious ideas of the time, ideas that functioned as mediating configurations
with an unstable quality.° The intersection of Catholicism was relevant in
the two spaces although the mediations were substantially different. Both
readings purposely separated Dewey’s pedagogical thinking from his prag-
matist philosophy. However, while Father Hurtado did a Catholic reading
to articulate Dewey’s pedagogical thinking with religious transcendence,
the members of the Institucién read Dewey motivated by the desire to free
education from religious dogmatism but still kept a transcendental vision
of the human being.


INTERNATIONAL FLOWS, INTERSECTIONS AND
MEDIATIONS IN THE FORMATION OF LOCALLY
ROOTED CONFIGURATIONS OF IDEAS


Historical Contexts: Profiling the Spaces of Reception
The Institucion Libre de Ensefanza was the core of one of the most impor-
tant movements of renewal of education in Spain at the turn of the twenti-
eth century. It expounded the values of progressive liberalism in a political
and ethical sense and was related in a rather direct way to many pedagogi- —
cal projects that aimed at modernizing the educational system. Originally,
in its early days, the educational project of the Instituci6n was based on the
philosophy of Krause and the pedagogy of Froebel, influences that were
synthesized in the formula: education of the human being as human. The
philosophy of Krause had been brought to Spain in the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury by Julian Sanz del Rio. In the generations that followed, Krausism, as
the Catalan philosopher and pedagogue Joaquin Xirau wrote, became a
moral discipline that defended freedom of conscience and research rather
than a closed system. There, Xirau stated, “one can find among the mem-
bers Hegelians, Kantians, positivists . .. Catholics, freethinkers . . . It only
detested the opaque and ankylosed bones-of decadent scholasticism.”7
   The introduction of Krausism by Sanz del Rio was not a capricious deci-
sion nor a despicable sign of poor intellect as the conservative intellectual
circles, concerned with the threat to traditional values, argued. Instead,
the conditions for the reception of these ideas were there. The humanistic,

[p. 25] [PDF page 43]

mystical, and even explicit religious elements present in Krause’s harmoni-
ous rationalism made his ideas appealing to Spain.’ Solomon Lipp sum-
marized the conditions for reception well when he wrote: “[{The] Spanish
intellectual while rebelling against what they considered to be theologi-
cal dogmatism, nevertheless experienced a need to fill a spiritual vacuum.
Krausism seemed to be the answer: it represented reason, moral rectitude,
and freedom, as opposed to what these intellectuals viewed as corruption,
hypocrisy and absolutism.”? The members of the Institucién saw in the
harmonious rationalism of Krause an open door to a free and sincere reli-
giosity compatible with an open Catholicism in intimate relationship with
God and the world and with a strong sense of humanity.
   This religious attitude of the Spanish Krausists was broken by the con-
servative radicalization of the Church hierarchy during the papacy of Pius
IX, who rejected freedom of conscience and the autonomy of reason in the
Syllabus of 1864, and by the approval of the dogma of the infallibility of the
pope at the First Vatican Council that concluded in 1870. Many Krausists,
among them Giner de los Rios, who professed an anti-dogmatic Catholi-
cism, which was compatible with freedom of conscience and religious plu-
ralism, could not conciliate their trust in freedom, reason, and progress
with the position of the Church. They left the Church. Abellan underlined
the importance of this moment and its influence on subsequent generations
of Spanish intellectuals when he wrote: “The Krausist crisis is historical
because it means a crisis of the Spanish conscience. From this moment it is
not justifiable to identify Spanish thought with Catholicism for the excep-
tions were many, and in many occasions, they pertained to the highest
expressions of culture or philosophy.”'°
    Elias Diaz, in his classical study entitled La Filosofia Social del Krau-
sismo Espanol (The Social Philosophy of Spanish Krausism), stressed,
beside the moral basis discussed earlier, a political one that would also
explain the reception of the Krausist philosophy. This political basis was
the exaltation of the individual, which was coherent with the political
organicism of Spanish progressive liberalism, and the rejection of exces-
sive state intervention.!! But the political militancy of the members of the
Instituci6n was not unwavering. The skepticism of the reforms from above
held by the first members was followed in later generations by a more
favorable attitude toward political intervention, often accompanied by an
explicit closeness to socialist positions. This was the case of the two main
disseminators of Dewey’s thought, Domingo Barnés and Lorenzo Luzur-
iaga. Barnés was Sub-Secretary of Public Instruction twice, and Minister
of Public Instruction and Fine Arts for a few months during the Second
Republic that went from 1931 to 1936. As Minister, he had to enforce the
principle of secular education included in the 1931 Constitution. Luzur-
iaga belonged to the Liga de Educacion Politica (League for Political Edu-
cational) founded by José Ortega y Gasset and Manuel Azana in 1913,
and to the Escuela Nueva (New School) of Nufiez de Arenas linked to the

[p. 26] [PDF page 44]

Spanish Socialist Worker’s Party. Luzuriaga embodied the socialist idea
of a public, secular, and common school.
    The reception and reading of Dewey’s ideas were conditioned by the
history of the Institucion and its configuration of ideas deeply rooted in
Spanish and even European history. The moral humanistic background of
the first Spanish Krausists led to a smooth reading of pragmatism, to put in
terms close to the expression the Spanish thinker Eugenio D’Ors used when
he referred to the French philosopher Emile Boutroux’s reading of James.’*
Not all the members of the Institucién were equally Krausists and the influ-
ence of this philosophy lost strength toward the beginning of the twentieth
century. Nonetheless, its influence would continue to be present in the way
the Institucién approached Dewey. At the same time, the liberalism of the
first Krausists left room for a major political commitment, which in turn
favored a politically and socially oriented reading.
     Father Alberto Hurtado,   a member of the Society of Jesus, canonized
Saint by Benedict XVI in Rome in 2005, has an important place in Chile’s
imagery as a social educator committed to the poor, the education of young
people as social leaders, and the organization of workers. He was the
founder of the Hogar de Cristo (1944) for homeless children, young people,
and adults. Father Hurtado understood, in his formative years at the Uni-
versity of Louvain, the political presence of new educational ideas in Chile
and the weight of Dewey’s ideas. His reading of Dewey became part of a
complex configuration of ideas, developed in part as a response to world
views expounded by socialists, communists, and the representatives of the
Radical Party which emerged in the nineteenth century and proclaimed
“uncompromisingly liberal-democratic opinions, heightened later on by a
note of fervent anticlericalism.”'? The latter had much to do with the con-
nections between Radicals and freemasonry. Why re-orient the reading of
Dewey to a Catholic perspective?
    New educational ideas had currency in Chile in the 1920s and 1930s.
They appealed to the General Association of Teachers, which played a lead-
ing role as a collective actor in educational change between 1923 and 1928.
In 1928, Chile underwent a unique experience implementing the concepts
of the ‘new pedagogy’ into the entire public system. It lasted eight months.
The leaders of the Association were inspired by an array of educators such
as Decroly, Kerschensteiner, Dewey, Kilpatrick, Agustin Nieto Caballero,
and Marxists teachers working in Soviet Russia such as Pistrack, Pinkevich,
and Chasky.'* The changes represented a drastic ‘rupture,’ that although
short, had repercussions for the future. Meanwhile, the socio-political cri-
sis that accompanied the international economic depression of 1929 gave
life, even if for a short time (from 4 June to 13 September 1932), to the
“socialist republic of Chile.”'’ The ruptures and discontinuities were as
dramatic as they were brief. No less important, under the Radical Party,
the Constitution of 1925 separated church and state, and the government
agreed to pay the Church a subsidy. The new situation, although accepted

[p. 27] [PDF page 45]

with reluctance by the Chilean hierarchy, did not alter the place of the
Catholic Church in Chilean life.'® It is important to note that the influence
of Dewey gained pre-eminence through liberal-minded educators such as
Dario Salas (who translated Dewey’s Pedagogic Creed in 1908), Irma Salas,
and Amanda Labarca, all of whom had strong connections with the Radi-
cal Party (liberal) and with Columbia University Teachers College (New
York). Labarca developed ties with traditional Protestantism, influenced
at the time by the social gospel. Dario Salas and Amanda Labarca were
also members of the National Association of Education which advocated a
modernist reformist, yet nationalistic, agenda.'’ This approach represented
yet another reading of Dewey that was not unique to Chile, as exemplified
by the post-revolutionary Mexican educational reforms of the 1920s and
1930s. Dewey’s notion of local communities and their pedagogical interac-
tion with the greater community gave room for those articulations.
    Although the Catholic Church was traditionally allied to the conserva-
tives in Chile, progressive Catholic leaders had seen the need to address the
poverty, misery, and exploitation dominant in Chilean society. The social
teachings of popes such as Leo XIII and Pius XI had conveyed suspicion of
western economic and social arrangements and built on a Catholic com-
munitarian tradition. At the beginning of the twentieth century the social
doctrine of the Church was taught in Chile, and Christian social thought
started to inform the work of a number of leaders of the Church and their
social work. Particularly relevant here is R. P. Fernando Vives del Solar S.J.
Vives developed a social apostolate, which was not always to the liking of
traditional Chilean Catholics, the Company ofJesus, and the clergy, and had
to endure long periods of exile.'* This Jesuit had great influence on Alberto
Hurtado’s spiritual formation and his commitment to the social Christian
renewal movement that that reached a critical point in the 1930s.'”
   Between 1925 and 1936, away from Chile during his intellectual and reli-
gious formation, Alberto Hurtado maintained correspondence with Fathers
Vives, Manuel Larrain Errazuriz (future bishop of Talca), and others. He stud-
ied pedagogy at Louvain following the insinuation from the rector of the The-
ologate, Jean-Baptiste Janssens, S.J., known for his commitment to a social
apostolate.”? Not surprisingly, by the time Hurtado returned to Chile, a group
of dissidents from the old conservative party, close to the Catholic Church,
had started the Falange Nacional, the precursor of the Christian Democratic
Party which was founded in 1957. The leaders were inspired by the social
encyclicals of the Papacy and in particular by the social and political philoso-
phy of Jacques Maritain.*! They were also motivated by the need to reconcile
Catholicism with liberal modernity. Meanwhile, the notion of ‘popular front’
had reached Chile, and the alliance of the Radical, Democratic, Socialist, and
Communist parties along with the Confederation of Workers would win the
election in 1938. It was against this context that Alberto Hurtado analyzed
Dewey in his thesis entitled Le systeme pédagogique de Dewey devant les
exigences de la doctrine catholique that he defended in 1935.

[p. 28] [PDF page 46]

The Ecole de Pédagogie and the Laboratoire de Pédagogie Expérimen-
tale at the Catholic University of Louvain placed emphasis on experimental
pedagogy concerned with the neutral side of education and in particular
the teaching processes, methods, and means—educational, ends were the
domain of theology—which allowed an articulation with Catholic doc-
trines. Hurtado’s doctoral supervisor was Raymond Buyse, a student of O.
Decroly with whom he worked, traveled in the United States, and who in
1928, founded the Laboratoire.’? However, although Hurtado was as con-
cerned with scientific method as his supervisor, his interest was in line with
education as a means for individual and social transformation.”
    In 1936, he started his multi-pronged approach to realize his spiritual
apostolic vocation as a Catholic priest committed to a social gospel.** The
critical examination of Dewey’s ideas from a Catholic perspective opened
an avenue for Catholics to explore modern ideas in education. It was also
a medium for Hurtado to explore critically a vision of the humane and the
redemptive character of Christian social education in the context of moder-
nity. He understood the need to reconcile the Catholic tradition with emer-
gent ideas in education and science, and did not shy away from engaging
the notions of scientific method (articulated by Dewey as a systematic exer-
cise of empirical intelligence), democratic community, and social morality.
We will focus on Hurtado’s reading of Dewey in his doctoral thesis with
some reference to other writings.


THE READINGS

The readers of Dewey in Spain wanted to reform education and found it
imperative to challenge a Catholic Church that kept control over education.
Dewey was brought to Spain by Domingo Barnés to help establish Dewey’s
ideas as part of the conceptual tools of paidology. Domingo Barnés belonged —
to the young generation of the Institucién Libre de Ensefanza. Influenced
by Claparéde’s functional psychology, Barnés was one of the proponents of
the study of child psychology and child pedagogy (known as paidology).
Claparéde had written the introduction to a compilation of Dewey’s writ-
ings entitled L’école et l'enfant, translated by Pidoux, which is considered
the first study in French of the pedagogy of John Dewey,?5 which in turn
was partially published in Spanish in the Boletin de la Institucion Libre de
Ensenanza in 1922.*° Claparéde undertook a psycho-pedagogical reading
of Dewey centered on three characteristics: genetic, functional, and social.
He is very explicit about the separation of Dewey’s pedagogy and psychol-
ogy from pragmatism.*’ The transcription in Spanish of Claparéde read:

     Also from the pragmatic point of view, Dewey has approached the
     important field of education, and in no other place does it seem to be
     more fertile; if applied to morality and logic it raises certain difficulties,

[p. 29] [PDF page 47]

with regard to education, on the contrary, it seems to generate consen-
    sus among impartial spirits.
       But, let us leave pragmatism alone. The psycho-pedagogy of Dewey,
    even if it is its faithful expression, is not tied to the fate of this doctrine.
    Dewey himself does not mention this word in his entire educative work,
    even once and the latter could have been conceived by a psychologist
    or a biologist who would never have had a concern with theoretical
    philosophy.**          ¢

Barnés, one of the first disseminators of Dewey and pragmatism in Spain,
kept a close relationship with Claparéde and with the J.J. Rousseau Insti-
tute that Claparéde had founded in Geneva. In 1915, Barnés translated and
published in Spanish Dewey’s paper, “The School and Social Progress,””°
which was the first chapter of School and Society that Barnés translated and
prologued. The prologue is based on Claparéde’s introduction to L’école et
l'enfant. In 1926, Barnés translated and wrote the prologue for another
compilation of Dewey’s writings that he entitled La Escuela y el Nifio (The
School and the Child).*° Barnés refers here again to the characterization
made by Claparéde:

    Claparéde is right when he asserts that, even if Dewey's psycho-peda-
    gogy is a close expression of pragmatism, its fate is not tied in any way
    to the fate of that doctrine. It is curious and symptomatic that Dewey
    did not even name it in his entire philosophical work.”!

Lorenzo Luzuriaga was the second great disseminator of Dewey’s ideas
through the Instituci6n Libre de Ensefianza. In an article published in 1918
in the newspaper El Sol, in which he announces the forthcoming publica-
tion of the Spanish translation of Schools of Tomorrow, Luzuriaga stressed
the functional aspect of Dewey’s pedagogy. Later on, in the introduction
to the Spanish translation of The Child and the Curriculum, published in
1925 with the title El Nivo y el Programa Escolar, he wrote that with the
exception of Claparéde’s introduction “we do not know any other work on
Dewey’s pedagogical ideas.” He also referred once more to the three charac-
teristics indicated by Claparéde quoted previously, to which he then added:
active, vital, and mindful of the personality of the child. He supported this
reading with a reference to Kerschensteiner, with whose ideas he became
familiar in Germany in 1913: “Indeed, John Dewey can be considered one
of the creators of the modern ‘active school.’ Nobody has defended the
principle of the active school more than him. He coincided on this with
Kerschensteiner’s conception of the ‘school for work.’”**
   Those mediations were articulated with other readings and interests.
Barnés went beyond Claparéde in his social interpretation of Dewey, whose
pedagogy was social “not only because it is functional, as Claparede said,
but because of its overall characteristics.”*> Luzuriaga, who put great

[p. 30] [PDF page 48]

emphasis on the translation and circulation of Dewey’s work, went even
further in his political and social reading of Dewey.
   Father Hurtado used the same paragraph from Claparéde as Barnés did
to support, along with other sources, his thesis that Dewey’s pedagogical
system is not grounded in his pragmatic philosophy of experimentalism
(as Hurtado liked to call it), which was incompatible with the doctrine of
the Catholic Church. Claparéde also said in his introduction to L’école et
l'enfant that if we move pragmatism to psychology, it becomes conflated
with the experimental method.** Hurtado further argues that Dewey devel-
oped his pedagogical ideas before becoming a pragmatist.*» My Pedagogic
Creed has an important place in Hurtado’s analysis although he makes
reference to Dewey’s main works until 1935.
    Father Hurtado conceived the gospel as a social gospel and, as the Amer-
ican representatives of traditional Protestantism who embraced the social
gospel tradition did, he thought of a socialized religious education, and a
socialized individual. In that he coincided with modern educational aims.
However, while pragmatism did not seem to be a problem for Protestant
religious educators of the time such as George A. Coe, who fully integrated
Dewey’s ideas with the social gospel in his quest for a democracy of God,
for Hurtado, it was. He gave the priest a mediating role in the generation of
social consciousness and rejected the idea that pragmatism was at the root
of progressive education and Dewey’s theories. Dewey’s philosophical posi-
tion centered on the inevitability of uncertainty conflicted with the notion
of the Church as the depository of truth, even as freedom of conscience
was central to Hurtado’s argument. Dewey’s rejection of dualism was no
less problematic, given its centrality to the Catholic theology of the time
and often expressed in the dualistic understanding of body and soul. For
Protestant social gospellers like Coe, practice in experiencing fellowship
with the Divine whole would secure moral power to attain new ideals.
Among Protestant social gospellers, the unresolved issue of transcendence |
was somewhat smoothed by the emphasis on religious experience and by
psychological principles rooted in theories of American pragmatism.°°
    The reading that Hurtado made of Dewey was also political and was in
line with the liberal humanism of Jacques Maritain and with the Catho-
lic political and social reformist projects that sectors of the Church had
started to articulate in Chile.” Dewey provided Hurtado with a pedagogi-
cal theory aiming at social transformation and a critique of the individual-
ist character of education. Hurtado was convinced that the social problem
in Chile was an educational one.** He wrote in 1942 that in order to elevate
the Chilean people, in particular the dispossessed, to a spiritual vision of
life, one had to begin by educating the people. Education for Hurtado had
a redemptive dimension that needed to be understood in relation to his
profound vocation to reach those who suffered, the poor, and the young
as revealed in his work as founder and worker of the Hogar de Cristo. He
did not separate education from social morality, or in other words, from

[p. 31] [PDF page 49]

the duties toward fellow humans that are rooted in the Christian message
and the teaching of the Church.*? Needless to say, Hurtado’s conceptions
made him vulnerable to criticism within the Church and he was even con-
strued as the conveyor of dangerous ideas, they generated tensions within
the Company of Jesus.*°
   There are important components of Dewey’s theories that Hurtado saw
as congruent with Catholic teachings, for example, an educational process
oriented toward life (he asserted that education is life), reflective thinking,
the development of “a spirit inclined to observation,” wise scepticism of
precipitated conclusions and of “exaggerated dogmatism,”*' freedom in the
classroom, and emphasis on internal motivation. Dewey’s active and real-
istic understanding of intelligence and its power to transform reality, and
Dewey’s emphasis on the social responsibility of individuals were fruitful
insights in Hurtado’s assessment.*? He saw the value of considering the
“union of intellectual and moral life” and “the social character of any social
life,” which is not the result of a will extrinsic to the subject. Nonetheless,
 the theoretical bases underlying both principles were in his view semi-true
 (demi vraie) since they lacked the supernatural dimension.* In his view,
 moral life shouldn’t be based on a law totally extrinsic to the subject, a law
that should be obeyed because it was commanded, even if that law did not
contain an idea of justice or its raison d’étre was not evident.’ In that, his
 position is close to Dewey’s. But Hurtado developed the argument further
 in line with his Catholic faith. He wrote in his thesis that the “moral atti-
tude is an intellectual, conscious one and comes from a personal light; the
duty of the teacher is to place the child in such an environment that would
facilitate the light to become brighter and brighter.”*’ This is an interesting
point—and not too far from Dewey—since it seems to represent a challenge
to the rather dominant, conformed patterns of institutionalized Christian-
ity of the time, in which attachment to rules based on rites, prohibitions,
observances, and permissions was stressed as a means to spiritual perfec-
tion.*® But what Dewey failed to acknowledge, Hurtado said, was that that
personal internal light guiding the conscience, light of reason, moral law, is
the manifestation in humans of the order of things created by God.”
    The understanding of the role of the teacher as a guide who helped the
child to acquire more experiences and “discover the truth” was paralleled
by the conception of the teacher as representing the authority of the Church,
the state, and the family, all of whom were charged by God with the task of
educating the child. In Hurtado’s thinking, the learning practice had to be
child-centered and the subjects organized following the psychology of the
child, but there was a mediating spiritual attitude in the learning process.
Education had a spiritual dimension for Hurtado that he tried to articulate
within the parameters of the Catholic Church.
    In both cases examined here, the Spanish members of the Institucion and
the Chilean Father Hurtado, there is a mediated reading of Dewey that led
to reintegration of ideas into configurations in the making. The treatment

[p. 32] [PDF page 50]

32.   Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Gonzalo Jover
of the notions of growth, experience, and, in particular, democracy exem-
plifies the separation from Dewey’s philosophical matrix and the “impu-
rity” of the reception. Within the context of the convulsive Spanish reality
of the first decades of the twentieth century, Barnés and Luzuriaga looked
into Dewey’s writings in search of ideas to support pedagogical, social,
and political projects in the making. The historical intellectual background
led to a reading that separated pragmatism from the pedagogical theories.
Thus, this separation led to a transcendentalist reading of Dewey, in which
the notion of growth became self-realization, unfolding. This “conversion”
allowed Barnés to relate Dewey’s pedagogy with Krause’s philosophy for
which “the realization of the individual’s own essence was also an ethical
goal for that individual”** and with Rousseauistic naturalism. With refer-
ence to the latter, Barnés wrote: “When preparing children, the first goal
should be to perform their mission as human beings. And Dewey would
fully subscribe to these words, with the only proviso that humans are social
beings who can only fulfill their mission and destiny in society through
actions and reactions.””
   These readings neglect to consider Dewey’s notion that in education
there are no external goals guiding the process, essence to realize, or a des-
tiny to fulfil. As Oelkers has indicated, Dewey kept the concept of growth,
but with a radically different meaning from the one it had in previous peda-
gogical theories. He moved it away from the organic concept of growth on
one side, and from finalistic conceptions of development, on the other.°°
The distinction was clear in Chapter 5 of Democracy and Education that
was translated by Luzuriaga and published in various volumes by La Lec-
tura between 1926 and 1927.
   The reading of Dewey in Spain, and in particular in the space created by
the Institucion Libre de Ensefianza, was a political one. It is evident in the
case of Luzuriaga through his activity as director of the Revista de Peda-
gogia, in particular during the times of the Second Republic (1931-1936).
The last two works of Dewey that were published in the Revista before it
closed in 1936 were “Education and Our Present Social Problems,” a lec-
ture delivered by Dewey at the Department of Supervisors and Directors
of Instruction of the National Education Association in Minneapolis on
March 1, 1933,°' and “The Future of Liberalism,” a lecture delivered at the
twenty-fourth meeting of the American Philosophical Association in New
York City in December 1934.°?
    Nevertheless, Luzuriaga seemed to have difficulties integrating the polit-
ical reading with the pedagogical one, partly because he did not engage in
a reading of pragmatism in an attempt to build the necessary articulation.
After the Spanish Civil War (1936-1939); Luzuriaga, already in exile, sent
Dewey a signed copy of his book Historia de la Educaci6n Piblica.3 In
this book, he portrays Dewey as a distinguished champion of democratic
education in the world and, with reference to Spain, he noted that “the
first manifestations in favour of the democratization of education and of

[p. 33] [PDF page 51]

the unified school were made by the author of this book from 1914 when
he reported the movement of the German Einheitschule and continued
with the dissemination of ideas of democratic education in various periodi-
cal publications.”** Democracy refers here to the external organizational
dimension of the school system, not to the internal dimension, the work in
the classroom as a setting where the conception of democracy is actualized
as a community of inquirers as proposed by Dewey.
    Father Hurtado paid attefition in his thesis to the enactment of democracy
in the classroom that could lead to personal and social transformation. His
starting point was that new education and Dewey’s ideas on pedagogical
methods relied on discoveries of the true nature of the child.° In his view,
the democratic ideal represented a truly Christian view, since it implied
changes in social relations favoring equal opportunities and economic
equality and a tendency to overcome “what separates and destroys.”** The
notion of cooperation, dominant in progressive education and in Dewey’s
thought, as well as the thinking of democracy as an ethical ideal, come
to mind. However, Hurtado argued that Dewey’s democratic ideas were
closely related to his experimentalist philosophy, which translated into the
notion of education as the continuing reconstruction and re-organization of
experience that increased its social meaning. This conception was problem-
atic for him because it embraced a notion of growth that excluded creation
and transcendental authority. It did not leave room for a morality that was
different from the idea of the autonomous individual, and the only measure
of the consequences of our acts was the pragmatic criterion. Hurtado could
not accept this conception of democracy because it was based on a purely
human conception of society, on human work, and inserted into the social
contract with no reference to the character of natural law which was, in his
view, intrinsic to social life. Furthermore, he said that it ignored the true
aim of human life, which was to serve God.*’ A metaphysical conception of
democracy based on experimentalism could not be accepted by a Catholic;
the practical and social pedagogical principles would have required another
philosophical conception to integrate them.** Agnosticism and relativism
were Hurtado’s obvious problems when dealing with Dewey’s notion of
morality and social morality, the latter at the core of a democratic society.
The incorporation of transcendental truth collided with Dewey’s philosoph-
ical position that truth is not to be understood in absolute or ultimate terms
but rather in the more provisional sense of “warranted assertability.””” A
difficult unresolved problem arises because Hurtado saw the opportunity
to use Dewey’s methodology to help children discover the moral law, but he
needed to make room for the absolute value of truth as revealed.
    The pursuit of a progressive practice of freedom, the development of a
critical sense, and the pursuit of new experiences all contributed, in Hur-
tado’s view, to educate the conscience and develop character, and were
acceptable for a Catholic. The personal, intellectual, reasonable aspect
of our moral life has great value, Hurtado wrote, although this is often

[p. 34] [PDF page 52]

forgotten. He went further to say that the mediocre moral education of
many Catholics was based on a code of prescriptions, external to them,
rather than on the development of the intimate light that is projected over
one’s actions. The difference with Dewey is that that light of reason, which
is the moral law for Hurtado, is the manifestation to humans of the order of
things created by God.® Hurtado’s criticism of the limits of institutional-
ized spirituality is noticeable again and again. This is in line with the spirit
of Louvain and a theological renewal that would take full shape later on
with the Nouvelle Theologie.
   Dewey found resonance in Spain because his writing converged with the
aspirations dominant at the time, in particular, his ideas about educational
reform and, to some extent, the pragmatic basis of his pedagogy. In the
case of the Institucién Libre de Ensenanza, we cannot talk strictly of anti-
pragmatism. Rather, there was an ambivalent attitude. The representatives
of the Institucion, as intellectual interpreters of their time, expressed that
vital stance (to which James referred in 1906) taken by those who “want a
system that will combine both things, the scientific loyalty to facts and will-
ingness to take account of them, the spirit of adaptation and accommoda-
tion, in short, but also the old confidence in human values and the resultant
spontaneity, whether of the religious or the romantic type.”*' Pragmatism
was James’ response to the tension between what he called tender-minded
and tough-minded temperaments; “Krausist positivism,” a way to combine
rationalism and experience, was the response of the members of the Span-
ish Institucion Libre de Ensenanza.
    Within this tension, Dewey’s pragmatism is inclined toward the empiri-
cal world, and for this reason, in his mind as Rorty has pointed out, reli-
gion, contrary to James’ position, does not constitute a valid source of
knowledge.” The members of the Institucién defended a free education,
a standpoint that led to confrontations with the Catholic Church. How-.
ever, there was a substantial difference from Dewey because their peda-
gogical project implied a notion of human-hood that would unfold beyond
the given conditions. For that reason they embarked on a transcendentalist
reading of Dewey.
    The intersection of religion in Hurtado’s reading of Dewey was inevitable.
This intersection had a political and historical dimension given the history of
Chile and its people, but the reading was done from a confessional perspec-
tive with historical intentionality. For Hurtado, the separation of religion
and religious experience was another step in the direction of denying the
possibility of an intellectual and true knowledge of God (although Hurtado
acknowledged that this is an imperfect knowledge), and the negation of the
doctrines related to spirituality and the immortality of the soul. The Catholic
Church made clear that God could be known through natural reason only.
    The issue of transcendence and the status of the transcendent in social
life were at the core of the difference. Dewey was a naturalist, while Hur-
tado’s vision was theo-centric with the proviso that the supernatural was

[p. 35] [PDF page 53]

complementary to nature. Hurtado wrote articles on Dewey and also on
New Education with some variations in the mid-1930s and 1940s. When
discussing the teaching of religion in 1947, he discussed a plan that con-
tained pedagogical principles that were innovative for the Chilean Catholic
Church. The first principle was the emphasis on the dynamic and functional
components of religious truth, rather than on the static and structural com-
ponents. It was important to show the internal renewal of dogmas. The sec-
ond was to be aware of the danger of making a religious course a course on
morals based on commandments separated from theology. The practice of
life would relate to the theological principles. The third principle was that
the student be placed vis-a-vis the supernatural life which is not realized
just in heaven and was not confined to the soul. Instead, the supernatural
life was lived on earth, involved the entire being (el hombre (sic) entero) and
irradiated into social life. The fourth principle was the consideration of the
psychology of the students.** In the same article, Hurtado wrote that “A
clear understanding of the elevation of nature through grace would help
the student to see how human values, the freedom of the person, the social
 unity of the human race, can only be fully realized in the supernatural life,
 in the unity of humans (men in the original) with God.”**
    Philosopher Daniel Trohler has made the case that in Dewey’s A Com-
mon Faith, humanity forms a community that is constituted not by a
 transcendentally-based belief that we are all God’s children, but by a “mys-
 terious totality of being,” the “Universe.” Trohler goes on to say that “this
 is in line with the anthropological statement that human beings possess,
or have developed, a facility directed towards participation and sympathy,
justice, equality and freedom.”* Dewey’s “comprehensive community,”
because it overcame the dichotomy of both supranaturalism and “mechani-
calism,” met the requirements for an ideal democracy. Tréhler associates
this view with religious assumptions that were in the background of Dew-
ey’s social philosophy and that, following Tréhler’s argument, he explicitly
developed in A Common Faith. An important question here is whether
Dewey had everything he needed in his theory of experience to develop his
notion of comprehensive community. If the response is affirmative, there
would not be room for a discussion of religious assumptions.°’ It is perti-
nent to note that Hurtado saw in Dewey’s philosophy a divinization of the
humane: humans took the place of God; instead of religion, Dewey openly
places faith in the creative power of intelligence.” At first glance, there
seems to be a point of convergence between the notion of “comprehen-
sive community” as analyzed by Trohler and Hurtado’s attempt to envision
“the social unity of the human race” incorporating transcendence from a
Catholic perspective. Both perspectives imply a holistically educated per-
son. The difference, however, resided in Dewey’s rejection of metaphysical
and/or transcendental doctrines that would hinder democracy, due in part
to notions of superiority based on truth, in particular religious truth. Oth-
erwise, one would have to make a case for the transcendental character of

[p. 36] [PDF page 54]

the notion of comprehensive community as “a mystic totality,” a concept
used by Trohler.


CONCLUSION

Dewey’s ideas were often separated from their philosophical basis and inte-
grated in political, philosophical, and theological discourses, thus becom-
ing part of localized configurations of ideas. The pedagogical and political
readings led to “mutilated” but living readings of Dewey’s work that gener-
ated new variants of progressive education.
   Dewey, the author, reacted against partial readings of this writing in
Experience and Education (1938), claiming that his pedagogical ideas were
not just an ensemble of practices to be applied. The following paragraph is
illustrative:

     I think that only slight acquaintance with the history of education is
     needed to prove that educational reformers and innovators alone have
     felt the need for a philosophy of education. Those who adhered to the
     established system needed merely a few fine-sounding words to justify
     existing practices. The real work was done by habits which were so
     fixed as to be institutional. The lesson for progressive education is that
     it requires in an urgent degree, a degree more pressing than was incum-
     bent upon former innovators, a philosophy of education based upon a
     philosophy of experience.”

The issue here is that any reception of philosophical and related pedagogi-
cal ideas, given the transportation and necessary dissonances of the experi-
ences grounding those ideas, has to generate “impure” outcomes given the_
contextual configurative elements which were alien to the original formu-
lations. We can certainly say that the readings of Dewey’s writings were
“impure” in the spaces of reception we analyze here.
   The religious theme is present in the two cases we have examined. Hur-
tado’s reading of Dewey, an author rejected by the hierarchy of the Church,
provided a way for Catholics to incorporate progressive ideas in education in a
country where those ideas were part of the secular political imagery. The mem-
bers of the Institucion Libre de Enseftanza read Dewey, having as background
the debate on religion and the power of the Catholic Church over education.
The idea of transcendence in the case of Hurtado was rooted in the Catholic
spirituality and in the doctrine of the Church, in the case of the Instituci6n in
the intellectual history of Spain and of the Instituci6n itself, including early
reactions to conservative authoritarian approaches of the Catholic Church.
    Hurtado and the members of the Spanish Instituci6n made an effort to
separate Dewey’s pedagogy from its philosophical foundations. In the case
of Hurtado, it was within the notion dominant at Louvain of the separation

[p. 37] [PDF page 55]

of means from ends, although his reading was permeated by his commit-
ment to personal and social transformation and intellectual openness to
articulate ideas and educational ends. In the case of the Spanish authors,
this separation responds to the demands of a concept of education that can-
not leave aside the notion of the human being as the “only finite being able
to aspire to infinity.””°
    It is significant that as late as 1948, on the occasion of the publication
in Mexico of the Spanish version of Experience and Nature, José Gaos, a
Spanish philosopher, lamented the lack of interest in translating Dewey’s
philosophical work into Spanish. Gaos interpreted this lack of interest as a
deficiency in the Spanish-speaking world. Dewey’s pragmatism embodied
the challenge of modernity, which for Gaos was ultimately the relationship
between immanence      and transcendence.   Dewey, Gaos said, tried to deal
with the gap between these two worlds by naturalizing both human-hood
and God.”' Hurtado could not accept this solution; neither could the mem-
bers of the Instituci6n. It went too far for them. The Institucién defended
a free school. However, the proposal advanced by the Instituci6n compen-
sated for the lack of an explicit confessional foundation with a transcen-
dental vision of human-hood.
    The readings that the members of the Institucion Libre de Ensefanza
and Hurtado made of Dewey’s work unveil the difficulties in rethinking
in modern terms a concept of education rooted in centuries of tradition.
Dewey understood well these difficulties when he wrote in 1909 in The
Influence of Darwinism on Philosophy: “Old ideas give way slowly; for
they are more than abstract logical forms and categories. They are habits,
predispositions, deeply ingrained attitudes of aversion and preference.””
The two scenarios show not only that habits and belief systems set limits to
what can be integrated in a concept of education, but also the relevance of
contingent conditions in the articulation of educational theories and prac-
tices. Perhaps, education, more than any other field, illustrates that sci-
ence and modernity could not suppress what Charles Taylor construed as
“the need to articulate a sense of something fuller, deeper.”’’ The need to
rethink education a new beyond contingency and traditions would lead to
a break and to an untenable ahistorical situation.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Special thanks to Maria Josefina Silva and Maria de los Angeles, graduate
students at the Pontificia Catolica Universidad de Chile and the Universi-
dad Complutense de Madrid, who served as research assistants to Rosa
Bruno-Jofré and Gonzalo Jover and collected many of the required sources.
Many thanks, too, to Father Samuel Fernandez, Centro Alberto Hurtado,
Pontificia Universidad Catélica de Chile for his generous sharing of docu-
ments and comments.

[p. 38] [PDF page 56]

NOTES

     il Antén Donoso, “John Dewey in Spain and Spanish America.” International
        Philosophical Quarterly 41, no. 3 (2001): 357.
     Dm Samuel Fernandez, “Los Primeros Conflictos del Padre Hurtado y ‘el Espiritu
        de Lovaina,’” Teologia y Vida LI (2010), 609-26.
     oe An important point of reference is the work of Andrés Guzman Traversa and
        Cecilia Ramirez Venegas, “El Pensamiento Educational del Padre Hurtado
          en el Contexto de las Ideas Educacionales en Chile Durante la Primera Mitad
         del Siglo XX,” Un Primer Avance B. Inv. Educ. 16, Faculty of Education,
         Santiago, Chile (2001): 15—S2.
       . It is not the intention of this chapter to examine the development of psychol-
         ogy and educational theory at Louvain. See George Meuris, “Looking Back:
          The Beginnings of a Scientific Outlook in Psychology and Education The-
          ory,” International Review of Applied Psychology 34 (1985): 7-16; Mare
          Depaepe, “The Practical Professional Relevance of Educational Research
          and Pedagogical Knowledge from the Perspective of History: Reflections on
          the Belgian Case in its International Background,” European International
         Research Journal 1, no. 2 (2002): 360-79.
       . For example, Alberto Hurtado, “Psicologia Pedagégica: Formacion de un Plan
         de Vida,’Revista Cat6lica (Chile) 71, no. 821 (November 1936): 529-33;
         Alberto Hurtado, “Psicologia Pedagégica: La Formacion Intelectual Segun
         Dewey,” Revista Catélica (Chile) 71, no. 818 (October 1936); Alberto Hurtado,
         “Psicologia Pedagégica: Psico-Pedagogia de la Afectividad en la Adolescen-
          cia,” Revista Catélica (Chile) 71, no. 822 (December 1936): 578-87; Alberto
          Hurtado, “Psicologia Pedagégica: La Escuela Nueva y el Aspecto Social de la
          Educacion,” Revista Catélica (Chile) 71, no. 816 (September 1936): 217-26;
          Alberto Hurtado, “Psicologia Pedagogica: La Educacién Nueva,”          Revista
          Catolica (Chile) 71, no. 815 (August 1936): 160-69; Alberto Hurtado, Psi-
          cologia Pedagogica: La Educaci6n Nueva, Revista Catoélica (Chile) 71, no. 814
          (August 1936): 111-21; Alberto Hurtado, “Psicologia Pedagdgica: El Verda-
          dero Concepto del Amor,” Revista Catolica (Chile) 72, no. 826 (March 1937):
          100-06; Alberto Hurtado, “Psico-pedagogia de la Afectividad en la Adoles-
          cencia,” Revista Catolica (Chile) 72, no. 825 (February 1937): 87-97; Alberto
          Hurtado, “La Ensefianza de la Religién en el Segundo Ciclo de Humani- °
          dades,” Revista Catolica (Chile) 932 (May-June 1947). For class notes and
          other unpublished work see Violeta Arancibia C. ed., Una Verdadera Edu-
          cacion: Escritos sobre Educacion y Psicologia del Padre Alberto Hurtado,
          S.J. (Santiago, Chile: Ediciones Universidad Catélica de Chile, 2005). See also
          Escritos de San Alberto Hurtado. Centro de Estudios San Alberto Hurtado de
          la Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, CD-ROM. Chile, Santiago, Centro
          de Estudios San Alberto Hurtado, 2007.
       . See Patricio Miranda    Rebeco, “Un Conflicto de Interpretaciones: La Fig-
          ura Intelectual de Alberto Hurtado,” Humanitas X, no. 39 (Winter 2005) .
          522-35.
       . Joaquin Xirau, “Julian Sanz del Rio y el Krausismo Espanol,” Cuadernos
          Americanos XVI (1944): 62. Quoted by: Elfas Diaz, La Filosofia Social del
          Krausismo (Madrid: Edicusa, 1973), 51 and 52.
        . E. Diaz, Filosofia Social: 17-22.
     oO
     CO . Solomon Lipp, Francisco Giner de los Rios: A Spanish Socrates (Waterloo,
          ON: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1985), 9.
     10. José Luis Abellan, Historia Critica del Pensamiento Espanol, IV (Madrid:
          Espasa-Calpe, 1984), 455. [This is a book constituted by various volumes.
          Number IV refers to the volume.]

[p. 39] [PDF page 57]

ALi. E. Diaz, Filosofia Social, 22-23.
12. Eugenio D’Ors, “Comment on the book of Emile Boutroux, William James
     (Paris: A. Colin, 1911),” Arxius de l'Institut de Ciencies 1, no. 1 (1911):
     151-S2. Reprinted in Eugenio D’Ors, La Filosofia del Hombre que Trabaja
    y que Juega (Madrid: Libertarias/Prodhufi, 1995), 116-21.
1S: Simon Collier and W. F. Sater, A History of Chile 1808-2002 (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2004), 117. For a good understanding of the
    context see Elena Sanchez Correa and Lucia Diaz del Valle, “El Padre Hur-
    tado: Su Contribucién af Fortalecimiento de la Educacién Nacional,” Pen-
    samiento Educativo 34 (June 2004): 321-54.
14. Ivan Nunez Prieto, “El Pensamiento de un Actor Colectivo: Los Profesores
    Reformistas de 1928,” Pensamiento Educativo 34 (June 2004): 162-78 and
       PAIL
 15: Collier and Sater, History of Chile, 224-25.
 ike Ibid), 2133
 iW Andrés Baeza Ruz, “La Dimensi6n Educacional de la Crisis del Centenario
      en Chile: Modernizacion, Nacionalismo y Reforma” (Licenciado en Historia
      thesis, Facultad de Historia, Geografia y Ciencia Politica, Instituto de His-
      toria, Pontificia Universidad Catdlica de Chile, 2006); Emma S. Salas Neu-
      mann, El Pensamtento de Dario Salas a Través de Algunos de sus Escritos
       (Santiago, Chile: Ediciones de la Universidad de Chile, 1987); Julio César
      Jovet, Doctrina y Praxis de los Educadores Representativos Chilenos (San-
      tiago, Chile: Editorial Andrés Bello, 1962?).
 18. Rosa Bruno-Jofré is completing an analysis of the Jesuit Fernando Vives del
      Solar’s writings with attention to the Spanish context in which Vives devel-
      oped his spirituality at the beginning of the century, his second exile—this
      time in Spain (1918-1931), and his work during the last four years of his life
      (1931-1935). She examines the conceptual field configuring his political and
      religious educational discourse, the creation of the Social League, and the
      opposition from the hierarchy of the Church and its close ally, the Conserva-
      tive Party.
    . See Jaime Caiceo Escudero, Dios y el Hombre en el Pensamiento Catolico
      Chileno: 1900-1950 (Pontificia Universidad Catélico de Chile, Facultad de
      Educaci6n, 1992).
0s Jaime Caiceo Escudero, El P. Alberto Hurtado y John Dewey: Presencia
      Educativa de su Pensamiento en Chile (Faculty of Education, Pontificia
      Universidad Catélico de Chile, 1986) says that Hurtado studied pedagogy
      in obedience to his superiors. However, Father Samuel Fernandez from the
      Facultad de Teologia, Pontificia Universidad Catélica de Chile, shared with
      me a document that made clear that Father Janssens suggested that he study
      Pedagogy. See Curriculum Vitae del Padre Hurtado, [1936], APH s62y053.
      It is written by Hurtado in the third person.
21; Collier and Sater, History of Chile, 227 and Jaime Caiceo Escudero, Marit-
      ain, La Politica y el Social Cristianismo en Chile (Santiago, Chile: Pontificia
      Universidad Catolica de Chile, 1994).
22, Arthur Gille, “Raymond Buyse, Promoteur de la Pédagogie Expérimentale,”
      in L’ Oeuvre Pedagogique de Raymond Buyse ed. Anna Bonboir (Louvain/
      Brussels: Vander, 1969), 19-358; Mare Depaepe, “The Practical and Pro-
      fessional Relevance of Educational Research and Pedagogical Knowledge
      from the Perspective of History: Reflections on the Belgian Case in Its Inter-
      national Background,” European Educational Research Journal 1, no. 2
    (2002): 360-79.
DS. See Tom DeCoster, Marc Depaepe, Frank Simon, and Angelo Van Gorp,
    “Dewey in Belgium: A Libation for Modernity?” in Inventing the Modern

[p. 40] [PDF page 58]

Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Edu-
    cation, ed. Thomas S. Popkewitz (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005),
    86-109.
24. In the years between 1936 and 1940, Hurtado was devoted to his peda-
    gogical apostolate and his commitment to religious vocations. He taught,
    directed groups at the Colegio San Ignacio in Santiago, taught pedagogi-
    cal psychology at the Catholic University and at the Seminario Pontificio in
    Santiago, and published a number of articles on pedagogical themes. Sam-
    uel Fernandez, “Reformar al Individuo o Reformar la Sociedad? Un Punto
    Central en el Desarrollo Cronologico del Pensamiento Social de San Alberto
    Hurtado,” Teologia y Vida XLIX (2008), 515-44, in particular 516. See also
    Samuel Fernandez Eyzaguirre, “El Padre Alberto Hurtado, S.J. y la Pontificia
    Universidad Catélica de Chile: Un Santo Universitario,” Humanitas X, no.
    39 (Winter 2005): 458-54.
DSc Daniel Trohler, “Langue as Homeland: The Genevan Reception of Dewey in
    the Challenge of Modernity,” in Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey,
    ed. Popkewitz , 68.
ZGr Edouard Claparéde, “La pedagogia de J. Dewey,” Boletin de la Institucion
    Libre de Ensenanza XLVI, no. 753 (1922): 353-61.
27. This was a position that already had been proposed by the psychologist and
       educator from Zurich, Gustav Stérring. At the Third International Congress
       for Philosophy that took place at the University of Heidelberg, in September
       of 1908, Stérring acknowledged the importance of pragmatism at best “for
       the question of the psychogenesis of thought, but not in a logical-epistemo-
       logical context” (cf. Jurgen Oelkers “Remarks on the Conceptualization of
       John Dewey’s Democracy and Education,” paper presented at the annual
         John Dewey Society Symposium, Montreal, QC, April 2005).
    28. Edouard Claparéde, “La Pedagogia de J. Dewey,” Boletin de la Institucion
         Libre de Ensenanza XVLI, no. 753 (1922): 354.
    BY): John Dewey, “La Escuela y el Progreso Social,” Boletin de la Instituct6n
         Libre de Ensenanza XX XIX, no. 662-33 (1915): 129-34 and 161-65.
    30. Barnés’ compilation was different from the collection published by Cla-
         parede with the same title. The prologue was also published in the Boletin
         de la Institucion Libre de Ensenanza. Domingo Barnés, “La Pedagogia de
         J. Dewey,” Boletin de la Institucién Libre de Ensenanza L, no. 797 (1926): -
         238-47.
    ile Barnés, “La Pedagogia de J. Dewey,” 240.
    3. Lorenzo Luzuriaga, “La pedagogia de John Dewey,” in John Dewey: El Nino
         yeh Programa Escolar (Madrid: Publicaciones de la Revista de Pedagogia,
         1925), 14.
    33% Barnés, “La Pedagogia de J. Dewey,” 243.
    34 . John Dewey, L’école et l'enfant. , Introduction by E. Claparéde (Paris: Edi-
         tions Delachaux & Niestlé, 1931), 10 (translated by L.S. Pidoux).
    3 John Shook questioned convincingly this line of thinking; he shows that by
        1891, Dewey had all of the pieces in place for his instrumentalism. This
        was five years before he wrote “My Pedagogic Creed.” Communication from
        James Scott Johnston, March 21, 2008.
    36. George A. Coe, A Social Theory ofReligious Education (New York: Charles
        Scribner’s Sons, 1927). First edition in 1917. See Donald Meyer, The Protes-
        tant Search for Political Realism: 1919-1941 (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
        University Press, second edition, 1988), 141.
    oz See Caiceo Escudero. Maritain.
    38. Alberto Hurtado, Puntos de Educacién (Santiago, Chile: Editorial Splendor
        1942). This book is included in Escritos de San Alberto Hurtado. Centro de

[p. 41] [PDF page 59]

Estudios San Alberto Hurtado de la Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile,
    CD-ROM. Chile, Santiago, Centro de Estudios San Alberto Hurtado, 2007.
ahy). Catholic Action was seen by Saint Hurtado as having an important role in
       popular education. In Hurtado’s words it would be to make a caricature of
       the Catholic Action to limit its work to sponsoring commentaries emerging
       from reading the Gospel and to holding religious practices as a group. Hur-
       tado, Puntos de Educacion.
40. Samuel Fernandez analyzed Hurtado’s early conflicts inside his Community
       immediately after he returned to Chile in light of the “spirit of Louvain”
       in contrast with the Spanish conservative views dominant among Chilean
       Jesuits. He placed the conflict in a broader context. Samuel Fernandez, “Los
       Primeros Conflictos del Padre Hurtado.” See also Elena Sanchez C. and Lucia
       Diaz del V., Padre Alberto Hurtado, S.J. La Riqueza de su Pensamiento.
       (Chile, Santiago: Ediciones de la Universidad Catélica de Chile, 2005), 13.
     . Alberto Hurtado, S.J., Le systéme pédagogique de Dewey devant les exi-
       gences de la doctrine catholique (Belgium: Université de Louvain, 1935),
       105.
    . Ibid., 104.
    MIbid S195.
    . Ibid.
    . Ibid.
   . It is not surprising to know that Hurtado felt more comfortable in Louvain
     and where there was a spirit of freedom and respect for personal autonomy
     and the personality of the individual than in Spain where rigidity dominated.
    Fernandez, “Los Primeros Conflictos del Padre Hurtado,” 620.
  eiTbid., 197.
  . Barnés, “La Pedagogia de J. Dewey,” 240.
  » Ibid. 243,
  . Oelkers, “Remarks on the Conceptualization of John Dewey’s Democracy
    and Education.”
  . John Dewey, “La Educacién y los Problemas Sociales Actuales,” Revista de
    Pedagogia XII, no. 140 (1933): 327-44.
  . John Dewey, “El Futuro del Liberalismo,” Revista de Pedagogia XIV, no.
    157 (1935): 126-31.
  . Cf. The Correspondence of John Dewey, 1871-1952. Electronic edition.
    Note to the letter August 28, 1942 (09852). Checked at the Center for Dewey
    Studies, Carbondale, IL, on July 26, 2006.
  . Lorenzo Luzuriaga, Historia de la Educacion Publica (Buenos Aires: Losada,
    [1946] 1964), 147.
  . Hurtado, Le systeme pédagogique, 209.
   bid, 185.
   . Ibid., 100.
  . Ibid., 186.
  . See Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Martin Schiralli, “Teaching History: A Discussion
     of Contemporary Challenges,” Encounters/Encuentros/Recontres on Edu-
     cation 3 (Fall 2002): 117-28.
  . Hurtado, Le systeme pédagogique, 196-97.                            ot
  . William James, Pragmatism, a New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking.
     Popular Lectures on Philosophy (New York: Longmans, Green, and Co.,
    1908), 20.                                                     uy
62. Richard Rorty, Esperanza 0 Conocimiento.       Una Introduccion al Pragma-
    tismo (México: F.C.E., 2001), 31.                D
63. Alberto Hurtado, S.J., “La Ensefianza de la Religion en el Segundo Ciclo de
    Humanidades,” Revista Catélica 932 (May-June 1947): 1016-17.

[p. 42] [PDF page 60]

64. Ibid., 1017.
Gor Daniel Trohler, “The Global Community, Religion, and Education: The
     Modernity of Dewey’s Social Philosophy,” Studies in Philosophy of Educa-
     tion 19 (2000): 179.
   . Ibid.
   . Communication from James Scott Johnston, March 21, 2008.
   . Hurtado, Le system pédagogique, 103.
   . John Dewey. Experience & Education (London and New York: Collier Mac-
     Millan Publishers, 1963), 29.
    . Domingo Barnés, “Un Aspecto de la Filosofia de los Valores y la Pedagogia,”
      in Ensayos de Pedagogia y Filosofia (Madrid: La Lectura, 1920/n.d.), 45-46.
      Gonzalo Jover has developed this theme at length in: “Readings of the Peda-
      gogy of John Dewey in Spain in the Early Twentieth Century: Reconciling
     Praagmatism and Transcendence” in Democracy and the Intersection of
     Religion and Traditions: The readings of John Dewey's Understanding of
     Democracy and Education, Rosa Bruno-Jofré, James Scott Johnston, Gon-
     zalo Jover, and Daniel Trohler (Montreal, QC and Kingston, ON: McGill-
     Wueen’s University Press, 2010); 79-130.
AA. José Gaos, Prologo del traductor, in John Dewey, La Expertencia y la Natu-
    raleza (México: F.C.E., 1948), XIX-XX XV.
V2 John Dewey, “The Influence of Darwinism on Philosophy” in James and
    Dewey on Belief and Experience, eds. J. M. Capps and D. Capps (Urbana
    and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1909/2005), 188.
3s Charles Taylor, A Secular Age (Cambridge and London: The Belknap Press
    of Harvard University Press, 2007), 391.
