The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Part I
Chapter 3: Dewey in Argentina (1916–1946): Tradition, Intention, and Situation in the Production of a Selective Reading
Marcelo Caruso; Inés Dussel
Original print pages 43–58; PDF pages 61–76

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 43] [PDF page 61]

3      Dewey in Argentina (1916-1946)
       Tradition, Intention, and Situation in
       the Production of a Selective Reading
       Marcelo Caruso and Inés Dussel




In Argentina, the name of John Dewey has persistently been quoted in edu-
cational debates since the beginning of the twentieth century, when his
work began to be read and known by an increasingly wider circle of educa-
tionalists. As in many other countries, Dewey was considered a representa-
tive of educational liberalism, and an advocate of activism, child-centered
pedagogy, and educational democracy.' Associated with this range of ideas,
and especially with (North) Americanism, the figure of John Dewey was as
 much loved as it was attacked.
     One of the most striking and certainly most unexpected places in which
 Dewey’s name was pronounced was at a political gathering held some days
 prior to the national general elections that were won by Juan Domingo
 Per6n, in the midst of a heated pre-electoral climate in February 1946.
 During a meeting held at the Luna Park stadium in Buenos Aires, the direc-
 tor of the local Teachers’ College and well-known fascist ideologist Jordan
 Bruno Genta shouted in front of “25,000 teachers who had been required
to attend on threat of dismissal”: “The pernicious influence of John Dewey
... must be eradicated from Argentina’s schools . .. The progressive school
must be replaced by the traditional school”.* These kinds of incidents, tak-
ing place in a repressive context marked by a military dictatorship aligned
with a national-Catholic ideology, solidified the already bad reputation of
Per6nism in those years. At any rate, John Dewey himself commented on
the anecdote in the weekly Time, where the report had been published, in
laconic terms: “The item about Argentina was new to me. Under the cir-
cumstances there, I regard it as a compliment.”?
    It is indeed much-telling that Dewey’s name played a conspicuous role
in Genta’s portrayal of the enemy of tradition and nationalism. In these
dramatic months, and following the aftermath of World War II, the politi-
cal debate was extremely polarized. One of the poles was expressed by
the coalition of traditional parties confronting Per6én’s bid, ranging from

[p. 44] [PDF page 62]

the most conservative and traditional parties dominated by big landown-
ers from the Northern provinces to the more progressive liberals from the
Radical Union, to the Socialist and Communist parties, which called itself
“Democratic Union,” and reduced the political confrontation to a mere
opposition between “democracy” and “fascism.” At the other pole, the
Labor party supporting Perén constructed a clear-cut political antagonism
between Peron and Braden (the name of the American ambassador who
was heavily involved in domestic politics at that time) that was framed
as nationalism against “North American” imperialism.* In this context
in which pro-American and anti-American positions were pitted as cen-
tral to the political antagonism of that time, mentioning Dewey was not
merely a scholarly reference, but it was used to evoke a series of associated
meanings—needless to say, most of them negative.° It has to be noted that
John Dewey’s influence in Argentine education was not significant at that
time, and whether the congregated teachers even understood the mean-
ing of Genta’s attack is unclear. However, Argentineans often dealt with
Dewey’s positions and concepts, looking rather for self assertion than for
other forms of knowledge. The work of Dewey could not be ignored in the
interwar period but, at the same time, acquaintance with it did not lead to
any generalized welcoming of his positions and thesis.
    In this chapter, we would like to set forth the thesis that the fate of Dew-
ey’s ideas in the Argentinean educational field during the interwar years
was mainly a story of selection and even exclusion of some of his works,
which did not lead to the formation of any significant re-reading and appro-
priation of his texts. Working through translations, articles, and comments
written on Dewey, we will not seek the deviations of a true version of
Dewey, but instead will focus on understanding the range of alternative
readings that were available at a particular time, and the contexts of debate
in which they became possible. As an inescapable international reference
in the international educational arena of those years, Dewey offered novel
conceptions on learning, the school, the curriculum, democracy, liberty,
ethics, and society. We will focus on the problems Argentinean education-
alists faced when they came to speak about “democracy” in education and
schools as a path for the reconstruction of the marginalization of his work
in the educational field.


DEWEY’S FIRST READERS ON THE EVE OF THE FIRST
WORLD WAR: LIBERALISM AND/IN TRANSLATION

As has been said, Dewey’s work was widely read in many countries, and
this reading combined the advance of an international movement in peda-
gogy with the construction of national educational scenes in those years.
This combination of international pedagogies with national fields seems to
be particularly important in Argentina where, since its independence from

[p. 45] [PDF page 63]

Spain, the quest for legitimacy and solidity in the process of modernization
had frequently been processed with the help of foreign authorities and mod-
els.° Argentinean elites followed the French model of a common,        secular,
and free primary school and supported the importation of French positiy-
ism, which became the founding educational philosophy of the Argentin-
ean school system. In the first decade of the twentieth century, educational
forces influenced by positivism took the upper hand and imposed a design
for mass schooling, which formulated a pedagogical program marked by
scientificism and rather authoritarian pedagogical rapports.’ This program
tied the expansion of schooling to the building of the nation-state.
    It was in this context that the challenge posed by Dewey’s work was
taken and discussed for the first time. On the whole, North American edu-
cation constituted a rather marginal reference for educational reformers in
 Argentina, usually more appealed to by European experiences. In the first
 decades of the twentieth century, the references for legitimating the national
experience were sought either in the Hispanic past or in “native” figures
 such as the gaucho or the indios.* But in the pedagogical field, “North
 Americanism” was indisputably linked to the very influential education-
alist and former president of the country, Domingo Faustino Sarmiento
 (1811-1888). Sarmiento had traveled to the United States in 1845/1846,
and years later he became the Argentinean ambassador in that country, a
post he resigned from in order to return to Buenos Aires as President-elect
in 1868. He befriended Horace and Mary Mann, and was deeply moved
by their experience of developing a centralized educational system with a
strong social basis. When he directed the schools of the province of Buenos
Aires, he conducted a significant local process of reform, in which he gave
impulse to Local School Boards and to organizing a standardized system.
As a President, he promoted the migration of sixty-five normal school grad-
uates from the United States, who had a pervasive influence in the creation
of Normal Schools throughout the country.’
    But Sarmiento’s North Americanism would remain a solitary example
for many decades. Along with economic and political reasons (economic
and political competitiveness for the leader role in Latin America),'° in
turn-of-the-century Argentina, the intellectual climate was tainted by an
anti-North American movement called “Arielism”. Influenced by the Span-
ish defeat at Cuba in 1898, the Uruguayan José E. Rod6o addressed Latin
American youth denouncing the perils of the imperialist expansion of the
United States across Latin America, already experienced by the material-
ist temptation pervading our culture—the spirit of Caliban represented by
North American values and fashions.'! This movement clearly favored anti-
liberal responses and weakened support for alternative educational models
based on the U.S. experience.
    Some scholars have asserted that Argentina, after Spain, was the most
receptive country for Dewey’s ideas in the first decades of the twentieth
century.'? This assertion, however, might lack significant evidence for its

[p. 46] [PDF page 64]

support. The first translation of Dewey into Spanish, My Pedagogic Creed
(orig. 1897), was published by the Chilean educationalist Dario Salas in
Santiago de Chile in 1908. The first Spanish translations of Dewey’s books,
The School and Society (orig. 1899) and How We Think (orig. 1910), were
published in Madrid (1915) and Boston (1917) respectively. Spanish edu-
cationalists were very active in the translation and publication of Dewey’s
work in these years until the Civil War.
    Only in the case of How We Think can we see an Argentinean interest
in translating and expanding Dewey’s ideas. Ernesto Nelson (1873-1959),
a school inspector who in 1902-1906 spent some time at Columbia Univer-
sity, wrote a sharp foreword to this book, which had been translated by the
Argentinean student Alejandro Jascalevich. Nelson and Jascalevich knew
each other from their time shared at the experimental secondary school
at the University of La Plata, the first research university in the country.
Nelson was the director of the reform boarding school of which Jasca-
levich was one of the first graduates.'? Despite the fact that all Dewey’s
texts published during the first three decades of the twentieth century were
related to education, Nelson showed in his foreword a profound knowledge
of his philosophical work. In the introduction of this “psychology,” Nel-
son pointed to the fact that, in Dewey’s philosophy, “democracy”, together
with “evolution,” “the establishment of psychology as a natural science”
and the “scientific method,” constituted the fundamental marks of modern
civilization."* This new “state of collective life” had discarded dogmatic
positions and its philosophical foundations such as a “realist” concept of
truth. “Democracy,” Nelson argued, was associated with the loss of abso-
lutist sources of authority and, consequently, it invited the individuals to
become active, because all hierarchies between ratio and experience were
no longer relevant.!’ He acknowledged that Dewey’s system of philosophy,
although highly inspiring for educational reform, was more than an educa-_
tional philosophy, and he quoted Dewey, who asserted that philosophy is a
“generalized educational theory.” For Nelson, the time had come in which
“education and democracy” had to become “correlative terms” in Latin
America.'® He called for a renewal of educational discussions increasingly
based on the “lessons of facts.” This “urgent” task for the whole continent
was tied to the “liberation from dogmatism, convention, and half-certain-
ties”.'” Nelson was a convinced pro-North Americanist: he was one of the
founders of the North American-Argentine Cultural Institute and of the
Rotary Club, and wrote a number of books and papers on North American
culture and institutions.'’ He was kindly accused by one of the establish-
ment pedagogues of an “inflamed Yankeeism” (yanquismo enardecido).!°
    Ofcourse, Nelson was not the only Argentinean educationalist who hada
thorough knowledge of Dewey’s work. In his turn, Ratil Diaz (1862-1918),
one of the chief inspectors of federal education, subscribed to Dewey’s ideas
as part of a more comprehensive form of democratic cultural politics. Diaz
had been commissioned by the Argentinean government to visit the United
States in 1907-1908.*° He returned deeply impressed by what he saw and

[p. 47] [PDF page 65]

brought with him a number of experiences regarding school government by
children. He emphasized Dewey’s commitment to democracy and stressed
both social and psychological aspects of education against the biological
and psychological reductions related to hegemonic positivism.
   Elements of pragmatism and the introduction of the issue of “democracy,”
both in the school curriculum and school life, distinguished Nelson and Diaz
from other authors more concerned with the issue of reforming only teaching
and didactics. Nelson, in particular, sustained an emphasis on “democracy”
at a very special moment in the country’s history. Democratic politics gained
momentum in Argentina after the new electoral law of 1912, and the first
middle-class movement, Union Civica Radical, took power after democratic
elections in 1916.*! At that time, it seemed possible and appropriate to re-ori-
ent the educational system under the “radical” governments that held office
from 1916 to 1930. But these governments had to deal with an inherited—
and quite successful—path of economic and cultural development.
    In the educational system, the radicals gave impulse to some reforms
at the level of the universities (where a grassroots movement provoked
a considerable change in 1918) and vocational training, but left most of
the structure of mass schooling unchanged.’? Thus, educational policies
clearly favored expanding the existing structures and scarcely affected the
pedagogical and institutional culture of Argentinean schools. Although the
promise of political democracy was at the top of the political agenda, the
wave of “democracy” did not encompass the domain of education.
    However, educational policies allowed more initiatives at the pedagogi-
cal level, and this paved the way for new readers of John Dewey’s work. In
a freer political and cultural atmosphere in the 1920s, liberal and radical
educationalists who confronted the educational (and political) status quo
started to read and translate Dewey’s texts. Although well-known among
teachers, Nelson’s and Diaz’s readings on Dewey, which particularly empha-
sized the issue of democracy, did not go beyond a restricted circle.
   In the following years, Argentinean educators from many different ten-
dencies such as Catholicism, Marxism, and moderate or liberal Spiritual-
ism regarded Dewey’s ideas with contempt, and thought they were neither
suitable nor positive for the further development of Argentinean schooling.
Although respected as an educator—but almost unknown as a philoso-
pher—Dewey became a “classic” reference of educational thought during
his lifetime, but ironically there was a comprehensive marginalization of
his works and positions from the political and educational arenas.”


FIRST STEP TOWARD MARGINALIZATION: OPPOSING VIEWS
AND GENERAL REJECTION OF DEWEY IN THE 1930S

That shift happened more clearly in the 1930s, when the New School
Movement became the official pedagogy of the first brief military régime
(1930-1931), with strong ties to right-wing Catholicism. Juan Bautista

[p. 48] [PDF page 66]

Teran (1880-1938), president of the National Board of Education from
1930 to 1932 under the military government of José E. Uriburu, led a
movement “to spiritualize the school”.*4 He criticized both positivism and
pragmatism, which he accused of reducing the child to a “beam of instincts
and tendencies.” “School should not only be a gym to awake and give full
shape to a child’s spontaneity,” as Dewey and Montessori sought.** The
aim of education, in Teran’s view, should be to shape a moral being with
freedom and responsibility.
    Teran considered Dewey as a naturalist philosopher, an heir to Rous-
seau. “Dewey’s practicism sets aside the purely intellectual and ethical aims
(of education), or considers them already included in the teaching adapted
to the conditions and conveniences of the environment in which the child
is going to develop. (His philosophy) is a strict application of pragmatism,
of the doctrine characteristic of his own   race and country, according to
which utility is the supreme aim of philosophy.”*° For Teran, not only was
this philosophical system ethically wrong but it was also condemned to
historical failure, as the recent crisis of the United States showed. In his
view, its incapacity to achieve material wellbeing and its disdain of “pure,”
contemplative, or speculative culture, had led that country to bankruptcy.
Obviously, he did not think it was wise to follow the model but to fight it.
    Teran defended Spiritualism as an educational philosophy, as it implied
a return to intelligence in opposition to pragmatism’s “cult of life”.°’ He
advocated the traditional humanist curriculum and denied the value of
vocational schools because they “condemn people to live in empiricism
and prevent them from getting access to the highest possibilities of intel-
ligence.”** In his argument, activism was subordinated to discipline, order,
and respect for the rules, which were the military government’s pedagogi-
cal principles. The New School that Teran and his partners had in mind
was similar to the one developed in fascist Italy. Teran’s appeal in 1930
launched a decade in which alternative experiences within the New School _
were to be persecuted, and radical teachers exonerated.
   This kind of reading of Dewey, however limited and biased it may seem,
was not confined to right-wing Catholic educationalists such as Teran. The
reader may be struck by many resemblances between Teran’s view of Dewey
and Anibal Ponce’s, the latter being one of the professors expelled dur-
ing that period because of his Communist affiliation. Ponce (1898-1938)
condemned Dewey’s pedagogy as a utilitarian and purely methodological
expression of American bourgeois civilization. He ascribed his criticism to
a roughly deterministic form of Marxism. He considered Dewey as part of
the “methodological trend” of the New School, which sought to increase
the performance of students by adjusting pedagogy to a child’s personality,
both biological and psychical.’? Dewey’s claim for collective work at school
was a response to changes in capitalism. Fordism required a new school
centered on child socialization, instead of the individualism of traditional
schools. According to Ponce, Dewey and Montessori implied a capitalist
rationalization of teaching.

[p. 49] [PDF page 67]

Ponce’s condemnation of Dewey and the whole New School Movement
was related to a class reductionism that structured his discourse and led
him to disregard national issues and any other kind of nuances or media-
tions.’ This bias may have prevented him from dismantling the discursive
equivalences that had been established years ago, that equated Dewey’s
pedagogy with the efficientist movement and vocational and manual train-
ing.*! Another important issue involved in his rejection of Dewey is the tra-
ditional admiration that Argentinean leftist political parties had devoted to
Sarmiento’s “civilizing” endeavour, sharing the official pedagogical gram-
mar.** Thus the Left had criticized all the reforms which intended to dis-
pute classic bachillerato’s legitimacy.»
    Attacked by both right-wing and leftist pedagogues, Dewey had few fol-
lowers in those years. Among them was another man from the Left who was
distinctively and firmly engaged in the New School Movement. The teacher
Jesualdo Sosa (1905-1982), born a Uruguayan and with a vast experience in
Argentina, had a different view of Dewey and New Education from Ponce’s.
He considered Dewey as “one of the most progressive bourgeois partisans of
the school of work,”** the school of the socialist tomorrow. Dewey’s proposal
articulated school work to intelligence and democracy, both issues eschewed
by Kerchensteiner. Jesualdo considered the influence of Fordism and Taylor-
ism in Dewey’s work but he qualified his concepts as “evidently progres-
sive”*> with respect to his predecessors’ educative means and objectives. One
of the negative remarks Jesualdo made about Dewey was the presence of reli-
gion, a topic that was associated in South America with conservatism. Once
again, Jesualdo stood out among leftist pedagogues when he recognized
that the term “religion” could include some kind of constructive mysticism
“necessary for human perfection.”*° Jesualdo was one of the few pedagogues
framed in the political Left who laid bridges for religious spiritualism.*”
    Returning to the pedagogical field, it was Teran’s reaction that articu-
lated the prevailing reading on Dewey in the 1930s and the 1940s, and
not Jesualdo’s plea. However, evidence has been found that some teachers
studied Dewey’s work in courses they organized by themselves.** Correla-
tive with these readings from the right-wing and the Marxist Left, Dewey’s
popularity gained momentum among teachers when his texts became more
“pedagogic” and less “political,” and could thus be less identified with a
liberal democratic creed—a shift that will be dealt with in the next sec-
tion. This shift seems to be consistent with the “technical” profile that the
Argentinean New School Movement was acquiring, as its first radicalized
versions waned and became inaudible.”


SECOND STEP TOWARD MARGINALIZATION:
DEWEY AMONG TEACHERS (1920-1946)

We will focus now on the reception of Dewey’s ideas related to the polit-
ical-pedagogical discussions enacted within the teachers’ press during the

[p. 50] [PDF page 68]

interwar period. We have already mentioned the disregard and contempt
that most educationalists had of American pragmatism and its political
philosophy. We will now present some evidence of the strategies of reform-
ist teachers regarding their readings of Dewey’s work, based on a survey of
the articles on New Education published in two central educational jour-
nals in the interwar period.‘® The first one, La Obra (the work), was the
most important weekly journal for teachers. The second one, El Monitor
de la Educacién Comtin, the official publication of the National Council
for Education, was delivered to all schools and had a monthly appearance.
Although El Monitor was not a paper written directly or exclusively by
teachers, they began to play a more significant role as authors from the
1920s onward. These two journals shaped the educational discussion of
that time and can be taken as representatives of the mainstream educa-
tional thought of Argentinean teachers.
   There is no doubt, considering the amount of quotations that his work
received, that Dewey was a symbol of New Education in these journals; as
one contributor said, he was “the most salient personality in the current
American pedagogical movement.”*! The New York teacher Estelle Jovin
reinforced this impression in her conference at the Faculty of Philosophy in
Buenos Aires: “In the United States, we consider that the true beginning of
modern or progressive education was 1896, when John Dewey founded his
experimental school at the University of Chicago.”*? On the whole, Dewey
was presented as the mainstream of American pedagogy. In a radio confer-
ence from 1931 that was published in E/ Monitor, Dewey celebrated edu-
cational progress in America and buttressed the advancement of schooling
despite some deficiencies. He stated that Americans had done their best in
reaching the values identified with the “great American dream.” Probably,
his critical and pessimistic remarks on the modern technological society
and schooling were not of interest to the Argentinean editors, due to the
even more enthusiastic view on schooling which continued after the eco-
nomic backlash in 1929. But it is also remarkable that this piece, praising
the United States, was published while Juan B. Teran, whose anti-Deweya-
nism has been made clear in our previous section, was the president of the
National Council of Education which edited El Monitor. This shows that
the journal probably had a certain degree of autonomy and had close ties
with the educational discourses that circulated in the pedagogical field, and
not only with the “official” pedagogies.
     In the 1930s and 1940s, there are many references to Dewey, most of
which are only cursory mentions without substance,** generally picturing
him as part of a purportedly larger homogeneous group of new educational-
ists. North American schools—wrote the teacher Bustos in the northern
province of La Rioja—were successful in showing, together with those from
Italy, Germany, Belgium, and Russia, the “reality” of the New School.‘ It is
very likely that Dewey’s prestige or fame was the privilege of an urban audi-
ence, interested in reform issues related to the New School Movement.

[p. 51] [PDF page 69]

Besides these frequent references in passing to Dewey, only a few texts
originally written by Dewey circulated in these publications. In La Obra,
more engaged with the progressive movement in schools, the bulk of refer-
ences made were of some fragments of Dewey’s work and a conference, as
well as a review of his work.*” In the official journal El Monitor, only a
radio conference was completely published in 1931.4* There is a remarkable
continuity between the consideration of Dewey’s work in these journals
and the previous publications. All of them privileged exclusively educa-
tional texts and discarded his works on philosophical and political issues.
Argentineans perceived Dewey mainly as an educator, and his philosophi-
cal background of pragmatism played a minor role in the knowledge of
American models.*”
   These narrow-scope readings of Dewey’s work continued for most of
the period we consider in this chapter. The comments on The School and
the Curriculum, published in La Obra 1925, are almost paradigmatic. The
book reviewer indeed mentioned that Dewey stressed “the eminent social
role played by schooling.” Dewey’s work itself remained in this regard
closely tied to a critique of the school subjects and their “artificiality.”°° A
teacher from the distant province of Misiones identified Dewey with the
critique against the rigid Herbartian didactic model.*! One famous leader
of the teacher movement in those years, Rosario Vera Penaloza, mentioned
Dewey as a valuable supporter in the critique against traditional school
desks, which she claimed were designed exclusively for looking at or listen-
ing to the teacher and which never promoted active work in the classroom.”
In addition, the presentation of Décroly’s ideas on centers of interest in
the curriculum included positive references to the American educator, even
though he had forged a different, more flexible concept of interest than that
of Décroly.°?
    There are some exceptions to this kind of selective and limited read-
ing of Dewey’s work. Lorenzo Luzuriaga (1889-1959), the famous Spanish
educationalist who lived in Argentina in exile after the defeat of the Span-
ish Republic, played a crucial role in turning Dewey into a popular figure
among progressive circles, and while doing so, attempted to bring other
aspects of his thought to the fore. Not only did he translate many writings
by Dewey, but he also tried to recast Dewey’s work in a different light.
Luzuriaga had been active in commenting on and translating Dewey since
the mid-1910s, still in Spain. Once in Argentina, and on top of the multiple
articles he published on Dewey, it is the publication of Experience and
Education in Buenos Aires in 1939, translated by Luzuriaga, that can be
regarded as the second largest effort to disseminate a more complex image
of Dewey’s work in Argentina after Nelson’s comments in 1917.
   Luzuriaga analyzed Dewey’s work as a paramount piece of modern psy-
chology, and saw in Dewey’s view of the functioning of the mind his most
original contribution, a kind of diferentia specifica among progressive edu-
cationalists. Capacities, which are to be developed by training, are not the

[p. 52] [PDF page 70]

52.   Marcelo Caruso and Inés Dussel

foundation of the mind, but the organization of experience, stated Luzur-
iaga. On this basis, he continued, it is almost mandatory to understand
school life as a “small” society, because experiences are fundamentally a
product of social interaction. Luzuriaga presented Dewey’s work as having
recast pedagogy within the frame of social progress and critique. He also
advocated the introduction of manual training in schools, which he con-
sidered to be “methods for life” and not merely a vocational form of train-
ing.°> Furthermore, Ernesto Nelson had tried to point out the social aspects
of Dewey’s educational ideas.°° However, the complexity of Luzuriaga’s
and Nelson’s readings did not have a serious impact on the mainstream of
Argentina’s reception of Dewey’s work, but remained rather isolated exam-
ples of nuanced and complex readings of his work.
   This pattern of reading is not only relevant to Dewey, but also the entire
New Education Movement. Since the 1920s, modern educationalists had
often disentangled the goals of pedagogical reform from the projects of
social change, thus defining a field of expertise which many teachers and
school officials considered to be apolitical. A review of the articles written
by worldwide famous “stars” of the New School Movement published in
La Obra between 1921 and 1945 shows a total neglect of the Soviet experi-
ence in the 1920s and 1930s, and also a concentration on authors such as
Décroly, Ferriére, Cousinet, and Montessori, who emphasized the psycho-
logical aspects of education. In the 1930s, nationalistic tendencies in soci-
ety and politics pervaded curriculum decision making, and many patriotic
“rituals” were introduced into schools in these years. The question of the
(in)compatible nature of “(North) American” techniques and a “national”
curriculum became more visible and urgent.
    In his work “Why Progressive Schools?,” published by La Obra in 1933,
Dewey addressed these kinds of questions. He recognized that pedagogi-
cal methods varied according to social and political contexts. Progressive
schools, he continued, are a product of modern societies and these are orga-_
nized in very different forms. But in all societies, he added, even in those
with diverse régimes, it is possible to know objectively the specific peda-
gogical needs of the people.*’ Argentinean teachers valued the possibility
of a politically neutral progressive pedagogy. Some teachers—at least those
that were published in the journals—could simultaneously consolidate their
field of expertise, including their “progressive” élan, and, at the same time,
support authoritarian forms of school life. “That the New Education,” the
editors of La Obra stated in 1944, “has nothing to do with any principle or
political, social and religious régime, is proved by the fact that their differ-
ent forms emerged and spread in countries with the most disparate systems
of government.”** This statement tried definitely to show that the “nation-
alist orientation of teaching,” issued for the first time in 1931,°° was not an
obstacle to be surpassed by the New School Movement in Argentina: The
new education “is not only wholly compatible with the nationalist orienta-
tion that teaching has to support, but also, as it has been shown, it implies

[p. 53] [PDF page 71]

in no way the most insignificant obstacle for the fulfillment of all those
goals, which the Federal State has adopted for schools.”* In his plea, the
author mentioned Dewey in order to assert that the “active school” is only
“a form of pedagogical work.”*! Whereas in the 1930s La Obra published
some contributions that analyzed old pedagogies as techniques for the for-
mation of “subjects and slaves,”® these positions declined some years later,
and “progressive” educators soon looked for a compromise with the lead-
ing politics of the time marked by authoritarian discourses and a renewed
religious tone.
   In the 1940s, Dewey’s work faced a new conjuncture of popularity.
After the aforementioned publication of Experience and Education in
1939, Luzuriaga, the Spanish educator in exile, started an ambitious proj-
ect of translating and publishing Dewey’s major educational works. Fol-
lowing the translation of The Sources ofa Science of Education (orig.
 1929), published in Buenos Aires in 1941 with a second edition in 1944,
 he published The Child and the Curriculum (orig. 1925) and My Peda-
gogic Creed (orig. 1897) together in 1944. Six new editions had followed
by 1967. Democracy and Education (orig. 1916) appeared in Buenos
Aires shortly after the coming of Peron to power in 1946 and had been
re-published six times by 1971. This renewed popularity eventually led to
Genta’s sharp invective against Dewey’s influence on Argentinean schools.
Only in the context of this wave of publishing, and obviously within the
political climate that was described at the beginning of this chapter, were
Genta’s anxieties understandable.
    The reappraisal of Dewey’s work in the early 1940s, particularly during
the nationalistic dictatorship from 1943 to 1946, was not only a byproduct
of Luzuriaga’s translation and publishing activities (of course, the texts had
to be at the disposal of the teachers to be reappraised), but was also a result
of an increasing democratic movement among teachers confronted with an
authoritarian and pro-Catholic educational policy. Teachers found in Dew-
ey’s ideas the opportunity to reestablish a sense of democracy and republi-
canism, now menaced by the emerging Labor party and Peron. However,
this reassessment was still far away from Dewey’s complex and multi-lay-
ered formulations on democracy, and the questions he posed concerning
the authority of knowledge.®’ Argentinean teachers identified “democracy”
first and foremost with the constitutional provisions from 1853. They con-
sidered the old constitution as “a kind of mystic, a deep-felt and a warmly-
embraced one.”** The mystification of the constitution culminated in the
assertion of its “eternal character” as “the most liberal worldwide.”® For
these teachers, the relatively high degree of inclusion of the poorer classes
in the school system defined the democratic nature of modern Argentinean
schooling. Other aspects of Dewey’s democracy, for example its relation
to pluralism and diversity, the critique against an authoritarian school cul-
ture and against any type of totalitarian tendencies in society, were not
picked up on by this group of readers.

[p. 54] [PDF page 72]

54.   Marcelo Caruso and Inés Dussel

   Once they had defined a field of technical expertise, which involved a de-
politicization of pedagogy, Argentinean teachers related to the New School
Movement then had to redefine their positions vis-a-vis the politics of the
time. This reconsideration did not imply a re-politicization at all. On the
contrary, this group of teachers reasserted the technical nature of peda-
gogy, which could be put to serve different political projects. Many teach-
ers in these dramatic years supported a left-right “democratic” coalition of
conservatives, liberals, radicals, socialists, and communists against Peron,
and mystified republicanism and liberalism in a way that neglected any
discussion about educational democracy that went beyond the integration
of all children into schools. Liberal teachers spoke about democracy after
1946 as a coined term for the opposition to Perén’s government, while they
mystified the “democratic” character of pre-Peronist Argentinean schools.*’
In their turn, Perénist educators, even though they were not comfortable
with the extreme views voiced by Genta, did not want to include Dewey, a
“foreign” educator, in their struggle for re-defining “democracy” as being
only a social rights and welfare state, disregarding its authoritarian frame.
Thus, by lack of will or by a political and epistemological difficulty in per-
ceiving his work otherwise, most Argentinean readers were incapable or
unwilling to consider the many aspects of democratic education that were
opened up by Dewey.


CONCLUSION

What, then, can be conceptualized with regard to these different readings
of Dewey in Argentina? We would like to argue that tradition, intention,
and situation were key determinants in configuring a pattern of reading
that marginalized Dewey’s work and, when it was considered in educa-
tional discussions, reduced its complexity to technical aspects of renewed
pedagogies and active schools.
   First, republican and liberal traditions reduced his multilevel concept
of democracy and redefined it as being only the affirmation of the older
path of educational development. These traditions reduced “democracy”
to formal procedures and did not consider it as being more “substantive”
in the sense of a new social form of passionate deliberation, cultural prog-
ress, and social cohesion. Second, the intention of the teachers in achieving
a respectable position as experts in a concrete field of practices, such as
pedagogy and didactics, reduced their view of the educational arena and,
consequently, Dewey was constructed as a “depoliticized” pedagogue unat-
tached to controversial social and political discussions. Lastly, changing
political situations reinforced these tendencies. In the 1930s, faced with the
new “national tendency in education,” many teachers from the field of pro-
gressive education asserted the possible articulation of their pedagogy to
many regimes and ideologies, thus reducing Dewey to a provider of neutral

[p. 55] [PDF page 73]

techniques. With the emergence of Per6n as a political leader and Perénism
as a political identity, “democracy” became an issue, but the prevalent con-
cept of democracy of those years was by no means marked by Dewey’s
consideration of “democracy.”
    In this sense, the semantic resources of the Argentinean teachers and their
possibility of attaching new meanings to “imported” educational knowl-
edge were mainly given at the level of selection. Argentinean educational-
ists did not create an “Argentinized” Dewey by attaching new meanings to
his work. As displayed in the teachers’ press, they rather selected strongly
legitimated texts and readings in order to fit him into their professional and
political strategies. They did so in line with the official educational tradi-
tion, their own purposes of ‘technical’ legitimacy, and the changing politi-
cal situations. These selections, indeed, are not original enough to speak
about any true “variation” of Dewey’s ideas. Beyond Luzuriaga’s efforts in
publishing Dewey’s works, and contrary to Jordan Bruno Genta’s invective,
Dewey’s educational principles related to democracy had little impact in
defining Argentinean educational policies.


NOTES

    1. Among the many writings on Dewey’s influence on international pedagogy,
       see: Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Trav-
       eling of Pragmatism in Education, ed. Thomas S. Popkewitz (New York:
       Palgrave MacMillan, 2005); Gert Biesta and Siebren Miedema, “Dewey in
       Europe: A Case Study on the International Dimensions of the Turn-of-the-
       Century Educational Reform,” American Journal of Education 10S (1996);
       Jaime Caicedo Escudero, “La escuela nueva y activa en América Latina.
       Influencia de Dewey en las reformas educacionales de Chile 1927 y 1945,” in
       Sociedad y educaciton. Ensayos sobre historia de la educacion en América
       Latina (Bogota: Universidad Pedagogica Nacional, 1995); Marc Depaepe
       and Frank Simon, “La diseminacion de ideas deweyanas en Bélgica a través
       de los manuales de pedagogia,” Historia Caribe 10 (2005); Jaime Nubiola
       and Beatriz Sierra, “La recepcion de Dewey en Espana y Latinoamérica,”
       Utopia y praxis latinoamericana 6 (2001).
   2. Quoted in: “Dewey Stands Firm,” Time (21 August 1944),
   3. See the readers’ Letters of Time (11 September 1944).
   4. This was the term used by the actors, although it only referred to the United
       States.
   5. For an analysis of this electoral process, including some educational aspects,
      see Marcelo Caruso, “El Afio que Vivimos en Peligro. Izquierda, Politica y
     Pedagogia” in Discursos Pedagogicos e Imaginario Social en el Peronismo
     (1945-1955), ed. Adriana Puiggrés (Buenos Aires: Galerna, 1995).
  6. Juan Carlos Tedesco, Educacion y Sociedad en la Argentina (1880-1945)
     (Buenos Aires: Solar, 1986); see also my discussion of the international mod-
     els of reference in the reform of primary schools at the end of the conservative
     era, Marcelo Caruso, “Zweideutige Verweise. Preufen als Vorbild argen-
     tinischer Schulreformen unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung des Projekts von
     Carlos Saavedra Lamas,” in Preufen und Lateinamerika, Sandra Carreras
     ed. (Miinster: Litt, 2004).

[p. 56] [PDF page 74]

7. Adriana Puiggros, Sujetos, Disciplina y Curriculum en los Origenes del
        Sistema Educativo Argentino, 1884-1916 (Buenos Aires: Galerna, 1990); Car-
        los Escudé, El Fracaso del Proyecto Argentino. Educaci6n e Ideologia (Buenos
        Aires: Tesis, 1990); Roberto Alfredo Miranda and Osvaldo Miguel Iazzetta,
        Proyectos Politicos y Escuela, 1890-1920 (Rosario: Matética, 1982).
      . Tulio Halperin Donghi, El Espejo de la Historia. Problemas Argentinos y
        Perspectivas Latinoamericanas, (Buenos Aires: Sudamericana, 1987), 160ff.
      . Jennie Howard, En Otros Anos y Climas Distantes (Buenos Aires: Raigal,
        1951).
      . See Carlos Escudé, 1942-1949. Gran Bretana, Estados Unidos y la Decli-
        nacion Argentina (Buenos Aires, Ed. de Belgrano, 1988).
      . See Charles Hale, “Political and Social Ideas in Latin America, 1870-1930,”
         in The Cambridge History of Latin America, ed. Leslie Bethell, Vol. 5 (Cam-
         bridge/UK: Cambridge University Press), 414.
      . Nubiola and Sierra, “La recepcién de Dewey en Espafia y Latinoamérica,”
         116-129, 117. A similar statement, although referring to Brazil and Argen-
         tina as the pioneering countries for the reception of Dewey’s work in Latin
         America, was advanced earlier by Walter Brickman, “John Dewey’s Foreign
         Reputation as an Educator,” School and Society 70 (October 22, 1949): 261.
      . Sara Jafella, “Universidad Nacional de La Plata: Dos Concepciones en su
         Perfodo Fundacional,” Anales de la Educaci6n Comun (2006): 196.
      . Ernesto Nelson, “Introducci6n a la Edicién Espanola,” in Psicologia del Pen-
         samiento, ed. John Dewey (Boston: D. C. Health and Co., 1917), xii.
      . Ibid., xv—xvi.
      ae bid pexctixe
      Mibids saci
      . See i.e.: E. Nelson, The Spanish Reader (Boston: DC Heath and Co., 1916);
        Las Bibliotecas en los EE.UU. (Washington: Dotaci6n Carnegie para la Paz
        Internacional, 1929); La Salud del Nino, su Proteccion Social en la Legis-
        laci6n y en las Obras. (New York: La Nueva Democracia, 1929).
      . Victor Mercante, Charlas Pedagogicas (Buenos Aires: R. Gleizer, 1927), 12.
       . Raul B. Diaz, Ideales y Esperanzas en Educaciton Comun (Buenos Aires:
         Talleres Graficos de L. J. Roso y Cia., 1913). In his view, the United States
         was the only country in the world which could show a school being “the
         center of the life and happiness of the child, close to his home, . . . guided by
         the nation’s ideals of democracy and greatness.” (1).                             ;
    Pre For a general view of this period, see Argentina en la Paz de Dos Guerras,
         1914-1945, Waldo Ansaldi, Alfredo Pucciarelli and José C. Villarruel eds.
     (Buenos Aires: Biblos, 1993).
Dap Maria Delia Terrén de Ferro, Historia de la Instrucci6n Publica en la Argen-
     tina, 1916-1930. Formas Institucionalizadas de Ensenanza (Buenos Aires:
     Ediciones Universidad del Salvador, 1996).
BEN Cf. An earlier work written by us, Inés Dussel and Marcelo Caruso, “Spec-
     ters of Dewey in Latin America: Some Notes on the Reception of Educational
     Theories,” Paedagogica Historica Supplementary Series III (1998), 380-86.
     See also Marcelo Caruso, “John Dewey und Jean Piaget: Weltklassiker im
     lateinamerikanischen Kontext,” in Weltkultur und kulturelle Bedeutung-
     swelten, ed. Jiirgen Schriewer (Frankfurt/M.: Campus, 2007)
   . Juan B. Teran, Espiritualizar Nuestra. Escuela. La Instruccion Primaria
     Argentina en 1931 (Buenos Aires: Libreria del Colegio, 1932).
      . Ibid.,4.
      _ Ibid., 12.
        Thid., 13.
      . Ibid., 42.

[p. 57] [PDF page 75]

29: Anibal Ponce, Educacion y lucha de clases (Buenos Aires: Cartago, 1984),
    163. He considered the existence of a second trend, “doctrinarian,” which he
    also criticized. In Ponce’s view, the doctrinarians held that the methodologi-
    cal tendency wanted to prepare children for present times and not for the
    future, as it was its own aim. According to Ponce, Teran’s pedagogy could be
    inscribed in this second type.
30. See Oscar Teran, “Anibal Ponce 0 el Marxismo sin Naci6n,” in his E12 Busca
     de la Ideologia Argentina (Buenos Aires: Catalogos, 1986).
Bile See Herbert Kliebard, The Struggle for the American Curriculum, 1896-
     1958 (New York: Routledge, 1986), who argues against this reductionism.
a0R. We have borrowed this term from Bernstein’s work on the structuring of ped-
     agogic discourse. The official pedagogical grammar refers to the hegemonic
     set of “rules which regulate the production, distribution, reproduction, inter-
     relation and change of legitimate pedagogic texts (discourses), their social
     relations of transmission and acquisition (practice) and the organization of
     their contexts (organization).” Basil Bernstein, The Structuring of Pedagogic
    Discourse. Class, Codes and Control vol. TV (London and New York: Rout-
    ledge, 1990), 193.
33. An Anarchist educationist, José Maria Lunazzi, produces another critique
     in line with Anibal Ponce’s. In Reconstrucci6n Educactonal (Buenos Aires:
     Claridad, 1935), he accuses Dewey of not desiring to change the social con-
     ditions which produce inequities and injustice, and of advocating adjusting
     the school to the social setting. He gets close to insult when he says that
     Dewey can be equated to low-band practicism (mercachifle practicismo) (64).
     The only aspect in which Lunazzi diverges from Ponce is when he defends
     the importance of material and technical education, and demands a balance
     between intellectual education and contact with real life and things.
   . Jesualdo, Los Fundamentos de la Nueva Pedagogia (Buenos Aires: Ed.
    Americalee, 1943), 132.
Sor Jesualdo, Diecisiete Educadores de América. Los Constructores, los Refor-
     madores (Montevideo: Ed. Pueblos Unidos, 1945), 198.
3G. Ibid., 199.
   . Another interesting case of an original reading is the one done by the Jesuit
     priest Alberto Hurtado, recently canonized. Hurtado studied in Leuven
     and earned his Doctorate with a thesis on “The Pedagogical System of John
     Dewey in Front of the Requirements of Catholic Doctrine,” in 1936. See
     Caicedo Escudero, “La escuela nueva y activa en América Latina,” 260. On
     his return to Chile, he established himself in higher education institutions.
     Today there is a Jesuit University that bears his name. No similar case of a
     Catholic studying and reappraising Dewey can be found in Argentina.
38. See Adriana Puiggros, “La Educaci6n Argentina Desde la Reforma Saavedra
     Lamcas Hasta el Final de la Década Infame,” in Escuela, Democracia y Orden
     (1916-1943), Adriana Puiggrés ed. (Buenos Aires: Galerna, 1992): 95.
BOs Puiggros, “La Educacién Argentina”; Silvina Gvirtz, El Discurso Escolar a
     Través de los Cuadernos de Clase (1930-1970) (Buenos Aires: Eudeba, 1999).
40. We want to thank Gabriela Trentin (Humboldt University, Berlin) and
     Leandro Stagno (University La Plata, Argentina) for their support in the
     archival work related to these journals.
41. J. M., “El Nifio y el Programa Escolar, de John Dewey,” La Obra 95 (1925):
    324.
42. Estelle Louise Jovin, “La Educacién Progresiva en Estados Unidos,” La Obra
    XIV: 254 (1934): 707.                                                 .
43. John Dewey,    “Algunos  Aspectos de la Educacion Moderna,”   El Monitor de
    la Educacion Comin LI: 712 (1932): 39.

[p. 58] [PDF page 76]

44. Juan Carlos        Agulla, “La Escuela Nueva,”   El Monitor de la Educacion
       Comun LX: 815 (1940): 20-25.
4S. Luis Galdames, “Algunos Aspectos de la Educacion Primaria en Norte
      América,” El Monitor de la Educacio6n Comin LI: 712 (1932): 39.
46. Pedro W. Bustos, “Renovar la Escuela Desde la Escuela,” La Obra XI: 196
      (1931):201.
47. John Dewey, “De la Oposici6n entre el Programa Escolar y el Nifo,” La
      Obra V: 94 (1925): 297; John Dewey, “Mi Credo Pedagégico,” La Obra
      X1:196 (1931): 198-99 and XI: 197 (1931): 250-52; John Dewey, “Por qué
      Tener Escuelas Progresivas?,” La Obra XIII: 254 (1933).
48. Dewey, “Algunos aspectos de la educaci6n moderna,” 42.
49. Hugo Biagini, Filosofia Americana e Identidad. El Conflictivo Caso Argen-
      tino (Buenos Aires: EUDEBA, 1989).
D0: J. M., “El Nifio y el Programa Escolar, de John Dewey,” 324.
oyils Emilio Abelleyra, “Fundamentos de la Escuela Renovada,” El Monitor de la
      educacion comin LI: 707/708 (1932): 117.
ar Rosario Vera Pefialoza, “Los Jardines de Infantes y las Escuelas Nuevas,” El
      Monitor de la Educaci6n Comun LI: 713 (1932): 86.
Dor Luis Borruat, “Orientaciones y Organizacién de la Escuela Moderna,” La
      Obra Il: 38 (1922): 4—6; also “La Escuela Activa” La Obra IV: 77 (1924):
      433-34.
54. At this time, other Latin American educationalists also presented a “purely”
      psychological Dewey. These works would become very popular many years
      later with teachers. See Lourengo Filho, “Principios Fundamentales de la
       Educacién Activa 0 Funcional,” La Obra XIII: 229 (1933): 243-46, particu-
        larly 243.
    Ie Lorenzo Luzuriaga, “La Pedagogia de Dewey,” La Obra Il: 42 (1922): 12.
        See also, in the same vein, Lorenzo Luzuriaga, “La Escuela Activa,” La Obra
        V: 105 (1925): 828-29.
      . Ernesto Nelson, “La Educaci6n en las Obras de Previsién y de Proteccién
        a la Infancia,” El Monitor de la Educaci6n Comtun LI: 710 (1932): 73-88;
        Ernesto Nelson, “Significado, Finalidades y Formas de la Accién Social Pop-
         ular,” El Monitor de la Educaci6n Comun LI: 712 (1932): 9-19.
      . John Dewey, “¢Por qué Tener Escuelas Progresivas?,” La Obra XIII:
         233 (1933): 436. Second article published in: La Obra XIII: 234 (1933):
         483-85.
      . See “La Escuela en Accion. La Escuela Activa,” La Obra XXIV (1944): 469.
      . See “El Consejo Nacional de Educacién Rearfirma la Orientaci6n Naciona-
         lista de la Ensefianza,” El Monitor de la educaci6n comin L: 704 (1931):
         119=20.
       . Dewey, “La Escuela en Acci6n. La Escuela Activa,” 470.
       . [bid.
       . Elisabeth Huguenin, “La Practica de la Escuela Activa,” La Obra XIII: 230
        (1933): 294.
      . See, among many scholarly studies, the remarkable texts by Robert West-
        brook, John Dewey and American Democracy (Ithaca: Cornell University
        Press, 1991); Alan Ryan, John Dewey and the High Tide of American Liber-
        alism (New York and London: W.W. Norton & Co, 1995)
      . John Dewey, “Pueblo Demécrata,” La Obra XXV: 418 (1945): 90.
      . John Dewey, “Principios Liberales,” La Obra XXV: 419 (1945): 138.
      . John Dewey, “La Escuela, Puntal de la Democracia,” La Obra XXIV: 410
        (1944): 423.
      . For the shaping of this discourse in the Argentinean Left, see Caruso, “El
        ano que vivimos en peligro.”
