The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Part I
Chapter 4: Ruralizing Dewey: The American Friend, Internal Colonization, and the Action School in Post-Revolutionary Mexico (1921–1940)
Rosa Bruno-Jofré; Carlos Martínez Valle
Original print pages 59–80; PDF pages 77–98

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 59] [PDF page 77]

4       Ruralizing Dewey
        The American Friend,
        Internal Colonization, and the
        Action School in Post-Revolutionary
        Mexico (1921-1940)
        Rosa Bruno-Jofré and
        Carlos Martinez Valle



In the article “Mexico’s Educational Renaissance,” published in The New
Republic on September 22, 1926,' John Dewey wrote that rural education
in post-revolutionary Mexico, one of the most important social experi-
ments that had taken place in the world, had helped him recover his faith in
the school as an instrument for social transformation, and in his own edu-
cational ideas.* Dewey’s acknowledgement of the work of Mexican educa-
tors was repaid from south of the Rio Grande with tributes and expressions
of gratitude to the American educator. The process of mutual legitimation
included reciprocal quotation. Thus, Dewey quoted Moisés Saenz saying
“nowhere have I seen better examples of a socialized school than in some
of these rural schools in Mexico.”* Saenz had studied at Columbia between
1921 and 1922 and taught at the Lincoln School in New York. At the time
when Dewey wrote the article, Saenz was the Sub-Secretary of Education,
a position he held between 1925 and 1931.4 This apparent circular unity
in the discourse seemed to imply a close rapport between the international
educational model and its local and regional application. In the same arti-
cle, Dewey went on to say:

    I have long had a pet idea that “backward” countries have a great
    chance educationally; that when they once start in the school-road they
    are less hampered by tradition and institutionalism than are countries
    where schools are held by customs which have hardened through the
    years. But I have to confess that I have never found much evidence in
    support of this belief that new countries, educationally new, can start
    afresh, with the most enlightened theories and practices of the most
    educationally advanced countries.°

Although Dewey argued for a creative relationship between school and soci-
ety, the quotation suggests that he seemed to forget that the inter-relationship

[p. 60] [PDF page 78]

between education, politics, and society transforms the meaning of the edu-
cational proposals when they are applied to educational contexts which are
different from the original ones. The quotation advanced the idea that “back-
ward” countries without educational traditions and institutions that could
resist and hamper change had a better chance of creating a progressive educa-
tion system. Dewey’s apparently a historical view is consistent with his ten-
dency to underestimate the structural conditions of society and its political,
cultural, and social forces. However, in a socialized school, as the one Dewey
and his Mexican “followers” envisioned, the complex interaction between
educational ideas and values and social forces would lead, out of necessity, to
a transformation of any project when moved to practice.
    The presence of Dewey during the 1920s and 1930s in the pedagogical
discourse and the Mexican educational plans looks, at first glance, unques-
tionable. Nonetheless, it is important to define this presence. This chapter
examines how and to what extent Dewey’s ideas were adopted and adapted
by the educational leadership in post-revolutionary Mexico and how these
ideas led to perverse effects when applied to a very different reality. After
studying the political, socio-economic, and cultural context of reception,
we then analyze the points of entry of Dewey’s ideas into Mexico, includ-
ing the relationships among the Secretary of Public Education (SEP), the
Universidad Nacional de México, and Columbia University, particularly
its Teachers College. We discuss some of the major issues and themes that
populated the Mexican educational debate and behaved as filters in the
process of adoption and adaptation of international pedagogical ideas. A
major theme was nation-building through either the incorporation or the
integration of the indigenous and rural population within an eclectic and
contradictory modernizing project. When analyzing the patterns of the
educational discourse and the reception of Dewey’s ideas as well as of other
contemporary educational theories, we make reference to various educa-
tional tendencies represented at the SEP. However, we will focus our study -
on the work of Rafael Ramirez, a long-time, high-ranking civil servant at
the Secretary of Education,    and a central protagonist    in the institution.
Ramirez, a progressive educator (following the definition of the time and
place) devoted his life to rural education as a civilizing mission.


CONTEXT

     “The difficulties in creating a moral and political entity out of Mexico
     are so enormous that they often seem insuperable (...) The fact that
     the Mexican Indians have a settled agricultural life, a much higher
     culture and greater resistance than our own Indians but increases the
     difficulty of the situation. Add to this fact that the Indians are anything
     but homogeneous among themselves, divided into some thirty differ-
     ent tribes, intensely self-centred, jealous of their autonomy, prizing

[p. 61] [PDF page 79]

an isolation which is accentuated by geographical conditions, and we
    begin to have a faint idea of the problem which the revolutionary gov-
    ernment is facing as systematically as all previous regimes dodged it.”

    After the revolution, Mexico was a mosaic of poorly connected territo-
ries in which geographical and economic differences underlined its politi-
cal, ethnic, and cultural diversity. For example, there were seventy-two
languages belonging to nineteen different linguistic families and hundreds
of dialects.’ Furthermore, just seventy years before the revolution, Mexico
had lost half of its territory in the war with the United States. American
interventions during the revolution, as well as the Monroe doctrine, made
it imperative to think of the need to keep national integrity. The educators
and politicians of the time saw the danger of further losses or even the pos-
sibility of becoming an American satellite.*
    The revolution itself mirrored Mexico’s fragmentation. The different
civil wars, later re-created by post-revolutionary historians as compo-
nents of a mythical unit, were motivated by different problems and aims
and were the product of distinctive socio-political movements. The mini-
mum common denominator of the revolutionary movements was their
reaction to the political, economic, and social tensions generated by the
dictatorship of General Porfirio Diaz (1876-1911). The regime’s economy
rested on the importation of manufactured goods and the exportation of
raw materials. The latter required large agrarian properties to the detri-
ment of communal land, small farms, and unenclosed land (baldios), and
had a high social cost. The power base of the regime was grounded on
a necessary alliance with the import-export sectors, but also with local
bosses (caciques) within the framework of a restricted, controlled, formal
democracy. The different movements which made the “Mexican Revo-
lution”   (Maderismo,   Magonismo,    Zapatismo,    Villismo,   Communism)
centered their claims around either land or democracy, or both. Lacking
strong ideological definitions, these movements were too heterogeneous
to formulate a consistent program or implement it in a coordinated way.
It was a world in which personal charisma, affinities, and networks were
more important than the ideological programs for which the different
revolutionary groups fought each other.’
    Vis-a-vis the more radical/revolutionary programs of land distribution/
devolution and democracy, the winning faction represented moderate posi-
tions and supported political and cultural reforms that would back the
system legitimized by the Constitution of Querétaro (1917). The victory
of constitutionalism allowed for the establishment of governments with a
strong military component. Between 1920 and 1934, the process was led
by a line of generals from the northern state of Sonora, whose ideology
was marked by a republican and Jacobin nationalism in line with the tradi-
tion of the nineteenth-century “republican liberalism,” rather than with
the basic demands for a democracy and radical agrarian reform expounded

[p. 62] [PDF page 80]

by the revolutionary groups. This changed with the presidency of General
Cardenas who, at least in the first years of his government, implemented a
more radical program of economic nationalism and agrarian distribution.
     The devastation from the war and the internal conflicts, the threat from
the United States, and the revolutionary demands moved the new govern-
ments to consolidate their power and build a new state through a project
of economic and moral “reconstruction” and “modernization,” and socio-
political integration, the latter to be achieved by means of a popular mobi-
lization with nationalist and populist overtones.'° This project included the
demobilization of the armed groups, the institutional reform of the state, the
implementation of moderated labor and agrarian reforms, and the creation
of a stable political platform that could manage conflicts emerging from
the various political factions. It aimed at the incorporation or integration
(depending on the dominant trend) of the Aboriginal and rural population
with the goal of improving their living conditions, but also aimed to accul-
turate them, in particular through the learning and adoption of castellano,
the “national language.” The Catholic Church, identified as responsible
for the backwardness of the country and especially of the indigenous and
rural population, was seen as a form of alternative power that needed to be
contained and even eradicated. The post-revolutionary state fomented not
only associationism and cooperativism, but also corporativism. The latter,
which blended with informal patronage and personal networks of power (el
cacicazgo), became key in the articulation of the country and in the stabil-
ity of the revolutionary governments. A central piece of this project was the
creation of political parties, unions, and agrarian organizations, which, by
and large, were official organizations that embodied a hegemonic ideology.
Thus, the Partido Nacional Revolucionario (NR) was founded in 1929, a
predecessor of the Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI). Education
and, in particular rural education, played a significant role in the develop-
ment of the intended hegemonic ideology.
   The understanding of public education as a transformative and indoctri-
nating agency of the post-revolutionary state led to the creation of the Secre-
tary of Public Education (SEP) in 1921, an idea strongly sponsored by José
Vasconcelos, who became the first secretary. The Secretary rapidly claimed
a central position on the educational stage, even as the Constitution of 1917
had established the “free municipality” as the organizational unit of the Mex-
ican state and therefore of its educational system. The federalization of public
education attempted to deal with the crisis generated by the closing of many
municipal schools that could not be financed by meager municipal budgets.
However, Rockwell, as well as Acevedo, demonstrated that in the Tlaxcala
and Puebla regions at many communities had been able to sustain and run
their centenary schools, even through the revolution. Therefore, the federal-
ization of education in those regions meant the expropriation of municipal
schools.'' However, because, as late as 1932, half of the Secretary’s budget
was allocated for the federal district and territories (in particular Mexico

[p. 63] [PDF page 81]

City) while rural schools were poorly funded, it can be argued that the feder-
alization of community schools meant not only the creation of new schools,
but also a wide nationalization of communal schools all over the country,
making them representative agents of the state and its projects.!”
   Four major pedagogical currents were represented at the Secretary or
SEP in the period under analysis (1921-1940): (a) what we could call the
“spiritualists,” incarnated in the thinking of José Vasconcelos; (b) the
populist developmentalists- represented by Moisés Saenz, a Protestant, a
student of Dewey, sub-secretary of the Secretary from 1925 to 1931 and,
for a short time in 1928, secretary; (c) the socialists represented by Narciso
Bassols, who was Secretary between 1931 and 1934; and (d) the advocates
of the anarchist-rationalist pedagogy (such as José de la Luz Mena) who
did not have top-ranking positions in the Secretary but had a strong ideo-
logical influence on the socialists.'’ Ramfrez was in line pedagogically and
politically with the populist developmentalists, although he worked in the
Secretary supporting the representatives of the first three currents.
   Redemption, reconstruction, and regeneration were ideas that not only
permeated all of the pedagogical currents represented in the Secretary
(SEP), but also the political discourse of republicans, populists, socialists,
communists, and, in another category, the politics and theology of Protes-
tant missionaries. These ideas motivated part of the intelligentsia to reject
social Darwinism, as espoused during the dictatorship of Porfirio Diaz, and
adopt Lamarck’s ideas of a close connection between ontogeny and phylog-
eny. Thus, contrary to Social Darwinism (Mendelianism and Weismanism),
which rejected the possibility of the advance of “inferior races,” Lamarck’s
ideas assigned an extremely important role to social and environmental fac-
tors in the development of the biological and psychological characteristics
of individuals and races.'* The adoption of Lamarckism was also a response
to the diagnosis of the etiology of Latin societies (and by extension the
Spanish-American and the indigenous ones) made by social psychologists,
who attributed their backwardness vis-a-vis the Anglo-Saxon societies to
particular cultural features such as individualism, laziness, indolence, lack
of entrepreneurial spirit, etc.'° These ideas led to emphasizing the regenerat-
ing power of education through a school that would transform not only the
individual, but the entire social environment, hence the interest in involving
the community.'°
    One of the main goals of the school, as Vasconcelos wrote in 1923, was
to incorporate the indigenous population into civilization and prepare them
for the exercise of their civic duties and rights as Mexican men (and women)
and citizens. The “incorporation” of the rural and indigenous population
was understood as the transformation of the culture of the rural commu-
nities according to the standards of the white minority. But this project,
dominant in the first years of the 1920s, was slowly replaced by the “inte-
gration” of the indigenous and peasant masses of Mexico,'’ a paradigm
that acknowledged some positive components in the culture and character

[p. 64] [PDF page 82]

of the indigenous people that had to be preserved and even extended to
the rest of the Mexicans in the process of integration of the country. This
change of paradigm had to do with the failure of the policies promoting
incorporation, which became evident with the economic crisis of 1927, and
also with a better understanding of the indigenous cultures on the part of
the officers of the Secretary.
   The need to transform the entire social environment in order to enact the
discourse of a regenerated Mexicanidad demanded a broad notion of edu-
cation that included diverse informal pedagogical means such as arts, ritu-
als, and public celebrations to generate community participation. Some of
the means, in particular in rural areas, were the Casas del Pueblo (People’s
Houses) which were schools with varied functions, the cultural missions
(teachers who spent short periods of time in rural communities working
with the regular teachers and the members of the community), the medical
teams (brigadas médicas), the traveling libraries (bibliotecas ambulantes),
and the schools functioning in railway cars (carros escuela). The educational
goal was multipronged and comprehensive. It included not only schooling
but also health, domestic life, improvement of agrarian techniques, and
recreation and social life as part of the extension of cultural activities to
the peasant milieu, all of which were considered necessary for the progress
of the nation. In order to generate sustainability of the various initiatives,
the Secretary promoted the creation of all kinds of associations. An illustra-
tive example is given by the organizations promoted by a cultural mission:
“committee for the improvement of living conditions, committee on roads,
society of women and mothers, local Red Cross, theatre group, children’s
sportive club, temperance campaigns.”!®


ROADS LEADING TO THE INTRODUCTION OF
DEWEY’S IDEAS AND NEW EDUCATION CONCEPTS

The central goal was to build a redemptionist-regenerationist school that
would become an agency to transform bodies and souls, change habits
and beliefs, and generate cooperation and a sense of identification with
the new national institutions. For this reason, the Mexican educational
leaders tried from very early on to develop the proper pedagogical tools
and within this context they selected international ideas that could fit with
their needs. Thus, an idiosyncratic and eclectic pedagogy took shape and
became embodied in the Action School (Escuela de la Acci6n). Post-revolu-
tionary Mexico, as with most Latin American countries, was open to mod-
ern psychology and pedagogical renewal,.from Kropotkin to Decroly, from
the soviet revolutionary pedagogy, to Ferriére and to Dewey. However, as
Rafael Ramirez put it, the new school was an important movement but “in
essence not transcendental.” '” Although the political discourses displayed
contradictory assessments of foreign influences on Mexican pedagogy, the

[p. 65] [PDF page 83]

tendency was to see foreign ideas as reinforcing the development of a ped-
agogy which was idiosyncratically Mexican and was developing its own
features and contents through practice. Thus, the importation of ideas was
considered as a “happy insertion” that would generate spiritual mestizaje
(miscegenation), rather than as a simple transplantation.2°
   John Dewey’s thought, rooted in his own historical time, had elements
that could appeal to Mexican leaders. Both shared the language of recon-
structionism and redemptionism, dominant among social meliorists and
American social gospellers that conceived school as the main force of
social change.
   The Action School, in spite of eclectic influences and idiosyncratic char-
acteristics, was aligned with many of Dewey’s ideas, considered by many as
the most adequate instrument to reach the ideal of new Mexicanidad. As
Francisco Arze Gurza wrote, the “integration” of life and school advocated
by the active school was not seen as different from the projects of cultural
and social integration of the Mexican mosaic, which were, in Vasconcelos’
or in Saenz’s views, the foundation for the building of the Mexican nation.*!
Nationalism and social integration were the main filters in the process of
reinterpretation and adaptation of foreign pedagogical ideas, although they
were not the only ones.
   In spite of what has been written,” it seems that Dewey had a limited
role in the first definition of the Mexican Escuela de la Acci6n as it was
delineated in Bases para la organizacion de la escuela primaria conforme a
los principios de la accion (Foundations for the organization of the elemen-
tary schools according to the principles of action), a document approved by
Vasconcelos in 1923, for the Federal District and Territories. The group of
zone inspectors who were members of the Technical Council of the School
Department of the Federal District, responsible for the writing of the Bases,
was quite interested in the works of Ferriére, Decroly and Kropotkine (sic).
In line with the traditional ties of the Mexican intelligentsia with the fran-
cophone culture, Eulalia Guzman,*> who wrote La escuela nueva o de la
accion (The new school or action school), which is the clearest precedent of
the Bases, visited some Mexican schools (Bacum) and some schools in the
United States. However, her main sources of inspiration seem to have been,
following Larroyo, Decroly and his centers of interest,** and according to
Fell, Ferriére, from whom Guzman would have taken classes in Switzer-
land. From Ferriére, Guzman would have learned to read Dewey as an edu-
cational psychologist, a reading that Rafael Ramirez would later repeat.”
   The references to Dewey, however, rapidly increased over time. In 1921,
Professor Lisandro Calder6n mentioned Dewey at the First Mexican Con-
gress on the Child.”° In 1923, Salvador M. Lima and Marcelino Renteria,
members of the group that wrote the Bases, wrote in their magazine Edu-
cacion, that the principles of the active school as a global movement were
enunciated by Decroly, Ferriére, Kerschensteiner, and Dewey.’’ Among the
pedagogues of the New Education (Escuela Nueva) mentioned by an officer

[p. 66] [PDF page 84]

related to the “Working Plan for Federal Rural Schools of 1925,” as cited
by Ramirez,’* were J.F. Eslander,”’ Faria de Vasconcelos,*® Angelo Patri, a
graduate from Columbia influenced by the writings of Dewey,*! and John
Dewey in particular with reference to School and Society,** which had
been translated by Domingo Barnés, a member of the Institucion Libre de
Ensefianza. Moisés Saenz, in his magisterial address at the University of
Chicago in the summer of 1926, said that School and Society was known
and appreciated in Mexico and that Dewey’s ideas had been fully trans-
lated into practice in Mexico. Saenz mentioned as Deweyan concepts that
pointed toward a new tendency in education: motivation, respect for the
personality of the child, self-expression, vitalization of school work, proj-
ect methods, learning by doing, democracy and education. Saenz even said,
hyperbolically, that, without realizing, Dewey had generated in Mexico a
“nedagogical war” between liberals and reactionaries.**
    In spite of the fact that SAenz has been described as one of the educa-
tors who introduced Dewey in Mexico, there were significant differences
between their proposals. For example, the Carapan project (1932) did not
translate either an understanding or the application of the scientific method,
in the Deweyan sense as the critical systematic exercise of empirical intel-
ligence. There was no design at all in Carapan. Furthermore, Saenz also
defended the separation between educational practice and research, thus
rejecting the Deweyan conception of the relevance of the inter-relationship
between theory and practice, idea and action. Given that the redemptionist
principle implied the imposition of salvationist elements, there was no room
for the students to become engaged in an experimental, self-correcting
inquiry process. Redemptionism also led to the use of memoristic educa-
tional tools (for example, the learning of the revolutionary civic catechism),
or emotional instruments (rites and celebrations) to enhance the national
spirit. Saenz even proposed the creation of a “political religion” that could
be construed in line with fascist and communist practices. The work of:
Saenz in Carapan showed neither an understanding of nor the implementa-
tion of Dewey’s ideas of the relationship between democracy and education
and, although Saenz rejected the caciquiles structures that emerged from
the revolution, he used them for his civilizing project. Saenz even asserted
that roads as a means of communication would be, more than the school,
the agents of Mexican integration and modernization.>4
    When analyzing changes in the perception of Dewey’s work, it is inter-
esting to note an article published in 1933 in El Maestro Rural (The Rural
Teacher), official publication of the Secretary, which referred to Dewey say-
ing: “It may not be a name that could sound so frequently in the ears of
our teachers because it is associated, in particular, to his system of proj-
ects (sic) in our contemporary pedagogy.” The article wrongly associated
Dewey with the psychology of Thorndike and Stanley Hall. It even said
that Dewey gave to their conceptions a new stamp by introducing the
democratizing and socializing dimension. The article went on to say that

[p. 67] [PDF page 85]

Dewey did not believe in metaphysics or in disinterested thinking and that
his pragmatist philosophy was at the basis of this pedagogical science. But
it also differentiated Dewey’s pragmatism from cruel materialism because
Dewey’s thinking was balanced by objective idealism. The latter distinction
seems to be foreign to Dewey’s ideas.*°
    The writings of Moisés Saenz or those of Rafael Ramirez made clear
that there was a functional approach to progressive pedagogy and to
Dewey’s theories, which emphasized the pedagogical components while
separating them from his philosophy. This was, in part, because most of
those introducing and implementing Dewey’s ideas were graduates from
Normal Schools, who had done additional pedagogical studies, but had
limited understanding and knowledge of the philosophical grounding of
Dewey’s pedagogy. The popularity of Edouard Claparéde contributed to
this reductionist understanding since Claparéde mediated the comprehen-
sion of Dewey in Iberian America.** In 1926, the year in which Dewey
visited Mexico, the Franco-American publishing house published in Mex-
ico, the prologue to L’école et l'enfant of Claparéde on its own, under the
title La Pedagogia de John Dewey (The Pedagogy of John Dewey). This
prologue had already been translated into Spanish and published in 1922
by the Boletin de la Institucién Libre de Ensenanza.* In the prologue,
Claparéde separated Dewey’s philosophy from his educational theory and
maintained that Dewey’s psycho-pedagogy could be used without pragma-
tism. We cannot neglect to mention that the bulk of the philosophical work
of Dewey was not translated and published in Mexico until the end of the
1940s and the beginning of the 1950s, at a time when the Fondo de Cultura
Econémica published the translations made by Gaos, Imaz, or Ramos.**
   The reading and interpretation of Dewey was also mediated by Botroux
and Bergson. Thus, Vasconcelos embraced the French critique of science
and in particular of Darwinism, which was in his view, a colonial ideol-
ogy.°’ Within this way of thinking, Vasconcelos, who, although with some
reservations supported the socializing Action School as an alternative to
the traditional and liberal individualist school, developed over time great
concerns with Dewey’s ideas and pragmatism. Vasconcelos thought that
the emphasis on learning by doing and the notion (poorly understood)
of the school as an instrument of adaptation to the environment were
dangerous. He believed that the latter would lead to an adaptative rather
than a liberating school. This interpretation reveals a reductive reading of
Dewey since Dewey understood education as an experiential/experimental
transformative process. This retrospective critique appeared in De Robin-
son a Odiseo, published in 1935, after the failure of his presidential can-
didacy in Mexico, which he attributed to the influence of America and its
Protestant allies.4° The critique was not only grounded in his spiritualism
and his search for aesthetic renewal, but also in the questioning of North
American utilitarianism as well as U.S. imperialism. Dewey had become,
in his view, a legitimizing instrument of the populist developmentalist

[p. 68] [PDF page 86]

ideas (expounded by Sd4enz, among others) vis-a-vis the spiritualism advo-
cated by Vasconcelos.
   Especially during the 1920s, the “presence” of Dewey in the Mexican
educational political scene had an institutional dimension. There was an
ongoing relationship between the Secretary of Education (SEP) and Mexi-
can educators with Columbia University and Teachers College. In April
1928, Rafael Ramirez, Director of Cultural Missions, visited New York,
commissioned by Secretary of Education Puig Casauranc to talk at an Edu-
cation Conference at Teachers College and publically convey, on behalf of
the Secretary, the acknowledgment of the contribution made by Columbia
University to Mexican education. Ramirez titled his presentation “What is
the American Contribution to the Educational Progress of the World?” He
asserted that Mexico was a country with strong traditions and that it had
been difficult to transform national values; he recognized American teach-
ers for being a source of inspiration and for their support to Mexico. He
made the point that a number of Mexican educators, who had graduated
from Columbia (for example Manuel Barranco,*' Moisés Saenz, Manuel
Gamio,” and Daniel Cosi6 Villegas**), held positions of great responsibility
and were inspiring and shaping Mexican education. Ramirez mentioned,
in particular, the course on secondary education organized by the Interna-
tional Institute of Education for Mexican teachers in the winter of 1925,
which had great relevance for the reorganization of Mexican secondary
education even as it kept its own specificity. Ramirez recounted the con-
nections with the Teachers College including the summer courses offered
at the Universidad Nacional de México, that, in the session running from
July 5 to August 21, 1926,** included, among other scholars, John Dewey
who delivered two courses: “Contemporary Philosophical Thought” and
“Advanced Educational Problems.”* (Dewey’s visit was preceded by lec-
tures delivered by Puig Casauranc [Secretary of Education between 1924
and 1928 and between 1930 and 1932] at Columbia University on March -
23 and 24, 1926.) Ramirez also mentioned in his presentation the coop-
eration agreements between the institutions and regular communication
with American professors such as Dr. Kandel, a comparativist, from the
International Institute at Teachers College and Frank Tannenbaum, both of
whom studied the Mexican educational system.** A large number of teach-
ers attended Dewey’s and other presentations. Furthermore, in 1934, the
Secretary of Education (SEP) distributed and charged a sensible price for
different translations of selected Dewey writings published in the collection
entitled Obras Pedagoégicas de Consulta.
     There is also another point of entry of Dewey’s ideas through the Ameri-
can Protestant schools. In 1885, there were in Mexico eighty elementary
schools with 3,000 children. After the first wave of elementary schools,
numerous secondary schools were founded. As Bastian wrote, the schools
were a key institution in the missionary work; thus, the Methodist or the
Presbyterian minister recently converted became an elementary teacher,

[p. 69] [PDF page 87]

a divulgator of “modern values linked to the preaching of the Gospel,”
including sports.” These bilingual schools gave the children of the con-
verted the possibility to embrace modern values advanced by a new peda-
gogy and become true instruments of social mobility for the poor sectors
in transition.** Protestant schools brought innovative pedagogical meth-
ods, taught skills that were applicable to industry and business, encouraged
problem solving, and conveyed American cultural values.*? From the late
nineteenth century and more clearly early in the twentieth century, Protes-
tant schools were spaces of reception and adaptation of the Social Gospel
and its reformist, meliorist content and progressive education. The presence
of progressive education and John Dewey’s ideas, in particular, were quite
prominent through the work of religious educator George Coe. Donald
Meyer refers to Coe as “the ablest exponent of the progressive ideas, ...a
student of John Dewey.”*°
   The Protestant presence in revolutionary and post-revolutionary Mexico
was not negligible. Protestants, who saw the Catholic Church as an enemy
and an impediment to progress, supported the revolution and the post-
revolutionary process even as they had to deal with the enforcement of
the laws against religious education that affected their schools. Protestants
served in prominent positions in the post-revolutionary administration,
such as the Presbyterian Moisés Saenz.*! In his capacity as Secretary of
Education, Saenz further developed rural education following the Action
School model. According to Miller, during his tenure in office the rural
schools grew from 300 to 6,800, while the number of students grew from
18,0000 to 600,000. Catholics complained that many of the teachers
recruited for the rural schools had been educated in Protestant schools.°*
There were political contacts with reformist-minded Protestants. Thus,
José Vasconcelos was at one point a member of the editorial board of La
Nueva Democracia (1920-1964), a journal of opinion for contemporary
issues with an overall evangelical perspective. The journal was published
by the Inter-Denominational Committee on Cooperation in Latin America
(1913) with its office in New York, whose secretary, Samuel Guy Imman
was an advocate of the Social Gospel and also of Pan-Americanism, a doc-
trine rejected by left-wing Latin Americans and by the Arielists (with whom
Vasconcelos shared views on Latin America).°* Vasconcelos developed over
time, in particular after 1929, a distrust of Protestantism as associated
with American imperialism. Protestant social gospellers and, in particular,
the Committee on Cooperation, had a close relationship with the Teach-
ers College at Columbia University. We note that the Panama Congress
entitled “Christian Work in Latin America,” organized by the Committee
included three professors from Teachers College: Paul Monroe, later Dean
of the College; James E. Russell, Dean at the time of the Congress; and
T.H.P. Sailer. These three were reconstructionists familiar with progressive
education.°4 However, Dewey’s presence as an icon of modern education
and the appeal of his name to legitimize internal policies, that reached its

[p. 70] [PDF page 88]

peak when the populist developmentalists were powerful in the Secretary,
started to decline with the introduction of socialist education.** The latter
was officially established under the auspices of Narciso Bassols, Secretary
of Education between 1931 and 1934, when Article 3 of the Constitution
was modified in 1934. Bassols underlined the social functions of the school,
the development of class consciousness, the emphasis on materialism and
rationalism, and on the de-fanaticizing role of the school. Thus, the refer-
ences to Dewey during this period are not as frequent as before, while the
references to Soviet pedagogues increased. However, given the lack of peda-
gogical and didactical resources adequate to the newly conceived practice
and in light of the failure of the Soviet complex method, the educational
leaders and the teachers continued using the methods and instruments of
the Action School.°°


RAFAEL RAMIREZ: HIS READINGS OF DEWEY

Rafael Ramirez was a central figure in the Secretary of Public Education.
After graduating in 1906 from the Normal School of Xalapa, one of the
most prestigious in the country and the locus of progressive positivist ideas,
he worked as a rural teacher. He then moved to the Federal District (FD)
where he taught methodology at the Normal Nocturna. Ramirez started
his career in the Secretary as a civil servant in 1921, under Vasconcelos.
In 1923, he was appointed director of the first cultural mission in Zacual-
tipan and, in 1927, director of the Department of Rural Schools, foreign
primary schools, and incorporation of the Indigenous peoples. In 1934,
Cardenas appointed Ramirez as advisor to the Department of Agricultural
and Rural Normal Schools, a position that he held while also teaching and
doing administration at normal schools.*”
   Ramirez, along with Puig Casauranc, strongly supported the federal- :
ization of education at the First Congress on the Child that took place
in Mexico FD in January 1921.°8 He staunchly defended the incorpo-
ration of the indigenous peoples, in particular through the adoption of
the “national language,” castellano, as means to build the new Mexico.
However, early in the 1930s, Ramirez embraced integration and also
worked in the definition, divulgation, and implementation of the socialist
schools in line with the policies of the Secretary at the time. This shows
the eclecticism that characterized the Secretary of Public Education and
the overall educational scene.
    In the winter of 1925, Ramirez along with a group of Mexican educa-
tors participated in an intensive course on secondary education delivered at
Columbia University. One can safely assume that he probably attended the
courses delivered by Dewey at the Universidad Nacional de México in 1926;
in the spring of 1928, Secretary Puig Casauranc and Sub-Secretary Sdenz
sent Ramirez to the United States to study rural education. The Teachers

[p. 71] [PDF page 89]

College and, in particular Mabel Carney from the Department of Rural
Education, helped in planning the trip. However, in spite of his exposure to
American and international ideas and his speech at Columbia in 1925, as
late as 1928 Ramirez asserted that “one realizes that the Mexican doctrine
of rural education is well aimed, sound, and hence more effective and that
such doctrine deserves the title of Mexican rural education because all its
characteristic features are its own and not foreign.”
    The first mention of Dewey in the writings of Ramirez appears in 1915,
in relation to industrial education, a necessary instrument “to regenerate
our people sick with indolence.”® Industrial education had been of great
interest to the young Ramirez before he was appointed director of the cul-
tural mission in Zacualtipan, a time when he developed a strong interest in
rural education that would be at the core of his career. The text in which
Ramirez mentioned Dewey is a paraphrased quotation from Omer Buyse
on the industrial schools in the United States. Buyse talked about the ele-
mental experimental schools associated with the University of Chicago or
with Teachers College at Columbia University in which, “guided by daring
ideas, children’s activities became the ground for the teaching and learning
process, placing the role of the teacher in a second place.” This comment
may be construed as a simplified understanding of the role of the teacher as
a guide in the inquiry process that characterized the progressive school, in
particular the one influenced by Dewey.°!
    The reference to Dewey as a professor of pedagogy and not of philoso-
phy may be read as the first filter and in line with traditional disciplinary
divisions in Mexico (and in the Francophone world). More important is
the erroneous attribution to Dewey that Ramirez made, using Buyse as
the source, of the recapitulation theory and, specifically, of the theory of
culture-epochs in the sense that child evolution reproduces human evolu-
tion.*? Ramirez went on to say that instincts of the primitive human being
(man in the original) are in the child and this motivates the child to see and
manipulate things with which his/her ancestors lived. The mission of the
school, then, would be to replicate human evolution by moving the students
through the phases of conscience that superior races had gone through in
order to reach their superior stage of civilization.’    The point here is that
Buyse’s statement is problematic because the application of culture-epochs
to pedagogy and curriculum was promoted by Herbart’s German and
American disciples and his main advocate in the United States was Stanley
Hall.** Dewey critiqued the culture-epochs theory in Democracy and Edu-
cation, since in his view it is the present that generates problems that may
lead to the past; thus, the interpretation in the text does not do justice to
Dewey’s thinking on this matter.*
   Ramirez’s writings in the 1920s and 1930s reveal familiarity with Dewey’s
pedagogical ideas, but his reading does not seem to be rooted in an under-
standing of pragmatist philosophy and moreover has eclectic connotations.
Ramirez conceived a modern rural school informed by a progressive spirit

[p. 72] [PDF page 90]

(his wording) that would involve both children and adults, help improve the
community, and have as a goal to promote the progress of rural civiliza-
tion. Ramirez placed the community at the center of his pedagogy, but it
is difficult to assert that he took the concept from Dewey, although School
and Society circulated in Mexico. The Deweyan notion of community as
an organism constituted by shared experiences, meanings, decisions, and
values that would make significant activities conform through symbolic
communication was indeed in opposition to liberal individualism and had
communitarian connotations. Language and culture were at the core of
Dewey’s understanding of an organic community.
   Ramirez embraced an organic notion of society, but in his thinking the
indigenous culture and language were dysfunctional in the project of com-
munity that he promoted. In 1933, Ramirez wrote an article in E] Maestro
Rural, an organ of the Secretary of Education, on the incorporation of
indigenous people into the new Mexicanidad through the teaching of Cas-
tilian (Castellano was referred to as Spanish). In his view, Castilian was
the instrument to acquire other knowledge, and for this and other reasons
“Indian” children should be taught Castilian to communicate with “us.”
The notion of otherness permeates the approach and was at the heart of the
project of incorporating the “indigenous race” to “ours.”
   Ramirez thought that there were no practical motivations to learn indig-
enous languages (their language), rather the indigenous people had to learn
Castilian (Spanish). Even more, in line with Lamarckian conceptions of
the role of the environment in the formation of the personality, he advised
teachers not to use the indigenous languages in their communications with
the people in the communities and in the classroom because this would lead
the teacher to learn the language and they would risk becoming assimilated
with the indigenous customs and inferior ways of life. The teacher would
become an “Indian,” an object of re-incorporation and re-education him/
herself. The teaching of Castilian (Spanish) would transform the “Indians”
into “people of reason,” a traditional naming referring to Spanish people
and their descendants, as the “criollos.” This conception of language as
a means to introduce the indigenous communities to “our customs and
ways of life that are, without doubt, superior to theirs,” as a basis of the
personality and a foundation of the culture and the national project, is
closer to the romantic nationalisms of the nineteenth century than to the
participatory democratic states of the twentieth.°° The incorporation and
redemptionism expounded by Ramirez implicitly demanded the negation
of the culture of the educatee because in order to legitimize the new proj-
ect, it was necessary to discursively deny the qualities of the culture of the
oppressed.°’ The persistent reference to the missionaries of the sixteenth
century in the Mexican educational discourse of the period underlines the
parallels between the missions and colonizers of modern and contempo-
rary times.** Ramirez stressed the importance of teaching Castilian (Span-
ish) to indigenous children “como Dios manda,” in other words, without

[p. 73] [PDF page 91]

translation to the mother tongue but placing the child in “life situations”
that would lead them to learn the new language through experience, in the
same way they learned the mother tongue. The teacher had to pay attention
to the social impulses that moved the child to express herself and facilitate
socialization among the students while subordinating other school compo-
nents, such as keeping the time schedule, to achieve this aim. In order to
avoid the possibility of involution, he stressed that the teacher was not only
the teacher of the children, but of the entire community. The Action School
became a technology for acculturation and was seen as an instrument to
force “modernization” through the immersion in experiences that would
lead to “superior cultural stages.”® This approach provided justification to
expand public education as a means to control the entire social environ-
ment and penetrate into spheres that had been reserved for the family or
the individual, such as hygiene and sexuality. The aim was to mold the new
Mexican man or woman, the new citizen. It is not then surprising that, for
example, in Carapan, the indigenous people rebuked Moisés Sdenz telling
him that he was not their father.”
    Ramirez’s thinking changed over time. In the 1935 lectures on the social-
ist schools that he delivered to school inspectors working for the Secre-
tary, he asserted, without making reference to Mexico or to his own work,
that the schools were instruments of European and American colonialism
to destroy the indigenous cultures and create a new one, and that “we
could live without another chain” of the many imposed by those systems.”!
Contrary to Dewey, who appropriated Darwinism as a philosophical tool
to challenge artificial distinctions between idealism and empiricism and,
among other things, develop his theory of human nature, Ramirez, as Vas-
concelos and other officers from the Secretary, saw in Darwinism a colonial
ideology leading to domination that had been imposed in Mexico by the
Porfiriato and its ally, international capital.
   Ramirez defined the socialist schools as nationalist, egalitarian, anti-
fanatic, and scientific-materialistic. In his view, the socialized school does
not differentiate itself from its surrounding environment since it was an
instrument for generating social improvement, a collective conscience
among the students, and forms of collective self-organization to achieve
their intended objectives. However, he made clear that this approach did
not mean that the school should be organized as a democracy or that it
should become a lab for strikes.”* Furthermore, he pointed out that there
were not great differences between the new school of this period and previ-
ous programs since the Mexican rural school “is engaging children in work
that is socially useful almost with exclusion of any other activities.”’? This
assertion seemed to contradict the distance Ramirez took from the Action
School in which socialization was a central component. At the time, he
moved to equate the Action School to attention or action (sic) centers that
he attributed to Dewey, a type of school that constituted more a new way
of organizing the school program rather than a global educative project.

[p. 74] [PDF page 92]

The accent on aspects not related to the traditional curricula led to serious
dysfunctions, he pointed out, such as lack of timetables, and vocational-
ization of the teaching and learning processes to the neglect of reading,
writing, and numeracy.” In spite of supporting the notion of the socialized
school, Ramirez identified those dangers and made clear that the child in
the rural areas had the same right to a balanced and literate education, not
merely vocational, as well as to acquire the necessary background to access
secondary education and university.”
   Those were not the only negative effects of the introduction of the
Action School. In spite of the federalization of schools, the Secretary
often took care only of expenses related to basic teaching materials and
the teacher’s salary. Thus, the demands set by the Action School in rela-
tion to land and buildings and the development of activities to be car-
ried out by the community, including keeping a garden, theater, proper
spaces for sports, races, and taking care of plants and animals, were far
more stringent than those of the traditional schools. These new demands
became a heavy weight for the communities and they can be conceived
of as a continuation of traditional services that the members of the com-
munities had to provide ‘in kind’ as communal work or as service to the
cacique.”° But it was the child’s work at the school’s plot that nourished
in the communities a strong rejection of the Action School because they
thought that the school and the teacher were taking from the family this
important component of the domestic economy.”
    Thus, although the Action School could be a valid instrument for the
rural proletariat, who had also lost their instruments of production and
socialization, it was not as substantial for the areas with small land hold-
ings. From the perspective of the communities, attending school was justi-
fied because it transmitted knowledge (such as literacy) that the families
could not offer to the young, while the Action School tried to teach children
the knowledge that constituted the center of their cultural and family life-
with a new twist, generating a sense of alienation in the child. The Action
School went against the grain of the traditional conception that considered
the school as a means for social mobility that would allow the new gen-
erations to liberate themselves from manual work, not for tying the young
generations to a land that could barely feed them. Moreover, the Action
School, in its eagerness to shape the environment, not only invaded spaces
such as religion, morality, and hygiene, that in the view of the rural popula-
tion did not belong in schooling, but polarized and increased factionalism
inside the communities.
   Ramirez showed actual familiarity with Dewey’s pedagogical ideas in
his text Los nuevos rumbos de la diddctica (New Directions in Didactic).
It was published quite late in 1950 in Reinvidicacién, number 14, the
magazine of the Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educacion
(National Union of Education Workers), when Ramirez was away from
politics and educational administration (and consequently had time to

[p. 75] [PDF page 93]

read) and when Dewey could not be considered any longer as the lead
toward a new direction in didactic.”* The notions of learning through
experience, cooperative learning, development of habits and dispositions,
building on experience, and learning by doing are delineated in the text.
He even explained Dewey’s theory of inquiry that was applied to the reso-
lution of problems and that Ramirez described as a form of thinking in
action.” Ramirez does not refer to the notion of systematic research in
relation to the building of a self-correcting democracy, which is a central
issue in the Deweyan theories of education and democracy.*° In practice,
the rural school, so dear to Ramirez, contained contradictions that had
roots in redemptorist concepts of education that could be considered as an
attempt at internal colonization.


CONCLUSION

Post-revolutionary Mexican leaders and educators generated an eclectic
notion of new education expressed in practice in the Action School (action
school). The latter became a technology, a tool, to redeem and incorporate
or integrate (depending on the period) the rural and indigenous population
to the newly conceptualized nation. This was done through the formation
of children and the reconstruction/regeneration of the social environment
to make it educative, in the sense of permeating it with alternative post-
revolutionary values. The Action School offered the means and the theo-
retical justification to penetrate all aspects of the life of the individuals
and the communities, especially those that the traditional school could not
reach such as food production and the raising of animals, hygiene at home,
domestic life, and even religion. The Action School was, in Calles’ words,
an instrument for a revolution in the people’s conscience.
    The premises and aims so specific to Mexico and the educational post-
revolutionary project that leaders and designing educators made were selec-
tive in the importation of foreign ideas on education. Thus, Dewey’s ideas,
in spite of their presence in Mexico and the close relations with Columbia
University, do not seem clearly separated from other pedagogues of new
education. Dewey often appeared mentioned or understood erroneously or
reductively in relation to the ideas of Kilpatrick, Decroly, Ferriére, Haller,
Kropotkin, Lunacharskii, or the complex method.
   In this process of selective adoption, the Mexican educators separated,
following Claparéde (see in this volume Bruno-Jofré and Jover), Dew-
ey’s pedagogy from his philosophy and with the latter they left aside the
reflections on democracy. They were interested in those ideas from Dewey
that could be operationalized in the regeneration of the country and the
redemption of the rural and indigenous population. That is to say that
the Mexican leaders understood and transformed Dewey as an educator
for the construction of the Mexicanidad and the social incorporation/

[p. 76] [PDF page 94]

integration of the rural and indigenous people. The aspect which clearly
reveals the existence of a filter that accommodated and adapted the Dew-
eyan pedagogy to Mexican needs was the ruralization of an educational
model that had been designed in American social conditions. There, the
process of industrialization had removed the means of production from
the families and with that the space where they socialized and educated
their children, and this task was transferred to the school.*! Thus, the
Action School, originally designed as a regenerating instrument for the
urban Federal District, was applied to rural education without evaluat-
ing the impact and the negative effects that its application could create,
including resistance from the rural population.


NOTES

     1. This is one of the three essays on Mexico authored by Dewey and published
        in The New Republic. The other two are “Church and State in Mexico” and
        “From a Mexican Notebook.” They were included in “Impressions of Soviet
        Russia and the Revolutionary World: Mexico-China-Turkey,” an article that
        was sent by the journal to President Calvin Coolidge to generate understand-
        ing and sympathy for Mexico.
     2. John Dewey, “Mexico’s Educational Renaissance” in John Dewey, The Later
        Works, 1925-1953, Vol. 2, eds. Jo Ann Boydston and Bridget A. Walsh.
        (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984), 200.
     3. Dewey, “Mexico‘s Educational Renaissance,” 202.
     4. Ernesto Meneses Morales, et al., Tendencias educativas oficiales en Méx-
        ico: 1911-1934 (México: Centro de Estudios Educativos—Universidad
        Iberoamericana, 1998), 450. Although in a number of writings it is said that
        Moisés Saenz did his PhD at Columbia, the registrar of that university does
        not have any record of his graduation.
      . Ibid.
      . Dewey, “Mexico‘s Educational Renaissance,” 201.
      .
     SANEngracia Loyo, Gobiernos Revolucionarios y Educacién Popular en México
        1911-1928 (México, D.F.: El Colegio de México, 1998), 199.
      8. Moisés Saenz, Carapan (Morelia: Talleres Linotipograficos, 1969), 196.
      9, Paul J. Vanderwood, “Explaining the Mexican Revolution,” in The Revo-
         lutionary Process in México: Essays on Political and Social Change, 1880-
         1940, eds. O. Rodriguez and E. Jaime (Los Angeles: UCLA Latin American
        Center, 1990), 97-114.
     10. Lorenzo Meyer, Rafael Segovia and Alejandra Lajous, Historia de la Revolu-
         ction Mexicana, 1928-1934, tomo 12. Los inicios de la institucionalizacion
         (México: El Colegio de México, 1995), 178; Arnaldo Cordova, La ideologia
         de la Revolucion Mexicana: la Formacién del Nuevo Régimen (México,
         DES ERA; 1972); 35-36.
     11. Elsie Rockwell, “Schools of the Revolution: Enacting and Contesting State
         Forms in Tlaxcala, 1910-1930,” in Everyday Forms of State Formation:
        Revolution and the Negotiation of Rule in Modern Mexico, eds. Gilbert
        Joseph and Daniel Nugent (Durham and London: Duke University Press,
        1994), 183-85; Elsie Rockwell, Hacer escuela, hacer estado: Las reformas
        posrevoluctonartas vistas desde Tlaxcala (Zamora: El Colegio de Micho-
        acan, 2007); Ariadna Acevedo Rodrigo, “Struggles for Citizenship? Peasant

[p. 77] [PDF page 95]

Negotiation of Schooling in the Sierra Norte de Puebla, Mexico, 1921-1933,”
    Bulletin of Latin American Research 23, no. 2 (2004): 184.
Pe Narciso Bassols, “Memoria del Ramo de Educacién Publica. Afio de Nese
    in Debates y propuestas de Narciso Bassols (Toluca: Ediciones del Estado de
    Mexico, 1932), 46.
Uy, Guillermo Palacios, La Pluma y el Arado (México, D.F.: El Colegio de Méx-
    1cOMI OD): Sie
14. Nancy Leys Stephan, The Hour of Eugenics: Race, Gender, and Nation in
    Latin America (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1991) 67-68, 73; Alexan-
    dra Minna Stern, “From Mestizophilia to Biotypology: Racialization and
    Science in Mexico 1920-1960,” in Race and Nation in Modern Latin-Amer-
    ica, eds. N. Applebaum, et al. (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 2003), 187-210.
Ss Gustave Le Bon, Leyes psicologicas de la evolucion de los pueblos (Madrid:
    Escobar, 1912); Carlos O. Bunge, Nuestra América (Barcelona: s.n., 1903);
    Brita L. Horner, El caracter mexicano      revelado por su literatura (México:
    SEP, 1925); Moisés Saenz, Carapan (Lima: np, 1936), 90.
16. José Manuel      Puig Casauranc, Address delivered by Dr. José Manuel Puig
    Casauranc, Secretary of Public Education of Mexico, March 23, 1926, at
    Teachers College, Columbia University, New York (México: SEP, 1926). SEP,
    Memoria de la Secretaria de Educacion Publica 1934, vol. Il (México: SEP,
    1934), 539-40.
i078 Enrique Corona Morfin, Al Servicio de la Escuela Popular (México: SEP,
    1963, 2™ ed.), 46, 67.
18. Primitivo Alvarez, “Informe del Jefe de la Mision, Villa Jiménez, Micho-
     acan,” AHSEP, Direccion de Misiones Culturales, Caja 42, Exp. 10. (1928).
iZB Rafael Ramirez, “El gran periodo constructivo del movimiento educacional
     de México surgido de la revoluci6n” in Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez
     (Jalapa, Veracruz: Gobierno del Estado de Veracruz, Direccion general de
     educacion popular, 1968), tomo VIII, parte 2, 181.
20. Corona Morfin, Al Servicio de la Escuela Popular, 30. Cita: Estudio acerca
     de la educaci6n fundamental en México. México D.F.: SEP, Biblioteca Enci-
     clopédica Popular, n. 183.
OAT Francisco Arce Gurza, “En busca de una educacion revolucionaria: 1924-
     1934,” in Ensayos sobre historia de la educacion en México, eds. Josefina
     Zoraida Vasquez, Dorothy Tanck de Estrada, Anne Staples and Francisco
     Arce Gurza (México: El Colegio de México, 1981), 183-84; Roland K.
     Goodenow, “The Progressive Educator and the Third World: A First Look at
     John Dewey,” History of Education 19, no. 1 (March 1990), 23-40.
Dp Palacios, La pluma y el arado, 66.
May. Eulalia Guzman graduated in 1920 from the Escuela Nacional de Maestros
     (National School for Teachers); in 1914, the government of Carranza gave her
     a scholarship to travel inside Mexico and go to the United States to learn about
     the new teaching and learning methods. In 1922, she was sent to the First
     Women Pan-American Congress in Baltimore, and to the Second International
    Congress on Moral Education and the Teaching of History that took place in
    Geneva. There she met Ferriére and Rudolf Steiner whom she considered one of
    her intellectual points of reference. In 1923, she was appointed Departamento
    de Alfabetizacién (Head of the Literacy Department) in the campaign against
    illiteracy and, in 1930, she was appointed inspector of primary schools in the
    city of Mexico. In subsequent years, she served as acting (interim) Subjefa del
    Departamento de Ensefianza Primaria y Normal (Vice-Head of the Department
    of Primary and Normal Teaching); she also taught pedagogy at the Escuela
    Nacional de Maestros (National School for Teachers).

[p. 78] [PDF page 96]

24. Francisco Larroyo, Historia comparada de la educacion en Méxtco (México:
       Porrua, 1947).
Doe Claude Fell, José Vasconcelos: Los anos del aguila (México: UNAM, 1989),
       30-32, 180; Adolphe Ferriére, L école active, Les origines (Ginebra: Forum,
       1992\ Dele LOS.
     . Morales et al., Tendencias educativas oficiales en México, 390.
     - Salvador M. Lima and Marcelino Renteria, “La Escuela de la accion II,”
       Educacion 2, no. 5 (September 1923), 294.
Mies. Ramirez, “El gran periodo constructivo del movimiento educacional de
       México,” 181.
Do} Eslander was a Belgian anarchist-rationalist who defended the new school.
       He was a member of the executive of the Liga Internacional para la Educaci6n
       Racional de la Infancia directed by Francisco Ferrer Guardia. Eslander wrote
       La escuela nueva. Bosquejo de una educacion basada sobre las leyes de la
       evolucié6n humana (Barcelona: La Escuela Moderna, 1909).
30. Antonio de Sena Faria de Vasconcelos (1880-1939) studied law in Coim-
       bra and at the New University of Brussels, where he was a professor (1903-
       04/1914-15). In 1912 he founded I’ Ecole Nouvelle Biérges-Les-Wavre. He
       worked with Ferriére, who commended his school and recommended him to
       the governments of Bolivia and Cuba. He collaborated with Claparéde in the
       Laboratory of Experimental Psychology and in the International Bureau of
       New Schools. Faria de Vasconcelos disseminated the new school in Bolivia and
       Cuba, from where he exerted influence on Mexico in relation to the interest in
       Ferriére. See Faria de Vasconcelos, Une Ecole Nouvelle en Belgique, Adolphe
       Ferriére, preface. (Paris: Neuchatel & Niestlé S. A. Editeurs, 1915).
      . Patri was an Italian school teacher who migrated to the United States and in
        1928 wrote La Escuela del Porvenir (Madrid: Imprenta Ciudad Lineal).
      . John Dewey, La escuela y la soctedad, Domingo Barnés traduccion y prol-
        ogo (Madrid: Tip. Artistica, 1921?).
      . Moisés Saenz, Antologia de Moisés Saenz (México: Oasis, 1970), 17-18.
      . Saenz, Carapan, 7 and ss, 102, 172-73, 194, 195.
      . S.n. “John Dewey”, El maestro rural (June 1, 1933), 31.
      . For an understanding of Claparéde and the discussion on Dewey in Geneva see
         Daniel Trohler, “Langue as homeland: The Genevan reception of Pragmatism”
         in Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the traveling |
         of pragmatism in education, ed. Tom Popkewitz (New York: Palgrave, 2006).
      . M. Ed. Claparede, “La pedagogia de John Dewey,” Boletin de la Institucién
         Libre de Ensenanza, XLVI, n. 753 (December 31, 1922), , 353-561.
      . Expertence and Nature, translated by José Gaos (1948); Arts as Experi-
         ence, translated by Samuel Ramos (1949); Logic translated by Eugenio Imaz
         (1950); Quest for Certainty, translated by Eugenio Imaz (1951).
       . José Vasconcelos, “Examen de algunas doctrinas pedagégicas contem-
         poraneas: El peligro de Dewey,” in Politica Educativa de la Revolucién
         (1910-1940, ed. Guadalupe Montroy Huitron (México: SEP, 1985), 71-78:
         José Vasconcelos, “Historia del pensamiento filosdfico” (1935), in Obras
        completas 4 (México: Libreros Mexicanos Unidos,       1957), 1152.
    40, José Vasconcelos, De Robinson a Odiseo: Pedagogia estructurativa (Madrid:
        Aguilar, 1935).
    41. After completing secondary schoolingsand the Normal School in Mexico,
        Manuel Barranco studied in the United States for six years, two of them at
        the Normal School and four at Columbia University (1910-1914). His Mas-
        ter’s thesis was entitled “Mexico, Its Educational Problems—Suggestions for
        Their Solution,” Columbia Univ. Teachers College Contributions to Educa-
        tion, n. 73 (New York: Teachers College, 1915).

[p. 79] [PDF page 97]

42. Manuel    Gamio   was an anthropologist, archeologist, and sociologist. He
    studied with Boas at Columbia, where he obtained his doctorate in 1921. He
    was General Director of Anthropology, and Sub-Secretary of Public Educa-
    tion (1924-1925). He was a proponent of incorporation.
43. The future founder and director of the Fondo de Cultura Econémica and
    Rector of the Universidad Nacional graduated in law in 1925 and studied
    economics at Harvard and Cornell. In the mid-1920s he visited Columbia
    and accompanied the Deweys to Vermont. 1947.09.12 (10567): Daniel Cosfo
    Villegas to John Dewey, Number: 10567 in John Dewey, The Correspon-
    dence of John Dewey, 1871-1952 (Il), (Carbondale: Southern Illinois Uni-
    versity Press, 1999-2004).
44, Dewey, The Later Works of John Dewey, 425-26.
45, Jay Martin, The Education of John Dewey: A Biography (New York: Colum-
    bia University Press, 2003), 341-45.
46. Jesus Velasco, “Reading Mexico, Understanding the United States: American
    Transnational Intellectuals in the 1920s and 1990s,” Journal of American
    History 86, no. 2 (1999): 641-67.
47. Jean-Pierre Bastian, Breve Historia del Protestantismo en América Latina
    (México: Casa Unida de Publicaciones, 1986), 103-04.
48. Ibid.
49. Rosa Bruno-Jofré, “To those in ‘heathen darkness’: Deweyan Democracy and
    Education in the American Interdenominational Configuration: The Case
    of the Committee on Cooperation in Latin America,” in Democracy and
    the Intersection of Religion and Traditions: The Readings of John Dewey’s
    Understanding of Democracy and Education, Rosa Bruno-Jofré, James Scott
    Johnston, Gonzalo Jover, and Daniel Tréhler (Montreal, QC and Kingston,
    ON: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2010); See Rosa Bruno-Jofré, Meth-
    odist Education in Peru: Social Gospel, Politics, and American Ideological
    and Economic Penetration, 1888-1930 (Waterloo, ON: Canadian Corpora-
     tion for Studies in Religion, Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1988).
50. Donald Meyer, The Protestant Search for Political Realism, 1919-1941, 2™
     ed. (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1988), 137. Cited in Bruno-
     Jofré, “To those in ‘heathen darkness.’”
   . Daniel R. Miller, “Protestantism and Radicalism in Mexico from the 1860s
    to the 1930s,”    Fides et Historia 40, no.   1 (Winter/Spring 2008), 22. See
   Jean-Pierre Bastian, Los disidentes: Sociedades protestantes y revolucion en
    México,   1872-1911    (México D.F.: Fondo de Cultura Econémica y El Cole-
   gio de México, 1989).
  . Miller, “Protestantism and Radicalism in Mexico,” 22.
                                                   2”
  . Bruno-Jofré, “To those in ‘heathen darkness.
  . Ibid.
  . Rosa Maria Torres Hernandez, “Influencia de la teoria pedagogica de John
    Dewey en los periodos presidenciales de Plutarco Elias Calles y el Maximato,
    1924-1934” (Tesis de Doctorado, UNAM, México, 1997).
  . Ramirez, Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez, Tomo V, 160-63.
  . Concepcion Jiménez Alarcén, “Prologo,” in Rafael Ramirez y la escuela
    Rural Mexicana, Rafael Ramirez (México, DF.: SEP, 1986), 14.
  . Meneses Morales, et al., Tendencias educativas oficiales en México, 389.
  . Ramirez, Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez, Tomo VIII, 13-14.
  ibid. Temo lV; 43:
  elbiae
  . Omer Buyse, Méthodes américaines d‘éducation générale et technique
    (Charleroi: H. Dunod & E. Pinat, 1908), http://www.archive.org/details/
    mthodesamericain0 |buysgoog.

[p. 80] [PDF page 98]

63. Ramirez, Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez, Tomo IV, 28.
64. Herbert M. Kliebard, The Struggle for the American Curriculum, 1893-1958
     (Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986), 45.
   . John Dewey, Democracy and Education (New York: The Free Press, 1944),
     72-77.
   . Ramirez, Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez, Tomo V, 47, 49.
   . Palacios, La pluma y el arado, 70 and ss.
   . Ramirez, Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez, Tomo V, 64.
   Milibidos47,40e56:
    . Saenz, Carapan, 62.
    . Ramirez, Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez, Tomo V, 127, 129.
    . Ibid., 152-53.
    . Ibid., 145-47.
    . Saenz, Carapan, 46.
    . Ramirez, Obras completas de Rafael Ramirez, Tomo V, 37, 40.
    . Saenz, Carapan, S58.
    . Acevedo, “Struggles for Citizenship?,” 188-89; Stephen E. Lewis, The
      Ambivalent Revolution (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
     AOOS), S2-
    . In Obras Completas, which are not organized chronologically, there is no
      date of publication for this work.
    . Rafael Ramirez, Los nuevos rumbos de la diddctica, Rafael Ramirez y la
     Escuela Rural Mexicana (México: SEP, 1986), 93-95.
    . For an understanding of this issue see James Scott Johnston, Inquiry and
      Education: John Dewey and the Quest for Democracy (Albany, NY: State
     University of New York Press, 2006).
    . John Dewey, The School and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
     1899),
