The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Part II
Chapter 5: The Chinese Dewey: Friend, Fiend, and Flagship
Barbara Schulte
Original print pages 83–115; PDF pages 101–133

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 83] [PDF page 101]

5      The Chinese Dewey
        Friend, Fiend, and Flagship
        Barbara Schulte




DEWEY IN FLUX

The topic ‘John Dewey in China’ looks like the prime example of West-East
transfer in education with all the ambivalences that accompany transfer
processes. Dewey’s two-year visit to China between 1919 and 1921 was
preceded by numerous Chinese articles on pragmatist education in general
and on his educational ideas in particular. Barry Keenan, with his para-
mount study on The Dewey Experiment in China, has provided us with
ample information about what happened during Dewey’s visit to China,
and how Dewey was integrated into the then current Chinese debates on
educational reform and, more generally, on China’s modernization.! In this
 chapter, I will not recount this story. Rather, I will look at how Dewey was
 re-contextualized in China over a period of nine decades—from around the
 time of his visit to China when he was welcomed as a friend of the Chinese
 people, to during the Stalinist era in the 1950s when he was demonized as
 the fiend of China and Marxism, and finally to during China’s Open Door
 policy, which was launched in the late 1970s and in the course of which
 Dewey was construed as a flagship of modernization. In the concluding sec-
 tion, I will present a brief overview over the most recent debates on Dewey
and education.
    By focusing on the re-contextualization processes, I will show that Dewey
was not simply ‘misunderstood,’ as a scholar in Deweyan thought might
intuitively feel when reading, for example, Chinese articles on Dewey in the
 1950s.2 Rather, Dewey—both in person and through his writings—offtered
a rich repertoire of ideas and ideologies which the Chinese intelligentsia
took up eagerly or refuted vehemently to add spice to their arguments about
what China should look like in the future. By drawing on either imagined
affinities or perceived incompatibilities, Dewey was twisted and turned to
legitimize certain aims and to reject others. These affinities and incom-
patibilities were rooted both in past and contemporaneous discourses.
Certain collective experiences which Chinese intellectuals had had dur-
ing China’s modernization process from the second half of the nineteenth
century onwards paved the way for ‘pragmatist ideas’ to enter the debate
on education and for the warm welcome which Dewey received upon his

[p. 84] [PDF page 102]

arrival in China. However, there were also experiences that made intellec-
tuals wary of or even hostile to Dewey’s ideas. These contrary experiences,
which led to competing concepts of the educational mission that these intel-
lectuals envisaged for China, were further complemented by the Chinese
experiences with Marxism and Maoism. What makes these experiences so
intriguing is, again, their ambivalence: Dewey’s ideas could be interpreted
both as in full concordance with Marxism and as its very antithesis.
   However, Dewey did not only represent conceptual imageries. Through
his function as a teacher and mentor to a great number of Chinese stu-
dents, through his personal, long visit to China, and, later on, through
his personal involvement in witnessing the Trotsky trial, he was not just
the embodiment of some more or less abstract ideas and theories but a
personality that could evoke admiration, distrust, or even hatred amongst
Chinese intellectuals. Already before entering China, Dewey did not stand
on neutral ground, but was embedded into pre-existing personal networks
and ideological alliances within Chinese elite circles. He was so closely
bonded to his Chinese friends and mediators that it is sometimes difficult
to decide who was actually talking to the Chinese audience: John Dewey,
through his Chinese translators, or his Chinese translators—who were all
important figures in the educational field—through the prominent person-
ality of John Dewey??
    Thus, Dewey’s ideas were received through a prism of collective, old
and new, experiences and through Dewey’s personal alliances with specific
Chinese agents of change. To this prism, another face was added: Dewey’s
ideas were not only ‘transferred,’ nor was he just ‘present’ during the trans-
fer processes; he was also convinced that his ideas were principally trans-
ferrable into other cultures,’ although he was aware of the fact that social
changes—like the democratic movement—had to “come from within.”> To
him, his ideas—and his mission—were linked to the very idea of America
itself: “we need to recover something of the militant faith of our forefathers
that America is a great idea, and add to it an ardent faith in our capacity
to lead the world to see what this idea means as a model for its own future
well-being.”® This faith of Dewey in the potential of the American (demo-
cratic) tradition coincided with his Chinese followers’ willingness to believe
in something that was decidedly different from their own tradition: above
all, democracy and science. Dewey’s visit in 1919 concurred with a move-
ment that was to give voice to these beliefs: the May Fourth Movement.”
    Later critics of Dewey—mainly during the ideologized Stalinist era—
accused Dewey of turning his experimentalist approach into some kind of
religion. (‘Religion’ was a swearword to staunch Marxists and Maoists.)
Taking into account the ardent faith that.Dewey’s former student Hu Shi
(1891-1962)* and others had in ideas such as ‘pragmatism,’ such criticism
is easier to decode. Enthusiasm for or criticism of John Dewey did not only
deal with Deweyan ideas. At least beneath the surface, it also dealt with the
Chinese concepts and ideologies that were associated with his philosophy

[p. 85] [PDF page 103]

and educational thought. The conflict arising from these competing ide-
ologies often took the form of a dispute between those who argued for
‘expert education’ and those who called for a more encompassing educa-
tion, often infused with moral or even utopian concerns. After 1949, this
was reframed as ‘expert’ versus ‘red.’ Chinese education vacillated back
and forth between these two extremes, sometimes going through phases
when educational policy makers attempted to reconcile the two notions.°
   What makes the case of Dewey in China so interesting is the observation
that it was, from the very beginning, not only the American philosopher of
education John Dewey who was praised or detested. Rather, intellectuals
writing on Dewey also always had in mind the Chinese ‘Duwei’—Dewey
as he had been appropriated within the Chinese context. When Dewey,
for example, was reestablished in China in the 1980s, it was not only his
writings that were reassessed, but also the Chinese ideologies and their
representatives that lay behind them. However, this does not mean that
Dewey unchangeably represented only one ideology or group within Chi-
nese intelligentsia, say ‘red’ or ‘expert.’ On the contrary, his writings served
both positions, and were sometimes even used to reconcile these apparently
contradictory aims.
   How did the initial Chinese appropriation of John Dewey take place,
and how did it give rise to the harsh criticism of the 1950s?


DEWEY AND CHINA: THE INITIAL ENCOUNTER

Chinese scholars today agree that Dewey exerted an exceptional influence
on China. It was exceptional not only because it was particularly thorough,
but also because Dewey is judged by these scholars to have had his greatest
impact on China—greater than on any other country, including even the
United States.'!° This status of exceptionality cannot be explained by the
person of Dewey alone. Rather, it has to be linked to two important fac-
tors: first, ‘pragmatism, the key term in the Chinese debate on Dewey at
the time of his visit, had been a hot topic in the modernization discourse
for several decades.   Second, John Dewey     was connected    to persons and
associations that were exceptional themselves—actors, individual and col-
lective, who, at least for a short time, seemed to decide the destiny of the
country. In the following, I will elaborate on these two points and then
discuss further reasons why Dewey could be integrated so successfully into
the Chinese discourse on education at the time.
   In August of 1913, the famous educator Huang Yanpei (1878-1965),
then director of the Educational Office in the province of Jiangsu and later
on the founder of the Chinese Association of Vocational Education, pub-
lished his famous essay “Discussion about Using Pragmatism in School
Education” in a supplement to the Educational Journal (Jiaoyu Zazhi).""
In this essay, he criticized the traditional dichotomy between learning

[p. 86] [PDF page 104]

at school on the one side and, on the other, reality and the professional
world. He called for a greater applicability of what was learned at school
and also for a more child-centered approach in teaching. Every primary
school should use pragmatist materials and methods, and teachers should
take as their starting point real-life situations. Although this is one of the
first times that the term ‘pragmatism’ is used, this thread goes back into
the nineteenth century when modernizers discussed the ‘usefulness’ of
education. (The Chinese term for ‘pragmatism, shiyongzhuyi, contains
the word ‘useful’.)
    Following the forced opening-up of China after the Opium Wars in the
mid-nineteenth century, Chinese modernizers severely questioned the ‘use-
fulness’ of the Chinese tradition. By ‘Chinese tradition, they had in mind
mainly the Confucian tradition, with its exaggerated emphasis—according
to these modernizers—on moral and aesthetical issues and its neglect of
the practical needs of the population. As a consequence, these actors began
to look for approaches that put more stress on ‘practical use’ (yong), and
found it in a Chinese tradition from the seventeenth century, the so-called
‘concrete studies’ (shixue). This practical outlook on the world was to help
statesmen and elites to settle worldly matters pragmatically (jingshi zhi-
yong), and it was based on the assumption that any kind of knowledge
should be useful for the community or the country.
    The argument of ‘practical use’ served as a central thread in the dis-
course of the modernizers of the late nineteenth century. The emphasis on
‘practical use,’ alongside the modernizers’ growing awareness of the foreign
powers, revealed the inherent problems of the Chinese educational and eco-
nomical systems—and of their intimate relationship with each other. In a
communiqué issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1864, the reformer
Li Hongzhang (1823-1901) stated that “what is needed is not studied, and
what is studied is not needed.”'? This phrase, which was reiterated numer-
ous times by various reformers in the decades to follow, linked the idea
of practical use to the problem of human resources, and to the potential
exploitation of these resources through education. Through the argument
of “practical use,” the out-dated examination system was critically revised
(and in 1905 abolished), and new ways in education were tested that had a
stronger orientation towards “application” and “practical use.”
   Thus, Huang’s pamphlet of educational pragmatism in 1913 was no
isolated phenomenon. Similarly, the earlier-mentioned writer Hu Shi, one
of the most prominent students of Dewey, also drew on pre-existing, tra-
ditional concepts to arrive at his understanding of “pragmatism”. In his
memoirs, he remembers that Dewey helped him find parallels between
Western and Chinese science:              .

     He |Dewey; BS] helped me [understand; BS] the research methods
     of classical science and of the historians from the last one thousand
     years—in particular the last three-hundred years—such as ‘kaojuxue’,

[p. 87] [PDF page 105]

‘kaozhengxue’ etc. I translate these into English as ‘evidential investi-
    gation’, since it is an investigation on the basis of evidence. There were
    at this time only very few people (virtually none) who noticed these
    commonalities between the principles of modern science and our clas-
    sical kaoju, kaozheng method. I was the first to have expressed these
    statements. And the reason why I could do so was really thanks to
    Dewey’s theories.'*

Consequently, Hu Shi used the term shiyanzhuyi (literally: ‘experimental-
ism’)'* instead of the more common term for ‘pragmatism’. Just like Huang
Yanpei, however, he favored ‘pragmatism’ over classical learning which he
saw as “much ado about nothing”: abstract things were discussed that had
no relevance; this could only be prevented if one started from looking at
concrete things.'’ But unlike Dewey, Hu Shi had no motivation to be wary
of an over-simplified view of science. In the Chinese context, he saw super-
stition, not scientism, as the real enemy of modern science. ‘Pragmatism’
was a weapon to fight superstition—the weapon.'® As Sor-Hoon Tan points
out, Hu Shi changed Dewey’s statement to “regard pragmatism as primar-
ily a method” into the claim that “Dewey, from beginning to end, only rec-
ognized pragmatism as a method.”'” Hu thus turned ‘pragmatism’ into an
utterly extreme concept that allowed no compromise with more moderate
reformers. To him, pragmatism was intrinsically linked to Western science,
and with it to the superiority of the West as such:

    I unreservedly condemn our Eastern civilization and warmly praise the
    modern civilization of the West. It has often been said that the Eastern
    civilization is idealistic while that of the West is materialistic. This is
    an untruth manufactured by people suffering from egotistical delusions
    ... There are half-wits ... who wish you to believe that the old Chinese
    culture and moral values are superior to all others. There are also fools
    who, having never been abroad, shouted: “To the East! To the East!
    The Western trick no longer works now.’ I want to say to you, don’t
    be fooled. We must admit . . . that we are inferior to others not only in
    technology and political institutions but also in moral values, knowl-
    edge, literature, music, fine arts and body physique."*

Through his extreme interpretation of ‘pragmatism’, Hu Shi was steer-
ing towards a precarious situation. Not only were traditionalists—
or, later on, neo-traditionalists like the philosopher Liang Shuming
(1893-1988)—strongly opposed to what they regarded as cultural self-
denial; other intellectuals, irrespective of their political orientation, were
also critical of such readiness to worship Western values. Dewey himself
was far from demanding such an attitude. Indeed, there were several occa-
sions when Dewey cautioned against eradicating traditional structures,
such as those of the family clan or the guilds, without equivalents to replace

[p. 88] [PDF page 106]

them.'? Hu Shi’s extreme (re-)presentation of Dewey might have made it
particularly easy for Dewey’s critics to attack him either froma traditional-
ist or Marxist perspective. Some accused Hu even of ‘abducting’ Dewey, of
treating him like a ‘puppet’, and of using Dewey to ‘increase his own fame’
and to ‘destroy traditional Chinese culture entirely.’*°
    Nonetheless—and now to the second point of Dewey’s connectivity
inside China—Hu Shi’s personality was one of the reasons why Dewey
could reach such a wide audience. Hu Shi and Dewey’s other mediators
in China were all well-known for their intellectual wit and rhetorical tal-
ent. The educated population took much pleasure in listening to them and
flocked to their lectures as if they were featuring a pop star.

     The charisma of men like Hu Shih gave Dewey’s lectures an effect
     which the near-sexagenarian would probably not otherwise have had
     with the students. [ . . . ]Dewey’s lectures, like his books in English,
     were not clear to his Chinese audience—but Hu Shih was an excellent
     speaker, and his interpreted version was comprehensible to everyone.*!

At the same time, Dewey’s China tour was meticulously orchestrated. Again,
the comparison to the tour of a pop star does not seem too far-fetched. Dew-
ey’s mediators made sure that his lectures received extensive media coverage.
Two journals, New Youth and The Morning Post, reported on every single
event in connection with Dewey; they printed not only his lectures, but also
reproduced short talks, photos, and the like.*? The educational journal New
Education, which was founded by another famous student of Dewey, Tao
Xingzhi (1891-1946; then Dean of the Faculty of Education at Teachers Col-
lege in Nanjing), was so devoted to Dewey’s educational theories that Hu Shi
called it a “Deweyan journal.“?* Since the journal was widely read amongst
Chinese academia, Dewey’s audience must have been familiar with what
he had to say (or what his mediators translated). In addition to the media ~
coverage of his activities and lectures—Dewey delivered some seventy-eight
different lecture forums all over the country, with some of them consisting
of fifteen to twenty lectures each—his translated lectures were published as
books. By the time Dewey left China, a Beijing publishing house had already
sold a dozen editions of his most important lectures, each edition consist-
ing of around 10,000 copies (and each copy containing about 500 pages!).*4
Many of his books that had been already translated—above all, Democracy
and Education—were used as reading material at colleges and universities.
   The craze about his person and lectures did not fail to impress Dewey,
who felt to be “in the hands of young China... We ought to have a very
good time. Quite unlike anything in Japan”, which seemed like “a land of
reserves and reticence.”’> Unlike in Japan, Dewey felt firmly integrated into
the Chinese intellectual landscape. Furthermore, he was provided access to
some of the most central associations of the country since his former stu-
dents had all attained crucial positions not only at important institutions

[p. 89] [PDF page 107]

such as Beijing University and Nanjing Teachers College, but also within
organizations that greatly shaped educational policy at the time, and often
even politics itself. What the German Carl Heinrich Becker, who in 1931
was leading the League of Nations’ Educational Commission to China,
called a “devastating” influence of the Teachers College on China,”¢ can be
re-formulated positively as the vast potential for shaping policy that lay at
the hands of the Chinese alumni of the Teachers College. Through his con-
nections, Dewey was able+to take part in the reform debates and proposals
directly. He spoke at the national assemblies of several educational organi-
zations who between 1915 and 1922 worked on the drafting of a new edu-
cation system, which finally replaced the old system in 1922. (This system
was later on criticized as too Americanized.) While Dewey was certainly
given the impression that he could actually accentuate the reform process,
his appearance at these assemblies—as well as at other institutions—can
also be interpreted as attempts, on the part of his Chinese mediators, to
use his prominence and popularity to pursue their own interests. Dewey
served as a virtual seal of quality if he agreed with a certain reform pro-
posal or visited a certain school. And his approval—or simple presence—
was particularly needed if it was a controversial proposal or institution.
For example, his visit to a primary school where craftsmanship had been
introduced as a subject was reported,’ as was his acknowledgement of the
achievements of the Chinese Vocational School in Shanghai.”*
   Thus, Dewey’s former students and then mediators had a vital interest in
ensuring that Dewey kept his outstanding reputation and wide popularity.
As Keenan notes, they may have even influenced the American opinion about
the events in China, since Dewey’s China analyses that were published in the
American media relied heavily on his former students’ views of, for example,
the democracy movement in China. In these accounts, Dewey repeatedly
stressed that he was indebted to a “close Chinese friend” when analyzing the
Chinese situation—this friend, very probably, was Hu Shi.”’
   A further coincidence made the star of John Dewey rise even higher in
China: his sixtieth birthday on October 20, 1919, co-occurred with the
2470" birthday of Confucius according to that year’s lunar calendar date.
The famous Cai Yuanpei (1868-1940), a former student at the University
of Leipzig and Chinese Minister of Education upon the foundation of the
Republic in 1912, did not fail to point out the similarities between the two
figures by quoting from Confucius, stressing the importance of experience:
“To learn without thinking is a disaster; but to think without learning ts
dangerous.” However, he also pointed to the differences and thus elevated
Dewey over Confucius:

    Confucius said respect the emperor (wang), the learned doctor (poshih)
    advocates democracy; Confucius said females are a problem to raise, the
    learned doctor advocates equal rights for men and women; Confucius
    said transmit not create, the learned doctor advocates creativity.*”

[p. 90] [PDF page 108]

Through such a flattering introduction by such a famous and well-respected
person, John Dewey emerged not only as an alternative to Confucius, but
almost as a sort of alternative Confucius himself: a wise but modern-minded
master who was to be widely heard in China.
   But which were the topics—besides the very general concept of ‘pragma-
tism’—that were actually heard, and how were they linked to acute con-
cerns among Chinese elites? Three groups of themes stand out as having
received the greatest attention in the Dewey-inspired debate of Republican
China: the debate on science and saving the nation, the argument against
‘old-style education’ and the discovery of the child, and the discussion of
vocational and mass education.
     To many Chinese, Dewey was a synonym for modern, ‘Western’, science.
Western science again—or an educational system that was modeled after
Western scientific standards—was deemed necessary for the country and its
people to survive—‘education to save the country’ (jiaoyu jiuguo). Just like
the discourse on ‘pragmatism’, the save-the-country discourse reached back
into the nineteenth century and drew some inspiration from Social Dar-
winism. It made Dewey’s conviction that it was education—and not revo-
lution—that would lead to improvement in China all the more acceptable.
To this older discursive thread of science, education, and national survival
came the scientification of education—or, in Carl Heinrich Becker’s words,
“the dissolution of all real knowledge into gibberish on the method and
psychology of education.”*' With his views on child-centered pedagogy, his
theories on human intelligence, and his practical experiences through the
laboratory schools, Dewey was the ideal representative of this new trend in
education; the high positions that his former students attained after their
return to China certainly strengthened this view. The role of education as
a cure-all to the country’s diseases seemed much more refined now: while
in the traditional sense it mainly meant to train talents and educate mor-
als, the newly introduced methods from psychology promised to provide —
much more efficient and scientific tools to understand and manipulate the
human, and in particular the child’s, mind.”
    ‘Old-style’ education, as has been noted previously with regard to the
debate on ‘pragmatism’, had been criticized already in the nineteenth cen-
tury. Rote learning and learning only oriented towards examinations (in
order to become an official) met with particularly harsh criticism. Natu-
rally, Dewey’s condemnation of an education that was completely detached
from the reality of the child was greeted with enthusiasm by reform-minded
Chinese intellectuals. What further vitalized the debate, however, was the
Chinese discovery of the child, which coincided with the Chinese reception
of child-centered pedagogy within the progressive education movement, of
which Dewey was seen to be the most important representative. During
the May Fourth Movement—which then evolved into the so-called New
Culture Movement—the child was suddenly at the center of attention: not
only as an embodiment of the nation’s future, but as a human being in its

[p. 91] [PDF page 109]

own right.*’ A number of writers attacked the traditional inhumane view of
humans in general and of the child in particular, where the child was seen
as some yet undeveloped form of the adult. One of the most famous modern
Chinese writers, Lu Xun (1881-1936), attacked this traditional misconcep-
tion of the child in his article “How We Are Going to Be Fathers Now.”*4
    Educators inspired by Dewey’s conception of the child started talking
about the child’s ‘innate’ wish to construct, and how this could be developed
into something useful in school education. Teachers were now expected to
foster the students’ “creative imagination” and build up their “constructive
spirit,” while before they had been entrusted with monitoring the students’
progress in rote learning. Through the intake of Dewey’s ideas, the concept
of science was merged not only with its applicability, but also with the
psychology of the child, the uniqueness of each product (of manufacturing
during the learning process), and the freedom of expression when creating
something new.*°
    The last thematic group—vocational and mass education—represents,
like the topics discussed so far, also a juncture of older and newer discursive
threads. The vocational education movement had its precedents already in
the nineteenth century, when the need for trained personnel at the newly
founded factories arose. Vocational education was then mainly conceptual-
ized as ‘expert education’. The reception of Dewey’s views on vocational
education coincided with a shift in focus within the Chinese vocational
education movement. Vocational education was no longer just a solution to
the country’s problem of finding adequately trained manpower. Rather, it
was to solve the country’s most urgent problem: the problem of livelihood
(shengji wenti). Vocational education was thus turned into a mass phenom-
enon and incorporated into movements to popularize education all over the
country (pingmin jiaoyu). When Dewey, throughout his lectures, admon-
ished not to forget the countryside, he hit a nerve among Chinese intellectu-
als, who had become aware of how the educational reform programs so far
had been too focused on the urban areas. Chinese scholars today generally
hold the opinion that Dewey’s visit and lectures inspired Chinese intel-
lectuals to extend their reform efforts to the rural areas.*° However, the
attention of many reform-minded writers and educators had already been
drawn to the Chinese countryside by the time of Dewey’s visit—whether
motivated by the search for bad habits and harmful superstition or alarmed
by the results from educational surveys, which, in the course of the sci-
entification of education, had become increasingly popular. Dewey’s visit
can be seen as reinforcing and adding legitimization to these intellectuals’
efforts to educate the countryside.
   With the merging of vocational and mass education, the raison d’étre
of general education began to be severely questioned. With his objection
to separating general and vocational education, Dewey served as a point
of reference. For example, the earlier-mentioned founder of the Chinese
Association of Vocational Education, Huang Yanpei, viewed all education

[p. 92] [PDF page 110]

92.   Barbara Schulte

as permeated by vocational education. He underpinned this view by quot-
ing from Dewey’s China lectures. Dewey, Huang argued, saw it as the fun-
damental principle of education that the individual was enabled to make
a living as well as serve society; these were, Huang asserted, exactly the
aims of vocational education. In this sense, there was no general educa-
tion: Every form of education touched upon some sort of profession, and
every profession upon some sort of education.*” Likewise, Wang Maozu
(1891-1949), propagator of mass education within the Association,
pointed out that what was understood as ‘vocational education’ really
should be an integral part of any type of education. If all those things that
were deemed useful, practical, and relevant for the professional life were
subsumed under ‘vocational education’, “then what is it that general edu-
cation consists of? Does this mean that general education is constrained
to an education where one handles a few void, abstruse characters?”** If
it was the mission of education to prepare students for life, then any sort
of education, in the end, was some kind of vocational education. Dewey’s
statement (made also during a lecture in Shanghai) that “education was
life itself”, was very well taken. Profession, life, and education now seemed
intricately linked to each other.*”
    As has been shown, Republican China was remarkably receptive to
Dewey’s ideas—again, quite unlike Japan, where the hegemonic reign of
the German/traditional model was a hindrance to any serious intake of
Dewey’s ideas.*” Interestingly, Dewey was able to satisfy the needs of both
progressive and moderately conservative forces. His democratic convic-
tions made him attractive for supporters of the May Fourth Movement,
but at the same time his objections to revolution and to using violence ren-
dered him digestible for those who wanted to reform and transform China
through education. Many even interpreted Dewey’s views on students and
(future) workers as a guarantee of social stability: students were taught to
be content with their situation and make the most of it, instead of turning ©
it upside-down, as the more radical forces demanded. The basic message
of Dewey’s Democracy and Education was, according to this rationale,
transformed into the tenet that “each should be in his proper place” and
“each should be properly provided for.”*' Propagators in vocational educa-
tion were particularly prone to following this line of argument, which was
criticized by contemporaries such as the earlier-mentioned Dewey disciple
Tao Xingzhi as the ‘principle of clothing and feeding’ (yishizhuyi). As we
will see, this ‘principle’ was viciously attacked in the 1950s.
    Dewey’s friendship with China, however, was not without flaws, as his
ideas did receive some criticism prior to 1949. John Dewey met with resis-
tance both among the Marxists and among those who were wary of an
extreme Westernization or ‘copyism’. The latter group was ideologically
undefined and comprised neo-traditionalists as well as moderate reform-
ers and Marxists. Their basic argument was that China should not make
the mistake of copying blindly from other countries—an argument that

[p. 93] [PDF page 111]

had already surfaced at the beginning of the Republic’? and that has been
repeatedly brought forward also during Communist times (including the
most recent reform debates). Borrowing from other countries should take
place only with sound judgment to avoid the past mistake of “taking over
the civilization of other countries in order to satisfy one’s own needs”;
“pumping up efficient results from abroad” would only lead to more “mis-
takes and disadvantages pouring down” upon China.*} Educators warned
that China should not deny its own history and society:

    Since during the reforms those who were politically responsible sought
    only to strengthen [the country; BS], nobody asked why it was the case
    that Japan could copy Germany; people just wanted to destroy, in the
    shortest time possible, Chinese history, to destroy the social environ-
    ment, and to turn a micro-structured agrarian society into a society
    defined by industry and commerce.**

 Although, as has been noted, it was by no means Dewey’s intention to
 ‘de-culture’ China, previous experiences with blind copyism made some
 reformers cautious to embrace his theory. Another reason might have been
 the mushrooming of Dewey-inspired ‘laboratory schools’ (shtyan xuexiao)
 which not all had the quality that educators desired them to have. In a criti-
cal article on these schools, Zhao Yichen sarcastically asks: “as far as the
 laboratory character is concerned, could it be that what is laboratory is the
 method of copying America?”**
    One of the earliest criticisms from a Marxist point of view, according to
Jessica Wang, was articulated in 1921 by the Communist Fei Juetian, who
 held that Dewey was too much engaged in abstract speculations and too little
concerned with concrete facts.*° Other Marxists maintained that Dewey’s
pragmatism just benefitted the bourgeoisie. In education, the pedagogue
Jiang Qi (1886-1951) attacked Dewey’s attempt to dissolve the distinction
between ‘vocational education’ and ‘liberal education’, or ‘professional
education’ and ‘cultural education’. Quoting extensively from both Marx
and Sun Yat-sen, Jiang argued that vocational education, from a historical
perspective, existed long before ‘liberal education’; it fulfilled education’s
original task of developing the social production forces (gesellschaftliche
Produktivkrafte), with which ‘liberal education’ had nothing to do. To deny
the difference between these two types of education would not do justice
to the fundamental importance of vocational education. However, Jiang
agreed with Dewey to avoid the term ‘vocational education’ (and replace it
by ‘education for production’ (shengchan jiaoyu)), since ‘vocational educa-
tion’ could be easily understood as ‘education for profit? (yingli jiaoyu). In
a final move, Jiang conceded that Dewey’s ideas might be of use to China
as long as it had to go through the capitalist stage, since both Dewey and
China were still “extremely conservative.”*” This criticism can be called
almost tender compared with what was to follow in the 1950s.

[p. 94] [PDF page 112]

A SWINDLER      AND    CHARLATAN:      DEWEY     IN THE MARXIST        ERA


The early communists had no fears of contact with Dewey. On the con-
trary, Dewey was on good terms with two of the founding fathers of Chi-
nese communism, Chen Duxiu (1879-1942) and Zhou Enlai (1898-1976).
Even Mao Zedong (1893-1976) went to two of Dewey’s lectures in Shang-
hai and Changsha. In Changsha, in October 1920, Mao was even entrusted
by the Hunan Newspaper Da Gongbao with taking notes of Dewey’s
lecture. According to Lu Guogi, Mao explicitly referred to Dewey in his
early thoughts on education and was clearly influenced by Dewey’s ideas,
although he at the same time admitted his ignorance in recognizing the
ideological divides: “To be honest, I still do not have a relatively clear idea
of all these different -isms and theories.”**
    This peaceful co-existence of ideologies ended abruptly with the dawn
of Stalinism. Dewey was now clearly identified as persona non grata and
class enemy. His former student Chen Heqin (1895-1982) was forced
to publicly engage in self-criticism (renzuishu) and denounce Dewey as
“reactionary”, as a representative of “subjective idealism”, and as the
“ereatest hypocrite and swindler in the history of education.”*” Through
his hypocrisy, so Dewey’s critics argued, Dewey had been able to deceive
a great number of upright Marxists, since he was disguised as ‘progres-
sive’ and ‘leftist’. This made his crime—of being a counter-revolutionary
and reactionary capitalist—all the more serious. As the vanguard of capi-
talism, Dewey became the target of a series of ferocious attacks, or, as
one of his prime critics, Cao Fu,*° put it: “If one wants to shoot a man,
one has to shoot the horse first.” What exactly did this horse carry on his
back to make his critics so upset?
    As has been noted previously, Dewey openly objected to revolution as
a means of transforming China; he was strictly opposed to using violence.
To replace revolution by education was at best naive, from a Marxist point
of view. It was also considered unfair in two aspects: first, Dewey himself
profited from former violent revolutions that had brought about liberal-
ism—why should he not accept the same means to achieve socialism? Sec-
ond, only on the battle ground, not in parliament could the ruling capitalist
class be driven away, who, ironically enough, were themselves masters in
using violence and repression: “It is not that the proletariat does not want
to use the ‘method of intelligence’, but that the ruling class does not allow
them to use the ‘method of intelligence’.”’! But, even worse, most critics did
simply not believe in Dewey’s naivety when speaking against revolution.
Dewey was presented as so cunning as to disguise his real aims by pretend-
ing to be a naive educator; in reality, he was part of a conspiracy that aimed
to keep the workers ignorant and sheepish. How did his critics arrive at
such a conclusion, and which ideological baggage was felt to be particularly
incompatible with the Marxist way of seeing the world?

[p. 95] [PDF page 113]

Clearly, Dewey’s objection to revolution was just one reason—but not the
main reason—why Marxists could not accept his thinking. At the bottom of
what Chinese Marxists saw in Dewey’s writings lay propositions that, taken
seriously, would annihilate the Chinese-Marxist world picture. In the discus-
sion on Dewey, three big topics surface again and again: ‘naturalism’, Dew-
ey’s purported stance of ‘anti-science’, and his proposition of ‘uncertainty’.
    Already in 1950, Dewey was accused of ‘naturalism’ or ‘biologism’—
of applying biological knowledge to the social world in a far too simplis-
tic manner. His critics blamed this on his orientation towards Darwinism:
progress and development were presented as an innate, biological phenom-
enon that could not and should not be manipulated or accelerated through
social forces. In the early 1950s, this position was considered untenable, since
Marx clearly demanded that education promote human development in a
certain direction: “Very obviously, social change without a direction or aim
means that society does not change!”** In the mid-1950s, this was rephrased
more polemically: any assumption based on ‘innate talent’ was, firstly, wrong
because the individual was a product of society. Secondly, terms like ‘innate
talent’ were suspected to be used in order to justify why workers were sub-
ordinate to the capitalist class since they were considered to lack the ‘innate
talent’.°’ As with his stance against revolution, Dewey was presented as part
of a greater conspiracy to maintain the capitalist system. Also, the tone of
the argument became more offensive: Dewey’s writings were described as
“mirroring the monopoly, rotten, moribund stage that capitalism has walked
into”; his Chinese followers such as Hu Shi or Chen Heqin were named “run-
ning dogs” (zougou); Dewey was to be “purged” from China.”*
    Dewey’s apparent ‘anti-scientific’ stance was another point of criticism.
On the surface, this did not seem to threaten the foundations of the Marx-
ist belief. However, it depends on how ‘science’—or ‘anti-science’-—was
defined. In a first step, Dewey’s theory was deconstructed; it was described
as being based solely on psychology, with an inexcusable neglect of scien-
tific content and logic. Ironically, Cao Fu used the same quotation from
Confucius that Cai Yuanpei had used when welcoming Dewey to China:
“To learn without thinking is a disaster; but to think without learning is
dangerous.”*’ Dewey was accused of discarding all scientific knowledge that
had been accumulated over the centuries, just to let the children be little
‘discoverers’ and ‘inventors’; by replacing the discipline-oriented curriculum
by project work, students would never acquire systematic knowledge of the
various sciences. Even more shocking to his critics, the teachers were bereft
of all authority: “the leading function of the teacher is negated.”** Che
Wenbo appealed dramatically to the reader not to forget the teacher as the
“mankind’s positive warrior in the battle against ignorance.”’’ Cao Fu, cit-
ing Pedro T. Orata, voiced his fear that this kind of teaching method would
only lead to chaos or even anarchism.** Regarding Dewey’s child-centered
pedagogy, he summarized the Chinese-Marxist standpoint concisely:

[p. 96] [PDF page 114]

We do not need to use Deweyism as a weapon, because parts of the
     anti-formalism in Dewey’s methodology are built on the wrong basis of
     the child-centered principle. The child-centered principle is individual-
     ist, and we are opposed to individualism. [ . . . ]We should adopt the
     advanced Soviet experience to build a country and should from now
     on strengthen the arduous training in systematic scientific knowledge
     at the schools!°”

The second step in the accusation of Dewey being anti-scientific went
much further, establishing Dewey as a serious threat to the essential prin-
ciple of Marxism: the principle that there was an objective truth that
could be attained through scientific methods. Chinese Marxists were
extremely critical of Dewey’s relativization of truth. Zhong Chengzhang,
in an article from 1963, launched an attack on ‘pragmatism’, which held
that “what is useful is truth.” He expressed his indignation at Hu Shi’s
statement that truth was just a product of humans. This idea was consid-
ered utmost selfish and lacking morality: the relativity of truth was thus
connected to both ‘individualism’ and ‘selfish’, ‘profit-making’ capital-
ism.°° This was a further step towards the inflationary and increasingly
de-specialized use of the term ‘pragmatism’: ‘pragmatism’ turned more
and more into a synonym for ‘selfishness’.
   This accusation of denying an objective truth leads directly to the third
and last big topic in the Dewey discussion of the 1950s and 1960s: Dew-
ey’s proposition of ‘uncertainty’. As with the preceding topic, the theorem
of ‘uncertainty’ was attacked from two angles: on the one hand, Dewey’s
incompetence was to be proven from a scientific point of view; on the other,
‘uncertainty’ was seen as an existential threat to Marxism. From a scientific
point of view, Dewey’s claim that education was “aimless” was ridiculed as
a failure to recognize the aim of education, which was, of course, to inte-
grate the individual into the (socialist) society. A closely related reproach —
was that this kind of ‘aimless education’ had no ideology as a basis, and
thus no standards of ‘right’ and ‘wrong’. As Cao Fu points out, such an
educational theory could serve both a socialist or fascist society; its vague-
ness in ideological terms would eventually lead to the de-politicization of
the school and, consequently, to the political ignorance of students.°!
    Again, critics of the mid-1950s and later were harsher in their judg-
ment: Dewey’s ‘aimless education’ was not just a wrong theory, but in fact
was aimed deliberately at keeping the workers ignorant. By re-directing the
children’s attention to only the most basic things (so-called ‘child-centered
pedagogy’), they were prepared to become workers who could “provide
for clothing and food.” Through such a‘narrowly constricted education,
students would not be given access to systematic theories and knowledge,
which would enable them to emancipate themselves. Students were thus
literally deprived of those instruments that could enlighten them, such as
teachers and books: “If this is not cheating the people, then what is it?”®

[p. 97] [PDF page 115]

Dewey’s ‘theory of aimless education’ was thus seen as “a fairy tale propa-
gated by the capitalist class that education is apart from politics, it is a
kind of vile intrigue in which they [the capitalists; BS] plan to cover up
the reactionary aim of imperialist education.”*} Attacking Dewey on these
grounds also meant attacking those educators, both past and contempo-
rary, who considered it most important to enable workers to satisfy their
basic needs: protection from hunger and cold. This rather technocratic idea
of the educational mission had no place in the increasingly utopian world
of the 1960s.
   The accusation of ‘uncertainty’, however, did not just touch upon edu-
cation being ‘aimless’. To the Chinese-Marxist world view, it meant much
more. In parallel with the enraged refutation that truth was subjective and
relative, Dewey’s   theorem   of ‘uncertainty’   met   with similar resistance,
because it entailed that the course of history as such—and therefore the
future—was uncertain. This was in direct contradiction to the Marxist
idea of inevitable historical stages, and it also dangerously threatened the
designable constructability of the world. As Jin Yuelin reasoned, “we are
able to recognize objective, inevitable laws, moreover, through our correct
recognition, we are able to reconstruct the world.”** As if comforting him-
self and his readers, he then explained that the reason why Dewey conveyed
the picture of an unstable, uncertain world was that the capitalist system
itself was on the verge of collapse; to the capitalists, the world was indeed
unstable and dangerous. Cao Fu, in his argument against Deweyan uncer-
tainty, became almost pleading in tone: “Marxist and Leninist philosophy
has given us a ‘certain’ aim, a correct direction. The Chinese people firmly
believe in this objective and keeps to this direction, consequently, they have
finally found salvation.”® It suddenly seemed that there was much to lose
by following Dewey.
    During the Cultural Revolution between 1966 and 1976, Dewey was
almost completely silenced. At first glance, this is no surprise: as a Western
thinker of the wrong ideology he had no place in the Cultural Revolution dis-
course. At second glance, however, it is peculiar that Dewey is almost com-
pletely absent from the discourse, even as class enemy. There is one article
from 1974—”Who Says that Open-Door Education Is ‘Pragmatism’?”°’—
which can give a very clear clue why this was the case: there were too many—
if superficial—similarities between Dewey’s educational practices and those
of the Gang of Four. In his article, Juan did allude to the fact that “some peo-
ple” had argued that the idea of ‘open-door education’ had some common
points with Dewey’s ‘pragmatist education’. But he then went to great lengths
to prove that one had nothing to do with the other: teachers in open-door
education were farmers, workers, and soldiers; moreover, Dewey’s ‘project
work’ was far removed from the real world, while Cultural Revolutionists
really went out into the real world. These were about the two most concrete
reasons Juan could offer to establish ‘pragmatist’ and ‘open-door’ educa-
tion as antidotes. The rest of his argument dissolved into phrase-mongering:

[p. 98] [PDF page 116]

‘pragmatism’ was a capitalist ideology, an instrument to turn education into
something that was useful to the capitalist class; as “subjective idealist edu-
cational thought” it was clearly the very antithesis of Cultural Revolutionist
ideology. His arguments were to be inversed after the end of the Cultural
Revolution and at the beginning of China’s Open Door policy.


RE-OPENING THE BOTTLE:
DEWEY’S COME-BACK IN CHINA

The end of the Cultural Revolution did not yet see the reestablishment of
Dewey. This had to wait until the beginning of the 1980s. In the meantime,
articles on Dewey uncovered a curious alliance between the Gang of Four
and Dewey: the Gang of Four were pragmatists! Due to the increasingly
slippery usage of ‘pragmatism’, the Gang of Four could be called prag-
matists because they did only what was of use to them to seize power—
and everything that was of use to them was “the truth.”*’ ‘Pragmatist’ had
clearly become akin to profanity by the late 1970s, and was sometimes
used interchangeably with ‘fascist’. Also, the idea of conspiracy or intrigue
was extended to include the Gang of Four: they were accused of repressing
the working class and preventing them from obtaining the knowledge that
would help them to overthrow the capitalist system; by keeping the stu-
dents ignorant of real knowledge, they led them into “blind action.”®
    The Gang of Four had brought about exactly the chaos that the Dewey
critics of the 1950s and 1960s had anticipated if his pedagogy of the child
as the center was put into practice: the de-centering of the teacher led to
vulgar disrespect, the self-organization of the students led to boundless
anarchism, and the idealization of ignorance led to the complete absence
of any systematic knowledge. Even the argument of ‘biologism’ was reit-
erated: just as Dewey maintained that the child was ‘innately talented’,
the Gang of Four held that the youth was ‘innately revolutionary’ and just
needed to grow—without any teacher. Writers from the late 1970s showed
themselves deeply shaken by the Cultural Revolution’s radical inversion of
educational values, which led to vicious attacks both on teachers and on all
‘book knowledge’. Fang Yan recounted, in a further comparison of Dewey
and the Gang of Four,” a particularly representative and detestable event in
which the student Zhang Tiesheng, who in 1973 sat for the college entrance
examination and purportedly handed in a blank paper, was used by the
Gang of Pour to further radicalize their assault on ‘traditional knowledge’.
In their worship of ignorance, illiterates were compared to brave and strong
wild oxen. (Students should grow horns on their heads and thorns on their
bodies to fight heroically against the capitalists.)
   Through their condemnation of a policy and an ideology that were
directed against the acquisition of systematic knowledge, the writers of
the late 1970s brought the notion of the ‘expert’? back into the discus-
sion—the prerequisite for China’s modernization. By placing the Cultural

[p. 99] [PDF page 117]

Revolutionaries and utopian Communists on the same level as Dewey—
whose anti-scientific and unmoral stance was a well-established truth—
writers could reveal the vulgarity and pointlessness of the hostile attitude
towards knowledge.” Fang Yan, in a third article, cites Chen Boda (1905—
1989), a former Communist chief ideologue, as saying: “You don’t need
that much theory, you can neither eat, nor can you drink [by theorizing;
BS], if you can drive a tractor, that’s sufficient”, before emphasizing the
importance of pursuing “both red and expert education” in order to achieve
the aims of the “Four Modernizations.” Finally playing the patriotic card,
Fang Yan accused the Gang of Four of intending, with their anti-modernist
policy, to drag China back into colonialism.”!
   Starting with Deng Xiaoping’s Open Door policy, articles on Dewey
were losing their emotional polemic. While some authors were still busy
with comparing Dewey and the Gang of Four, others started—slowly and
cautiously—to acknowledge his educational thought. This was also due
to the fact that Western scholarship was begun to be read and reviewed
again, in journals like World Philosophy (Shijie Zhexue), Social Science
Frontline (Shehui Kexue Zhanxian), or Comparative Education Research
(Bijiao Jiaoyu Yanjiu). From a political-ideological point of view, how-
ever, any similarities between Deweyism and Marxism were vehemently
denied.” Dewey’s slow reestablishment went about indirectly: through a
re-appraisal of Tao Xingzhi’s educational thought and his contributions
to China, Dewey was re-evaluated quasi en passant. Thus, Tao served as
Dewey’s mediator for a second time—although both of them had passed
on by the 1980s.” Authors on Tao Xingzhi in the early 1980s made it
clear that Tao was neither capitalist nor pragmatist nor Deweyan; still, the
reassessment of Tao’s legacy paved the way for a more positive reception
of Dewey’s thought, since the discussion of Tao’s educational thought initi-
ated a debate on democracy and science.
    In an article from 1981, Chen Hancai described how Tao “critically
absorbed the contents of Dewey’s educational theory that made sense, but
threw away its scum”, and “starting from the needs of the people’s masses
of our country, presented innovative educational contents.””* Chen’s article
laid the groundwork for the Dewey discussion of the 1980s; almost all the
big topics (except for vocational education) that were to characterize the
discourse of the 1980s were at least broached: democracy and the ‘masses’,
science and innovation, Marxism and revolution, and the ‘Chineseness’ of
China’s modernization and reform. Until 1982, Dewey’s potential contri-
butions to this discourse were acknowledged only reticently; while there
might have been some positive side-effects of Dewey’s theory, the core of
his thinking still had to be rejected on the grounds that it was ‘capitalist’
and full of ‘subjective idealism’. The placement of these negative character-
izations changed very clearly from 1983 onwards: they no longer pervaded
the general argument of the articles, but were placed either at the begin-
ning or at the end of an article, to please censorship and be on the safe side.
This change might also have been due to the fact that in 1982, the Chinese

[p. 100] [PDF page 118]

Association for Research on the History of Education (Zhongguo Jiaoy-
ushi Yanjiubui) made ‘Dewey’ a special topic at their annual conference.”


DEMOCRACY        AND THE MASSES

‘Democracy’ was a programmatic topic of the 1980s, albeit less tied to
the right of each individual than to the well-being of the masses. Authors
reminded readers that for the Dewey disciple Tao Xingzhi, democracy
meant “penicillin for politics and vitamin for the mind.”” At the same
time, to be democratic meant to be a man of the people, like Tao: “When
we seek knowledge, why are we doing it? To become officials and get rich?
For the profit of our own little circle? No! . . . The way of the great learn-
ing is: in enlightening the virtue of the people, in being close to the masses,
until the happiness of the people [is achieved; BS].””” In the wake of China’s
Open Door policy, such an attitude was deemed essential for achieving the
Four Modernizations; the Republican educator Tao Xingzhi was seen as
suitable to embody the new program of modernizing the country and incor-
porating the masses at the same time. All of a sudden, he was transformed
into a key figure of the 1980s. The fact that Dewey, with his educational
program, targeted the masses (and not just a tiny group of a chosen few)
and that he wanted to enlighten them, was now re-considered positively. A
further point of resurging interest was Dewey’s stress on ‘real life’ and on
what was really relevant to the people.
   However, there were also seen to be drawbacks in Dewey’s theory, which
Tao Xingzhi, as his Chinese student but not imitator, managed to over-
come: an “exaggerated democratization.” The experience from the Cul-
tural Revolution still vividly on their minds, Chinese scholars were more
than reserved when it came to “let the child do what it wants to do.” Tao
Xingzhi, in contrast, was judged to have upheld a notion of “discipline” ’
which was lacking in Dewey’s thought—but which was thought essential
for “socialist education.”’*Also, Tao’s conception of the masses was felt to
be different from Dewey’s, which became clear through Tao’s alteration of
Dewey’s ‘education is life’ into ‘life is education’. Tao was presented as being
really concerned to overcome the difficulties and hardships of the working
class, while Dewey’s main objective was described as making the working
class adjust to the existing difficulties and hardships. Tao was reported to
have criticized Dewey’s view of education as a “bird’s cage” where a few
twigs were placed to simulate nature—students had contact only with a
“fake society” at school.”


SCIENCE AND INNOVATION

Besides democracy, science was the other catchword of the 1980s—which
rendered this period, also in the eyes of many intellectuals, strikingly similar

[p. 101] [PDF page 119]

to the times of the May Fourth Movement, in which ‘Mr. Science’ and ‘Mr.
Democracy’ had taken the reins. How could Dewey be re-connected with
the idea of science—only a few years after he had been established as the
very antidote of science and was considered even as a threat to the acquisi-
tion of systematic scientific knowledge? Again, the transformation occurred
via Tao Xingzhi, who regarded “the present world [as] a world of science,
the entire Chinese country has to receive the baptism of science.”*° Tao also
brought the importance ofexpert education and book knowledge back into
the discussion: while Dewey, in the early 1980s, was still described as dis-
carding all book knowledge, Tao just wanted to erase the “deadly” attitude
towards book knowledge. Instead of “reading dead books, reading books
in a deadly manner, and reading books to die”, students should “read living
books, read books in a lively manner, and read books to live.”*!
    However, starting in 1982, Dewey’s contributions to science education
could be recognized on their own terms, without Tao Xingzhi functioning
as mediator. Now, Dewey could be called “progressive” again: even if there
were some shortcomings to his theory, his thought, “on the great path of the
spiritual and civilizational development of mankind, had some progressive
effects amidst the transformation process of educational theory.”*? Authors
began to attach great importance to Dewey’s ‘experience-based’ approach,
since they saw such an approach as perfectly suited to the times of modern-
ization. The earlier-quoted Wang Tianyi, however, was still wary of too much
emphasis on the child’s individuality, thus echoing his colleagues from the
1950s and 1960s as well as the concerns right after the Cultural Revolution:

    This emphasis    [on the child’s individuality and freedom;      BS] does
    not only give freedom to the children, but it also sets them free to the
    extreme [ .. . ] An even more serious consequence of this emphasis
    is that it brings chaos to the normal order of the schools, so that the
    teachers are not able to teach anymore, the students are not able to
    study anymore, and the rules that a school should have dissolve into
    chaos [... | This is the real quality of Dewey’s “revolution” or “trans-
    formation” in educational matters.*

His fears, however, were quickly allayed in subsequent articles. Qiao
Youhua maintained that Dewey’s purported stance of anti-science was a
misunderstanding, just as his reported dissolution of all discipline into dis-
respect and chaos was.*4 Gradually, Dewey’s image was transformed into a
figure that highly respected science but wanted to connect it to the student’s
individual experience.*’ Finally, Dewey even served as a guarantee of order
and stability and as a warning against going to the extremes (as had hap-
pened during the Cultural Revolution). Dewey, so these authors asserted,
had not completely annihilated tradition and, even more importantly, he
offered a new philosophy in exchange. To the educationists of the 1980s,
this gave rise to the pressing question: what kind of philosophy did China’s
new education need?*®

[p. 102] [PDF page 120]

The idea of innovation was closely associated with how Chinese educa-
tors now interpreted Dewey’s approach towards science. Considering that
‘innovation’ was to be one of the main pillars of Chinese modernization,
Dewey seemed particularly promising in this search for innovation. For-
merly demonized or at least derided, Dewey’s insights into the psychol-
ogy of the child suddenly began to attract attention. The notion of ‘talent’
(rencai) was back—not as a political entity, but as an inbuilt potential that
could be extracted through the right kind of education. At the beginning
of the 1980s, the idea of ‘innate talent’ was only cautiously accepted and
counter-balanced by the idea of training. Thus, Wang Tianyi cautioned
against a neglect of training by putting too much stress on the individual
development: “there will be eight or nine out of ten who will not be able to
become useful talents. A human being definitely needs to go through educa-
tion, and also needs to go through patient and meticulous training.” Oth-
erwise, mankind would have to go back to “dwelling in caves and living in
the wilderness” again.*” The end of the 1980s, on the eve of the Tianan-
men Massacre, was witness to a full embracement of Dewey’s emphasis on
individuality and creativity; there was no other way towards becoming an
innovative country:

      Do the analysis and the criticism that Dewey presented with regard
      to the past educational theory and the then current educational prac-
      tice in the West offer points which the present school education of our
      country should consider or can draw lessons from? I think they do.
      Remember how comrade Liu Fonian once pointed out with regard to
      postgraduate examinations that there were quite a few who memorized
      mechanically and learned by rote. Passing the examinations for middle
      school, for university, even for postgraduate programs, is all based on
      memorizing mechanically and learning by rote. These people have never
      paid attention to training their own creative thinking capability, they
      have never wanted to grasp true skill and genuine practical knowledge
      [...] In their future work they will inevitably teach their trammeling
      conventionalities to the students, how can we, with this method, train
      the students’ active character, develop their cognitive skills?**


MARXISM AND REVOLUTION

Interestingly enough, the author just quoted closed his article with a para-
graph on Marx—but not, as it had been usually the case, as a kind of cor-
rective or at least complement to Dewey; but to underline the importance
of human thinking. This is symptomatic of how the image of Marxism was
polished in order to fit the new times. But how were Marx and the idea of
revolution reconciled with the American capitalist Dewey, who was outspo-
kenly against revolution as a means to change society?

[p. 103] [PDF page 121]

Again, Tao Xingzhi served as mediator in the initial phase of reestab-
lishment. Through him, Dewey’s thoughts could evolve into real dialectical
thinking, by unifying teaching, learning, and doing. Moreover, Tao quickly
recognized the necessity of revolution, and of education to serve the revolu-
tion. He was thus seen as having succeeded in transforming the ‘education-
for-survival’ discourse (jiaoyu jiuguo), which Dewey was considered part
of, into a ‘revolution-for-survival’ discourse (geming jiuguo).*? Apart from
that, the notion of ‘revolution’ (and its necessity) faded more and more into
the background. Modern Marxism could increasingly do without revolu-
tion, and in this process, Dewey became decreasingly capitalist: the tra-
ditional school system against which Dewey crusaded had after all been
a capitalist school system!”” Also, Dewey’s resistance against segregating
students through education, by providing to one group a “preparation for a
life of leisure”, and to the other group a “preparation for a life of productive
work”, was now perceived as anti-capitalist.”!
    Others differentiated between Dewey as theorist and Dewey as prac-
titioner: while his political attitude was “wrong in theory”, his approach
yielded useful results in practice.”? But even the philosophers, who by their
very nature were more concerned with Dewey’s theory than their counter-
parts in education, began to see good points in Dewey. Dewey was praised
for his dialectic method, and his criticism of Marxism was seen as mainly
directed against the “false” Marxists (as well as the “right” Marxists who
had made a mistake), who had proposed theories of economic determinism.
The authors also acknowledged that in socialist societies, there could “hap-
pen” some “feudal” elements which were even worse than capitalism (such
as Stalinism), and Dewey had been right to criticize these “elements.””* Put
that way, Dewey was no more a threat to socialism as such, but merely—
and justly so—to its deformations.


MODERNIZATION          A LA CHINOISE

Dewey was also re-discovered on the grounds of his—in Chinese eyes—
balanced view of society and individual. While only years before he had
been the ill-reputed representative of excessive individuality and selfish-
ness, he went through an astounding metamorphosis in the 1980s and
emerged as a wise compromise between the Rousseauean notion of a
“too individualistic education” and the German or Japanese national-
ist programs which aimed at subjecting the future citizens completely to
the interests of the state.’ Dewey was seen as reconciling the apparent
contradiction and tension between individual and society, through an
education that served the interests of both the individual and society. In
the 1980s—as today—this was perceived to be one of the major chal-
lenges: how to individualize society without de-socializing the individ-
ual. Dewey seemed to provide useful answers in this regard. A similar

[p. 104] [PDF page 122]

reconciliatory tone began to pervade the simultaneity of ‘old’ and ‘new’
knowledge: Dewey was now perceived as having found the way how to
transmit knowledge that had accumulated over the history of mankind in
a manner that linked it to fresh, individual experience.”
    Finally, Chinese authors increasingly identified with Dewey and the situ-
ation that he had faced during his lifetime: a situation “where we are fac-
ing a new break-through in industry, economy, and technology.”’* Dewey’s
historical situation was no more described as a stage where capitalism was
about to collapse, but as a stage of utmost importance for technological
development and innovation, as a time of great challenges, to which educa-
tion had to react and readjust. The portrayal of Deweyan education had
thus been successfully readjusted as well, from an ‘aimless’ (and thus ‘use-
less’) education to one of the strongest and most influential instruments to
change society.””


VOCATIONAL EDUCATION

In the mid-1980s, one more part from Dewey’s educational thought was
recovered and re-activated in China: his ideas about vocational education.
In the more ideologized phases of Chinese education, there was hardly
any space for vocational education: if every worker could become a doc-
tor and every farmer a professor, there was no need to submit anybody to
vocational training. Moreover, as has been noted previously, vocational
education was, on the one hand, heavily criticized as an instrument to
appease the masses and thus reproduce the ruling capitalist system: by
making workers content, they would never emancipate themselves. On
the other hand, the ‘expert’ interpretation of vocational education as
‘technical training’ was regarded by many as too narrowly defined and
not suited to a socialist type of education. While Dewey, in the 1950s and.
1960s, had clearly been seen as using the capitalist strategy of ‘appease-
ment’ in vocational education, authors of the mid-1980s and later reval-
ued Dewey’s holistic conception of vocational education, which was seen
to permeate his entire educational outlook. What’s more, with the help of
Dewey, vocational education could represent much more than just some
training in a special technology or skill. It was now life itself, and a tool
to help each individual develop to its fullest.
   This new kind of Dewey-inspired vocational education targeted two
groups: workers and children. As Wang Peixiong pointed out, the new
times were in need of an education that would “make the workers aware
of the scientific and social basis of their vocation, as well as of the meaning
of their vocation.”"* Vocational education was now understood as a part
of the cultivation process of each individual and not as the technical coun-
terpart of general education. With regard to child education, vocational
education was to attain moral functions. Referring to Dewey’s notions of

[p. 105] [PDF page 123]

‘social empathy’ and ‘sense of responsibility’, authors urged to engage in
vocational education not just for economic reasons, but in order to develop
the child’s social competence and to make it understand the professions—
and, consequently, real life—in a holistic, scientific manner.°? In this line of
argument, there was no more mentioning of Dewey’s methods leading to
chaos and anarchy. On the contrary, his educational thought was seen to
provide guidelines for a society which, due to the changing conception of
Marxism, was increasingly losing its ideological basis.!"°
    In terms of published articles, the end of the 1980s saw a Dewey wave,
followed by silence in the second half of 1989, just after the suppression of
the democracy movement. As Beate Geist puts it:

    June 4 brought the (pluralistic) debate on culture held in the 1980s to
    an end. It has been followed by a prescribed recollection of the long
    and glorious history and culture of China, with the unambiguously
    political goal of counteracting the anti-traditionalism and the national,
    historical, and cultural nihilism of the preceding years. Emphasis is put
    on the ‘diffusion of the excellent national culture’ (hongyang minzu
    youxiu wenhua). It was intended to strengthen national self-confidence
    and national unity—and social stability.'”!

In October   1989, Confucius    was   re-enthroned, the old master of social
and state-individual relations. Intellectuals were busy with “Searching for
Educational Values that Put Equal Stress on Society’s Needs and Individual
Development”, as the title of one article from 1990 reads.'* This article
relapsed into previous arguments in which the United States served as a
deterring example of a “self-service model” in education, leading to selfish
individuality on the side of the students. The socialist society, in contrast,
was presented as the ideal compromise where individual and societal inter-
ests were reconciled. Socialist education was to “adjust” to the needs of
society, but also to pay full attention to each person’s development. Further
goals were to merge the best of Chinese and Western culture, revive the
traditional culture, and build a new culture that would correspond to the
current political and economic structure and promote the “evolution of the
race and the progress of society.”
   The reversion to Dewey criticism did not last long. Soon, Dewey was
discovered as a way out of the Bermuda triangle of state, society, and indi-
vidual. Dewey was seen as offering a solution to the conflict between indi-
vidual and society through his proposition that one could not exist without
the other. Individual development was to be emphasized, but for the sake of
society, which again could only thrive if individuals were fully developed.
This ‘harmonization’ of individual and societal interests was to be achieved
through the school. Drawing on Dewey’s writings on the school, the school
was to be a small cooperative society of its own. Contrary to earlier criti-
cism that Dewey’s school was still too detached from reality, the modern

[p. 106] [PDF page 124]

school should not be confused with society but be turned in “a better kind
of society.”' In a neat move that topped the argument off, Dewey’s ideal
society—now no more under criticism—was judged to be feasible only in
the communist system!
   Also starting in the 1990s, there has been a resurging interest in Repub-
lican China. Both Republican China and the China of the 1990s were felt
to be at crossroads. The (historical) topics in connection with Dewey that
were broached within this research strand can be easily associated with
more contemporary concerns. Drawing on quotations from Dewey, authors
recounted instances of resistance against a too Western-oriented ‘copyism’
and against the erasure of tradition. They also recalled Dewey’s emphasis
ona strong state, which should entrust things of public interest (such as the
railway system) into private hands.'"° Most recently, research on Republican
China has made the ideological divides between Dewey, Mao, and Marx
much more permeable: authors argue for a Marxian influence on Dewey'”°
and a Deweyan influence on Mao.'°’ In a time when fewer and fewer people
are interested in Marxism, the discovery that the United States’ most rep-
resentative philosophy, pragmatism, was originally derived from Marxism
can only raise the value of this ideology: “This expresses [ .. . ] what a
strong power Marxism possesses, and makes us even more determined to
use Marxism as our leading ideology and be consistent in following the
path of socialism with Chinese characteristics.”  !"*


DEWEY IN RECENT CHINESE DEBATES—AN                   OUTLOOK

In this last section, I will sketch out roughly the topics that have been domi-
nating the most recent Chinese discussions of Dewey. The focus on individ-
uality, creativity, and talent still figures prominently in the discourse'”’ and
has been integrated into the debate on ‘quality education’ (suzhi jiaoyu). °
‘Quality education’ had emerged in the 1990s as a more holistically ori-
ented education and as opponent of the traditional ‘examination-oriented
education’ (yingshi jiaoyu);''" it was condensed into educational programs
launched at the beginning of the new millennium. Dewey and ‘quality edu-
cation’ are judged to share the same views on the aims, the curriculum,
and the methods of education. Dewey’s emphasis that ‘education is life’,
and his stress on experience and ‘active development’ are felt to be highly
compatible with the orientation of ‘quality education’. Both aim at “raising
the quality of the citizen” and “making this new-born generation of citizens
adjust even better to the changing social life, and, even more importantly,
making them create an even better, more progressive society.”!!!
   Consequently, Dewey is used to justify educational reforms that should
lead away from examination-oriented, ‘useless’ knowledge and from the
Chinese “military”-style tradition of education.''2? A number of reform-
minded authors see the conflict between traditional and quality education

[p. 107] [PDF page 125]

embodied in the two educators Herbart and Dewey: Herbart’s view on
education is reflected in the traditional Chinese teaching style, whereas
Dewey’s educational thought lies at the heart of the present-day reform.
Noting that the guiding role that Dewey envisions for the modern teacher
is a great challenge in the actual teaching process, Zhou Hailing argues for
a dialectical approach: “Therefore we must learn useful, reliable knowledge
and seek for the yet unknown knowledge, absorb what is already there and
nurture the search for the unknown path.”!'> However, the more authors
argue for ‘using’ Dewey in the present-day reform of education, the blurrier
this Dewey becomes. Some authors actually complain that Dewey raised
“demands of a very general nature, but did not provide a clear, easy-to-use
model to work with.”''* Other articles read outright bizarrely, for exam-
ple when students are encouraged to develop “independent thinking” and
“individuality”, but at the same time follow “the correct world view, view
on human life, and view on values.”!'5
    Probably due to this mantra-like stress on ‘individuality’, there are also
warnings against an all too mechanical ‘application’ of Dewey’s thought to
‘quality education’. As Zhu Guohui and Luo Yaocheng remind their read-
ers, a well-rounded individual—the aim of ‘quality education’-—cannot be
achieved without real individuality:

    For a long time, the higher education of our country has been aiming to
    train a standard adaptation to society, the main function of education
    was to promote the socialization of the individual. The quiet arrival of
    the knowledge economy urgently cries out to higher education to train
    a great number of innovative human talents, but the key to training
    innovative human talents lies in the development of a person’s individu-
    ality, this has brought a new challenge to our country’s higher educa-
    tion which has been traditionally “oriented towards society.”  ''

Thus, Dewey is not only used to legitimize new educational programs such
as ‘quality education’, but also to critically evaluate if these programs are
being carried out in reality—or if they are just serving as rhetoric banners
on the surface.
   The conception of ‘quality education’ is tightly knit into the broader
discussion of what should be the moral and ethical basis of present-day
society. Articles from across the past decade still mirror the search for the
right balance between individualization and socialization. Several authors
use historical comparisons to stress the simultaneous importance of indi-
viduality and sociability. While Confucius''’ and the earlier-mentioned
philosopher Liang Shuming''* are used—alongside Dewey—as more tra-
ditional examples that can propagate the moralization of society, Mao
Zedong serves (again together with Dewey) as a more recent legitimization
that ‘morals’ are just as important as knowledge. Dewey is now seen to
have considered ‘moral education’ as the means to keep society stable and

[p. 108] [PDF page 126]

to promote the economy. Thus, the previous accusation that Dewey used
education to manipulate and stupefy the working class has been conversed
into a full appraisal of his purported instrumental use of education.’
    Almost inevitably, these discursive tropes of ‘quality education’, ‘indi-
vidual and society’, and ‘moral education’ are blended in the vision of the
current president, Hu Jintao, to “build a socialist harmonious society.”'”°
Dewey’s idea of placing the human in the center is seen as the “basis for
building a harmonious society”,'*! which cannot afford to have students
who “do not participate in the most basic activities of society” and therefore
has to put more emphasis on moral education.'** Also vocational education,
in continuation of the Dewey exegesis that had started in the mid-1980s,
is seen as an instrument to bring about this harmonious society—but only
if not reduced to technical training. Harmony would be achieved in two
ways: first, vocational education helps to find the proper occupation, from
which one would gain satisfaction: “In general, occupational activity is the
only means to let a person’s specific talents and his service to society achieve
a balance.”!3 Second, transmitting profession-related ethics would train
“persons in harmony” and “workers of a high quality”, thus preventing
them from becoming “useless machines.”       !*4 Clearly, ‘red’ and ‘expert’ have
been reconciled to produce the happy couple of ‘harmony’ and ‘quality’.
    However, Dewey is not just state ideology. His moral authority in Chi-
nese scholarship is not exhausted in repetitive references to a ‘harmonious
society’. He is also used as a weapon against ‘neo-liberalism’—as the true
representative of a liberalism that has nothing to do with the Chinese
neo-liberalism of the wild 1990s.'7° It is pointed out that Dewey would
have never sacrificed ‘equality’ for the sake of ‘freedom’—as some Chi-
nese advocates of liberalism would today. Freedom should not be in pos-
session of a small (capitalist) minority, but of the highest possible number
of people, even if this meant for the state to restrict the freedom in some
well-defined areas. Likewise, another article points to Dewey’s emphasis
on the steering capacity of the state—in contrast to the views of ‘old’ lib-
eralists like Locke. Democracy, according to this view, was not a means to
achieve liberalism, but the morally legitimate basis for a society to discuss
its needs and interests.'*°
    Interestingly, Dewey has replaced Marx in this discussion—who would
have been the most natural reference in any argument against neo-liberal-
ism, at least from a Western point of view. Thus, Dewey has successfully
undergone three metamorphoses: from the very antithesis of science and
knowledge, he changed into an emblem for innovative science; his deeply
immoral, selfish, capitalist character was transformed into a symbol of the
(almost apolitical) harmonization of individual and society; and, finally,
from a victim of Marxist-cum-socialist       criticism, he has turned     into a
stakeholder of Chinese state governance vis-a-vis Chinese neo-liberalism.
John Dewey—or rather Duwei—has really become both ‘red’ and ‘expert’.

[p. 109] [PDF page 127]

NOTES

    . Barry Keenan, The Dewey Experiment in China. Educational Reform and
      Political Power in the Early Republic (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
     University Press, 1977).
    . Similarly, Jessica Wang argues that “[mlJost criticisms of Dewey were misun-
      derstandings”; see Jessica Ching-Sze Wang, John Dewey in China. To Teach
      and to Learn (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 2007).
    - Wang makes a similar argument in her sub-chapter “Whose Teaching? Or
     Hu’s Teaching?,” ibid., 30-40.
    . This is also noted by Bong-Ki Kim, Das Problem der interkulturellen Kom-
      munikation am Beispiel der Rezeption Deweys in China [The Problem of
      Intercultural Communication Through the Example of the Reception of
      Dewey in China], Duisburg Working Papers on East Asian Studies no. 19
      (Duisburg: Institute for East Asian Studies, Gerhard-Mercator-Universitat
     GH Duisburg,     1999).
    . See James Scott Johnston, “Can Democratic Inquiry Be Exported? Dewey
      and the Globalization of Education,” in Democracy as Culture: Deweyan
        Pragmatism in a Globalizing World, ed. Sor-hoon Tan and John Whalen-
        Bridge (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2008), 69. Johnston quotes Dewey as say-
        ing that “the problem is to extract the desirable traits of forms of community
        life which actually exist, and employ them to criticize undesirable features
       and suggest improvement;” ibid., 76.
     . Quoted in Keenan, The Dewey Experiment, 7.
   SISIn this patriotic-revolutionary movement, students and intellectuals not only
     .
       protested against the loss of national sovereignty but also advocated a ‘new
       culture’ that rejected the Confucian tradition and that should be accessible
       for everyone both in terms of ideology and language.
     . Hu Shi was a famous writer and prominent figure in the May Fourth Move-
       ment. During his lifetime he fought for a new Chinese culture and language
       which would be intelligible to everyone (in contrast to Classical Chinese).
       After his studies at the Teachers College, he was a professor at Beijing Uni-
       versity (later on its chancellor).
     . On this ideological pendulum in Chinese education, see e.g., Chan Hoiman,
       “Modernity and Revolution in Chinese Education: Towards an Analytical
       Agenda of the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution,” in Educa-
       tion and Modernization. The Chinese Experience, ed. Ruth Hayhoe and
       Zhu Weizheng (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1992), 73-99.
 IMO} See e.g., Zhou Ye, “‘Xin Jiaoyw yu Zhongguo jiaoyu jindaihua [The Jour-
       nal Progressive Education and the Modernization of Chinese Education],”
       Gaodeng Jiaoyu Yanjiu 26, no. 1 (2005): 83-84. This claim is made despite
       the fact that by the late 1930s, more than 5,000 progressive schools were in
       operation in the United States. | am grateful to the anonymous reviewer for
       this information.
 ih. Huang Yanpei, “Xuexiao jiaoyu caiyong shiyongzhuyi zhi shangque [Discus-
       sion about Using Pragmatism in School Education],” Jiaoyu Zazhi 5, no. 7
       (1913) (supplement): 55-82.
 12, Li Hongzhang, “Jiangsu xunfu Li Hongzhang yuanhan [The Original Letter
       by Li Hongzhang, Provincial Governor of Jiangsu]” [1864], Chouban Yiwu
       Shimo: Tongzhichao [Chronicle of Barbarian Matters from the Beginning
       to the End [of the Oing-Dynasty]: Tongzhi-Period] 5, section 25 (Taibet:
       Guofeng Chubanshe, 1963), (originally 4-12), 624.

[p. 110] [PDF page 128]

ilies Hu Shi, Hu Shi Koushu Zichuan [Hu Shi’s Oral Autobiography], translated
      by Tang Degang (Beijing: Huawen Chubanshe, 1989), 107-08. This is the
      Chinese translation of audiotapes which have recorded Hu Shi’s memoirs
      and are kept at Columbia University.
14. See Xia Jun, “Duwei shiyongzhuyi lilun yu Zhongguo xiangcun jianshe yun-
      dong [Dewey’s Theory of Pragmatism and the Movement to Construct the
      Countryside in China],” Minguo Dang’an 3 (1998): 63.
ID. See Yuan Qing, “Duwei de Zhongguo zhi xing jiqi yingxiang [Dewey in
      China and His Influence],” Jindaishi Yanjiu 2 (2001): 149.
16. Yuan Qing calls the newly introduced ‘pragmatism’ a weapon for Chinese
      intellectuals to fight traditional education; see Yuan, “Duwei de Zhongguo
      zhi xing.”
 iW, Sor-hoon Tan, “China’s Pragmatist Experiment in Democracy: Hu Shih’s
      Pragmatism and Dewey’s Influence in China,” Metaphilosophy 1/2 (2004):
      51-52.
18. Quoted in Y. C. Wang, “Intellectuals and Society in China 1860-1949,”
      Comparative Studies in Society and History 3, no. 4 (1961): 410.
 12. See e.g., Yang Fengyin, “Duwei he Luosu de Zhongguo jindaihua fang’an
     [Dewey’s and Russell’s Programs for China’s Modernization],” Jianghuai
      Luntan 4 (2002): 68-72.
AY), Wang, John Dewey in China, 33 (see n. 2). According to Wang, Dewey was
     aware of being ‘used’: “Dewey knew that what he symbolized was more
     important than what he said;” ibid., 39.
     . Keenan, The Dewey Experiment, 13 (see n. 1).
     . Yuan, “Duwei de Zhongguo zhi xing,” 139ff. (see n. 15).
     . Ye, “‘Xin Jiaoyw’ yu Zhongguo jiaoyu jindaihua,” 87-92.
     . Yuan, “Duwei de Zhongguo zhi xing,” 142; Zhang Liangcai, “Duwei lai
       Hua dui Zhongguo jiaoyu de yingxiang [The Influence of Dewey’s Visit
       to China on Chinese Education],” Liaoning Gaodeng Jiaoyu Yanjiu 89, 6
      (1996): 97-102.
 2o5)n Wang, John Dewey in China, 4 (see n. 2). See the chapter on Japan by Jeremy
       Rappleye in this volume.
 26. See his eighth letter in Carl Heinrich Becker in China. Reisebriefe des ehe-
      maligen preufsischen Kultusministers 1931/32, ed. Susanne Kuf, Berliner
      China-Studien/Quellen und Dokumente (Minster: LIT, 2004), 151.
 OW Ni Zhuhua, “Xiaoxue gongyike jiaoxue he shebei de shangque [A Discus-
      sion of the Didactics and Facilities of Craftsmanship Instruction at Primary
      Schools],” Jiaoyu yu Zhiye 26 (1921): 1-6.
 2S Ni Zhuhua, “Zhonghua Zhiye Xuexiao gaikuang [The General Situation of
      the Chinese Vocational School],” Jiaoyu yu Zhiye 20 (1920): 1-6.
 ie) See Keenan, The Dewey Experiment, 23. While Wang stresses the differ-
      ences in opinion between Dewey and Hu Shi, she does not present convinc-
      ing evidence that Dewey was able to obtain first-hand information without
      relying on his Chinese friends, given his limited knowledge of the Chinese
      language and society (as he himself admitted). Overall, Wang’s account is
      pervaded by the underlying conviction that Dewey, by way of sympathy with
      the Chinese people and his far-sightedness, grasped the complexities of Chi-
      nese society; see chapter 4 in Wang, John Dewey in China (see n. 2).
 30. Keenan, The Dewey Experiment, 10.
    . See his seventh letter in Carl Heinrich Becker in China, 133 (see n. 26).
 a2, Cf. Li Sanfu, “Shilun Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyu sixiang yu Zhongguo
      jiaoyuxue kexuchua [A Tentative Discussion of Dewey’s Pragmatist Edu-
      cational Thought and the Scientification of Chinese Educational Science],”
      Yunnan Shifan Daxue Xuebao 4 (2001): 13-17.

[p. 111] [PDF page 129]

333 This was paralleled by the discovery of the woman as a complete human
     being. It was no coincidence that Alice Dewey lectured on women’s rights
     during the couple’s stay in China.
   . Sun Jianjiang, “Duwei ‘Ertong Benweilun’ jiqi yu Zhongguo ertong wenxue
     de guanxi [Dewey’s ‘The Child as the Center’ and Its Relationship with Chi-
    nese Children’s Literature],” Yustnan Shehui Kexue (1995): 89-94.
  . Ni, “Xiaoxue gongyike jiaoxue” (see n. 27).
  . See e.g., Zhang, “Duwei lai Hua dui Zhongguo jiaoyu de yingxiang” (see
    n. 24).
  . Huang Yanpei, “Zhiye jiaoyu [Vocational Education],” Jiaoyu Zazhi 13, no.
    11 (1921): 61-63.
  . Wang Maozu, “Jiaoyu shang shiyongzhuyi zhi weizhi [The Position of Prag-
    matism in Education],” Jiaoyu Zazhi 12, no. 7 (1920): 4.
  . See Gong Chushu, “Zai tan xiaoxue kecheng zhong de zhiye zhidao [Recon-
    sidering Vocational Guidance in the Primary School Curriculum],” Jiaoyu
    yu Zhiye 98 (1928): 521-26.
  . On Japan, see Jeremy Rappleye’s chapter in this volume.
  . Gong, “Zai tan xiaoxue kecheng zhong de zhiye zhidao,” 525.
  . See e.g., Zhuang Yu, “Lun jiaoyu fangzhen [Discussing the Principles of Edu-
    cation],” Jiaoyu Zazhi 4, no. 1 (1912): 1-11.
   . Wang, “Jiaoyu shang shiyongzhuyi zhi weizhi,” 3.
   . Shu Xincheng, “Zhongxue zhiye zhidao de xianjue wenti [Preconditions for
     Vocational Guidance at the Middle School],” Jiaoyu Zazhi 17, no. 1 (1925):
     1-6.
   . Zhao Yichen, “Shiyan xiaoxue huo fushu xiaoxue yinggai zenmeyang [What
     Should Laboratory Primary Schools or Attached Primary Schools Be Like]?,”
     Jiaoyu Zazhi 21, no. 5 (1929): 1-7.
   . See Wang, John Dewey in China, 50-51 (see n. 2).
   . Jiang Qi, “Zhiye jiaoyu de benzhi zhi yanjiu [An Investigation of the
     Basic Character of Vocational Education],” Jiaoyu yu Zhiye 136 (1932):
     241-67.
48. Lu Guogi, “Lun Duwei dui Mao Zedong zaoqi jiaoyu sixiang de yingxiang
     [Discussing Dewey’s Influence on the Early Educational Thought of Mao
     Zedong],” Xue Lilun 5 (2009): 137.
49. Qi Xingui, “Duwei dui Zhongguo de yingxiang: yi zhong pipanxing pingjia
     [Dewey’s Influence on China: A Critical Evaluation],” Chongqing Shizhuan
     Xuebao (Shehui Kexueban) 3 (1997): 17. Hu Shi would have met the same
    fate had he not emigrated to Taiwan.
  . Cao Fu, “Duwei pipan yinlun (shangpian) [An Introduction to the Criticism
   of Dewey (first part)],” Remmuin Jiaoyu 1, no. 6 (1950): 21.
  . Cao Fu, “Duwei pipan yinlun (xiapian) [An Introduction to the Criticism of
    Dewey (last part)],” Renmin Jiaoyu 2, 1 (1950): 23.
   . Cao, “Duwei pipan yinlun (shangpian),” 22.
   . Che Wenbo, “Pipan Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyuxue fan kexue fan geming
     de benzhi—Dui Duwei Mingri zhi Xuexiao yi shu de pipan [Criticizing the
     Anti-Science and Anti-Revolution Essence of Dewey’s Pragmatist Peda-
     gogy],” Renwen Kexue Xuebao 2 (1956): 105-28.
  Ibid: 3106:
  . Cao, “Duwei pipan yinlun (shangpian),” 26.
  . Cao, “Duwei pipan yinlun (xiapian),” 28.
  . Che, “Pipan Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyuxue fan kexue fan geming de ben-
   zhi,” 124.
  . Cao, “Duwei pipan yinlun (xiapian),” 29 (see n. 56).
  : Ibid., 29.

[p. 112] [PDF page 130]

£12     Barbara Schulte

      . Zhong Chengzhang, “Fandui shiyongzhuyi guandian [Against the Pragma-
        tist Perspective],” Jianghuai Luntan 5 (1963): 16-22.
      . Cao, “Duwei pipan yinlun (shangpian)” (see n. 55).
      . Che, “Pipan Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyuxue fan kexue fan geming de ben-
        Ama? UND) (eee in, 5 7))s
      . Ibid., 114.
      . Jin Yuelin, “Pipan shiyongzhuyizhe Duwei de shijieguan [Criticizing the
        World View of the Pragmatist Dewey],” Zhexue Yanjiu 2 (1955): 13.
      . Cao, “Duwei pipan yinlun (shangpian),” 28 (see n. 50).
      . Juan Zhi, “Shei shuo kaimen banxue shi ‘shiyongzhuyi’ [Who Says that Open-
       Door Education Is ‘Pragmatism’]?,” Renmin Jiaoyu 11 (1974): 41-42.
      . Liang Si, “Si Ren Bang’ weishenme haipa pouxi shiyongzhuyi [Why is the “Gang
        of Four’ Afraid of Analyzing Pragmatism]?,” Rermun Jiaoyu 2 (1977): S.
      . Fang Yan, “‘Sirenbang’ de ‘xuesheng zhizhi’ yu Duwei de ‘ertong zhongxin’
        [The ‘Students’ Self-Organization’ of the ‘Gang of Four’ and Dewey’s ‘Child
        as the Center’],” Shandong Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Renwen Shehui Kexue-
       ban) Z1 (1977): 109-10.
  69. Fang Yan, “‘sirenbang’ de ‘wenmang jia yeniu’ yu Duwei de ‘jiaoyu ji shen-
      ghuo’ [The ‘Gang of Four’’s ‘Illiterates Are Wild Oxen’ and Dewey’s ‘Educa-
      tion Is Life’],” Shandong Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Renwen Shehui Kexueban)
       61977)      = 182
 TO. This was enhanced by the fact that language use during the Cultural Revolu-
       tion was extremely vulgarized. On the demonization of the discourse from
       the 1950s to the 1970s, see Michael Schoenhals, “Demonising Discourse in
       Mao Zedong’s China: People vs Non-People,” Totalitarian Movements and
       Political Religions 8, nos. 3—4 (2007): 465-82.
 val 2 leas Wein. ““sirenbang’ de ‘renwu dai jiaoxue’ yu Duwei de ‘cong zuo zhong
       xue’ [The ‘Gang of Four”’s ‘Teaching Mission’ and Dewey’s ‘Learning by
       Doing’],” Shandong Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Renwen Shehui Kexueban) 4
       (1977): 61-65. The ‘Four Modernizations’ were formulated by Zhou Enlai
       in January 1975 at the Fourth People’s Congress and officially launched by
       Deng Xiaoping in 1978. They included modernization in agriculture, indus-
       try, technology, and defense.
 Wh See e.g., the article by Xu Chongwen, who was indignant about a book by
       George Novack, a veteran theoretician of the United States’ Socialist Work-
       ers’ Party, which compared parts of the pragmatist tradition with Marx-_
       ist thought; Xu Chongwen, “Makesizhuyi he shiyongzhuyi: Duili haishi
       tiaohe?—Ping Nuofanke: ‘Dui Duwei zhexue yi ge pingjia: shiyongzhuyi
       tong makesizhuyi de duil’? [Marxism and Pragmatism: Opposition or
       Harmony?—Reviewing Novack: ‘An Appraisal of John Dewey’s Philosophy.
       Pragmatism versus Marxism’],” Guowat Shehui Kexue 2 (1978): 90-93. The
       correct bibliographical title of Novack’s book is as follows: George Novack,
        Pragmatism    Versus Marxism.   An Appraisal of John Dewey's     Philosophy
        (New York: Pathfinder, 1975).
  Vx Hu Shi was reestablished somewhat later, starting in 1986, maybe even prof-
     iting from the then on-going, increasingly positive re-evaluation of Dewey’s
      thought. Because of his decidedly liberal attitude and due to his emigrationto
      Taiwan, Chinese debates on the mainland had to be open enough to concede
      any appreciable contributions to Hu.
  74. Chen Hancai, “Qianxi Tao Xingzhi yu Duwei jiaoyu sixiang de benzhi qubie
      [A Shallow Analysis of the Qualitative Differences between the Educational
      Thought of Tao Xingzhi and Dewey],” Huanan Shifan Daxue Xuebao (She-
       hui Kexueban) 4 (1981): 44.

[p. 113] [PDF page 131]

wD), Pang Dan sees the turning point towards a more open reception of Dewey’s
      thought much later, in 1987; this cannot be verified by the articles published
      prior to that date. However, she is right to point out that the disciplinary
      focus of the Dewey reception was in education, not philosophy. In contrast
      to their more pragmatic colleagues in education, philosophers also had a
      much more deprecating attitude towards Dewey’s philosophy. See Pang Dan,
      “Jin shi nian lai wo guo xuejie Duwei sixiang yanjiu pingshu [A Critical
      Account of my Country’s Scholars’ Research of the Past Ten Years on Dew-
      ey’s Thought],” Lilun Tantao 1 (2008): 53-57.
    . Chen, “Qianxi Tao Xingzhi yu Duwei jiaoyu sixiang de benzhi qubie,” 44.
  . Tao Xingzhi, quoted in ibid., 46-47.
  . Ibid., 44-45.
  . Ibid., 49-50.
  . [bids 45,
  . Ibid., 51.
  . Wang Tianyi, “Duwei jiaoyu sixiang tanjiu [Exploring Dewey’s Educational
    Thought],” Beijing Shifan Daxue Xuebao (Shehui Kexueban) 3 (1982): 74.
  . Wang, “Duwei jiaoyu sixiang tanjiu,” 83.
  . Qiao Youhua, “Guanyu Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyu sixiang zai pingjia de ji
    ge wenti [Some Questions Concerning the Re-Evaluation of Dewey’s Prag-
    matist Educational Thought],” Dongbei Shida Xuebao (Zhexue Shehui Kex-
    ueban) 3 (1983): 66-70.
  . Zhang Fakun, “Duwei ‘Minzhuzhuyi yu Jiaoyu’ zhong de pipan jicheng
    wenti [Critical Succeeding Questions in Dewey’s ‘Democracy and Educa-
    tion’],” Jiaoyu Yanjiu yu Shiyan 2 (1984): 89-95.
  . Wang Peixiong, “Duwei jiaoyu gaigeguan fawei [Some Small Points about Dew-
    ey’s View on Educational Reform],” Bijiao Jiaoyu Yanyiu 5 (1986): 44-49.
  . Wang, “Duwei jiaoyu sixiang tanjiu,” 78-79.
  . Li Yaling, “Duwei lun fazhan xuesheng de siwei nengli [Dewey Discusses
    Developing the Students’ Capability to Think],” Heilongjiang Gaojiao Yan-
   jiu 1 (1988): 71.
 9. Chen, “Qianxi Tao Xingzhi yu Duwei jiaoyu sixiang de benzhi qubie.” See
    also Liu Zhiju, “Tao Xingzhi jiaoyu sixiang bu tong yu Duwei sanlun [Three
    Points Where the Educational Thought of Tao Xingzhi Is Different from
    Dewey],” Anhui Shifan Daxuebao (Zhexue Shehui Kexueban) 4 (1981):
    16-22, 29.
  . Wang, “Duwei jiaoyu sixiang tanjiu,” 77.
  . Zhang, “Duwei ‘Minzhuzhuyi yu Jiaoyuw’ zhong de pipan jicheng wenti,” 89
     (see n. 85).
   . Qiao, “Guanyu Duwei shiyongzhuyi jiaoyu sixiang zai pingjia de ji ge wenti”
     (see n. 84).
   . Sun Yuecai, “Duwei de duoyuanlun ziyouguan—Jian lun dui shiyongzhuyi
     de pingjia wenti [Dewey’s View on Pluralistic Freedom—Discussing Critical
     Questions of Pragmatism],” Shehui Kexue 4 (1985): 52-54, 13.
  . Zhang, “Duwei ‘Minzhuzhuyi yu Jiaoyu’ zhong de pipan jicheng wenti.”
  . Li Yaling, “Duwei lun fazhan xuesheng de siwei nengli” (see n. 88).
  . Wang Peixiong, “Duwei zhiye jiaoyu sixiang shuping [Comments on Dewey’s
     Vocational Education Thinking],” Bijiao Jiaoyu Yanjiu 5 (1984): 45.
  . Cf. Wang, “Duwei jiaoyu gaigeguan fawei,” 45 (see n. 86).
  . Wang, “Duwei zhiye jiaoyu sixiang shuping,” 45.
  . Ibid., 47.
  _ What vocational educationists did object to, however, was Dewey’s call for
   abolishing vocational schools altogether. The differentiation of the school

[p. 114] [PDF page 132]

system was deemed important, especially after the experience with a ‘uni-
     tary’ education during the Cultural Revolution.
101. Beate Geist, Die Modernisierung der chinesischen Kultur: Kulturdebatte
     und kultureller Wandel im China der 80er Jahre (Hamburg: Institut fiir
     Asienkunde, 1996), 217.
102. Zhou Zhichao and Zhang Wenchao, “Xunqiu shehui xuyao yu ren de fazhan
     bingzhong de jiaoyu jiazhiguan [Searching for Educational Values that Put
     Equal Stress on Society’s Needs and Individual Development],” Jiaoyu Pin-
     glun 3 (1990): 28-29.
103. Ibid., 29.
104. Xu Bangguan, “Lun Duwei de jiaoyu jiazhi quxiang [Discussing Dewey’s
     Educational Value Orientation],” Jiaoyu Yanjiu yu Shtyan 2 (1990): 38.
105. See e.g., Yang Fengyin, “Duwei he Luosu de Zhongguo jindaihua fang’an”
      (Scepnsno)):
106. Huang Xiaoyan and Zhang Quanxin, “Makesizhuyi zhexue shi Duwei
     ‘Minzhu gongtongti’ de lilun laiyuan [Marxist Philosophy Is the Theoreti-
     cal Source for Dewey’s ‘Democratic Community’],” Shandong Shifan Daxue
     Xuebao (Renwen Shehui Kexueban) 1 (2009): 10-14.
107. Lu Guogqi, “Lun Duwei dui Mao Zedong zaoqi jiaoyu sixiang de yingxiang”
      (see n. 48).
108. Huang and Zhang, “Makesizhuyi zhexue shi Duwei ‘Minzhu gongtongti’ de
       lilun laiyuan,” 13.
109. See e.g., Pei Changling, “Gexing yu chuangzaoxing—Duwei jiaoyu sixi-
       ang gei women de qishi [Individuality and Creativity—Insight from Dew-
       ey’s Educational Thought],” Oinghai Shizhuan Xuebao (Shehui Kexue)
       2 (2001): 86-87; or, on pre-school education: Wei Cai, “Duwei bixia de
       ‘jingyan’ dui youeryuan jiaoxue de qishi [Inspiration from Dewey’s ‘Expe-
       rience’ for Kindergarten Pedagogy],” Kejiao Wenhui (Zhongxunkan) 1
       (2009): 124-25.
110. On ‘quality education’, see e.g., Belinda Dello-Iacovo, “Curriculum Reform
       and ‘Quality Education’ in China: An Overview,” International Journal of
       Educational Development 29 (2009): 241-49.
iN, Yu Kangping, “Duwei yu suzhi jiaoyu [Dewey and Quality Education],”
       Wenjiao Ziliao 3 (2008): 122-24.
i, Song Zhirun and Chen Xiaoping, “Cong Duwei de jiaoyu sixiang kan woguo
       de jiaoyu gaige [On the Reform of Education in China from the Angle of
       Dewey’s Thought of Education],” Chuangxin 4 (2009): 13-15; 31.
iis. Zhou Hailing, “Cong renshilun jiaodu kan Heerbate yu Duwei jiaoyu sixiang
       de fenqi [Looking at the Differences in Herbart’s and Dewey’s Educational
       Thought from an Epistemological Perspective],” Huabei Shuili Shuidian
       Xueyuan Xuebao (Shekeban) 2 (2006): 33.
114. Xia Dongjie and Guo Xu, “Shilun Duwei de jiaocaiguan jiqi dui xin kecheng
       gaige de qishi [A Tentative Discussion of Dewey’s View on Teaching Mate-
       rial and Its Inspiration for the New Curriculum Reform],” Nei Mengu Shifan
       Daxue Xuebao (Jiaoyu Kexueban) 8 (2007): 63.
     . Yu Jie, “Duwei deyu sixiang dui wo guo xiandai deyu de qishi [An Inspi-
       ration from Dewey’s Moral Education Thought for my Country’s Present
       Moral Education],” Kejiao Wenhui 7 (2008): 279.
IANS. Zhu Guohui and Luo Yaocheng, “Duwei de ‘Jiaoyu wu mudi lun’ pingxi-jian
       tan woguo gaodeng jiaoyu mudi ying chuli hao de ji dui guanxi [A Criti-
       cal Analysis of Dewey’s ‘Theory of Aimless Education’—Discussing Some
       Relationships with How to Deal Well with Our Country’s Higher Education
       Aims],” Jilin Gongxueyuan Xuebao 4 (2001): 8

[p. 115] [PDF page 133]

Li: Zhang Wu, “Xunzhao xinyang de shuguang—Kongzi yu Duwei yishu shehu-
        ixue sixiang bijiao [Dawn in the Search for Belief—Comparing the Art and
        Social Science Thought of Confucius and Dewey],” Kongzi Yanjiu 4 (1998):
        47-56.
118. Xia, “Duwei shiyongzhuyi lilun yu Zhongguo xiangcun jianshe yundong,”
        63-68.
119, See Zhu Yingxue, “Mao Zedong yu Duwei deyu sixiang bijiao [A Compari-
        son of the Ideas on Moral Education of Mao Zedong and Dewey],” Sanxia
        Xueyuan Xuebao 1 (2002): 94-97.
120. Zhang Wenhai explicitly refers to this programmatic agenda: Zhang Wen-
        hai, “Duwei jiaoyu sixiang dui woguo dangdai hexie jiaoyu de qishi [The
        Implications of Dewey’s Educational Ideas for China’s Modern Harmony
        Education],” Yancheng Gongxueyuan Xuebao (Shehui Kexueban) 4 (2008):
        57-59.
ileal . Yu, “Duwei deyu sixiang dui wo guo xiandai deyu de qishi,” 279.
122. Yao Jun, “Qiantan Duwei de deyu fangfa [A Preliminary Investigation of
        Dewey’s Moral Education Methods],” Xtandai Jiaoyu Kexue 1 (2009): 71.
123% Dan Zhonghui, “Lun Duwei de xin de zhiye jiaoyuguan [Discussing Dewey’s
       New View on Vocational Education|,” Zhijtiao Luntan 7 (2002): 11.
124. Wei Xuefang, “Cong Duwei zhiye jiaoyu sixiang fansi wo guo dangqian zhiye
       jiaoyu [Reflecting on Our Country’s Present Vocational Education through
       Dewey’s Vocational Educational Thought],” Guangxi Jiaoyu Xueyuan Xue-
       bao 6 (2007): 156.
IDASY. See the critical article by Huang Lizhi, “Duwei: Ziyouzhuyi zhi ming yu shi
       [Dewey: Name and Reality of Liberalism],” Shuwu 3 (2002): 44-46.
126. See Tong Dezhi, “Xin jiu ziyouzhuyi—Duwei yu ziyouzhuyi de lilun zhuanx-
       ing [Old and New Liberalism—Dewey and the Transformation of Liberalist
     Theory],” Zhejiang Xuekan 5 (2005): 116-20.
