The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Part II
Chapter 6: Re-Contextualizing Foreign Influence in Japan’s Educational History: The (Re)Reception of John Dewey
Jeremy Rappleye
Original print pages 116–145; PDF pages 134–163

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 116] [PDF page 134]

6      Re-Contextualizing Foreign Influence
       in Japan’s Educational History
       The (Re)Reception of John Dewey
      Jeremy Rappleye




Perhaps nowhere in the world was the enthusiasm for John Dewey greater
than in Japan. In the span of just over ten years, some 150 books and articles
pushed aside traditional educational tomes, flooding onto bookshelves and
into academic journals across the country. Translations of Dewey’s major
works appeared in rapid succession. Students at the University of Hok-
kaido in the north celebrated a solemn ‘John Dewey’ night, while those in
rural Ehime to the south inaugurated a raucous, colorful ‘Dewey Festival.’
The Japanese national broadcasting service, NHK, carried a radio program
entitled ‘Dewey’s Philosophy and Japanese Education’ to millions of listen-
ers across the country. Even the Ministry of Education—considered the
bastion of educational conservatism—acknowledged Dewey’s innovative,
progressive ideas in its Dictionary of Education. Scholars formed the John
Dewey Society of Japan as a forum for reading and debate about Dewey’s
philosophy. Perhaps most remarkably, in just ten years, more than 250 dis-
sertations were submitted to Japanese universities by young students pas-
sionate about the ideas of a man who had, lest it be forgotten, visited the -
country for only three short months in the cold spring of 1919.
    Those who envision a uniform, disciplined and dour—anything but
experiential, democratic, and progressive—Japanese educational enter-
prise will find this surprising. More surprising still, however, is the fact that
this passionate reception of Dewey came some three decades after Dewey
came to lecture in Japan. Indeed, the events just described span from the
mid-1940s to the mid-1950s. Translations of Dewey classics Experience
and Education and Democracy and Education were published in 1950 and
1952, respectively. The university celebrations also date to the mid-1950s,
the NHK broadcast aired in 1955 and the Ministry’s Dictionary of Educa-
tion was published a few years earlier in4949. The John Dewey Society of
Japan began in 1957, nearly four decades after Dewey’s visit and five years
after the death of Dewey himself. Extraordinarily, the post-war craze for
Dewey far surpassed anything before or since, including Dewey’s personal
visit. What then explains this sudden, unprecedented Dewey ‘boom’? What
accounts for this resurgence-cum-paradox in Japan’s reception of Dewey?!

[p. 117] [PDF page 135]

Framed by these broad questions, Dewey’s reception in Japan presents a
unique perspective on both his worldwide influence and upon larger ques-
tions of the dynamics of educational transfer. Arguably few other national
accounts of Dewey’s reception and influence would appear to reveal as
much about how transformations in political configurations, dominant ide-
ologies, and social context produce profound fluctuations in what qualifies
as educational ‘knowledge.’ Nothing makes this more evident than thirty
years of indifference to Deweyian ideas that suddenly blossom within
the constellation of political and social changes occurring in Japan in the
decade following the World War IL. Situating Dewey within pre-existing
Japanese intellectual traditions and evolving political realities, the chap-
ter reveals how his ideas were selectively appropriated, interpreted, and
reinterpreted according to the changing cultural, social, and ideological
contextual milieu of Japan in a complex process that stretches back to the
late 1800s and continues even today.


FOREGROUNDING CONTEXT AND CONTINUITY: THREE
DOMINANT JAPANESE INTELLECTUAL TRADITIONS

In recounting the history of John Dewey’s reception in Japan, the scholar
is faced with an immediate, albeit crucial decision as to which of those two
elements—Dewey or Japan—should become the focus. That is: will the
account revolve around Dewey, detailing how Japan appeared in his world?
Or will the opposite approach be taken: foregrounding the context of Japan
and then tracing Dewey’s interaction therein? To borrow imagery from the
world of theatre, should the account give Dewey the leading role, shifting
the stage set as his story unfolds? Or should Dewey appear and reappear
as the drama of modern Japan develops? The decision is far more than aes-
thetic, but the results are no less dramatic.
   The first—Dewey-centric—approach has been decidedly more attractive
in the English-language literature* in part because they are based largely
on Dewey’s own accounts, of which Letters from China and Japan (1920)
features most prominently. The second approach has been less prominent,
although there are notable exceptions.’ Yet, much is at stake in this choice
of perspective, especially if Dewey’s reception in Japan is viewed as a means
of illuminating the dynamics of trans-national knowledge flows. As Steiner-
Khamsi* argues:

    If researchers focus on the content of transfer, there is no doubt that they
    will find a common denominator . . . however, if we choose to bring the
    local context to the fore. . and ask why some idea or discourse has been
    transferred, we gain a completely different understanding of transfer.

Indeed, there is a need for an account of Dewey’s reception in Japan that, by
responding to calls such as Steiner-Khamsi’s to foreground the local context,

[p. 118] [PDF page 136]

brings a fresh contribution to the existing literature of Dewey’s reception
in Japan.’ Yet, detailing the context of any place, let alone one as consis-
tently portrayed as enigmatic and frequently laden with exoticism as Japan,
is no easy task. It requires an appreciation of continuities without trivializing
change; portraying transformation without erasing original form.
    The historical narrative that follows then traces the changing context in
which Dewey’s ideas were interpreted, contextualized, and appropriated in
five separate periods—post-Meiji Restoration, Taisho Democracy, World
War II, postwar Occupation, and the 1960s through today. At the same
time, the story of Japan’s evolving intellectual traditions provides an ele-
ment of continuity that binds all of these periods into a cohesive whole and
weaves Dewey’s reception there into the much larger intellectual brocade of
modern Japan. Here, however, the complexity of unraveling the impact of
exogenous forces on local context cannot begin and end with simple duali-
ties between external/internal, foreign/indigenous. In the case of Japan, as
perhaps elsewhere, the thread of continuity—Japan’s indigenous intellec-
tual traditions—actually reveals itself to be an intricate braid upon closer
inspection: three distinct traditions of knowledge that predate, help form,
and then persist within modern Japan. Each of these strands must be taken
into account, each put in conversation with Dewey’s ideas to understand
fully his reception and impact (or lack of) therein.
   The first of these is neo-Confucianism, coming from China some thou-
sand years before only to be reinterpreted and reworked down through the
centuries.° By the time of the Tokugawa period (1600-1868) that begets
modern Japan, it emerges as a powerful elite ideology with a pervasive
impact on education, legitimating a hierarchical system revolving around
the cultivation of morality led by a single ruler:

      According to Tokugawa neo-Confucianism, the purpose of studying
      the Chinese classics was to discover the eternal, unchanging moral
      principle governing both the natural world and human society. There-
      after, maintaining peace and harmony in society was largely a matter
      of the ruler applying that knowledge to rectify his own inner mind and
      outward conduct, thereby serving as a compelling example of virtue
      for others to follow, each according to his own proper position in the
      social hierarchy.’

With this heavy emphasis on morality, classic Confucian virtues such as loyalty,
filial piety, humanity, fairness, and harmony through hierarchy of social rela-
tions, neo-Confucianism carried a very specific educational project: explicit
moral education, fostering group relations, instilling respect for sources of
authority (teachers and parents), and stress on harmony with nature.*
    A second intellectual tradition was nativism (kokugaku).? Lincicome'®
describes a tradition in opposition to the dominant neo-Confucian ortho-
doxy that “rejected slavish imitation of Chinese institutions and adherence

[p. 119] [PDF page 137]

to Chinese texts in favor of rediscovering the superior essence of spirit of
native culture manifested in ancient Japanese texts.” Nativism naturally
identified closely with the indigenous Shinto religion in opposition to Bud-
dhism, frequently disparaged together with neo-Confucianism as another
debilitating Chinese import. When the Meiji Restoration (1868) ended the
neo-Confucian monopoly on knowledge production, the nativist scholars
emerged immediately to assert the importance of Japanese studies. Even as
early as 1869, the resulting tensions were apparent in education:

    debate raged among the faculties of nativism and Chinese studies over
    the proper direction of education at the university, and by implication,
    throughout the country . . . in the end, neither party claimed victory,
    for the very next year the campus where both doctrines were being
    taught was closed, leaving only the faculties and students of Western
    studies and medical learning to gain prominence.'!

Despite being inclined to view the Meiji Restoration as the triumph of
their championing of the Imperial Throne, nativism would play a relatively
minor role at the dawn of Japanese modernity. Yet, its influence would
grow substantially in the ensuing decades and, as some have contended,’
became triumphant in the late 1920s and early 1930s providing much of
the ideological underpinning for the emerging ultranationalism and milita-
rism of Imperial Japan and its heavily nationalist educational program.
   The third major intellectual tradition was Western studies (yogaku) that
had evolved slowly since the first contact with the Western missionaries
in the sixteenth century. At first disparaged as ‘barbarian studies’ (nan-
bangaku), it was from the very outset heavily intermeshed with Christi-
anity and as such became a source of suspicion because it “represented a
new source of authority and a new body of knowledge that competed with
accepted doctrines for popular allegiance”.'? Nevertheless, this tradition
was seen as much more practical in relation to both neo-Confucian and
nativist doctrines, treating subjects such as astronomy and navigation as
well as medicine and applicable scientific principles, redeeming it in the
eyes of many. These ‘barbarian studies’ morphed into Dutch studies (ran-
gaku) when foreign contact was limited to Dutch traders during Japan’s
self-imposed isolation (sakoku), only to transform again into Western
studies at the dawn of the Meiji modernization. As described next, in the
turbulent decades following the Meiji Restoration, Western learning, and
by extension Western educational forms, were ascendant, even dominant.
It even appeared as though Western studies might completely relegate the
other two traditions to Japan’s pre-modern history. Fortunately, the story
is much more complex, as is locating Dewey within this rich, intertwining,
fascinating intellectual milieu.
   It is important to note that despite the apparent tidiness of the com-
pressed, simplified description here, fusions of the three traditions—neo-

[p. 120] [PDF page 138]

Confucian, nativist, and Western—often emerged out of particular political
and social contexts.'4 The Mito School (mitogaku), for example, drew many
adherents to its private academies in the late Tokugawa and early Meiji
period with is approach that joined “neo-Confucianism’s belief in a natu-
ral social order with nativism’s elevation of Japanese culture over Chinese
culture and advocated propagating this native cultural and spiritual essence
as a national religion, equal in power to that of Christianity in the West”.'°
Indeed, it is the interaction, conflict, and melding of these three traditions
that gives Japan’s modern history much of its texture as well as its inscruta-
bility, but also its dynamism. As S.N. Eisenstadt'® explains:

      It is probably Japan’s continual encounter with China, with Confucian-
      ism and Buddhism, and later with the West, and the continual neces-
      sity to distinguish itself from China and the West without denying the
      outside values or admitting their superiority, that has led to the devel-
      opment of the intense, complex, and sophisticated mode of ideological
      discourse that distinguishes Japan from other non-Axial civilizations.

Like Japan’s unique writing system that preserves the origin of Chinese
words (kanji), native Japanese concepts (hiragana), and Western imports
(katakana) even while rendering the otherwise uneasy alliance workable
and fluid, the Japanese intellectual and educational context may be con-
ceptualized in much the same way. Yet perhaps unlike the Japanese script,
the tensions between these three different intellectual traditions must be
seen as fundamentally one of continual competition and fluidity, with each
side aligning and repositioning itself according to Japan’s rapidly chang-
ing social conditions and in relation to the other traditions. Amid this
struggle, educational knowledge and forms become highly contested, with
each side looking for ways to tip the intellectual balance—reinterpreting
the past, contesting the present, and—most crucial for our purposes— ”
‘externalizing’'” to events and ideas outside of Japan. Understanding this
interplay of intellectual traditions in the Japanese context is the starting
point for developing a deeper notion of Dewey’s reception in Japan.


MEIJI RESTORATION TO WORLD WAR I:
WESTERN (GERMAN) LEARNING WITH
COMPROMISE, DEWEY TRICKLES IN

John Dewey was just nine years old when the Meiji Restoration (1868)
ended nearly three centuries of self-imposed isolation (sakoku) in Japan. It
elevated Western learning over both neo-Confucian and nativist traditions
by decreeing, “evil customs of the past shall be broken” and “knowledge
shall be sought throughout the world”.'* Yet, Imperial decrees—like so
much education policy today—cannot so easily alter imbedded, indigenous

[p. 121] [PDF page 139]

traditions. In the chaotic years following the Restoration, nativist tradi-
tions relished the withdrawal of State support for the Confucian hegemony
of knowledge. Buruma!’ summaries an array of highly symbolic acts fol-
lowing the Restoration that revealed the enduring tensions such as when
“Shinto fanatics went about smashing Buddhist temples in an effort to
purge Japan of its Chinese cultural traditions.” He explains that “West-
ern ideas excited Japanese nativists: They helped to emancipate Japan from
the Chinese cultural orbit”.*° Clearly then the Meiji Restoration, despite
the apparent triumph of some Western forms, had really only unleashed a
power struggle among the pre-existing intellectual traditions that had been
suspended (or rendered invisible) under the previous State support for neo-
Confucianism. In the five decades that preceded Dewey’s visit to Japan,
these competing traditions would continue to struggle for dominance in
nearly every sphere of social and political life, but perhaps nowhere more so
than in realm of education.*! No analysis of Dewey’s reception can afford
to overlook the monumental struggles that preceded his arrival.
   In the first decade following the Restoration, Western learning indeed
appeared ascendant. The famed Iwakura Mission (1871-1873) sent nearly
the entire Meiji government on a twenty-one month voyage to discover the
secrets of Western ‘civilization’ and prestige. Education was heralded as a
major source of Western power and the Mission brought back an eclectic
mix of educational features from various nations of the West.?* Moreover,
the government spent a considerable amount of its national education
budget sending students overseas and invited hundreds of foreigners to
Japan. These tutors of Western learning were known as oyatoi gaijin and
resemble the technical assistance experts of the development apparatus
today.*> Some achieved prominent positions in the government such as
one David Murray who served as superintendent at the Department of
Education and helped found Tokyo University. Indeed, the story of Dew-
ey’s reception in Japan might have been very different if he had arrived
in these years when drastic political change rendered Japan extremely
receptive to Western educational ideas, but alas Dewey had not yet even
graduated from high school, let alone college, half a world away. Instead,
the reaction against a decade of unfettered Western learning had already
begun by forces within Japan.
   From roughly 1880, the nativist tradition began to realize the consid-
erable power and threat posed by Western learning and slowly mounted
a counter-offensive premised on an alliance with the once loathed neo-
Confucian   tradition.24 Indeed, the neo-Confucian    tradition was already
at work vigorously challenging the flood of Western knowledge. Motoda
Nagazane, Confucian lecturer to the Emperor, complained that education
reforms had “overemphasized the acquisition of Western knowledge and
Western ways” and again raised the call for “the study of morality based
on Confucius”.25 Increasingly forceful appeals along similar lines led to a
substantial, conservative revision of the Education Law (1881) and moves

[p. 122] [PDF page 140]

by the Ministry of Education to limit the use of schools for political gath-
erings (1883).
   Traditional knowledge—increasingly a salient shorthand made possible
by the closer alliance between nativists and neo-Confucianists—began to
be seen as worthy of ‘recapturing’ as a spiritual supplement to the under-
nourishment of Western modernization.*° This made the Meiji oligarchy
that had appeared so progressive (read: Western) in the previous decade
begin to seem increasingly conservative. This had profound implications
for which Western learning Japan would choose to adopt. Swale (2000),”
for example, highlights a shift from the individualism of John Stuart Mill
to the more collective emphasis of Spencer’s social Darwinism, while Hos-
ton? shows that among Japanese with liberal tendencies there was a marked
shift towards strains of liberalism that emphasized a greater social perspec-
tive for the individual, rejecting the legitimacy of the private vis-a-vis the
public in line with Japan’s more communitarian traditions.
    This increasingly conservative, collective climate, had profound impli-
cations for Japan’s ‘reference society’ of choice: from the eclecticism of the
Iwakura Mission that found strengths in many systems, there was a marked
shift in which Western learning became defined almost exclusively as Ger-
man. This ‘German turn’ mirrored wider shifts in the highest levels of
government and should be seen as ultimately the triumph of the nativist/neo-
Confucian alliance. Buruma”’ writes that the “Meiji oligarchs, despite some
opposition even in their own ranks, chose to go the German route” because
“they wanted to be modern and invoke ancient traditions at the same time.
This was achieved by grafting German dogmas onto Japanese myths.”
    This German turn naturally had profound implication for education.
In 1885, the first Minister of Education, the charismatic and learned Mori
Arinori created a unified educational network based on the Prussian model.
He had apparently succumbed to conservative pressure despite having
been a vocal supporter of more liberal American models in the previous ©
decade.*" In 1886, a series of more stringent, uniform school regulations all
based on German models were decreed. Government support for overseas
students began to go to those who studied in Germany and the German
oyatot gaijin invited by the Japanese government increasingly replaced
their American, British, and French counterparts. Perhaps nowhere was
the German influence more pronounced than the Tokyo Imperial Univer-
sity, which had been originally modeled after the German university and
now employed dozens of German professors.*' Neo-Kantian idealism was
dominant and to study philosophy meant to study German thought. One
of the German professors at Tokyo Imperial University, Emil Hausknecht,
found that his lectures on Herbart’s teaching methods were increasingly
well received within this wider shift toward German models. Indeed, the
political climate fed a “Golden Age of Herbartianism” that would find
Herbart’s five-step method triumphant throughout Japan over the next
decade or more.*

[p. 123] [PDF page 141]

Yet, the powerful nativist/neo-Confucian alliance would not be appeased
so easily; not content with even the more conservative German model. On
the very day the Meiji Constitution was promulgated in 1889, the once
outspoken liberal Mori Arinori’, was stabbed by a fanatic nativist furi-
ous over a perceived symbolic disrespect by Mori at one of Japan’s most
sacred Shinto shrines. Yet, the assassination of the Minister of Education
was about much more: it ultimately symbolized the death of the liberal
model at the hands of resurgent nativist forces. The notorious Imperial
Rescript on Education followed the next year (1890) as well as Elementary
School Regulations (1890) and Explanation of School Matters (1891) all
elevating moral training, reverence for the Emperor, and nationalism as the
primary goals of schooling. German models would remain in form, albeit
increasingly reworked from ‘within’ according to the logic of conservative
forces. Amid this conservative shift, debates about alternatives would be
increasingly stifled making it difficult for more liberal voices to be heard,
including—eventually—the distinctive voice of John Dewey.
    Yet, we must not get ahead of ourselves. Even as Herbartian pedagogy
became discredited and a ‘New Education’ movement began to gather
momentum, by far the more central drama in Japan at the time was the
surge in nationalism and concomitant unraveling of social order under
the strain of Japan’s compressed modernization and war mobilization. As
Japan fought and defeated China in the Sino-Japanese War (1894-1895)
and then triumphantly announced its presence on the world stage with a
crushing defeat of Russia in the Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905), war
mobilization seemed to create a restless feeling among the people: tens of
thousands of protestors came out to demonstrate against the terms of the
Portsmouth Treaty ending in a lawless, two-day rampage across the city.
This initiated what some historians have called an Era of Popular Vio-
lence that saw large numbers of increasingly violent social protests over
the next decade. For the traditional-cum-German oligarchy it was proof
of the moral decline brought on by modernization, yet for the landless,
disenfranchised, and liberal intellectuals it was proof that ‘enlightenment
from above’ could not meet the needs of a rapidly changing society. It was
this central struggle, a continuation of long standing intellectual traditions,
that was playing out in new ways as news of World War I reached Japan
and it was into this stew of nationalism and unrest seasoned with hopeful
uncertainty that John Dewey would arrive in Japan.


WORLD WAR ITO LATE 1920: DEWEY’S
RECEPTION IN THE INCREASINGLY POLARIZED
BUT HOPEFUL JAPANESE CONTEXT

World War I brought unprecedented prosperity to Japan. It hastened indus-
trialization as well as urbanization, thereby straining the contradictions in

[p. 124] [PDF page 142]

Meiji governance to the breaking point. The wartime inflationary spiral cli-
maxed in the Rice Riots (kome s6d6) in the summer of 1918, in which thou-
sands of disgruntled farmers and a growing urban working class unleashed
a wave of protest, looting, and violence across Japan that signaled funda-
mental changes were necessary to maintain public order. Responding to
this new democratic mood, Prime Minister Teruchi stepped down and in
his place Hara Takashi became the first commoner to ever hold the highest
elected office in Japan. It was hailed as a triumph for democracy, the first
tangible change of a new order since the ailing Emperor shifted power to the
Diet several years earlier. Massive street demonstrations of 1919 and 1920
continued the ferment spearheaded by urban intellectuals, increasingly
assertive and organized labor interests, and a proliferation of democratic,
socialist, communist, and anarchist groups. When World War I ended with
the submission of Germany—Japan’s reference society par-excellence—the
democratic, liberal ideas of the triumphant democratic powers became the
talk of Japanese intellectual circles. Feuer* relates, “The defeat of Germany
seemed to offer Japanese liberals their chance to woo their country away
from admiration of things German, political and intellectual, and to lead it
to the theory and practice of liberalism on the American model.”
   These political developments at first appeared to hold profound implica-
tions for education. This momentum injected life and a renewed promise into
the ‘New Education’ movement that had begun quietly a decade before. Trac-
ing its roots to a reaction against Herbartian pedagogy by increasingly disen-
chanted teachers, the progressive education movement that had began slowly
and tentatively before World War I quickly burst out in all different direc-
tions in the liberal, frenzied postwar atmosphere. ‘New Education’ began to
take on the hues and tone of its supporting political ideology with names like
liberal education, proletarian education, life-in-education, and the creative
writing movement all gaining followers. The Japan Teacher’s Union Associa-
tion for Enlightenment formed in 1919, making an impassioned appeal for —
education in line with a democratic spirit founded on the development of the
individual over the needs of the State.*° Even the government could not help
but respond to the new demands placed on education: in 1917 it took the
unprecedented step of launching the Extraordinary Council on Education.
    Into this milieu, John Dewey arrived in Yokohama on February 9, 1919.
In a rather inauspicious start, one Hoashi Riichiro, an up-and-coming
young member of the Waseda Group of pragmatists, arrived eagerly at
the port to greet Dewey. However, not finding a man befitting his idea of
an older, distinguished philosopher he returned home disappointed, only
to see from the newspaper that a younger man he had spotted that day
was indeed Dewey.*° Two wealthy Japanese businessmen who had become
acquainted with Dewey in New York financed the trip. Dewey and his wife
Alice stayed the first few nights at the Imperial Hotel, but feeling uncom-
fortable moved to the spacious home of Inazo Nitobe, a Japanese writer
well known in the West for his publication of Bushido: The Soul of the

[p. 125] [PDF page 143]

Nation.”’ By all accounts, Dewey was afforded every traveling luxury by his
Japanese hosts: an unlimited first-class pass for Japanese trains, a private
car in Kyoto, his choice of rooms in one of Osaka’s most luxurious hotels.
He was also shown Japanese culture at its finest, Noh and Kabuki plays,
the famed temples of Nara and Kyoto, and an evening with Gion’s famed
Geishas, the presence of Mrs. Dewey not withstanding. Back in Tokyo, he
met the Prime Minister and was offered the Order of the Rising Sun, which
Dewey respectfully and gently declined. Indeed, on a personal level the
Japanese reception of Dewey was magnanimous, with Dewey himself writ-
ing as much in the preface of Reconstruction in Philosophy**—his Tokyo
lectures published together in 1920.°°
    Dewey began his professional visit with a series of eight lectures con-
ducted twice a week beginning in February at the prestigious law faculty at
the University of Tokyo. It was the premier academic and intellectual stage
in Japan, but also the bastion of German idealism. More than 700 people
initially came to hear Dewey speak but after a few lectures, attendance had
dwindled to about half, most probably because there was no interpreter on
hand.*® One can only imagine the difficulty the Japanese audience must
have had understanding the complexity of Dewey’s ideas in a foreign lan-
guage in an overcrowded lecture hall without modern acoustic technology.
Dewey’s lectures elsewhere did, however, have interpreters, often students
who had studied abroad and were likely to be familiar with pragmatism.
   Such was the case when Dewey delivered several lectures at Waseda
University, a stronghold of pragmatism with pre-existing links to Dewey,
not to mention the premiere rival to Tokyo University’s claim to be the
most prestigious academic institution in the country. The Waseda Group of
pragmatists led by Tanaka Odo, (who had actually studied under a much
younger Dewey at the University of Chicago—more on this to follow), was
well known in intellectual circles of the day and, in addition to translating
Dewey’s lectures, helped more generally to infuse Waseda with a very dif-
ferent intellectual climate than that of Tokyo University. Other members of
the Waseda Group included Sugimori Kojiro and Hoashi Riichro, the one
who had come looking for an older man at the port the day Dewey arrived
in Japan. In addition to lectures in Tokyo, Dewey also ventured outside of
the capital, speaking in the cities of Kobe, Kyoto, and Osaka as well. It had
been a short trip—just over ten weeks—when Dewey and his wife boarded
a ship for China where they would stay for over two full years.


DEWEY’S (THREE) INTELLECTUAL RECEPTION(S): FORCES OF
TRADITION, YOUNG RADICALS AND CHRISTIAN LIBERALS

More important than the itinerary of the trip, however, is the reception
of Dewey’s ideas in Japan. How were they interpreted, evaluated, and
transformed by his Japanese audience? How did they interact within the

[p. 126] [PDF page 144]

pre-existing knowledge traditions evolving out of the previous era? In ana-
lyzing Dewey’s reception in Japan it becomes necessary to formulate sepa-
rate answers for three distinct groups in the rapidly polarizing Japanese
society into which Dewey arrived: the mainstream forces of tradition, the
agitated young radicals, and the Christian, liberal fringe.
    Dewey’s reception in the dominant, mainstream philosophical and intel-
lectual circles was cool at best, antagonistic at worst. For example, one
prominent member of the Tokyo University faculty was unimpressed, even
lamenting of Dewey’s talks, “If I had given the same lecture in Japanese,
the audience would have complained”.*! Another asked, with apparent dis-
dain: “What was this ‘philosophy’ Dewey is talking about?”.** These com-
ments were just the tip of a much wider undercurrent of doubt about the
basis of Dewey’s ideas and even its worthiness for the title of philosophy.
To explain this, recall that the University of Tokyo had been constructed
in the image of the German model and its philosophy faculty was nurtured
by both German nationals and Japanese professors trained in Germany. To
study philosophy was to study German thought.** This begins to explain
the cool intellectual reception to Dewey’s ideas.
   Yet, as with so much of Japanese history, it would be wrong to view this
simply as German thought wrapped in a Japanese form, rather it was the
other way around. As Bartholomew writes of the Faculty of Law where
Dewey lectured:

      Tokyo Imperial University’s Faculty of Law in particular was pervaded
      by a nationalistic, bureaucratic elitism which the philosophy of Hegel
        . must surely have reinforced—if not created. However, most of what
      is called statist, elitist, authoritarian, nationalistic, or bureaucratic in
      Japanese political or academic culture derives more from native rather
      than German sources.

Here then we find the story of Dewey and his ideas coming into direct con-
tact with the enduring knowledge traditions of Japan. Like the indigenous
traditions that cloaked themselves in German forms of governance, there is
much evidence to support Bartholomew’s* assertion that German philoso-
phy functioned in a similar way in the Japanese academy. Kobayashi**, for
example, emphasizes the much more direct connection between German
philosophy and these pre-existing, native traditions when he contends that
the dominance of neo-Kantianism during this period

      was due to a habitual preference for subjectivist philosophies, rather
      than objectivist philosophies. Because of the long experience with Bud-
      dhism and Confucianism, which tend toward subjectivism, the Japa-
      nese found it easier to develop in this direction.

Further support for this assertion are comments by Japan’s foremost educa-
tional historian to the effect that “philosophies like that of Dewey are too

[p. 127] [PDF page 145]

practical, too uncomplicated to fascinate either Germans or Japanese”.‘” The
un-receptiveness to pragmatism by this dominant mainstream then must
ultimately be viewed as the persistence of indigenous forms of knowledge,
but also a window on how German philosophy functioned as a means of
indigenous knowledge articulation. To further the point, we might also con-
trast Dewey’s reception with that enjoyed by Josiah Royce, an American who
blended his absolute idealism to notions of loyalty and became a favorite
of Japanese philosophers im the years preceding Dewey. Feuer*® makes the
point that “philosophical distance between Royce and Dewey corresponded
in Japan to the political distance between militarist absolutism and liberal
democracy. Dewey’s philosophy was not falling on friendly soil.”
    On the other end of the political and intellectual spectrum were groups
with demands that made the German articulation unacceptable. Yet, here
too Dewey’s message did not resonate because it was not bold enough, in
the eyes of these young radicals, to meet the challenges facing Japan. This
was the other pole of a rapidly polarizing Japanese society. Inspired by the
Bolshevik Revolution in 1917 and energized by the urban proletariat aris-
ing out of Japan’s booming industrialization, the young radicals were not
united but their revolutionary ideas of socialism, communism, and anar-
chism nevertheless infused the political discourse and emerged as mutually
supportive. This made Dewey’s philosophy and pedagogy, which refused to
articulate a particular type of social system, somewhat suspect despite his
priority on the democratic process:

    Many of the educationists, like other intellectuals of the period, were
    interested in socialism, which they associated with democracy, and
    Dewey’s position seemed ambiguous, since he did not take a clear stand
    in favor of a specific kind of socialistic system.”

In part, this was also because many young Japanese Marxists tended to con-
flate capitalism and the West, and thus became especially critical of West-
ern ideas and its agents. Accordingly, some saw Dewey’s philosophy as an
 “expression of America’s capitalist imperialism,” while others emphasized
the class angle in calling Dewey’s philosophy “a bourgeoisie capitalist ide-
ology.” To further the point they highlighted the fact that Dewey’s sojourn
was only made possible by wealthy Japanese businessmen.*’ Educationally,
these radicals instead tended to reference the work of Paul Natorp, whose
blend of neo-Kantian philosophy and socialist-like pedagogy emphasizing
solidarity seemed much more applicable to both traditions and current real-
ities in Japan. In 1924, a popular book entitled Natrop or Dewey?! was
published that brought the debate into full relief. The author—like the vast
majority of the young radicals—came out in favor of Natrop.
    Although the indifferent mainstream intellectuals and the dismissive young
radicals formed the most powerful forces in Japanese society at the time,
there was a small progressive ‘middle’ where Dewey’s ideas were afforded
a warm reception. Most members of this group had two distinguishing

[p. 128] [PDF page 146]

characteristics: they had studied in America and they were predominantly
Protestant Christians. The profile of Tanaka Odo, the leader of the Waseda
Group of pragmatists, who was perhaps the strongest follower of Dewey, is
instructive.** The young Tanaka had been infused with the Meiji spirit of
reconstruction of Japan and the ideal of seeking knowledge abroad. Nolte*
writes “He admitted the comprehensive vision of the Confucian sages, while
rejecting their insistence on social hierarchy, and disparaged the prevailing
limited utilitarian approach to Western learning.” He converted to Chris-
tianity and learned English from American missionaries, then embarked
on studies in America. He found his way to the University of Chicago and
studied under the young John Dewey from 1894 to 1897. He returned to
Japan and quickly took up a position at Waseda, molding it into a center of
pragmatism which churned out some of the most well-known liberals, prag-
matists, and followers of John Dewey: Ueda Seiji, Nieda Rokusaburo, and
Hoashi Riichiro. Although not intuitionally affiliated with Waseda, others
such as Hani Motoko, Obara Kuniyoshi, Nishimoto Mitoji, and Kawasaki
Riichi revealed a similar mix of Christianity and experience in America that
seemed to create strong affinities with Dewey. Not only would these indi-
viduals receive Dewey in Japan, but they would be the prime translators of
his work both in the years following his visit and again after World War II.
    Beyond the personal ties to Dewey and the shared common Christian
background, it is not immediately clear why there would be such com-
monality between this group and the ideas of Dewey. Surely they faced
marginalization from the traditional-German mainstream that must surely
be one strong reason they found such resonance in the democratic phi-
losophy of Dewey. Perhaps also they felt principled individualism was the
means to promote Christian ideals or maybe they were simply reacting to
the increasingly repressive political and intellectual atmosphere. Works by
Hoashi published in the early 1920s** support this latter view as when he
wrote—although it was suppressed by the government—that the univer-
sities were simply providing the intellectual legitimacy for the Prussian-
inspired authoritarianism.*° Here too we see that central to the reception of
Dewey was the struggle over which reference society would hold the imagi-
nation of Japan. This tiny progressive middle, which would become the
interpreters of Dewey for Japan and favored the American model, would
have the unenviable task of attempting to roll back four decades of German
dominance rooted in Japanese nativist/neo-Confucian traditions.


TRANSFORMATION AND APPROPRIATION IN THE LIBERAL
MIDDLE: SOME JAPANESE INTERPRETATIONS OF DEWEY

Important for our purposes is an understanding of how Dewey’s philoso-
phy and pedagogy were interpreted and transformed by these select few
who did champion Dewey’s ideas. Here we find that, despite their affinities
for Dewey, they nonetheless remolded Dewey’s ideas according to the logic

[p. 129] [PDF page 147]

of the Japanese situation in several distinct ways. First, they prioritized
the individual far more than Dewey himself did, in a direct critique of the
political atmosphere of rigid conformity. Here we might examine the ideas
of Tanaka who arguably did most to transform Dewey’s ideas to become
relevant in the Japanese context. Nolte,** the foremost scholar on Tanaka
and the wider Taisho movement in general, finds that:

    Tanaka accented individualism even more than did Dewey who stressed
    the need for cooperation and social engineering in industrial America.
    In his view, the first task of the democratic movement in Japan was the
    achievement of individual freedom in thought, law and custom.

Given the weak basis for “principled individualism” in Japanese society”
and the needs of the democratic movement of the time, this selective accen-
tuation of particular aspects of Dewey’s thoughts makes much sense.
    A second way in which Dewey’s ideas were transformed was a subtle,
but unmistakable scrubbing off of the optimism and peaceful inevitability
of social progress in Dewey’s speech and writings. Tanaka felt that Dew-
ey’s social evolution process was far from inevitable and could easily be
stopped by straying into ‘rigidity in customs’ or stymied by antagonistic
‘social classes.”* This was clearly the situation that Japanese liberals faced
at the time, making them unable to share Dewey’s optimistic appraisal of
natural processes of social evolution. This created a significant difference in
tone between Dewey and his Japanese translators, who were desperate not
to stray into either tradition- or class-conflict and thus wrote in a markedly
more social activist tone, often forcefully advocating social change. Nolte°’
supports this in relation to Tanaka’s writings, suggesting that those works
“differed from Dewey’s mainly in its exhortatory tone, which implied that
the accent on the individual aspect was less a matter of intellectual conve-
nience that of relevance to social problems.”
   Third, there is much evidence to show that Dewey’s ideas on education,
once translated into the Japanese context, became disconnected from the
underlying logic of pragmatism. This could have either happened because
of the inability of educators to understand the complexity of Dewey’s ideas
(especially when delivered without interpreters) or because of the repressive
political environment. Kobayashi takes the latter view:

    The progressive educationalists were limited by strict government sur-
    veillance of their activities; the school curriculum itself was under the
    direct control of the government . .. consequently, there was little inter-
    est shown in the deeper philosophical bases of Dewey’s educational
    ideas; very few understood pragmatism.

Another possibility was that Dewey’s pedagogy was intentionally severed
from its pragmatist roots, by educators and intellectuals who indeed wished
to improve education not for the sake of individuals but rather for the sake

[p. 130] [PDF page 148]

of the nation. It is important not to underestimate how much Japan was
soaked through with nationalism at the time. More than the simple result
of efforts to instill nationalism as part of the wider modernization project,
repeated discrimination against Japan in the international community (many
cite the failure of the League of Nations to include a racial equality clause)
pushed many progressive educators and thinkers to view Dewey’s pedagogy
not as an end in and of itself, but as a means of strengthening Japan. Here we
find that “much of the enthusiasm for new teaching techniques advocated by
progressives was also within a framework of nationalistic aims of education.
To many teachers, progressive methods meant better teaching, for the good
of the nation.”*! This reversal of Dewey can be attributed to the political cli-
mate, but also to the ways these nationalist ideas resonated with indigenous
traditions and Japanese history. This is even more apparent in intellectuals
who explicitly identified with pragmatism but still altered it to fit the Japanese
situation. Ohkura® supports this view with the case of Oikawa Heiji—one
of the best known progressive educators of the day—who advocated “incor-
porating the self-governing aspect of pragmatism to reflect life in terms of
collective self-regulation. His major argument was that the self-governance
of liberalism was compatible with the need for social control through the use
of a problem solving form of pedagogy.”
    In the years following Dewey’s visit, the main features of the Japanese
social, intellectual, and educational landscape persisted much as before.
Instability continued with the assassination of Prime Minister Hara in 1921.
Government control also continued and strengthened: Hoashi Riichiro was
imprisoned for two months and his books on ethics suppressed when they
failed to mention the imperial household therein. The young radicals con-
tinued agitating—albeit increasingly disillusioned with the hope of democ-
racy. In July 1922, the Communist Party of Japan was established (with help
of the ComIntern operating out of Moscow) gaining members rapidly until
Peace Preservation laws sent them scurrying underground. The progressive ~
education movement also flourished for a time before meeting a similar
fate. Driven by visits of Helen Parkhurst introducing her ‘Dalton Method’
in 1924 and William Heard Kilpatrick promoting the ‘Project Method’ in
1927, progressive schools continued to proliferate, with names like “Free-
dom Hills School” (Jiyu-gaoka). Books on Dewey sold well, but it would
still be too much to state that Dewey had really left a lasting impression on
even the progressive education movement, if for no other reason than the
movement was so limited in Japan. A few normal schools—especially one
in Nara—implemented new approaches they claimed to be molded after
Dewey, but these seemed less to do with his pérsonal visit to Japan and
more to do with the legitimacy affordeck by his international reputation.
Indeed, Dewey’s visit must ultimately be judged as insignificant at the time.
Its significance only inflated after World War II by the small, liberal middle
that would find itself the ‘last man standing’ among the three groups that
dominated the Taisho era.

[p. 131] [PDF page 149]

THE MARCH TO WORLD WAR II:
ELIMINATING THE (PROGRESSIVE) OPPOSITION

Japan marched into World War II to the cadence of the traditionalists
cloaked in German forms, first eliminating the young radicals, then turn-
ing attention to the liberals and their progressive education movement.
Taisho democracy, never as healthy as historians in later periods would like
to believe due to internal tensions®’, began to suffocate under successively
more stringent Peace Preservations laws (1926, 1928), while an increasingly
intrusive state surveillance apparatus actively strangled critics on the Left.
By 1929, the Communist Party had been forced completely underground
and, according to most accounts, largely ceased to exist to by 1933. This
lack of opposition fueled by increasing international tensions and economic
depression gave the increasingly conservative, nationalist mainstream the
upper hand in charting the future course. Buruma® highlights both the
historical continuity and the international dimensions writing, “It was as
though the militarist monster, forged in late Meiji from a mixture of late
Edo nativism and borrowed German racial theories, had finally burst into
horrible life.” This ‘militarist monster’ would go on to invade Manchuria in
 1932, China in 1937, and America in 1941, driven by the central myths of
the nativist school—a divine Emperor, Shintoism and Japanese exception-
alism—but also neo-Confucian ideals—a strong state, rigid social bonds,
and ‘virtues’ amenable to militarism such as loyalty.
    For more than a decade as the militarists gradually consolidated power,
the progressive education movement hobbled on, albeit increasingly con-
strained. As early as 1924, the Minister of Education had issued a strong
warning about the consequences of non-conformity in schools. In 1926,
military training became mandatory for both public and private schools.
Facing this increased pressure, more and more progressive educators tended
to situate progressive education in the larger framework of the good of
the nation. The New Education World Fellowship Conference came to
Tokyo in 1932, legitimating progressive ideas and pragmatism reminiscent
of Dewey to some degree, yet it was perhaps too late. Much more influ-
ential was the government’s notorious kokutai no hongi (Defining Prin-
ciples of the National Entity of Japan) promulgated in 1937, followed by the
appointment of General Araki Sadao as Minister of Education in 1938 that
elevated nativist-cum-ultra-nationalist, militarist doctrines to the status of
official educational philosophy.
    This shifting political context again had profound implications for
what qualified as knowledge—philosophical, educational, or otherwise—
and thus implications for Dewey’s ideas in the Japanese context. Despite a
government-promoted effort to cleanse Japan of ‘Western’ influence, most
clearly evident in rendering Western-imported words into native Japa-
nese script (such as baseball into yakyu, the Chinese ideogram equiva-
lent) and purging American and British figures like Benjamin Franklin

[p. 132] [PDF page 150]

and Florence Nightingale from morals courses®*, German philosophy
continued to flourish: “Although research into Western philosophies was
discouraged and sometimes forbidden during World War II, exceptions
were made for the study of German philosophies in line with the official
ideology”.®* This further reveals the tight link between nativist ideas and
German forms that legitimated them. As for Dewey, there was not the
degree of ‘degradation’ one might expect and little evidence of suppres-
sion or targeting of Dewey’s thoughts specifically. Somewhat paradoxi-
cally, this presents some of the best evidence that Dewey’s ideas and the
liberal, progressive education movement was not a threat to the powerful
mainstream ideological forces and instead of being actively suppressed,
had largely dissipated on its own accord in the rising tide of ultra-nation-
alism. As late as 1944, for instance, a book on Dewey still managed to get
published, albeit one with a telling twist: it used Dewey’s own words as a
critique of ‘American national character’.*”
    Contributing to the decline of the progressive opposition was also the
more natural process of old age and death of several members of the liberal
movement who had come of age during the first liberal decade following
the Meiji Restoration, endured the German turn, and then reasserted their
voices in the Taisho democracy period. Tanaka Odo, for example, died
in 1932. Yoshino Sakuz6—perhaps the most well-known face of Taisho
Democracy—passed in 1933.°% Disciples of this first liberal generation
would have come of age during the lead up to World War II, but instead
had to wait until Japan’s unconditional surrender in 1945 and subsequent
purges to find space for their ideas.


POST-WAR DEWEY BOOM: LIBERALS ALONE,
THEN ‘TRADITION’ RESURGENT

We can now return to unravel the Dewey ‘boom’ highlighted at the outset.
Indeed, with the historical, political, and ideological context of Dewey’s
personal visit to Japan retraced, the sudden burst of enthusiasm for Dewey
can be appreciated as all the more extraordinary. In fact, the stark contrast
between Dewey’s personal reception and his re-reception after World War
II clearly reveals the dynamics of how political and ideological change leads
to profound readjustments in definitions of what constitutes educational
knowledge. During this time, not only did a fascinating reinterpretation of
Dewey’s influence occur that elevated the impact of Dewey’s visit to some-
thing way out of proportion to its actual significance, but—crucially—the
events of this period transformed Dewey. into a symbolic, rhetorical tool
within Japanese educational debates.
    Following Japan’s unconditional surrender in August 1945, changes to
the political, ideological, and intellectual landscape were as profound and
far-reaching as anytime in Japan’s history, with the suddenness of change

[p. 133] [PDF page 151]

having few apparent parallels in the world.©’ One poignant example is that
the Emperor, who had been elevated to the status a living god for most of
the previous decade, broke the precedent of imperial silence, announced
Japan’s surrender, and then went on to renounce his own divinity. The
Allied Occupation would primarily be an American-led affair and fun-
damental changes to Japan’s political and social structure were swift and
decisive: a new Constitution was adopted in November 1946 that aimed to
purge authoritarian influences and construct (or reinvigorate, depending
upon one’s preconceived notions of Japan) democratic institutions. Educa-
tion was singled out by the Occupation authorities as a major source of
Japan’s drive to war, as well as one of the prime levers for rebuilding a more
democratic Japanese society. In 1947, the Fundamental Law of Education
was promulgated that preserved a place for individualism and explicitly for-
bade the use of education for nationalist goals. The main themes promoted
by the United States Education Mission who visited Japan in March 1946
were demilitarization, democratization, and decentralization, recommen-
dations clearly modeled after the American system—a fact that would cre-
ate problems and infuse domestic education policy debates for decades.”
    There appears to be debate in previous scholarship in regard to how much
Dewey’s ideas were an explicit policy of the Occupation authorities with
important implications for exploring the Dewey ‘boom’. Saito and Imai,”!
citing secondary sources in Japanese, write that, “Indeed, the educational
thought of the mission was influenced by the philosophy of Deweyan pro-
gressive education as well as by American New Deal idealism.” They point
out that the Mission included George S. Counts, “a disciple of Dewey’s
philosophy of education.” Tsuchimochi” also reports that Dewey’s name
had initially been put forth as a possible member of the U.S. Education
Mission to Japan, though his participation never materialized. In contrast,
Kobayshi,”* personally conducting primary interviews with former mem-
bers of the Educational Mission in the early 1960s, found no explicit use
of Dewey in the actual policies introduced. Ultimately, Kobayashi’s conclu-
sion appears to be more plausible, given his sources as well as the failure of
Saito and Imai to account for the reinterpretation of historical periods by
later scholars eager to promote Dewey—a theme central to this analysis.
Thus, instead of being able to trace the Dewey ‘boom’ to the directives of
the Allied Occupation, we must search for deeper explanations of the rush
to glorify Dewey.
    Indeed, a more contextual, historically grounded analysis begins with an
examination of the drastic changes to the political landscape in the first few
months following the surrender: the Occupation authorities purged not only
militarist politicians and bureaucrats, but also several thousand militant
teachers. The purge extended to the university level where professors—espe-
cially those who had been most vigorous in promoting the kokutai—were
also removed. Faculty that taught German philosophy were particularly
suspect. This was a purposeful, concerted effort by the Occupation to alter

[p. 134] [PDF page 152]

the intellectual orientation of Japan away from Germany that must be seen
as removing the major force opposing the liberals.” On the other side of the
political spectrum, the Occupation authorities also actively removed the
radical Left, although this did not occur immediately. Indeed, at first the
Occupation consciously nurtured the radical Left as a vocal counter-weight
against traditionalists.’?> A prime example being General MacArthur’s sup-
port of the formation of Japan Teacher’s Union, organized primarily by the
socialist and communist heirs to the young radicals.
   Yet this was short-lived. As early as 1949, a ‘reverse course’ was apparent
as Cold War political tensions punctuated by the Red Scare in the United
States and the Korean War would change America’s approach to the Occu-
pation. Strikes were banned, unions were suppressed, and the Left became
suspect as well: “the reforming zeal of the Americans had abated, and the
environment in Japan underwent an important change”.”° The effect was
that the initial purge of the conservatives became a double purge now tar-
geting the ‘radical’ Left. Although some conservatives did manage to regain
positions of power while attention shifted towards the ‘threat’ of Com-
munism, both sides were weakened considerably until at least 1953. With
a new emphasis on democracy, the progressive, liberal ‘middle’ was the last
acceptable player on the Japanese political and intellectual stage—a player
eager to act the part the American authorities hoped they might.
   Thus, in the ensuing political vacuum the liberals emerged with a free
hand to promote their worldview, reinterpret history, and publish their
vision of education and all that had gone ‘wrong’ over the past two decades,
at least until the neo-Confucian/nativist forces were able to reassert them-
selves after the Occupation ended. They did this in myriad ways, but most
noticeably—and most importantly here—through a redefinition of the
Taisho progressive education movement and Dewey’s place therein. Sud-
denly, scholars of Dewey who had no outlet for their work during the pre-
vious decade quickly found it easy to publish their ideas in the new climate ©
fostered by the Occupation. As Kobyashi” relates, one prominent postwar
Dewey scholar, Nagano Yoshio, for example, found that

      with the onset of World War II, it became impossible to publish them
      [articles and reviews on Dewey], and so his Dewey manuscripts were
      hidden in the cellar to protect them from bombing of Tokyo. They were
      published in rapid succession after the war, and greatly accounted for the
      profusion of Dewey books in the years of the American occupation.

Moreover, the flood of students entering the education departments and
normal schools following the war to take up positions opened by the purges
was eager to study Dewey as a means of understanding, if not courting
favor, with the Occupation authorities. Indeed, there was an intense drive
among many in Japan to understand American thought and by extension
the American authorities, with organizations like Society for the Science of

[p. 135] [PDF page 153]

Thought and the American Research Seminar sprouting up rapidly. In this
political climate, Dewey was seized upon as the quintessential American
philosopher and educator.
   There were also other, albeit related, forces at work as well: a desire
among many Japanese to show the Occupational authorities that Japan
did indeed have a democratic tradition. This is the larger reinterpretation
of prewar history that bestows new meaning on Dewey’s personal visit.
Numerous works appeared that elevated the Taisho democracy movement
to something way out of proportion to its actual impact. Some like Shibata
Shingo, a well-respected philosopher and historian of social thought at the
time, even went so far as to claim that pragmatism was “the philosophy of
the Taisho democracy movement.””* which necessarily elevated Dewey’s
visit to one of stimulus for an entirely new philosophical and social move-
ment that (supposedly) swept through Japan. Not only is there little histori-
cal evidence to support that claim, as the previous account has intended
to show, but the entire conceptualization is inherently biased because it
overemphasizes the impact and scope of the Taisho democracy movement
itself. Nevertheless, it was these types of historical reinterpretations which
appeared frequently and came to directly catalyze the postwar Dewey
“boom.” Here Kobayashi’s” contribution is again the most well chosen:
“Dewey was but one of the many thinkers from Europe and America who
inspired Japanese progressives [during the Taisho period]; nevertheless, in
the years after World War II, the Japanese tended to identify the progressive
movement as a Dewey movement.”
   This in turn directs attention to the next phase of the Dewey ‘boom’.
Even before the official end of the Occupation, the ‘reverse course’ and
various statements by the Occupation authorities had implicitly signaled
tolerance for a reemergence of the traditional alliance, given the (perceived)
socialist alternative. Beauchamp*’ relates how in the early 1950s this had
immediate effects for education:

    Prime Minister Shigeru Yoshida advocated the creation of an educa-
    tional statement on morality that would replace the discredited Impe-
    rial Rescript . . . The following year Teiyu Amano, then minister of
    education, provoked charges of a rebirth of militarism by proposing to
    celebrate national holidays by raising the rising sun flag and playing the
    national anthem. He also echoed Yoshida’s call for a new ethical code
    to replace the discredited Imperial Rescript.

This emphasis on morality reveals the connections to Japan’s neo-Con-
fucian heritage, while the symbols of the rising sun flag and the national
anthem suggest the reassertion of nativist-cum-nationalist ideas. Sensing
this, and fearing a repeat of another militarist outcome of that tradi-
tion, the reaction by the progressives was swift. There were ‘movements
for people’s education’ launched by the Japan Teacher’s Union which

[p. 136] [PDF page 154]

“involved many philosophers of education and pedagogues, ranging from
the liberal camp to the Marxist left.”*! From this moment, references to
Dewey become subtly but noticeably infused with even more new mean-
ing: a symbol of protest against the ascendant traditionalists and the spec-
ter of a return to prewar conservative excess. This interpretation allows
us to explain why the slough of translations, works on Dewey, Dewey fes-
tivals, and the like extends way past the life of the Occupation and even
peaks after the Occupation leaves. To take but one example to illustrate
this point, the formation of the Dewey Society in Japan occurs in 1957.
Despite previous, sustained scholarly interest in Dewey, the formation of
the group does not occur during the Occupation, but instead amidst the
rollback of many of the democratic reforms implemented by the Occupa-
tion, such as the elimination of democratic local school boards (1955),
and the reintroduction of moral education courses (1958).
    Thus, at the end of the Dewey ‘boom’ we find that Dewey becomes
transformed from an American philosopher, pragmatist, and advocate
of progressive education into a symbol of protest that encapsulates (1) an
elevation of the significance of the Taisho democracy movement, (2) the
‘lost’? democratic reforms of the immediate Occupation period, (3) a pro-
test against resurgent neo-Confucian and nativist traditions, and therefore
(4) a critique of the emerging status-quo ‘regression’ in Japanese political
and educational institutions. As during the Meiji era when German mod-
els and institutions became re-injected with Japanese meaning until they
remained largely in form only, in the period following World War II, the
name ‘Dewey’ becomes reworked in ways that created a stronger associa-
tion with Japanese realities than the original ideas of John Dewey himself.
Instead of Dewey changing Japan, we find that Japan’s ‘adopters’ altered
Dewey so that ‘his ideas’ come to ultimately reflect relations within pre-
existing knowledge traditions and political change within Japan. Clearly,
this is a far cry from a Japanese enactment* of his famous democratic, pro-
gressive ideals. As such, it becomes increasingly difficult to make the case
for, let alone trace, a Deweyian impact on the Japanese context because
references to Dewey now become less about the ideas of the man, and more
about the political and ideological context into which they are put forth.


1960S TO TODAY: CONTINUITY,           RE-POLARIZATION
AND DEWEY’S DISAPPEARANCE

By the beginning of the 1960s, the Dewey “boom” had largely subsided.
Prime Minister Ikeda’s famed income-doubling plan announced in 1960
inaugurated a new era of economic growth. Indeed, the Japanese economy
grew at a blistering pace, fostering rapid migration from the countryside
to the cities as employment opportunities expanded and social mobility
increased.’ These factors, coupled with the postwar baby boom generation

[p. 137] [PDF page 155]

entering secondary schools, led to policies focused primarily upon targeted
educational expansion that enjoyed broad political consensus. It increased
the number of technical schools and laid plans for the cultivation of a huge
number of scientists and engineers. This simultaneous funding of certain
sectors and sudden arrival of the baby boomers at the college level led to the
intense competition and demand for education. Its effects—the persistent
image of Japan’s ‘exam hell’-—would appear to be anything but the demo-
cratic education envisaged by either Dewey or the Occupational authori-
ties. Yet, as Beauchamp* explains:

    It was not so much that the democratizing themes of the Occupation
    were forgotten—the more democratic segment of the population would
    allow that to happen—but after years of economic hardship there was
    a wide consensus on the need for economic reconstruction. Educational
    policy in the 1960s and much of the 1970s was consciously designed to
    foster economic development.

 One of the primary ways that the “more democratic segment of the popu-
 lation” did not allow the memory (or hope) of the democratization fade
 was again through the symbolic use of John Dewey, with liberal educators
 and academics continuing to publish works about him* often using Dew-
eyan ideas largely as means of showing how far Japan had strayed from its
 ‘democratic roots.’
    However, a subtly growing polarization reminiscent of the Taisho period
again found liberals who promoted Dewey increasingly marginalized. As
Saito and Imai** describe, during this time Dewey’s ideas were “criticized
not only by the conservatives, but also by Marxists, and others who studied
Soviet pedagogy, for its ‘anti-intellectualism’ and its ‘empiricism of aimless
doing’.” For traditionalists and conservatives, “Deweyan child-centered
and problem-solving education came to be criticized as a result of con-
cern over the decline of morality and the faltering academic performance
of children.”*” Between students and intellectuals on the Left who became
increasingly militant (even taking over the University of Tokyo for nearly a
year in the violent protests of 1968) and conservatives on the Right refus-
ing to give ground, the liberals found their voices drowned out or simply
ignored much as had happened during the Taisho era. Studies and refer-
ences to Dewey increasingly retreated—if not disappeared—into the realm
of academia. Echoing many of those who have evaluated Dewey’s influence
historically, Saito and Imai** lament the loss of enthusiasm for Dewey in the
decades following the 1950s: “Dewey had ‘come and gone’ like a fad: his
thought had not taken root in the soil of Japanese culture.”
    This brings us to a final reflection of Dewey’s place in the Japanese edu-
cational landscape of today. What is fascinating, although unsurprising
given the history retraced here, is that we still find the same contours of
the debate, the same battle between the self-evolutive knowledge traditions

[p. 138] [PDF page 156]

at work. The neo-Confucian strain is seen clearly in the societal response
to a (supposed) increase in school violence and disturbances in the 1980s
and 1990s. Beauchamp*? makes the connection citing a prominent Japa-
nese educationalist: “The actions of this still tiny minority have shocked
adult Japan because ‘their behavior violates the most fundamental code of
Confucian-influenced traditional educational values—namely, respecting
and obeying teachers.’” Neo-Confucian values are also seen enduring in
repeated attempts to implement particular forms of moral education, most
recently in the Education of the Heart (1997) initiative. The nativists are
also alive and well. Marshall? reports that, particularly during the 1980s
when the West began to look to Japan for its ‘unique secrets’ to educational
turned economic success, the nativist discourse was energized:

      Increasingly in the 1980s ideas of such uniqueness gained popularity in
      the press and other media. The debate had a new label— Nihonjinron’
      or ‘discourse on Japanese identity’—but in essence it was a revitalized
      version of the prewar ideological struggles and successors to the Nativ-
      ist tradition of the nineteenth century.

More recently, former Prime Minister Abe Shinzo (2006-2007)           actively
promoted a similar nativist-cum-nationalist line, leading a movement with
ties to major Shinto religious organizations that was successful in pushing
for a revision of the Fundamental Law of Education. Previously untouched
since the Occupation, the revision added phrases that emphasized the
importance of education for the good of the nation, ‘community spirit’,
and ‘inheritance of tradition’—a blatant and limited, yet highly symbolic
attempt to purge Japanese education of more its most visible ‘Western’
influence and return to Japan’s ‘native’ traditions.
    And what then of Western learning? What of Dewey today? Saito and Imai”!
make the case that there are four primary schools of Western learning mani- ~
fest in Japanese educational theory circles today—the French Annales School
(Aires), analyses of power (Bourdieu and Foucault), postmodernism (Haber-
mas among others), and Deweyan philosophy. Most prominent among this
group of Dewey scholars are Saito and Imai”’, Mori”, and Sugiura.°* Although
there is some treatment of Dewey’s philosophy and pedagogy in nearly every
philosophical treatise on education in Japan, and the John Dewey Society of
Japan continues to hold its meetings despite a declining membership, Dewey’s
ideas seemed to be largely confined to the driving force of these few scholars.
Indeed, even for them, their work appears to be less a focus on his ideas and
more—in a now familiar theme—a symbol of their disappointment with the
neo-Confucian/nativist direction of Japanese society and education. Saito and
Imai’s® call to arms for Deweyan scholars is characteristic:

      In light of the current need for the reconceptualization and reconstruc-
      tion of democracy in Japan, [the Deweyan scholar’s] role is especially

[p. 139] [PDF page 157]

significant . . . [the] unique task must be to realize democracy through an
    enrichment of the relationship between the public and the private in the
    face of [Japan’s] anti-democratic culture and to release the freedom of its
    young people from the invisible hand of national and economic interest.

It is but the latest salvo in Japan’s enduring battles over tradition, history,
and culture that reveal the continuing evolution of culture-specific con-
structions of knowledge. -


CONCLUSION

John Dewey’s reception and re-reception in Japan adds much to theoretical
understandings of the transfer of educational knowledge. First, as shown
in the enduring and yet unresolved tensions between neo-Confucianist,
nativist, and Western learning, long-standing ‘traditions’ are not so easily
altered, let alone erased, by ideas and models coming from the ‘outside’. In
fact, if the case of Japan is any guide, indigenous traditions tend to utilize
transferred knowledge in ways that strengthen on-going tensions and strug-
gles, thus making de-contextualization and re-contexualization processes
much more highly context dependent than existing research tends to real-
ize, as well as suggesting that the ‘external’ may often really be a dimension
of the ‘internal’ articulating itself in new ways.
    Second, adoption and use of ‘transferred knowledge’ occurs primarily in
sites—such as Waseda University and among progressive Christian educa-
tors who had lived in America—that are already predisposed to do so from
the outset. This creates the need to enlarge the research gaze from reception
itself to the position of receptors vis-a-vis others in the educational-cum-val-
ues debates (the political conflict dimensions of context). This, in turn, gives
clues as to why and how ‘filtering’ and selective adaptation of the transferred
knowledge occurs—such as the primary emphasis on the individual in Dew-
ey’s philosophy by Japanese intellectuals like Tanaka. That is: more often
than not, processes of selection turn ‘external knowledge’ into weapons—
pointed critiques—of on-going practice for use against intra-contextual
opponents or more general appeals against the dominant status quo.
    Finally, Dewey’s reception in 1919, re-reception in the postwar era, and
reinterpretation throughout the past century clearly illuminates how fluctu-
ations in national political dynamics underpinned by indigenous knowledge
traditions—more than any other combination of explanatory variables—
prefigure what qualifies as educational knowledge.
    Ultimately, neither Dewey’s reception in Japan, nor his negligible his-
torical impact thereafter, tend to support a hypothesis of convergence
in educational knowledge with either other places Dewey visited around
the world or an emergent world model. If anything then, this analysis
has herein thus lent further support to findings elsewhere that suggest

[p. 140] [PDF page 158]

the internationality of the progressive education movement, and therefore
offers a cautionary note against an assertion that we are experiencing a
similar era of harmonious, global convergence—no matter how seduc-
tive or well-intentioned that idea may be. In the case of Japan, the most
fascinating development to watch may not be Japanese ‘harmonization’
with the West, but how the rise of China may influence and strengthen the
aspects of Chinese tradition in Japanese thought and thereby reconfigure
and shift the neo-Confucian, nativist, and Western alliance once again, a
preview of which was already seen in the ‘Asian Values’ fervor” cut short
by the Asian financial crisis of 1997.
    Clearly then the march of a shared world culture is not borne out in
the Japanese case, as each time that Japan was opened itself to the world,
its traditions have quickly regrouped and reasserted themselves. Nor is
this opening and closing a dialectical zigzag tending towards some type of
Hegelian higher synthesis of Western values-cum-world culture. Indeed,
rather than a movement towards greater freedom, progress, and justice,
in Japan today we see perhaps the most aggressive reassertion of tradi-
tional forces at anytime since the end of World War II as evidenced by the
successful Revision of the Fundamental Law of Education in December
2006. Yet—crucially—this ‘traditionalism’ is not simply a suppression of
the people’s will: parents are among the most resistant to a relaxation of
the traditional curriculum that would bring Japanese education in line with
experiential, progressive models.”” Not only is Dewey nowhere to be found,
but the neo-Confucian/nativist traditions seem to be cloaking themselves
in ‘globalization’ and Western forms in much the same way as they once
did with the German model in a process that becomes easier as constructed
notions of ‘global policy trends’ become all the more conservative.


NOTES

      1. The first to highlight this paradox was Victor Kobayashi (1964) whose
         exhaustive study still remains the best historical account of Dewey’s recep-
         tion in Japan. This chapter is heavily indebted to that study, even as it works
         to develop and extend the theoretical implications of those findings.
      2. See for example, L. Feuer, “John Dewey’s Sojourn in Japan,” Teachers
         College Record 71, no. 1 (1969): 123-45; N. Saito, “Education for Global
        Understanding: Learning From Dewey’s Visit to Japan,” Teachers College
         Record 105, no. 9 (2003): 1753-73.
      3. V. Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought (Ann Arbor:
         University of Michigan School of Education, 1964).
      4. G. Steiner-Khamsi, “Transferring Education, Displacing Reforms,” in Dis-
         course Formation in Comparative Education, ed. J. Schriewer (Frankfurt/M:
         Peter Lang, 2000), 158.
      5. Feuer, “John Dewey’s Sojourn in Japan”; Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese
         Educational Thought.                                              :
      6. S. Eisenstadt, “Some Observations on the Transformation of Confucianism
         (and Buddhism) in Japan,” in Confucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity:

[p. 141] [PDF page 159]

Moral Education and Economic Culture in Japan and the Four Mini-Drag-
    ons, ed. T. Wei-Ming      (Cambridge, MA:    Harvard    University Press, 1966),
    175-85; W. Smith, Confucianism in Modern Japan: A Study of Conserva-
    tism in Japanese Intellectual History (Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1959).
  . M. Lincicome, “The Historical Context of Japanese Education to 1945,” in
    Windows on Japanese Education ed. E. Beauchamp (New York: Greenwood
    Presssali991) Mae
  . S. Yamashita, “Confucianism and the Japanese State, 1904-1945,” in Con-
    fucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity ed. Wei-Ming, 132-54.
  . The terms nativism and nativist are those that have traditionally dominated
    the English-language scholarly literature on this aspect of Japanese intel-
    lectual/educational history (see for example B. Marshall, Learning to Be
    Modern: Japanese Political Discourse on Education (Boulder, CO: West-
    view, 1994); Lincicome, “The Historical Context of Japanese Education to
    1945.” This article adopts such terms in accordance with such usage noting
    the term may strike readers today as somewhat odd or awkward, but argues
    that is preferable to equivalent words such as ‘indigenous’ that might tend
    to mistake a constructed nativist doctrine for actualities predating Chinese
    influence (for more on this see P. Dale, The Myth of Japanese Uniqueness
    (London: Routledge, 1988); J. Kitagawa, “The Japanese Kokutai: History
    and Myth,” History ofReligions 13, no. 3 (1974): 214-25.
  . Lincicome, “The Historical Context of Japanese Education to 1945,” 12.
  . Ibid., 14.
  . See Marshall, Learning to Be Modern; Kitagawa, “The Japanese Kokutai.”
  . Lincicome, “The Historical Context of Japanese Education to 1945,” 7.
  . P. Nosco, Confucianism and Tokugawa Culture (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
    versity Press, 1988).
  . Lincicome, “The Historical Context of Japanese Education to 1945,” 12.
  . S. Eisenstadt, Japanese Civilization: A Comparative View (Chicago: Univer-
    sity of Chicago Press, 1996), 304.
  . J. Schriewer, “The Method of Comparison and the Need for Externaliza-
    tion: Methodological Criteria and Sociological Concepts,” in Theortes and
    Methods of Comparative Education ed. J. Schriewer in cooperation with B.
    Holmes (Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 1990).
  . H. Watnabe, “‘They are Almost the Same as the Ancient Three Dynasties’:
    The West as Seen Through Confucian Eyes in Nineteenth-Century Japan,”
    in Confucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity ed. Wei-Ming, 119-31.
  . 1. Buruma, Inventing Japan, 1853-1964 (New York: Random House, 2003),
    45.
  wibidy:22:
  _ B. Platt, Burning and Building: Schooling and State Formation in Japan,
    1750-1890 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center, 2004); B.
    Platt,   “Japanese   Childhood,   Modern   Childhood:   The   Nation-State,   the
    School, and 19th Century Globalization,” Journal of Social History 38, no.
    4 (2005): 965-85; Y. Shinya, Jinjo Chugakko no Setritsu [The Formation
    of Secondary Schools in the Meiji Era| (Fukuoka: Kyushu Daigaku Shup-
    pankai, 1997); Lincicome, “The Historical Context of Japanese Education
    to 1945.”
ides E. Beauchamp, “The Development of Japanese Educational Policy,” in Win-
     dows on Japanese Education ed. E. Beauchamp (New York: Greenwood
    Press, 1991), 27-50.
D3: A. Burks, “The Yatoi Phenomenon: An Early Experiment in Technical Assis-
    tance,” in Foreign Employees in Nineteenth-century Japan eds. E. Beau-
    champ and A. Iriya (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990).

[p. 142] [PDF page 160]

_ B. Marshall, “Professors and Politics: The Meiji Academic Elite,” Journal of
       Japanese Studies 3, no. 1 (1977): 71-97.
     . Lincicome, “The Historical Context of Japanese Education to 1945,” 15.
     . Beauchamp, “The Development of Japanese Educational Policy.”
     . A. Swale, The Political Thought of Mori Arinori: A Study in Meijt Conser-
      vatism (Surrey: Curazon Press, 2000).
   . G. Hoston, “The State, Modernity, and the Fate of Liberalism in Prewar
     Japan,” The Journal of Asian Studies 51, no. 2 (1992): 287-316.
   . Buruma, Inventing Japan, 1853-1964, 53.
80) For a similar account with more details of the period see J. Schriewer, “Mul-
     tiple Internationalities: The Emergence of a World-Level Ideology and the
     Persistence of Idiosyncratic World-Views,” in Transnational Intellectual
     Networks: Forms of Academic Knowledge and the Search for Cultural Iden-
     tities (Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 2004), 473-87.
Sil J. Bartholomew, “Japanese Modernization and the Imperial Universities,
     1876-1920,” The Journal of Asian Studies 37, no. 2 (1978): 251-71.
o2. Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought.
   . Using the term ‘liberal’ to define any of the Japanese actors described in this
     chapter is much less straightforward than it might first appear. This is because
     the term liberal, in Japan as elsewhere, carries various meanings—freedom of
     the individual, a parliamentary system of government, unrestricted develop-
     ment (economic, social, political, cultural, etc.), government assurance of indi-
     vidual and/or civil liberties—so that one—like Mori—might be a ‘liberal’ in
     some respects but not others. The reader reading this chapter also carries their
     own definition(s) of liberalism, as did John Dewey and others. The point is that
     the multi-vocal terms ‘liberal’ and ‘progressive’ necessarily make the account
     here manageable but in doing so run the risk of obfuscating real differences
     among certain figures, groups, and personal understandings—these questions
     are part and parcel to reception/adoption processes addressed herein but space
     limitations prevent the fuller treatment these complexities deserve. (see, for
     example, J. Rappleye, Y. Imoto, $. Horiguchi, “Towards Thick Description of
     Education Trasnfer: understanding a Japanese institution’s ‘import’ of Euro-
     pean Language Policy,” Comparative Education, 2011)
   . Feuer, “John Dewey’s Sojourn in Japan,” 4.
   . Lincicome, “The Historical Context of Japanese Education to 1945”.
   . Feuer, “John Dewey’s Sojourn in Japan.”
   . I. Nitobe, Bushido: The Soul of Japan (Tokyo: Shokobo, 1901).
   . John Dewey, Reconstruction in Philosophy (New York: Henry Holt & Co.,
       1920).
     . It is perhaps interesting to contrast the official comforts but relative auton-
       omy Dewey was provided during his time in Japan with the ‘pop star’-like
       following and ‘meticulously orchestrated’ trip Dewey was afforded in China
       by virtue of his affiliation to Hu Shi (Schulte’s account of Dewey’s reception
       in China, this volume).
     . Feuer, “John Dewey’s Sojourn in Japan.”
     . Cited in Kobayashi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 39.
     . Feuer, “John Dewey’s Sojourn in Japan.”
     . Kobayashi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought.
     . Bartholomew, “Japanese Modernization and the Imperial             Universities,
       1876-1920,” 253.
     . Ibid.
     . Kobayashi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 21.
     . Cited in Kobayashi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 20.
     . Feuer, “John Dewey’s Sojourn in Japan,” 2.

[p. 143] [PDF page 161]

49. Kobayashi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 85.
50: Cited in Kobayashi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 41.
    Dewey himself was well aware of both at the polarization of political and
    intellectual traditions and the reasons he might have been invited to lecture
    in Japan as well: to provide an alternative to the radical ideologies of the Left.
    He relates a conversation with Baron Shibusawa who financed the majority
    of expenses for Dewey’s trip: “He explained for about half an hour or more
    his [Confucian] theory of life... and what he is trying to do, especially that
    it isn’t merely relief. He is desirous to preserve the old Confucian standards
    only adapted to present economic conditions; it is essentially a morality of
    feudal economic relationships, as perhaps you know, and he thinks the mod-
    ern factory employers can be brought to take the old paternal attitude to the
    employees and thus forestall class struggle here. The radicals laugh at the
    notion here much as they would in the United States, but for my part if he
    can get in a swipe at the Marxian theory of social evolution and bring about
    another type still of social evolution, I don’t see why he should not have a run
    for his money.” J. Dewey and A. Dewey, Letters from China and Japan (New
    York: E.P. Dutton & Company, 1920).
ok Yasuhiro Watanabe, Natorupu to Dyui |Natrop or Dewey?] (Tokyo: Bunkyo
    Shoin, 1924).
2s Tanaka 1s clearly the equivalent in the Japanese context to Hu Shi in China
   (see Schulte, this volume). A comparison of the crucial roles that these two
   figures played in facilitating and shaping the reception of Dewey in these
    two contexts is worth contemplating in terms of the wider issue of the role
    pre-existing human networks often play in the dissemination and diffusion
    of educational knowledge and international ‘models’.
  . S. Nolte, “Industrial Democracy for Japan: Tanaka Od6 and John Dewey,”
    Journal of the History of Ideas 45, no. 2 (1984): 280.
  . Cited in Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought.
  . Cited in Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 34.
  . Nolte, “Industrial Democracy for Japan,” 278.
  . Eisenstadt , Japanese Civilization, 89; S. Nolte, “Individualism in Taisho
    Japan,” The Journal of Asian Studies 43, no. 4 (1984).
  . Nolte, “Industrial Democracy for Japan”.
  . Ibid., 290.
  . Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 15S.
  . Ibid., 108.
  . K. Ohkura, “Dewey and the Ambivalent Modern Japan,” in Inventing
    the Modern Self and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Prag-
    matism   in Education,    ed. T. Popkewitz    (New   York: PalgraveMacmillan,
    2:005),290:
  . A. Gordon, Labor and Imperial Democracy in Prewar Japan (Berkeley: Uni-
    versity of California Press, 1991).
  . Buruma, Inventing Japan, 1853-1964, 105.
  . Marshall, “Professors and Politics,” 136.
  . Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 23.
  -Kazuko Tsurumi, Amerika kokumisei no kenkyu—Dyui no            Amerkia
    kokuminsei hiban no hitotsu sokumen |Research on American National
    Character: An Aspect of Dewey’s Criticism of American National Charac-
    ter] (Tokyo: TaiheiyO Kyokai Shuppanbu, 1944).                     f
68. D. Stegewerns, “Yoshino Sakuzo: The Isolated Figurehead of the Taisho
    Generation,” in Nationalism and Internationalism in Imperial Japan:
    Autonomy, Asian Brotherhood, or World Citizenship?, ed. D. Stegewerns
    (London and New York: Routledge Curzon, 2003).

[p. 144] [PDF page 162]

_ J. Dower, Embracing Defeat: Japan in the wake of World War II (New York:
      W.W. Norton, 2000).
     _ E. Beauchamp, “The Development of Japanese Educational Policy, 1945-
       1985,” History of Education Quarterly 27, no. 3 (1987): 299-324.
     _N. Saito and Y. Imai, “In Search of the Public and Private: Philosophy of
       Education in Post-War Japan,” Comparative Education 40, no. 4 (2004):
       584.
     . G. Tsuchimochi, Education Reform in Postwar Japan: The 1946 U.S. Edu-
       cation Mission (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1993).
     . Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought.
     . M. Shibata, Japan and Germany under the US Occupation: A Comparative
       Analysis of Post-war Education Reform (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books,
       2005).
     . Dower, Embracing Defeat.
     . Beauchamp, “The Development of Japanese Educational Policy, 1945-1985,”
       OY.
     . Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 43.
     . Cited in Nolte, “Industrial Democracy for Japan,” 279.
     . Kobayshi, John Dewey in Japanese Educational Thought, 109.
     . Beauchamp, “The Development of Japanese Educational Policy, 1945-1985,”
       306,
     . Saito and Imai, “In Search of the Public and Private: Philosophy of Education
       in Post-War Japan,” 586.
     . J.Meyer and F. Ramirez, “The World Institutionalization of Education,”
       in Discourse Formation in Comparative Education, ed. J. Schriewer
      (Frankfurt/M: Peter Lang, 2000).
   . T. Kariya, Katsoka Nihon to Kyoiku Kiki: fubyodo saisetsan kara tyoku
     kakusa shakat he |Education in Crisis and Stratified Japan: From Reproduc-
     tion of Inequality to Incentive Divide] (Tokyo: Yushindo, 2000).
   . Beauchamp, “The Development of Japanese Educational Policy, 1945-1985,”
     B10;
85. K. Shimizu, Research on John Dewey {J. Dyuui Kenkyuu] (Tokyo: Bun-
     dou Shobo, 1970); S$. Mori, The Relationship Between Japan’s Education
     Reform Movement and Research on Dewey (Tokyo: The Bulletin of the
     Dewey Society, (1971); Y. Makino, Research on Dewey's Educational Per- |
     spectives (Tokyo: Fuuma Shobo, 1977).
86. Saito and Imai, “In Search of the Public and Private: Philosophy of Education
     in Post-War Japan,” 587.
87. Ibid.
88. Ibid.; H. Kamidera, “Nihon ni okeru Dewey kenkyu” [Dewey studies in
     Japan], in Dewey kyotku-ron no sho-mondai: Dewey tanjo hyaku-nen sai
     no kinnen shite [Fundamental Issues in the Philosophy and Educational
     Theory of Jobn Dewey: Contributions in Commemoration of the Hun-
     dredth Anniversary of the Birth of John Dewey] The John Dewey Society of
     Japan ed. (Tokyo: Tokyo Shoin, 1959); Kobyashi, John Dewey in Japanese
     Educational Thought.
89. Beauchamp, “The Development ofJapanese Educational Policy, 1945-1985,”
     3228
90. Marshall, Learning to Be Modern, 254
91 . Saito and Imai, “In Search of the Public and Private: Philosophy of Education
     in Post-War Japan.”
Di Ibid.
93) A. Mori, Nthon nt okeru John Dewey shiso kenkyu-no seiri [A Review of
     Dewey Studies in Japan| (Tokyo: Shuo Sha, 1992).

[p. 145] [PDF page 163]

94. H. Sugiura, ed. Nihon no sengo kyoiku to Dewey [Dewey and Postwar Japa-
    nese Education] (Tokyo: Sekai Shiso Sha, 1998).
25; Saito and Imai, “In Search of the Public and Private: Philosophy of Education
    in Post-War Japan,” 592.
96. T. Wei-ming, Confucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity: Moral Edu-
    cation and Economic Culture in Japan and the Four Mini-Dragons (Cam-
    bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996); W. Cummings and P. Altbach,
    eds.The Challenge of Eastern Asian Education: Implications for America
    (Albany, NY: SUNY Pyess, 1997).
97. R. Goodman, “The Why, What and How of Education Reform in Japan,” in
    Can the Japanese Change their Education System? eds. R. Goodman and D.
    Phillips (Oxford: Symposium Books, 2003). For a more updated description
    of recent changes, see also T. Kariya & J. Rappleye “The Twisted, Unin-
    tended Impacts of Globalization on Japanese Education,” in Research in the
    Sociology of Education: Blobalization, Demographic Change and Educa-
    tional Challenges in East Asia (pp. 17-63), eds. E. Hannum, H. Park, Y.
    Goto-Butler; and D. Willis & J. Rappleye, Retmagining Japanese Education
    Borders, Transfers, Circulations, and the Comparative (Oxford: Symposium
    Books, 2011).
