The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Part III
Chapter 7: Diffusion-Reception Networks of Pedagogical Knowledge: The Circulation of John Dewey’s Educational Discourse in the Luso-Afro-Brazilian Space
Ana Isabel Madeira
Original print pages 149–169; PDF pages 167–187

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 149] [PDF page 167]

7        Diffusion-Reception Networks
        of Pedagogical Knowledge
        The Circulation of John Dewey’s
        Educational Discourse in the Luso-
        Afro-Brazilian Space
        Ana Isabel Madeira




This chapter concentrates on Portuguese-speaking communities, group-
ing together countries that have historical and cultural connections, which
communicate in the same language (Portuguese), which have maintained
colonial links for over five centuries, and which are located on three differ-
ent continents: South America (Brazil), Southern Africa (Mozambique) and
Southern Europe (Portugal). My interest is to identify the diffusion, recep-
tion, and circulation mechanisms through which different forms of edu-
cational knowledge linked to the experiences of the so-called New School
were used in the Lusophone space. I am, in particular, interested in track-
ing down the presence of Dewey’s pedagogical thought in the production
of a modern pedagogical discourse acting as a bridge between “scientific
knowledge” and “practices.”
    In this context, the first reference must be Antonio Novoa’s commitment
to envision the Lusophone space as a theoretical field with a proper specific-
ity.! The inclusion of the University of Lisbon in the European network ‘Pres-
tige’ in 1998 was a first step. It was followed by institutional partnerships in
the Lusophone universe, recruiting investigators of Portuguese language in
Brazilian and African universities.? This endeavour prompted the creation
of a conceptual matrix that would allow a renewed apprehension of the
main Lusophone educational sources in a comparative historical perspective.
Indeed, the field included economic, political, and cultural maps imbibed in
different temporalities and with particular imaginary identities.
    In this chapter, we sketch a voyage through the previously mentioned
mechanisms of diffusion-reception of the educational discourse. We use
as its framework the philosophy of action put forward by Dewey as may
apply to Portugal, Brazil, and Africa and attempt to define the theoretical
specificity of these Luso-Afro-Brazilian transfers. We end by suggesting
areas of research that might contribute to unveiling the specificities of these
Lusophone educational transfers.

[p. 150] [PDF page 168]

THEORETICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL                      REFERENTIALS


The American Progressivist Movement, Dewey’s Pragmatism,
and the European Movements of Pedagogical Renewal
The first decades of the twentieth century that followed World War I were
marked by the instability that ensued from the transformation of agrarian
societies into industrialized ones, the increased economical       competition,
the urbanization processes, and increased ethnical diversity of western
nations. This instability led to the eclosion of movements of social and
cultural reform.
   In the educational field, several nations tried to reorganize their systems
so as to meet the demands posed by these changing patterns. The belief
that scholarity contributed to progress, economical development, political
stability, and social integration was consensual. It supported an acceptance
of political and social movements, aiming to cast a reflection on education
and reform teaching systems.
  In the United States, the “educational revolution” of the last decades of
the nineteenth and the first decades of the twentieth century generated an
optimistic view about the transforming capacity of the school, looked upon
as a social institution that contributes to progress, to individual and col-
lective fulfilment, and to sustaining the implementation of an equalitarian
model.* In the pedagogical domain, this attitude translated into a series of
discourses centered on self-government and on transferring to the school the
responsibility of transforming youths into free, autonomous, and respon-
sible citizens. It was in the settings of this revolution that the finalities, the
means, and the education methods that would lead to the construction of
a democratic society became a matter for hot debate. The administrative
organizations of the schools, reform of curricula, innovation of teaching
methods, and teachers’ formation were all part of the dialogue.
   The proponents of the American progressist movement, with special men-
tion to William James, John Dewey, William Heard Kilpatrick, Harold Rugg,
and Ann Schumaker, pointed out the need for a complete revolution of the
teaching models in schools. They criticized the traditional classroom, cen-
tered on the authority of the teacher; they opposed the abstract curricula, the
symbolic nature of syllabus, which seemed to be disconnected from everyday
realities, with students being expected to act passively and submissively.
    The progressivist movement was, according to Dewey himself, rooted
in the pioneer work of Francis W. Parker in Massachusetts in 1870.4 The
term “progressivist movement” was, from the mid-1880s onward, loosely
applied either to formation in industry and skills, or to designate pedagogi-
cally innovative techniques, similar to those developed at Parker’s Quincy
School. By scrutinizing these techniques with pedagogical experimentalism,
and by underlining the capital importance of the scientific epistemology of
knowledge and of teaching methods centered on the student, it was Dewey’s

[p. 151] [PDF page 169]

work that conferred unity to this pedagogical aspect of the movement. The
construction of this new school, the arguments for its potential to contrib-
ute to the arousal of a democratic society and to help students become inde-
pendent, responsible citizens, and the strong criticisms of the “medieval”
school, which are displayed in his work School and Society (2002 [1900]),
engaged, on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean, the movements of pedagogi-
cal renovation at the beginning of the twentieth century.
    Under the light of a “broader social evolution,” the American progres-
sivist movement had a counterpart in the movements of pedagogical reno-
vation taking place in Europe. Whether rooted in a philosophical—“New
School” (Montaigne, Rousseau, Herbart, Spencer) —or a practical—“Active
School” (Pestalozzi, Froebel)—matrix, together they designed a common
language. The reform leaders of the New School—Desmolins in France;
Decroly in Belgium; Ferriére and Claparéde in Switzerland; Montessori in
Italy; Adolfo Lima in Portugal—were proponents of a new type of school,
sharing with the American model its role in securing the upbringing of
autonomous, free, and responsible citizens.
   The dialogue between the American progressist movement and the New
School was boosted by the global acquaintance with Dewey’s work on
pragmatism. During his activity at the University of Chicago (1894-1904)
and while running the “experimental school,” Dewey had designed a the-
ory of knowledge based upon naturalism and pragmatism. Observation of
his students had led him to conclude that they were capable of learning and
working out the solutions to problems in a degree that was proportional
to the inclusion of their needs and necessities in the school’s activities. He
realized that when entering school, the child was already a creative and
active being. Education should therefore potentiate as well as direct this
creative promise. Children had interests and activities related to their envi-
ronment outside the school. The role of school and teachers should consist
of supporting and orienting children, with the objective of fostering a bal-
anced development. In a complementary perspective, Dewey was defending
a functionalist pedagogy, wherein the center was the construction of rela-
tionships between the intellectual work and practical needs, to be reached
by tasks meeting the capacity and the curiosity of the children. Learning
and acquiring knowledge would become tools for the resolution of prob-
lems met with in the day-to-day life experience, being coincident and not
opposed to the child’s acquired knowledge. The best way to match school
teaching with everyday activities consisted of applying active methods and
of “learning-by-doing”—a methodology that aimed at mingling the educa-
tional subjects with the “real life conditions.” °
   By recognizing that the scientific method represented an instrumental
capacity for social planning, pragmatism became a methodological tool
suitable for the resolution of nearly all educational problems. Its relevance
in scientific and political discourses on educational reform became accord-
ingly more and more important.°

[p. 152] [PDF page 170]

152.   Ana Isabel Madeira

THE INTERNATIONALIZATION              OF EDUCATIVE REASON


Dewey’s Pragmatism and the Construction of Colonial
Educational Systems at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century
Dewey’s ideas swept across international borders by various means: publi-
cations in European’ and American® pedagogical papers; translation into
different languages; and through Dewey’s presence in international con-
gresses and conferences: Japan (1919), China (1919, 1921), Turkey (1924),
Mexico (1924), USSR (1928), and South Africa (1934).’
    Thomas Popkewitz tried to answer the question of how Dewey’s thought
was appropriated by nations with different historical and intellectual tradi-
tions. What was the matrix that allowed his pragmatism to be found opera-
tive in such radically different reform projects on a global scale? One of the
concepts that he proposes for the analysis of the circuits of pragmatism on
such a scale is that of “traveling libraries,” by which he signifies the combi-
nation and adjustment of different pedagogical and ideological standpoints,
and the resulting intelligibility conferred on the changing processes."°
    An analysis of the appropriation of Dewey’s discourses on education in
Africa" has highlighted its inherent complexity, due to the diverse ideologi-
cal and strategic models that accomplished it. As had happened in other
places, the progressivist and pragmatist principles traveled throughout
Africa by the hand of social, religious, and political groups. Lacking an
“authorship” reference, they were dismantled and later incorporated in the
pedagogical and political discourses according to the particular strategies
of colonial governments. This eventually led to hybrid positioning regard-
ing school and child development, that included notions of “adaptation,”
“conformity,” “active methods,” “environment,” “education through
work,” “community school,” “manual work,” and so on.'*
   In these appropriations, Dewey emerges as a conceptual persona, asa ~
pedagogical-scientific support for a number of local strategies, interests,
and frameworks directed at the educational incorporation of Africans
into a system designed according to their “necessities.” Notions such as
learning-by-doing became disconnected from their original context (and
from their role as active learning tools) and used in ways opposed to the
basic principles of pragmatism. Arguments that justified such deviations
include: different types of teaching according to race, supported by the
differing ability to learn; vocational training to be directed at the African
student’s needs, therefore justifying barriers to academic levels; and curri-
cula directed at practical learning, understood as matching the “cultural”
needs of the black community (supposedly agricultural, industrial, and
mechanical labor).
   In the colonial frame, and more so in rural areas, the “African” took the
place that Dewey attributed to the “child.” The discourse applied to the
black people expressed an infantilized concept of the African. He should

[p. 153] [PDF page 171]

be protected from barbary and brought into western civilization. As an
infantilized, subdued, and subaltern object, teaching aimed at the African
expressed the prejudice of his inherent inferior condition. This argument
justified the continued use of methodologies centered on learning-by-doing,
based on the apology of “vocational training,” in order to connect the Afri-
can to manual labor. Encompassing the notion of collective progress, they
kept the African away from upward mobility—from which the African was
prevented by way of his social condition.
   These notions, diffused by the action of Protestant, English, and Ameri-
can missionary societies, were eventually incorporated into the discourse
of the British Colonial Office. Through “redundancy,” they made their way
into the discourses of the Portuguese (and French) colonial administra-
tions, which adapted them to their specific cases. The process of modelling
“adapted education” reformulated Dewey according to the needs of local
politics and ideologies: enhancing some of his premises, and ignoring or
scratching out others (democratic participation, children’s interests, com-
munity development, participation in scientific and economic progress, and
so on). As a matter of fact, Dewey’s presence in Africa was alien to the
establishment of “adapted education” (in British colonies) and of “ensino
de adaptagao” [adapted teaching] (in Portuguese colonies). Dewey thus
became an indigenous foreigner, to use Thomas Popkewitz’s expression.
Colonial reformists used an “author” to frame their own notions and ideas,
as if these were naturally “autochthonous” with the objective of legitimat-
ing the change and constructing the sort of student, teacher, curriculum,
and teaching that would be requisite in the colonial scenario.'?


THE NETWORKS AND CIRCULATION CIRCUITS
OF PEDAGOGICAL MODELS IN AFRICA

Dewey’s participation in the conference “Educational Adaptations in a
Changing Society”—organized in South Africa, July 1934, by the New
Education Fellowship (NEF)—was, to the best of our knowledge, his only
visit to sub-saharan Africa.'* On its own, this presence is of little signifi-
cance, as Dewey’s work was by then well known by the pedagogues involved
with colonial education in European empires. But this visit, at a time when
Dewey was nearly seventy-five years of age, represented above all the recog-
nition that the American teaching methods and pragmatism, as a frame of
concepts, methods, and techniques, were all important to the educational
reforms being made by the government and the protestant missions.'°
    The American teaching methods were known to the Europeans through
Omer Buyse.'® On the other hand, pragmatism had reached international
reputation through the investigation carried out at the Teachers College
of Columbia University, New York, an institution that had formed many
teachers for African universities. Despite this, the networks and circuits of

[p. 154] [PDF page 172]

154.   Ana Isabel Madeira

diffusion of progressivism and of Dewey’s pragmatism in Africa involved
intricate   connections   between   groups,   organizations,   and   associations
that helped shape the African educational systems. The analysis of this
network involves taking note of the set of relations that brought together,
in the three regions (Europe, United States, and Africa) a diverse group of
agents, among which were philanthropic foundations, political and reli-
gious groups, universities and pedagogical institutes, and governments and
local administrations.
   The first of this axis appeared at the end of the nineteenth century,
through the connections between North American protestant missionary
societies and the Phelps-Stokes Fund. The second involved the relations
between the British protestant missionary societies and the British Colonial
Office, and includes the action of the Advisory Committee on Education
in the Colonies, mainly during the twentieth century’s first decades. The
third axis is represented by the articulate relations between the Columbia
University Teachers College, New York, the Institut Jean Jacques Rousseau
in Geneva, and the Institute of Education in London, throughout the end
of 1920s and beginning of the 1930s. The fourth axis is represented by the
dialogue that took place in scientific journals and international congresses,
namely the journal Overseas Education in the UK, and the regional confer-
ences organized under the sponsorship of the Commonwealth (reaching the
journals The New Era and Pour l’Ere Nouvelle). A last axis can be found
in the circulation of reports, legal recommendations, research papers, and
official norms, which circulated in British colonies. Without explicit refer-
ence to Dewey, they spread concepts, expressions, and ideas rooted in prag-
matism.'” These relational axes, present in the dialogues that infiltrated the
local colonial administrations, contributed to framing a complex network
of references and interactions. It thus becomes clear that the transfer pro-
cesses of ideas, concepts, and educational theories configure a working field
that extends far beyond the analysis of the diffusion-reception (to include ~
translations) processes viewed in the light of a primordial origin. Consider
the examples in Figure 7.1.
    Isaac Kandel thought the wide acceptance of pragmatism was due to a
general dissatisfaction vis-a-vis the concepts of liberal culture and educa-
tion.'* In the rational (and operational) characteristics of pragmatism was
to be found the belief of the child as an agent for change. At the same
time, pragmatism seemed to embody a scientific basis for the resolution of
problems that encompassed the reorganization of everyday life and of the
communities. But, permeating the pedagogical debates taking place in the
United States, the progressivist educational movement meant very different
things to distinct individuals and groups in North American society.!? The
perspective of the school as a tool for social development included at least
three aspects. First, the broadening of curricula and of the school functions
was deemed as including concern with public health, vocational training,
and quality of family and community life. Second, progressist education

[p. 155] [PDF page 173]

Philanthropic
                                    organizations:
                                      Carnegie,
                                     Rockefeller,
                                     Ogden, and         Universities and
                 Hampton &           Huntington           pedagogical
                   Tuskegee                                institutes:
                Institutes NEF                             Teachers
                                                            College
                                                             LULR.




                                      DEWEY                              Periodicals,


                                     AFRICA                                 Acta



                   Central                                  Funds:
                Government                                   Slater
                  Bodies &                               Phelps-Stokes
                  Colonial                   :               Jeanes
               Administrations       Pedagogical
                                     movements
                                    Progressivism
                                       Dewey
                                     Pragmatism




Figure 7.1   Diffusion networks of Dewey’s pragmatism in Africa.


meant adapting teaching to children of different social backgrounds, there-
fore demanding a diversification not only of methods but of programs as
well. Last, progressivism implied a general belief of the necessity of indi-
vidual participation in the genesis of a new culture, wherein each citizen
might expect his share of the benefits brought about by scientific, economic,
and technological progress. In general terms, the “progressist revolution”
tried to meet different teaching “problems” in diverse school “types.” The
expression could relate to the transformation of the school into a commu-
nity center, according to an ideology close to “social education.” It could
simply refer to “vocational training.” It could as well represent an educa-
tion aimed at “agricultural labor.”
   Under this multiplicity of concepts was to be found a shared idea—the
adjustment of the school to society—an idea that was transversal to the
various discourses on educational reform in the United States at the begin-
ning of the twentieth century.

[p. 156] [PDF page 174]

DISCOURSE APPROPRIATIONS:
DEWEY IN THE COLONIAL CONTEXT

One of the fundamental     ideas of the progressist American      movement
was that, in order to meet the changing social, cultural, and economic
patterns of the Western world, the school should adjust to society. This
adjustment was viewed in the frame of a global reform of the educational
system (the curricula, teacher’s formation, and pedagogical methods) and
implied as well a revolution in the relations between school, family, and
society. Dewey thought that the school should contribute to awakening
in the children a social and cooperative mood, and to impress on them a
democratic spirit. The school’s principal task should aim at shaping free,
responsible, self-governing citizens—concepts present in the ideology of
the New School. Dewey’s School was, above all, a democratic community
and, as such, an experiment in education for democracy. The school was
not perceived as a mere instrument for social reproduction. It is clear
that the philosopher-pedagogue pretended to link the school to external
social life, placing productive activities—occupations—at the center of
his program. But he placed the social production relations in a coop-
erative context, freed from any material restraint. Dewey’s objective was
not to develop the capitalist society, but instead to enable citizens who
possessed the capacities that would allow them to take their share of its
benefits. In this process, education and school played a crucial role in the
emancipation of the individual and society.
   The design of a system of education adjusted to the colonial context
was being developed from the end of the nineteenth century, in connection
with work at the Tuskegee and Hampton Institutes in the states of Vir-
ginia and Alabama. With the advent of international networks circulating
pedagogical knowledge, the transversal nature of the question of adjusting
school to society found in the colonial context an experimental field for the ©
formulation of reformist discourses. The principles of American progres-
sivism equated a number of concerns common both to the Western govern-
ments and the local agents—governors, missionaries, teachers—namely the
questions of social change and of professional teaching, and the worth of
“social education.” Besides, pragmatist democratic pedagogy shared with
protestant Christians an important number of ideals. When stressing that
the school represented an embryonic stage of society, Dewey committed
himself to a radical project of society which sprang from the school reform;
this view had similarities to the creation of a democratic society proposed
by the Protestant congregations.
    Indeed, Protestant missionaries considered the congregation as the cor-
nerstone of the Church, and were deeply involved with their democratic
organization, requiring the individual participation and cooperation in
order to reach collective progress. This objective had a counterpoint in the
idea of the “creation of an African community,” an ever present concept

[p. 157] [PDF page 175]

in the political doctrine of the British colonial governments that extended
to the action of the Protestant missionaries (American and British) present
in all of the colonial territories (including Mozambique). As a rule, Protes-
tant missions cared more for religious social practice than for theological
speculation, organizing their activity around local specificities (language,
culture, natural environment). It ensued that the secularization of the cur-
ricula posed no problems, even more so since for Protestants, science and
religion were not mutually exclusive.
    This view was shared by Dewey. He believed that social reform to be
obtained through the democratic school should rely upon a unification of
the “languages” of the ideal and of the real worlds. Ina letter he sent in 1892
to Joseph Denney, rector of the College of Arts, Philosophy and Science of
the University of Ohio, Dewey wrote: “The “unified language” seems to
be the most complete expression of what the “idea” does in thought, how
religion has one language, philosophy another, science another, literature
another, and so on. Seeing the common objective fact, we get the unified
language—the language of action. This is democracy—the appropriation
of the store of spiritual wealth in all directions by the whole and common
people.”*° It was this spiritual wealth that was the backbone of a social
gospel of secular character, materialized in the “belief” of the potential
of education and in the “faith” of pedagogical methods. Therefore, in a
scenario where school and mission co-existed and were interdependent, it
is not difficult to conceive that pragmatism gave to Christian doctrine a
scientific legitimacy. Christianity and pragmatism shared principles that
were mutually reinforcing.
    Table 7.1 attempts to trace a panoramic view of the discursive reconfigu-
rations that transformed the philosophical-scientific principles of pragma-
tism into a pedagogic doctrine which made its way to the African colonies
at the beginning of the twentieth century. It tries to resume the selective
appropriations, and particularly the restrictive transformations that ensued
in the colonial context.
   I would suggest a map for reading Table 7.1. The articulation between
the American progressivist gospel (educational revolution, democracy,
progress) and the Protestant ethic in Africa (effort, sacrifice, autonomy,
self-subsistence); and the lasting acceptance by the Protestant missions
of the scientific-pedagogical discourse of pragmatism (self-government,
active school, citizenship) was possible only insofar as these movements
shared multiple principles and finalities. It was in the framework of this
communion that the discourses on adapted education reached a common
reference code. However, the appropriation of the pragmatic discourse in
the colonial context, and the translation of its educational semantic to
educational practices and politics, effected a transformation, and even an
inversion, of their original philosophical-moral statements. Indeed, the top
concern of the British colonial government was to control social change
(the end of tribalism, accelerated urbanization, racial conflicts) and direct

[p. 158] [PDF page 176]

20UPISIP B J BUIUIIAOD),,                                                   . AMJeJUIUIUIIAOS),,
                                  asmmoosip [eomyod - estso;oap]                                        asmoosip yestydosoyryd - syMUaIN¢
                      (sjeIOU UToIsaA\ pure sIIqey BuryIOM YsnosYyI UONRATeS)
                                                  JeIO
                                            dad) ese
                                           Peet                                                                           MORVAVS) P2272] estisosepag
                                                                                                    Rite i passaiddo FOjo uoieayes)paary
                                                                                                uarpytyo                                          P
                                uOT}eINpa JO aN]LA STUIOUODI/TEIOVY                                          uoneonpa Jo anyea [eos
                          (saduaIds ISIWOP, SYIOM [eLsNpul “Surwse.f)                                    (apesi/sjse/emypnd11de/AIjsnpuy)
                                   s][P{s Supjzom jo uonrtsmboy                                                 IdIOJ JOGE] Pa]P{S
                                         SUIPUTG JEUOTIBIOA,                                                   SUIUTeI [EUOTIEIOA,
                                        Sulop-Aq-3uTuse 9 T,                                                      Oops aay,
                              aspoyMouy DeIsqe Woy UONdwepey,                                             adpaymouy [eooeidjoensqy
                                          umynorany                               komaq                           umynoriny                   .         J
                             (Ssoua]pr ‘IFeIYIIM *ssouUsyUNIp ‘SIdIA)              uyof                          JUIWIUIIAOS-JJ9g
                           dtpsedoy  so [eos/apioop/snosasueq/auldiosiq                                    spoou s.pytyD — Alljenprarpuy
                     SpdoU .dAIDa]JOS, — UOTBINps Jo JaqUsd sy} Je AWUNUIWIOD,                           uoneonpa Jo Jayuad ay} Ie pytyD
                                         sadalqns pazifIAly                                                        SUdZIND 991]
                            ssoIsO1g SWOUOIT pure [eInyND/UONeZIIAID                                                     Wy/ADeIDOUWIIG
                                                                                                   ssaIdOIg [BIOS /UOTeZIUIapoO
                                   (UOTIeN]eAD pue JUSUIINSeaUT)                                         (uoneaouut - uoTeUsUTTIadxa)
Ana Isabel Madeira




                                              Aqiquend)                                                               Ayyend
                                    AIOILIOGE] JEIDOS B SB JOOYIS                                         UWISOSOIDIUI [EIDOS B SB [OOYIS
                                Jadsory snorstay/[eloos aAtssaIs01g                                         UWISIJVWISEIG/UISTAISSIIZOI]
                                    JUSWUOIAUD JeINI,/[OOYIS                                                 JUAWIUOITAUA [EIDOS/JOOYIS
                                       juoneonpy poidepy,                                               Aya1I00s 0} jusuSsNnIpe JeuOneONpY|
                      SA1UOJOT) ASANSNIAO J<——> SaiuOJOD UBADYS-qus Yysiiag                                 aqdoiny ——> Saqv1g pauuy
158                                                                      BoLyy [euojoD ut uonedoiddy aansajas si] pue wstjewseig s.AaMmaq                   et
                                                                                                                                                            Lie

[p. 159] [PDF page 177]

its path. This path was by no means similar to the one that, in Europe and
the United States, was aimed at imprinting a cosmopolitan rationality on
the education of citizens by the school. In the colonial scenario, the mobi-
lization of the American progressivism, and later on the pragmatist ideals,
was performed through a selective, and restrictive, appropriation. This
resulted from the “evidence” that the African populations had not yet,
according to the Western metric scale, reached a stage that would allow
them to engage in “civilized” cosmopolitanism. The emphatic presenta-
tion of African societies as a developmentally delayed “ethnic group,” and
paradoxically the continued reference to the dangers of indigenous mental-
ity/culture, required an intervention suited to their “arriére” condition.22
    As pedagogical matters are concerned, the progressist movement
defended a curriculum centered in children’s interests, and was considered
the neuralgic knot in the change of the teaching paradigm. In Dewey’s
pragmatism, the change of the teaching process itself was emphasized,
through the modification of the teacher-student relation, and the curri-
cula were oriented towards the enhancement of active learning of matters
centered in children’s interests. Since in Dewey’s view education’s primary
goal was the development of social values, curricula design should take
into account the different stages of individual development and should be
related to the environmental milieu. The replacement of the formal curric-
ulum, abstract and theoretical, by learning processes constructed around
children’s experience, was a primary objective. That was, in Dewey’s per-
spective, the core of “learning-by-doing” methodology. Moreover, the role
of the teacher in this learning-by-doing context involved a constant preoc-
cupation to ensure that the teaching materials related to the children’s and
the community life.
    In the colonial context, the place of the child was replaced by the collec-
tive, by the “community,” viewed as an entity with capacities, needs, and
scope similar to the children’s. In name of stability and harmony, this col-
lective entity presented traits that should be erased (alcoholism, polygamy,
witchcraft), work capacities that had to be disciplined, and material and
spiritual needs that should be provided. In this perspective, the association
of gospel and social morals was instrumental to the establishment of colo-
nizing rationality. All of these changes implied an infantilized view of the
African, as someone incapable of reaching civilization on his own, and by
the same token justified the tasks of teaching him self-government and of
exercising the best government on his behalf.
    The educational offering the colonial governments designed for Africans,
leading to their inclusion in their own community, highlights the restric-
tive aspects of this appropriation. Dewey’s perspective of reinforcing the
connections between the school and the community, which would imple-
ment the school as a source of democracy, would enhance participation
of the individual, and would promote his potentialities of emancipation,
was somehow lost in translation, and for that matter betrayed. Indeed,

[p. 160] [PDF page 178]

there was no thought of applying the principles of pragmatism. Instead,
the objective was to install a second-class, discriminating, and subdued
education.2? Valuing active curricula, stressing learning-by-doing methods,
enhancing vocational training linked to agriculture and skills—transver-
sal to the thesis of “adapted education”—colonial governments sought to
frame the colonial educational policies within the modern scientific theo-
ries by (ab)using Dewey’s pragmatism as a reference.
   To be sure, the appropriation of pragmatism, instead of promoting an
emancipation policy, served to lock Africans in defined occupations, and to
prevent their aspirations to an academic progression. Vocational training
was restricted to educational policies oriented towards for and by labor;
the school-community relation tended to reinforce the communal tradi-
tional relations and to prevent migrations and promote tribalism; social
evangelization was based more on moral than on social matters. Promot-
ing active curricula was aimed at preparing Africans for selected sectors
of economic activity, mainly agricultural; learning-by-doing methods were
adapted so as to define the role of the African within the context of colo-
nial economy. In this respect, the widespread use of the Jeanes’ teacher
training methods confirms the intention of transforming teachers into mere
social action technicians, concerned more with vocational training than
with “education.”
   We should then conclude that Dewey’s inclusion in the colonial discourse
betrayed his original pedagogical philosophy. The fact that his conceptual
persona was used to legitimate a functional perspective of education should
not hide the fact that his ideas, concepts, and discourse were selectively
(and restrictively) borrowed from pragmatism. Reformist colonial dis-
courses stepped away from the ideals of democratic schooling, and embod-
ied inequalities that prevail to the present day.


THE RECEPTION OF DEWEY’S PROGRAM
IN BRAZIL AND PORTUGAL, 1920-1950/60

Research on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean has confirmed the transversal
nature of the idea of school’s “adjustment” to society in African and Latin
American territories of Portuguese language. Carvalho and Cordeiro,” in
a research of publications on education in the frame of comparative his-
tory, explored the international circulation of educational models through
the presence (or absence) of transferences between Brazil and Portugal that
might have led to the construction of specialized pedagogical knowledge.
Taking as sources two journals, the Brazilian Education from Sao Paulo,
and the Portuguese Revista Escolar, they reached the conclusion that refer-
ences to authors, movements, or publications from one nation were almost
totally absent in the other, and vice-versa.‘ Notwithstanding, the authors
were alerted to the need of complementing their study with a thorough

[p. 161] [PDF page 179]

search of other sources—primary and secondary, including official reports,
other journals, legislation, manuals, correspondence, biographic and auto-
biographic materials.
    This work was done by Correia and Silva’* and Correia and Gallego,””
projecting the same comparative history theoretic referential to the study
of manuals directed at normalists from both countries. After performing
an analysis of the universe of references of pedagogical manuals, as well
as their articulation with the official programmes of primary teacher’s
training between 1930 and 1970, these authors championed the existence
of continuity elements, movements of knowledge, convergence of and re-
signification of ideas, pedagogical knowledge, and teaching practices. The
simple quantitative series of references to authors, papers, countries, and
institutions had obscured the ways by which pedagogical knowledge was
appropriated and translated into pedagogical actions.** This work empha-
sized the importance and advantages of comparative research in histori-
cal perspective, shedding light on the local incorporation of widely diverse
discourses on teaching, school, and education.”’ It also showed the ways
through which the circulation of pedagogical knowledge led to the founda-
tion of forms of self-referencing in the Lusophone societies. These incor-
porated the thesis of “educational backwardness” in the Portuguese and
Brazilian educational systems, and also identified the societies that housed
the “modern” pedagogical theories. The study concluded: “this analysis of
over 30,000 references present in the books of the normalists has shown
the modalities of classification made of the different national spaces: the
first relates to the place of birth and of original development of the school,
Western Europe; the second to an important space of expansion of the
school, the USA; the third to that group of nations that have not reached the
benefits of teaching, therefore remaining outside the modern discourse.”*”
These two studies seem to point to the fact that externalization towards
world situations,*' and in particular the idealization of the North American
society as a symbol of educational modernity and a cradle of the demo-
cratic school, was instrumental in Brazil in cutting free from the traditional
Brazilian culture inherited from the nineteenth century (and largely influ-
enced by the French culture), and simultaneously recreated an identity and
a history separated from Portuguese origins.
   In Portugal, the reference to foreign examples, under the form of an
externalization that would sustain reforms compatible with the First
Republic (1910-1926) ideals, was centered in the selective mobilization of
educational models from the Francophone (French, Belgian, Swiss) universe
and that of Germany. At first glance, nothing seems to suggest that either
Portugal or Brazil was to the other a model to follow or to contradict.”
However, both the first group of researchers,*’ that had as their objective
the strict comparison of the presence of foreign referentials in the discourses
of the educational communities of two of the Lusophone countries, and the
second group* transporting to the field the comparison of appropriation

[p. 162] [PDF page 180]

mechanisms to the Luso-Brazilian space according to the Chartier perspec-
tive (1990), contributed to identifying a set of crucial aspects concerning
the diffusion-reception of educational knowledge in the Lusophone space.
The wide use of common reference frameworks (authors, papers, coun-
tries, journals, organizations, pedagogical models), even if external to both
countries, allows one to put forward as a working hypothesis the existence
of Ibero-American transit networks, of multiple threads of communication
and circulation of pedagogical knowledge between Portugal and Brazil,
through Europe and North America, and even through Spain.
    It is a fact that research on Dewey’s pragmatism reception in Brazil is
far more advanced than in Portugal.** This work testifies to the reception,
appropriation and “re-contextualization” of Dewey’s thought in Brazil,
and materialises in translated work, published scientific papers, textbooks,
and even in the political and legislative discourse produced in the educa-
tional arena. In Portugal, and despite the simultaneous timing of the Amer-
ican progressist movement and of the European movements of pedagogical
renovation, the networks between the progressivist movement, Dewey’s
pragmatism and the Portuguese New School have not been the scope of
autonomous study. The Portuguese pedagogical historiography has privi-
leged the New Education and the school reforms in Europe during the first
three decades of the twentieth century, covering the period from the decline
of monarchy to the instalment of dictatorship.*° It is true that the ideal of
the democratic school decisively contributed to the concepts of civic and
moral education for the New School European reformers, being introduced
and known in Portugal through the generation of Portuguese pedagogues
that represented the New School: Adolfo Lima (1874-1943), Antonio Faria
de Vasconcelos (1880-1939),    Alvaro Vieira de Lemos     (1881-1972),   and
Antonio Sérgio (1883-1969).
   To be sure, attempts at studying the reception of Dewey’s thought and
work by the Portuguese intellectuals and pedagogues have been scant*” |
and testify to the vast research still to be undertaken. But it should not be
concluded, as Maria Joao Mogarro clearly demonstrated, that the reform
movement of the New School was followed by a pedagogical vacuum
of four decades, coincident with Salazar’s dictatorship. Similarly, the
authors who claimed to be influenced by the New School and the active
methods were not solely those who opposed the regime and who have
been consequently persecuted.:In a recent paper,*® it is shown that the
ideals of the New Education resisted the conservative pedagogy institu-
tionalized in Portugal from the 1930s onward, and that several pedagogi-
cal texts produced by teachers in the framework of teaching institutions
clearly referred to the New School reformers’ principles. By tracking
down the personal pedagogical libraries of these teachers and of authors
of teacher training textbooks, Mogarro found a significant number of
foreign works, particularly from Brazil, either from Brazilian authors or
as translations published by Brazilian editors. This finding is of particular

[p. 163] [PDF page 181]

significance, since in these libraries many texts, including Dewey’s work,
were marked and commented on in the margins by their respective own-
ers. Mogarro had stated previously that “this finding reveals the produc-
tion of a pedagogical thought in the lusophone space, the circulation of
pedagogical knowledge through the printed materials, and the modalities
of that appropriation that supported that production, and by the same
token demonstrates the existence of a communication network between
the Brazilian and the Portuguese communities in the field of pedagogy,
particularly among those who had as a reference the New School.”?”
    Based on the analysis of reports written by Portuguese travel grant recip-
ients, Joaquim Pintassilgo has shown that, during the first three decades
of the twentieth century, several teachers contacted teaching institutions
seen as models in Switzerland, Germany, France, Belgium, and the UK.*°
Besides the wealth of material testifying to the pedagogical innovations, the
methodologies, and the organization of the teaching training schools, the
reports included references to work and authors that were not accessible in
Portugal, namely Dewey’s work. These travels to foreign countries there-
fore represent another link of the communication networks between diverse
discursive communities, with special relevance to the diffusion of work
by authors from the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, which intersected
the production of the European New School movement. All this work has
disclosed the complexity of appropriation modes, translation mechanisms,
and pedagogical strategies that are associated with the reception of John
Dewey’s work in such diverse cultural and social contexts.


CONCLUSION

At this stage, it seems clear that the comparative historical inquiry presents
advantages for the identification of internal and international circulation
networks of pedagogical discourses, and more so in the framework of large
cultural spaces, where histories and identities are simultaneously shared.
But, as Novoa has stated, the historical and linguistic question of the Luso-
phone universe does not present itself to the investigator as an incontestable
configuration, but rather as a field where, through “adherence or rejection,”
a common history and shared identities are present.*'! Thomas Popkewitz*
proposed to study pragmatism in cultural terms, arguing that, besides the
set of plans and solutions for educational action, pragmatism embodies a
cultural thesis that presents rationality and a set of articulated conditions
of possibility that apply both to social change and to the invention of a
modern self. We have thus some insight on these different rationalities that
crisscrossed the Lusophone space.
   However, the future depends upon increasing the awareness of interna-
tional sources and bibliographical references; making available the inven-
tory of the scientific knowledge produced; identifying the documental corpus

[p. 164] [PDF page 182]

dispersed in archives of both countries; and setting up periodicities, rhythms,
and forms of appropriation and interpretation of the texts, translations, and
editions. Pedagogical private and public libraries should maintain collec-
tions of Dewey’s work. A census is needed detailing Dewey’s works that were
translated into Portuguese and published in Brazil, and circulated during
the first half of the twentieth century in Portugal. Another worthwhile field
of study is the identification of references to Dewey and to pragmatism in
teacher training textbooks, to map trips abroad that led to the importation
of different perceptions of reality, and to identify the filters and selections to
which the educational and pedagogical discourses were subjected.




                                   Bibliography on
                                       Dewey



          | Pedagogical
               legislation




                                                ‘


Pigure 7.2 “Diffusion-reception networks of pedagogical knowledge: Dewey’s
translations in Protuguese language and its circulation between Protugal and Bra-
zil (1920-1960).” Research project currently taking place at Pntificia Universidade
Catolica do Rio de Janeiro, PUC-Rio, Brazil.

[p. 165] [PDF page 183]

On the other hand, Dewey’s presence in scientific journals cannot be
disassociated from the relation of mediation established between the main
authors of the journal (inspectors, teachers, educators, etc.) and the target
population (primary and secondary school teachers) relating the production
of scientific knowledge to the applied sciences. This task turned out easier
after the publication of Repertério Analitico da Imprensa de Educacao e
Ensino,* and constitutes a unique tool for the community of historians of
education in the Portuguese language.
    The empirical problems herein presented, concerning the renewal of com-
parative approaches to the educational history of Portugal, Africa (Mozam-
bique), and Brazil during the last decade, suggest possible potential areas
of comparative research. The option for a wide time frame (1920-1960) is
intended to capture the construction of the mass school in the three coun-
tries, with their respective rhythms and political convulsions, although the
nuclear period is centered in last decade of the last century and the first
decades of the twenty-first century. This periodicity has the advantage of
referring the educational field to an autonomous configuration, related (not
subordinated) to political events and national geographies.
    There remains much to be explored concerning the circulation of cultural
models between Portugal and Brazil (and the African countries where Portu-
guese is the official language) in order to identify the mechanisms of diffusion,
circulation and reception that allowed the construction of educational argu-
ments based on externalization to world situations. The eight axes presented
try to circumscribe, on the basis of acquired knowledge, some of the themes
and research problems as applied to the Luso-Brazilian space. I hope that
such suggestions serve as stimulus to the design of comparative research proj-
ects, and might contribute to identifying the educational transfers between
Portugal, Africa, and Brazil, and in particular the role of John Dewey as a
reference for the production of a specialized educational knowledge.


NOTES
   1. Antonio Novoa, “Tempos da Escola no Espago Portugal-Brasil-Mogambique:
      dez Digressdes sobre um Programa de Investigagao,” in A Difusao Mundial
      da Escola, eds. A.N6voa and J. Schriewer (Lisboa: Educa, 2000), 127.
   2. A. Névoa and Jiirgen Schriewer, eds. A Difusdo Mundial da Escola: Alunos,
      Professores, Curriculo, Pedagogia (Lisboa: Educa, 2000).
   3. Jeffrey Mirel, “Old Educational Ideas, New American Schools: Progressiv-
      ism and the Rethoric of Educational Revolution,” Paedagogica Historica 39,
      no. 4 (August, 2003): 478-79.
   4. John Dewey more than once addressed Francis W. Parker as “the father of
      progressist education.” It was to the school founded by Parker in Quincy,
      Massachusetts, that he sent his children. In 1875, Parker founded a school
      in Chicago that became a model for teacher’s formation and education. He
      wrote Talks in Pedagogy (1894), most likely the first textbook on pedagogy
      to receive international recognition. There he details his innovative methods:
      situate the child at the center of the educational process, organize the syllabus

[p. 166] [PDF page 184]

so as to reinforce its meaning and its apprehension by the students, reorga-
       nize schools making them true embryonary democratic communities. Jack K.
       Campbell, Colonel Francis W. Parker: The Children’s Crusader (New York:
       John Wiley, 1968).
     . John Dewey, “Schools of To-morrow,” in The Middle Works of John Dewey,
       1899-1924, ed. Jo Ann Boydston, vol. 8, 1915: Essays, German Philoso-
       phy and Politics, and Schools of To-Morrow. (Carbondale and Edwardsville:
       Southern Illinois University Press, 1985), 391.
     . A. Novoa, “A Republica e a Escola: Das Intengdes Generosas ao Desengano
       das Realidades,” Revista Portuguesa de Educagdo 1, no. 3 (1988): 75.
     . Namely through the action of the Institut des Sciences de ’Education—Jean
       Jacques Rousseau (IJJR) (1912); of the Bureau International des Ecoles Nou-
       velles (BIEN) (1899); of the Ligue Internationalle pour Education Nouvelle
       (LIEN) (1921); and of the journals Pour l’Ere Nouvelle, directed by Adolphe
       Ferriére. The ideals of progressivist education also spread by means of New
      Education   Fellowship (NEF)   (1921), whose   founder, Beatrice Ensor, was
        editor of New Era in England. The International Review of Missions and
        Africa: The Journal of the Royal African Society is also to be credited with
        the diffusion of the American education methods, though with no explicit
        reference to Dewey. Dewey’s role was, on the other hand, substantiated in
        Overseas Education, a British journal published by the Advisory Committee
        on Education in the Colonies, under the direction of Arthur Meyew (1929-
        1946), and later on of Frank Ward (1946-1963).
      . In particular, the journal Progressive Education.
    \o. William
    oO            W. Brickman, “John Dewey’s Foreign Reputation as an Educator,”
      in School and Society 70 (1949): 257-65; William W. Brickman and Stanley
      Lehrer, eds. John Dewey Master Educator (New York: John Wiley, 1975);
      A. Roberto Munizaga, “John Dewey, Filosofo de America,” Ediciones de los
      Anales de la Universidad de Chile, 9 (1960); Ronald Kronish, “John Dewey’s
       Influence on Jewish Educators: the Case of Alexander M. Dushkin,” Teachers
       College Record 83, no.3 (1982): 419-33; A. Harry Passow, “John Dewey’s
      Influence on Education Around the World,” Teachers College Record 83, no.
      3 (1982): 401-18; W. W. Brickman, “The Turkish Cultural and Educational
     Revolution: John Dewey’s Report of 1924,” Western European Education
     16, no. 5 (1984): 3-18; Ronald K. Goodenow, “The Progressive Educator.
     and the Third World: a First Look at John Dewey,” History of Education 19,
     no. 1 (1990): 23-40; Naoko Saito, “Education for Global Understanding:
     Learning from Dewey’s Visit to Japan,” Teachers College Record 105, no. 9
     (2003): 1758-73; Thomas S. Popkewitz ed. Inventing the Modern Self and
     John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragmatism in Education
     (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2005).
10. Popkewitz, Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey, 10-11.
   . Ana Isabel Madeira, Ler, Escrever e Orar: Uma Andlise Histérica e Compar-
     ada dos Discursos sobre a Educagao, 0 Ensino e a Escola em Mogambique,
     1850-1950. Tese de Doutoramento em Ciéncias da Educagao (Educagao
     Comparada). Faculdade de Psicologia e de Ciéncias da Educacgao da Univer-
       sidade de Lisboa (2007).
     . Ibid., 327-33.
     . Popkewitz, Inventing the Modern Self and John Dewey, 8.
     . R.K. Goodenow (1990) refers to Dewey’s influence in Nigeria but does not
       indicate any bibliographical reference on the subject.
     . A.I. Madeira, “Framing Concepts in Colonial Education: A Comparative Ana-
       ysis of Educational Discourses at the Turn of the Nineteenth to the Twentieth
       Century,” in Identity, Education and Citizenship—Multiple Interrelations,

[p. 167] [PDF page 185]

Jonas Sprogee and Thyge Winther-Jensen eds. (Frankfurt am Main/Berlin/
    Bern/Bruxelles/New York/Oxford/Wien: Peter Lang, 2006), 225-38.
16. Omer Buyse, Méthodes Américaines d’Education Générale et Technique,
    2™ ed. (Presses de LEtablissement Litographique de Charleroi,1909); O.
    Buyse, Métodos americanos de educacao geral e técnica (trad. especial para
    a revista de Estudos Pedagégicos por Luiz Ribeiro de Senna) (Bahia: Imp-
    rensa Oficial do Estado, 1927); Madeira, Ler, Escrever e Orar, 276-91.
NWA Madeira, Ler, Escrever e Orar, 307-27; A.I. Madeira, “Comparing Colo-
    nial Education Discourses in the French and Portuguese African Empires:
    An Essay on Hybridization,” in International Handbook of Comparative
    Education, eds. Robert Cowen and A. M. Kazamias, (London & New York:
    Springer, 2009), 165-78.
  . Isaac L. Kandel, “The Influence of Dewey Abroad,” Teachers College Record
    31, no9i(1929)2 240.
  . Lawrence Cremin, “What Happened to Progressive Education?” Teachers
    College Record 61, no. 1 (1959): 23-29. http://www.tcrecord.org [Accessed
    on June 20, 2006].
  . Daniel Trohler, “The ‘Kingdom of God on Earth’ and Early Chicago Prag-
    matism,” Educational Theory 56, no. 1 (2006): 98.
  . Madeira, Ler, Escrever e Orar, o74—33.
  . O. Buyse, Méthodes Américaines d’Education Générale et Technique (Char-
    leroi: Dunot et E. Pinat, 1908), 581-91.
  . Madeira, Ler, Escrever e Orar, 327.
  . Luts M. Carvalho and Jaime Cordeiro, Brasil—Portugal nos circuttos do
    discurso pedagogico espectalizado (1920-1935), Cadernos Prestige 9 (Lis-
    boa: Educa, 2002).
  . Ibid.
  . Antonio C. Correia and Vivian B. Silva, Manuais Pedagogicos—Portugal e
    Brasil, 1930 a 1971—Produgao e Circulagao Internacional de Saberes Ped-
    agOgicos, Cadernos Prestige 13 (Lisboa: Educa, 2002).
    A.C. Correia and Rita de Cassia Gallego, Escolas Publicas Primarias em Por-
    tugal e em S. Paulo: Olhares sobre a organizagao do tempo escolar (1880-
     1920), Cadernos Prestige 21 (Lisboa: Educa, 2004).
   . Correia and Silva, Manuais Pedagogicos—Portugal e Brasil.
   . V.B. Silva, “Saberes em Viagem nos Manuais Pedagogicos: Construgdes da
     Escola em Portugal e no Brasil (1870-1970),” Revista Brasileira de Educagao
     12, no. 35 (2007): 268-76.
30. Silva, “Saberes em viagem nos manuais pedagogicos,” 235.
61} J. Schriewer, “Sistema Mundial e Inter-Relacionamento de Redes: A Inter-
     nacionalizacao da Educagao e o Papel da Pesquisa Comparativa,” Revista
    Brasileira de Estudos Pedagégicos 76, nos. 182/183 (1995): 241-304; J.
    Schriewer, “World-System and Interrelationship Networks: The Internation-
    alization of Education and the Role of Comparative Inquiry,” in ed. Thomas
    Popkewitz Educational Knowledge: Changing relationships between the
    state, civil society, and the educational community (New York: SUNY Press,
    2000), 305-43; J. Schriewer, “Estados-Modelos e Sociedades de Referéncia:
    Externalizacao em Processos de Modernizagao,” in A Difusdo Mundial da
    Escola, eds. A. Novoa and J. Schriewer (Lisboa: Educa, 2000).
Boe Carvalho and Cordeiro, “Brasil—Portugal nos circuitos do discurso ped-
    agogico,” S1.
53. Luis M. Carvalho, Nos Através da Escrita: Revistas, Espectalistoas e Con-
    hecimento Pedagégico (1920-1936). Cadernos Prestige (3) (Lisboa: Educa,
   2000); Carvalho and Cordeiro, “Brasil—Portugal nos circuitos do discurso
   pedagogico.”

[p. 168] [PDF page 186]

34. A. C. Correia and V.B. Silva, Manuais Pedagogicos—Portugal e Brasil, 1930
     a 1971—Producao e Circulagao Internacional de Saberes Pedagdgicos. Cad-
     ernos Prestige (13) (Lisboa: Educa, 2002); A. C. Correia and Vera Gaspar da
     Silva, A Lei da Escola: Os sentidos da Construcao da Escolaridade Popu-
     lar Através dos Textos Legislativos em Portugal e Santa Catarina—Brasil
     (1880-1920) Cadernos Prestige (16) (Lisboa: Educa, 2003); Correia and
     Gallego, “Escolas Publicas Primarias em Portugal e em S. Paulo.”
   . Ana Waleska Mendonga, Universidade e formacdao de professores: Uma per-
     spectiva integradora. A “Universidade de Educagao” de Anisio Tetxetra.
     Rio de Janeiro, Departamento de Educagao, PUCRJ, Tese de Doutoramento
     (1993); A.W. Mendonga, Anisio Teixeira e a Universidade de Educacao. Rio
     de Janeiro: EAUERJ       (2002); Zaia Brandao and A.W. Mendonga, eds. Uma
     tradic¢ao esquecida: por que nao lemos Anisio Teixeira? (Rio de Janeiro:
     Forma& Accao, 2008 2nd ed.); A.W. Mendonga, L.N. Xavier, V.A. Breg-
     lia, M. Chaves, M.C. Oliveira, C. Lima, and P.B. Santos, “Pragmatismo e
     Desenvolvimentismo        no pensamento     educacional     brasileiro dos anos       de
     1950/1960,”    Revista    Brasileira de Educagao       11, no.   31 (2006):    96-113;
     Marta C. Carvalho, “O debate sobre a identidade da cultura brasileira no
     anos 20: O americanismo de Anisio,” in Provocagées em Educacao, orgs.
     A.L. Smolka and M.C. Menezes (Campinas, SP: Autores Associados/Bra-
     gan¢a Paulista, SP: Universidade de S. Francisco, 2000); Diana G. Vidal,
     “Escola Nova e Processo Educativo,” in Eliane Lopes, Filho L. Faria and
     Cynthia G. Veiga, eds. S00 anos de Educagao no Brasil (Belo Horizonte:
     Auténtica, 2007, 3rd ed. 1 reimp.), 497-517; Clarice Nunes, “Anisio Teix-
     eira entre nos: A defesa da educagao como direito de todos,” Educagdao e
     Sociedade XXI, no. 73 (2000): 9-40; C. Nunes, Amisio Teixeira: a poesia
     em accdo (Sao Paulo: EDUSF,2000); C. Nunes, “(Des)Encantos da Moderni-
     dade Pedagogica,” in Lopes, et. al. 500 anos de Educagdao no Brasil, 371-98;
     Léa Maria V. de Castro, Uma escola de professores: formagao de docentes
     na Reforma Antsio Tetxetra (1931-1935) (Rio de Janeiro, PUCRJ, Depar-
     tamento de Educagao, Dissert. Mestrado,            1986); M.V. Cunha, John Dewey:
     Uma filosofia para educadores em sala de aula (Petropolis: Vozes, 1994);
     M.V. Cunha, A educacdo dos educadores: da Escola Nova a escola de Hoje
     (Campinas: Mercado de Letras, 1995); M.V. Cunha, “Dewey e Piaget no Bra-
     sil dos anos trinta,” Cadernos de Pesquisa, Sao Paulo, no.97 (1996): 5-12;                 .
     M.V. Cunha, “A’presenga de John Dewey na constituigao do idedrio educa-
     cional   renovador,”   Educagado   em   Revista,    Belo Horizonte,   no.    31 (1999):
     77-91; M.V.Cunha,        “Trés vers6es do pragmatismo      deweyano     no Brasil dos
     anos 50,” Educagdo e Pesquisa, SP, no. 2 (1999): 39-55; M.V. Cunha, “John
     Dewey: Filosofia, Politica e Educagado,” Perspectiva, Florianopolis,             19, no.
     2 (2001): 371-88; M.V. Cunha, “John Dewey e 0 pensamento                    educacional
     brasileiro: a centralidade da nogao de movimiento,” Revista Brasileira de
     Educagdo, Rio de Janeiro, no. 17 (2001): 86-99; J. A. De L. Rocha, ed. Ani-
     sto em movimento: a vida e as lutas de Antsio Teixeira pela escola publica e
     pela cultura do Brasil (Salvador: Fundagao Anisio Teixeira, 1992).
 36. A. Névoa, Antonio, Le Temps des Professeurs. Analyse Sécio-Historique
     de la Profession Enseignante au Portugal (X VIII-XX siécle) Vol. 1 (Lisboa:
     Instituto Nacional de Investigagao Cientifica, 1987); Novoa, “A Republica
     e a Escola”; A. Novoa, dir.        A Imprensa de Edugao e Ensino: Repertério
     Analitico (Séculos XIX-XX)         (Lisboa: Instituto de Inovagao Educacional,
     1993); A. Novoa, “On History, History of Education, and History of Colo-
     nial Education,” Paedagogica Historica, International Journal of the His-
     tory of Education, Supplementary Series. Vol. I (1995): 23-61; A. Novoa,
     ““Educacgao Nacional’ (1930-1974): Andlise Histérica e Historiografica,” in

[p. 169] [PDF page 187]

Los Caminos Hacia la Modernidad Educativa en Espana e Portugal (1800-
    1975). Actas do Il Encontro Ibérico de Hist6ria de la Educacién, Zamora,
    1995 (1997); A. Novoa, « Modeles d’Analyse en Education Comparée : Le
    Champ et la Carte. In Histoire et Comparaison (Essais sur |’Education) »
    (Lisboa : Educa, 1998), 75 ; A. Novoa, dir. Diciondrio de Educadores Por-
    tugueses, (Porto: Edigdes Asa, 2003); A. Novoa, « La Pédagogie, Les enseig-
    nants et la recherche, réflexions en chantier » Cadernos Prestige 19 (Lisboa:
    Educa, 2005); Joaquim Pintassilgo, Republica e formacao de cidadaos. A
    educagao civica nas escolas primdrias da 1° Republica Portuguesa (Lis-
    boa: Edigdes Colibri, 1998); Rogério Fernades, As ideias pedagogicas de
    Francisco Adolfo Coelho, (Lisboa: Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciéncia/Centro
    de Investigagao Pedagégica, 1973); R. Fernades, Os Caminhos do ABC.
    Soctedade Portuguesa e Ensino das Primeiras letras do Pombalismo a 1820,
    (Porto: Porto Editora, 1994); Aurea Adao, O Estatuto S6écio-profissional do
    Professor Primario em Portugal (1901-1951). (Oeiras: Instituto Gulbenkian
    de Ciéncia, 1984); A. Adao, Estado Absoluto e Ensino das Primeiras Letras:
    As Escolas   Régias (1772-1794).   2 vols. Lisboa: Faculdade de Ciéncias da
    Universidade de Lisboa, Departamento de Educagao. Tese de Doutoramento,
    1995; M. Filomena Monica, Educagao e Sociedade no Portugal de Sala-
    zar (Lisboa: Editorial Presenga/GIS, 1978); R6mulo de Carvalho, Historia
    do Ensino em Portugal desde a Fundacao da Nacionalidade até ao fim do
    Regime de Salazar-Caetano (Lisboa: Fundagao Calouste Gulbenkian, 1986);
    Justino Magalhaes, Justino, Ler e Escrever no Mundo Rural do Antigo
    Regime. Um contributo para a Historia da Alfabetizagao e da Escolarizagao
   em Portuga. (Braga: Universidade do Minho/ Instituto de Educagao, 1994).
37 Jorge Ramos do O, “Dewey on Lima or the social prosthesis in the Construc-
   tion of the new Education discourse in Portugal (1925-1936)” in Inventing
   the Modern Self  and John Dewey: Modernities and the Traveling of Pragma-
   tism in Education, ed. T. Popkewitz (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005),
    111-31; Madeira, Ler, Escrever e Orar.
38. Maria Joao Mogarro, “Bibliotecas particulares e saberes pedagogicos: Circu-
    lacdo e apropriacgao de modelos culturais” in Historia da Escola em Portugal
    eno Brasil, eds. J. Pintassilgo, M. Freitas, M.J. Mogarro, and M.C. Carvalho
    (Lisboa: Edigdes Colibri/Centro de Investigagao em Educagao, Faculdade de
    Ciéncias da Universidade de Lisboa, 2006), 233-57.
oes Ibid., 244, XX XX.
40. J. Pintassilgo, Images and Interpretations of New Education in Portugal.
     The Reports of Portuguese Teachers holders visiting European educational
     institutions. Comunicacao apresentada a International Standing Conference
     for the History of Education—ISCHE 26, realizada entre 14 e 17 de Julho de
     2004 na Universidade de Genéve (Suiga) [policopiado].
   . Névoa, “Tempos da Escola no espago Portugal-Brasil-Mogambique,” 127.
42. Popkewitz, Inventing the Modern Self   and John Dewey.
43. Novoa, A Impresa de Edugdo e Ensino.
