The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Part IV
Chapter 8: John Dewey and the Development of Education in Russia Before 1930: Report on a Forgotten Reception
Irina Mchitarjan
Original print pages 173–195; PDF pages 191–213

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 173] [PDF page 191]

8      John Dewey and the Development
       of Education in Russia Before 1930
        Report on a Forgotten Reception’
       Irina Mchitarjan

John Dewey (1859-1952) “is one of the few educators of the 20th cen-
tury, whose work, in both theory and practice, has gained worldwide
influence.”* Like elsewhere, Dewey’s work also got wide response in Rus-
sia, particularly in the period between 1900 and 1930. Yet apart from a
few exceptions,* the Russian reception of Dewey’s educational ideas has
laregely remained unexplored. This article attempts a reappraisal of this
neglected part of Russia’s history of education. My guiding question will
be: What was nature of the response Dewey received in Russia between
1900 and 1930, and to what extent did he influence the educational debate
there? I will try, first, to establish the reasons or preconditions for Dewey’s
critical reception in Russia; second, to reconstruct this reception in terms
of chronology and content; and third, to explore the significang of Dewey’s
reception for the educational reform process in Russia.*
    In order to understand Dewey’s reception in Russia during the first three
decades of the twentieth century, it is important to have at least a rough
idea of the historical background, particularly the school politics, in which
it took place. Therefore, I shall begin with a brief description of this histori-
cal context to then present the principal features of Dewey’s reception in
the second part of this article. A third part will draw some conclusions.


THE SOCIAL AND HISTORICAL CONTEXT

School development in Russia in the period between 1900 and 1930—and
hence the reception explored here—was strongly influenced by the country’s
general socio-political development. Major historical breaks that also had an
effect on Russia’s school development and the reception examined here were
the bourgeois democratic revolution of 1905, the Socialist October Revolu-
tion of 1917, and the introduction of the first five-year plan in 1928.
   At the beginning of the twentieth century, Russia was still an absolute
monarchy, characterized by an illiberal or repressive politics towards criti-
cal public discussions. The bourgeois democratic revolution of 1905 marked
a transition from absolute to constitutional monarchy and brought in its
wake a number of democratic liberties. These led, among other things, to
the establishment of a critical educational public with strong tendencies

[p. 174] [PDF page 192]

towards reform, as manifested in the founding of progressive schools and
educational journals, the organization of school conferences, etc.
   The Socialist October Revolution of 1917 led to the foundation of the
Soviet state and to a radical change in Russian educational policy. Although
Soviet educators attempted to ameliorate many of the existing school prob-
lems, they excluded ideologically “suspect” initiatives of the progressive
movement from their discussion and practice. Henceforth, progressive edu-
cational ideas—including those from other countries—had to conform to
the educational standards of the Soviet state. Yet, despite state control, the
1920s in Russia (until the introduction of the first five-year plan in 1928)
can be seen as a period of extensive educational experimentation.
    Since the introduction of the first five-year plan in 1928—aimed at step-
ping up Russia’s industrialization—the measures of reform to be promoted in
the education system (compulsory education, the elimination of illiteracy, the
vocational and technical training of the masses, etc.) were primarily aimed
at ensuring the cultural growth of the working masses and the education of
highly qualified specialists and scientists.’ These measures went hand in hand
with the “intensification of the class struggle” and an increase of party con-
trol—including the control over schools. The Central Committee’s resolution
“On Elementary and Secondary Schools” of September 5, 1931, “conclusively
prohibited any experimentation in schools providing general education.”°
Henceforth, any reference to the Russian heritage of educational reform, or to
foreign models of progressive education, became impossible too.
    At the end of the nineteenth century, the Russian school system was
divided in two subsystems known as “lower” and “higher” education. As
far as “lower” education was concerned, by the beginning of the twentieth
century Russia did not have compulsory education, or a sufficient num-
ber of schools to introduce it. In 1897, only a quarter of the population
were able to read and write.’ Russia’s higher schools were attended by only
0.13% of the population at the end of the nineteenth century.* Access to —
“higher” education was strongly restricted by law.’ Accordingly, the cen-
tral issues of the Russian educational discussion at the turn of the century
were: the extension of the network of elementary schools, the introduction
of compulsory education, the abolition of the traditional division between
classical grammar schools and secondary schools, and the connection of the
elementary schools to higher schools in terms of a unified school system.
    The main agents in Russia’s school political arena between 1900 and
 1917—the educational administrators and the advocates of reform—held
very different views on the just-described problems. Whereas the educa-
tional administrators, the representatives of the state and Church authori-
ties, wanted to preserve the underdeveloped Russian school system, the
increasingly powerful forces of reform advocated—for different educational
reasons—the introduction of compulsory education and the establisment
of a general, equal and educationally reformed school system. Apart from
these common demands, the different forces of reform each developed their
own, separate reform plans.'' Two major lines of educational reform—that

[p. 175] [PDF page 193]

of “Free Education” and that of “realistic” education—also acted as recepi-
ents of Dewey’s educational theory.
   The reform line of “Free Education” was inspired by the educational
teachings of Leo Tolstoi (1828-1910), who is generally considered the
founder of Russian progressive education. His disciples—especially Ventsel’,
Durylin, Gorbunov-Posadoy, Klechkovskii, Chekhov, Shatskii, Kaidanova,
Zelenko, Shleger, and Krupskaia—promoted in particular the autonomy of
schools, i.e. their liberation from administrative control by the state and the
transfer of control to local institutions of self-administration, as well as the
right of each school to shape its own educational practice.!”
    The reform plans of the “realistic” educators (Obukhov, Sokolov, Levitin,
Ignatiev, Rumiantsev, Znamenskii, and others) emerged against the back-
ground of the industrial change in Russia, setting in around 1890. The “real-
istic” educators primarily wanted to strengthen the work principle in schools
that provided general education and to extend vocational training. Their aim
was to implement a realistic, scientific, and practice-oriented education.'3
   In the 1920s, the Soviet authorities placed even stronger restrictions on
the public educational discussion than the tsarist regime had done previ-
ously.'* The former multiplicity of educational approaches, with their own
independent organizational centers, publications, and school experiments,
fell victim to state interventions. Henceforth, all positions critical of Marx-
ist state education were regarded as “counter-revolutionary.”
    Still, even the dominant camp of the new state education was not com-
pletely unified—neither in terms of educational theory nor in terms of
policy—and it also contained some liberal elements. The strict advocates
of the Marxist-Leninist doctrine, such as Pinkevich, Shul’gin, and Kame-
nev, politically supported the idea of class struggle, the dictatorship of the
proletariat, and the battle against the class enemy; whereas with respect to
education, they argued for implementing these state goals in school. For
the most part, they opposed both foreign educational influences and the
Russian progressive education of the tsarist period, which they criticized as
“petty bourgeois.”'*
   The liberal Soviet educators (Shatskii, Blonskii, Fortunatov, Gorbunov-
Posadov, Ventsel’, Chekhov, Kapterev, and Levitin) came mostly from the
group of pre-revolutionary progressive educators. In most cases, it was only
after some thinking that they had come to co-operate with the Soviet author-
ities. They argued for a critical adoption of both the national heritage and
of foreign models of progressive education, and they supported—at best—
an undogmatic implementation of the Marxist doctrine in school. They
advocated equal rights for children of all social classes and were against all
forms of violence, including political violence.'’ Given these attitudes, it is
little surprising that liberal Soviet educators were often criticized by party
line Marxists for their indecision and their lack of radicality in pursuing
the political goals of the new state.'°
    In addition to these two groups, there were a number of soviet educators
(e.g., the Minister for Education, A. V. Lunacharskii, and N. K. Krupskaia,

[p. 176] [PDF page 194]

a leading staff member of his ministry), who held a kind of middle position
in arguing for an overall yet undogmatic implementation of the Marxist-
Leninist doctrine. They were pragmatic enough to see that it was impossi-
ble to construct a new school system in Soviet Russia without some pattern
of orientation, and that in doing so, they could benefit from the models of
“new” and “progressive” education in other countries (despite their, ulti-
mately, “bourgeois” character). The extensive study of Dewey’s ideas in
Soviet Russia during the 1920s is the best example of this policy.


THE PRINCIPAL FEATURES OF DEWEY’S
CRITICAL RECEPTION (1900-1930)


Dewey’s Reception Before 1917
The reception of Dewey’s educational ideas in Russia began in 1907 and
was primarily grounded in the upswing of the Russian movement of pro-
gressive education after the bourgeois democratic revolution of 1905S. At
that time, many people in Russia were searching intensely for models for a
school reform. This search created a favourable situation for the reception
of foreign approaches to reform.'’ In this situation, Dewey proposed an
educational conception that aroused the interest of various lines of progres-
sive education. However, at this time, his approach was still regarded as
only one among several possible reform models for the Russian school.
    In the period between 1907 and 1917, there were at least sixteen responses
to Dewey’s educational ideas in the sources I have analyzed (writings by
Russian educators, educational journals, congressional proceedings, etc.).
These range from Russian translations of works by Dewey to short refer-
ences to his approach in educational publications or congressional debates
on educational policy. Compared to Georg Kerschensteiner, the most popu- —
lar Western educator in pre-socalist Russia, John Dewey was clearly less
intensely studied in Russia before 1917.'*’ Whereas by 1917, at least thirteen
books and two articles by Kerschensteiner had been published in Russian,
only three books by Dewey were translated during the same period (“Shkola
i obschestvo” [The School and Society] (1907), “Psikhologiia i pedagogika
myshlentia” [How We Think] (1915) and “Shkoly buduschego” [Schools of
Tomorrow] (1916/1917)). Whereas some fifty extensive articles by Russian
authors were published on Kerschensteiner’s approach during this period,
there were only thirteen responses to Dewey. And even these responses were
rarely detailed and critical discussions of Dewey’s approach, but consisted
for the most part of short citations, hints; and references. It may therefore
seem to be all the more surprising that—shortly before the Socialist Octo-
ber Revolution—Dewey came to play a role in the development of the Rus-
sian school system that equalled or even exceeded that of Kerschensteiner.
This will be elaborated in the next section.

[p. 177] [PDF page 195]

Dewey’s Reception by the Advocates
of “Free Education” (1905-1917)
Dewey’s reception before 1917 was characterized by the fact that the advo-
cates of “Free Education” and those of “realistic” education were interested
 in different aspects of Dewey’s teachings. The supporters of “Free Educa-
 tion” were mostly interested in Dewey’s demand for a child-centered orga-
 nization of the educational process; in his idea of learning from experience;
 and in his comprehensive conception of work education. For Tolstoi’s disci-
 ples did not want to use work education to solve the economic problems of
 their time, but to achieve a well-balanced education of human beings. They
 were not so much interested in the political and economic than in the ethi-
cal and educational meaning of work.'’ In Dewey they found primarily a
 confirmation of this view. Yet it was not only the programmatic demands of
 Dewey’s educational theory that attracted the attention of the Russian sup-
porters of the “Free Education” movement, but also the promising results
 of their practical implementation.
     For example, Konstantin Ventsel considered the Laboratory School
 founded by Dewey at the University of Chicago as a potential “ideal school
of the future.”*° According to Ventsel’, this ideal school was to be a school
without coercion and punishment; a school that organized its teaching
according to the interests of the child; a school achieving the comprehen-
sive development of the child’s abilities and personality by a well-aimed
deployment of productive work. Of particular importance for Ventsel,’ as
an advocate of “Free Education,” was the fact that Dewey’s version of the
production school was not aimed at the development of specific manual
skills, but at the overall education of young people.*! This was probably
the reason for Ventsel’s claim that Dewey had thought through the idea of
work education “much more profoundly than Kerschensteiner.””
    Another advocate of “Free Education,” Stanislav Shatskii, was impressed
both by Dewey’s educational theory, which “kept insisting on testing ideas in
real life,” and by his “perceptive analysis of the child’s interests.”*’ As early
as 1910, Shatskii recognized a “certain influence of John Dewey’s ideas on
the development of [his own] educational views.”** With this, Shatskii explic-
itely confirms what is strongly suggested by indirect evidence, namely that
leading progressive educators in pre-socialist Russia were influenced by John
Dewey’s pedagogy when they developed their own approaches to reform.
    Moreover, Dewey’s reception by German educators such as Gansberg
and Pabst, whose articles were published in the journal Free Education,
also coincided with the perspective of Tolstoi’s disciples: The German
authors drew on Dewey’s concepts in relation to the same issues as did the
followers of Tolstoi.*°
    In sum, it can be said that the critical reception of Dewey’s work by
the aherents of the “Free Education” movement covered a relatively wide
spectrum of issues. The reading of these Russian recipients of Dewey was

[p. 178] [PDF page 196]

above all guided by their own ideas of reform, which determined both the
thematic focuses of their reception, and the assessment of Dewey’s educa-
tional significance. Thus, the discussion of Dewey’s pedagogy served Tol-
stoi’s followers primarily to elaborate their own concepts and make them
more precise.


Dewey’s Reception by the Supporters
of “Realistic” Education (1905-1917)
Whereas the reception of Dewey’s work by the advocates of “Free Educa-
tion” spanned a rather wide thematic spectrum, the supporters of “real-
istic” education were primarily interested in one particular aspect of his
approach—Dewey’s conception of work education. However, the “real-
istic” educators approached this conception from a different perspective
than Tolstoi’s disciples. Whereas the advocates of “Free Education” were
primarily interested in the educational function of the work principle, the
adherents of “realistic” education saw its importance primarily in contrib-
uting to the training of “modern” workers.
    Arguing from this perspective, Sokolov (1913) commented on Dewey’s
criticism of the “old” school as follows: Dewey has clearly shown that the
“old” school contributes neither to the development of the pupil’s indi-
viduality, nor to the development of public life. In this type of school, he
says, teaching is detached from the everyday reality and experience of the
child, and the knowledge conveyed cannot be used for the benefit of mod-
ern industrial society.”° As an alternative, Sokolov proposes Dewey’s pro-
duction school. S. A. Levitin, another imporant advocate of the “realistic”
education movement, similarly demanded that the new school should be a
production school, claiming that such a school was already being realized
in the United States, with Dewey being an outstanding advocate.”’
    At the first All-Russian Congress on National Education that took —
place from December 1913 through January 1914 in St. Petersburg, the
subject of the production school, along with the issues of compulsory
education and the unified school, formed a central focus of discussion.28
Numerous talks were presented on the topic of the production school and
work education. The central argument of almost all these talks was: the
production school is the best solution to both the educational and the
economic problems of the time.’? To substantiate this argument, a num-
ber of “realistic” educators (e.g., Kasatkin, Levitin, and Repin) referred,
among others, explicitly to Dewey and his conception of work education.
They quoted from Dewey’s writings and claimed that, due to the imple-
mentation of the work principle in American schools, the educational
process had made substantive advances.*° By implementing the work prin-
ciple, they said, the American school had not only improved instruction,
but had also achieved remarkable successes in the social education of
young people.*' Consequently, they demanded: “Our school should take

[p. 179] [PDF page 197]

a similar direction, i.e. stimulate the education process through practical
work, just like the American school has done.”
    These arguments of the “realistic” educators—supported by Dewey’s
authority—were addressed at two groups: the Russian teachers and the edu-
cational administrators. By means of these arguments, the teachers were to
be won over for the idea of the production school, whereas the educational
administrators were to be forced to abandon their adversary positions on
reform.*’ This strategy was’successful: the All-Russian Congress on National
Education of 1913/1914 declared the work principle “a necessary element of
schools providing general education” which was “to reshape the inner orga-
nization of the school.”** Thus, the work principle became publicly accepted
as a central element of the reform of general education and was linked to the
fundamental issues of the school reform in Russia. This success of the “real-
istic” educators was surely aided by their reference to Dewey. Although the
congress’ resolution was not binding, the idea of the production school could
at least be transported into practice by the teachers.


The Reform Plans of the Russian Minister for
National Education, P. N. Ignatiev (1915)
At least since 1915, Dewey can also be said to have influenced Russia’s offi-
cial educational policy. For at that time, Dewey’s progressive educational
ideas also found their way into the school reform projects of the Russian
Ministry for Education. This was made possible through the appointment
of an advocate of “realistic” education, Count Pavel Nikolaevich Ignatiev,
as the new Russian Minister for National Education. In this position he
tried to initiate a fundamental reform of the Russian school system, draw-
ing primarily on Dewey’s approach.
    According to the ministry’s plans, the backwardness of the Russian
school system was to be finally overcome, and it was to reach a level that
could compare to that of Western Europe. The reformed school was to
be a unified school with practical learning widely applied in it: In the
new curricula, practical exercises in physics, chemistry, and biology, as
well as in technical drawing and physical training were given wide space;
handicrafts was considered to be primarily of educational value and was
to be gradually established as a compulsory subject.” Moreover, Ignatiev
placed great importance on the reform of vocational education and train-
ing, founding a special “Council for Vocational Training Affairs in Rus-
sia” for this purpose.*°                                                ;
   Dewey’s    influence  on the reform plans of the Russian  Ministry  for
National Education is supported by the following evidence. Already before
1914, the new minister had studied one of Dewey’s most important writ-
ings, his book The School and Society and—according to his own testi-
mony—he had found in Dewey’s philosophy and pedagogy the theoretical
foundations for the kind of school reform that had been on his mind for

[p. 180] [PDF page 198]

a long time. These were, above all, Dewey’s ideas of practical learning,
of a reality-oriented education, and of the school being part of the child’s
environment.°” Dewey’s book, Ignatiev writes, had given him and his staff
the greatest help and encouragement in implementing the same ideas in
Russia.*® Moreover, some of Russia’s leading progressive educators, among
them active recipients of Dewey’s pedagogy such as Levitin, participated in
the discussion of the ministry’s projected reforms.”
   Ignatiev’s reform plans represent a radical change of the state education
as it was practiced before. These plans were suited to solve the most pressing
problems of the Russian school system and to adapt it to the current condi-
tion of economic and social development. With these reform plans, the most
important demands of the Russian progressive educators—the demands for
a unified school and for a production school—became accepted goals on
the level of state education. The reception of Dewey’s educational ideas
seems to have contributed considerably both to development, as well as to
the specific contents of the reform plans. All in all, then, in 1915 one could
easily have the impression that Dewey’s reform ideas (just like Kerschen-
steiner’s*®) would have a decisive influence on the future development of
the Russian school system. However, things did not quite turn out like this:
The implementation of Ignatiev’s reform plans were first prevented by the
Great War and then by the Socialist Revolution of 1917. As shall be seen,
however, this did not put an end to Dewey’s reception in Russia.


Dewey’s Reception after 1917
Soviet Russia saw an enourmous upswing in the reception of Dewey’s theories.
Dewey’s educational works Vvedenie v filosofiiu vospitaniia [Democracy and
Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education] (1921), Shkoly
buduschego [Schools of Tomorrow] (1922), Shkola t obschestvo [The School
and Society] (1922, 1924, 1925), Shkola i rebenok [The Child and the Cur-
riculum|] (1922, 1923) and Psikhologtia i pedagogika myshleniia [How We
Think] (1922) were published in Russian, often in several printings,*! and his
educational approach was discussed in more than forty articles by Russian
authors (either exclusively, or in the context of broader issues). Soviet Russia’s
leading educational administrators studied his teachings and declared him
to be the best existing example for the projected unified and polytechnical
Soviet production school.” In the 1920s Dewey became the most popular
Western educator in Soviet Russia—something that was all but obvious given
the critical attitude of the Soviet regime towards all “bourgeois” models.
How can this development be explained?
   One reason may have been that a number of Dewey’s basic positions
(which reflected American pragmatism) could be seen as related to Marxist
ideas. These ideas include: considering practice as the basis of all knowl-
edge and as the criterion of truth; acknowledging the outstanding impor-
tance of material-practical activity for human development; reducing class
differences and promoting social justice; acknowledging the leading role of

[p. 181] [PDF page 199]

production for social development; and involving broad masses of the pop-
ulation in the control of the cultural, social, and political life. All of these
ideas had parallels in the works of Dewey. Dewey, too, demanded to learn
from experience and to base the educational process on practical work;
he, too, promoted placing mental and physical work on the same level and
called for joining school to production; and he, too, wanted to connect the
school closely to the social life of society.*’ Even Marxist educator Pinke-
vich who, in the second half of the 1920s, became rather critical of Dewey’s
approach, wrote that Dewey was “infinitely closer both to Marx and the
Russian communists than to Western European educators like Kerschen-
steiner, Lay, Scharrelmann, Forster, or Seidel.”*4
    Another related reason for Dewey’s popularity in Russia was that the
Soviet educators considered his conception of the new school as the most
convincing model of the production school. In contrast to Kerschensteiner’s
production school—which was accused by the Soviet educators of an exces-
sive orientation towards handicrafts and of advocating bourgeois class inter-
ests—Dewey used the work principle for the comprehensive education of the
individual rather than for developing specific manual skills.In contrast to
Kerschensteiner, he emphasized the growing importance of industrial devel-
opment for the cultural life of society, and hence also for education,** and
developed the idea of a polytechnical education.*® At the same time, Dewey
demanded equal educational opportunities for all members of society. “As an
educator, Dewey was far more progressive than the educator from Munich.”
It was on these grounds that Soviet educators turned away from German and
Western European models toward the example of America. The beginnings
of this turn in the reception of foreign educational ideas—in simplified terms:
Dewey instead of Kerschensteiner—can already be found in pre-socialist
Russia,** but it was only in Soviet Russia that this turn was completed.
    The extensive reception of Dewey’s ideas in Soviet Russia is further
owed to one particular person: Lenin’s companion Nadezhda Konstanti-
novna Krupskaia, who was a leading staff member of the Soviet Ministry
for Education. She was open to both national and international efforts at
educational reform.*? Among the latter, Krupskaia favored the American
school system as being much more democratic than the German one, which
she believed to encourage subservience. In America, Krupskaia said, the
president’s and the wage-laborer’s sons are sitting next to each other at
their school desks, whereas in Germany, school is far more characterized
by “social standing or class.”°? Like Krupskaia, other leading Soviet educa-
tors also believed that the American school was not characterized by social
standing or class. Moreover, the American school was thought to adapt
quickly to the nation’s social and economic development, to co-operate
actively with public organizations, and to be under public control. Surpris-
ingly, many Soviet educators considered the production school to have been
implemented most completely and in close association with production in
America.’! And within America’s educational landscape, Dewey’s approach
was viewed as the most attractive.

[p. 182] [PDF page 200]

Dewey’s Reception by Liberal Soviet Educators (1917-1928)
When, in 1918, it had been decided that the new Soviet school was to be
a production school, there began immediately an intense discussion on
what this school should look like in practice. The ideas of what ought to
be understood by a “true” production school differed considerably. In the
course of this discussion, it was particularly the liberal-minded Soviet edu-
cators    (Shatskii, Fortunatov,   Blonskii, Gerit, Gotalov-Gottlieb)    and the
state educators open to international ideas for reform (such as Krupskaia
and Lunacharskii) who, in the first half of the 1920s, turned to John Dew-
ey’s work, because it seemed to them to offer the most adequate model for
the Soviet production school. This point is underscored, among others, by
Shatskii in an analysis of the different models of the production school in
Western Europe and North America.*? Dewey’s production school, Shatskii
says, has come closest to “the type of school we are projecting . . . for our
school reform.”** “Dewey has completely captured the spirit of the new
school—a school particularly needed in Russia.”°* Fortunatov’’ writes
that Dewey’s conception of the production school offers a synthesis of all
forms of production schools from Western Europe. Even Pinkevich, who
rejected Dewey’s “ideology” although he greatly appreciated his educa-
tional achievements, writes: “Dewey’s words contain much that is true and
valuable, for he wants to join science to practice, life and production. In
his works, we have found a variety of ideas that must be completely agreed
with.”** “Studying Dewey’s works is a must for every educator.”>”
    Thus, analogous to the advocates of “Free Education” before 1917, the lib-
eral Soviet educators (who, in part, had themselves been supporters of “Free
Education”) had broadly adapted Dewey’s approach in the first half of the
1920s. In doing so, they percetved Dewey’s approach as a complex educational
program, of which particularly the following aspects captured their attention:
(1) to start from the child’s interests and abilities and to dispose of pre-deter-
mined educational goals at the service of any particular state; (2) to learn from
experience and by means of self-determined practical work; and finally, (3)
to consider school as a part of the social environment. For, like Dewey, they
wanted to build a school system that would both promote the development
of the individual and contribute to the welfare of a democratic society. Like
Dewey, they saw school as the first stage of democratic society.**
    Fortunatov, Blonskii, Shatskii and Krupskaia, in particular, emphasized
Dewey’s concern with a “child-centered” educational process. Only this
could guarantee the success of the teaching process. Krupskaia considered
Dewey to have shown that “the child’s individuality is the sum of certain
forces and instincts rooted in the organism” and that “great [educational]
successes can be achieved by taking the child’s individuality into account.”
Fortunatoy regarded as particularly revolutionary Dewey’s argument that
the educational process has no purpose beyond itself: “The purpose of
education cannot be the preparation        for something specific. No, educa-
tion should only provide the opportunity for a comprehensive development

[p. 183] [PDF page 201]

according to the child’s individuality . .. The child cannot be prepared for
specific conditions of his or her future life . . . for these conditions may turn
out to become outmoded in the course of time. . . therefore, one should
develop those abilities in children that enable them to create the conditions
of their future lives themselves.”*"
   According to Shatskii, one of the most enthusiastic advocates of Dewey’s
ideas in Soviet Russia, Dewey’s major merit was to have recognized the
dualism in educational theory that is reflected “in the separation of theory
and practice, of science and life, of intellectual and manual labor.” Even
the “dualism of dividing society into classes, which is reflected in the cur-
ricula and methods of education,” Shatskii says, was correctly recognized
by Dewey.** Dewey is guided by the desire to establish a school system that
abolishes social inequality.°* Shatskii shared Dewey’s view that there is a
constant attempt to preserve existing ways of life through school, whereas,
in truth, “the task of education is to encourage the processes of societal
growth.”® Therefore, Shatskii appealed to his Russian readers “to study
Dewey very closely, by immersing themselves into every single argument of
this best of contemporary philosophers.”°¢
    Yet, it was not only Dewey’s educational theories that were adopted
in Soviet Russia, but also some practical examples of progressive educa-
tion in the United States. In 1925, two other liberal Soviet educators, A.
 Gerit and A. Gotalov-Gottlieb, presented Dewey’s so-called “schools of
 tomorrow,” described by him in his book of the same title.°? What the
 two Soviet educators thought to be particularly progressive about these
 schools was that they pursued no utilitarian but exclusively educational
and social goals, were open to broad strata of the population rather than
 being accessible only to an elite, and regarded themselves as miniature
models of a democratic society, thereby also contributing to social recon-
ciliation. Education in these schools, they said, is organized in a way that
combines in an optimal fashion the rights of the individual with his or her
social obligations. Such a kind of education, they concluded, would also
be highly beneficial for Russia.°*
    Given this interest in Dewey’s educational ideas, it is not surprising that,
especially in the early 1920s, his teachings were also actively used in the
development of a new school program. The leading state educators of Soviet
Russia openly testified to have learned from Dewey. Pavel Blonskii, for
instance, who authored the book Production School that became popular
not only in Russia but also in the West, was in large measure influenced by
Dewey. Dewey, Marx, and Russian reality, Blonskii said, had been “nearly
his only guides” in developing his concept of the production school.” Later
on he wrote: “From Dewey we have learned to build a school according to
the demands of the modern century . . . and the needs and interests of the
child.” Even the Soviet Minister of Education conceded, “we have learned
a lot from educators like . . Dewey.””!
    The decisive reasons for the extensive reception of Dewey’s ideas in the
first half of the 1920s were educational rather than political. It was mainly

[p. 184] [PDF page 202]

because of its educational quality that Dewey’s approach was seen to be the
best school concept in international educational theory. The educational lit-
erature of the time gives the impression that the construction of the Soviet
production school would have been hardly possible without drawing on
Dewey’s ideas. This hypothesis is further supported by the extensive recep-
tion of the didactic and methodical approaches developed on the basis of
Dewey’s educational theory, which are reported in the next section.

The Project Method and the Dalton Plan
at the Service of the Soviet Mass School
When the Soviet educators had decided that the contents of learning in
the new school should be centered on the principle of productive work,
they were confronted with the question by which forms of learning and
by which instruction methods these contents could be conveyed. What
seemed to them to be best suited for this purpose was the didactic meth-
odology developed more or less in accordance with Dewey’s educational
theory by his disciples and successors (W. H. Kilpatrick, E. Parkhurst, and
E. Dewey). According to Krupskaia,” these approaches to didactic method
opened up “completely new horizons” for the Soviet production school. Of
particular importance to Soviet educators was the fact that the American
instruction methods promised to teach the students how to combine indi-
vidual and collective work in an optimal fashion. They would further allow
communication to the students a comprehensive knowledge of the world,
and would teach them to organize their work and to acquire knowledge by
themselves.”* To the Soviet educators, these appeared to be useful—if not
indispensable—qualifications for every Soviet citizen.
    Thus, Krupskaia wrote in her preface to the Russian translation of Eve-
lyne Dewey’s book The Dalton Laboratory Plan (1923): “Us Russians are
poor at working according to plan, at assessing material conditions... All —
of this, we will yet have to learn in order to build a new life. The Dalton
Plan teaches us to work systematically, to assess our time, forces, and pos-
sibilities. At this moment, it is of utmost importance to teach our children
... to organize their work. In this respect, the Dalton Plan can be very help-
ful. It ought to be thoroughly studied.””* Another Soviet educator, M. M.
Rubinstein, argued in a similar vein: “The development of people’s ability
to learn for themselves is of extraordinary relevance in Russia. The Russian
workers and farmers who have come into power and have taken on the task
of building a new state must now cope with their positions as leaders.””5
The Dalton Plan and the Project Method were supposed to optimally foster
the qualifications necessary for this task.*
    For Pinkevich, the Dalton Plan had additional advantages: It “eliminates
passive class compounds . . . it gives the pupil an overview of the entire work
that has to be done; it allows the pupil to choose his tasks by himself . . . does
away with coercion and offers the pupil a lot of free space . . . improves the
work of the school, making it more flexible; provides optimal conditions for

[p. 185] [PDF page 203]

the collaboration of teachers and students.” “It must be acknowledged that
the Dalton Plan answers the demands for childlike activity, motor functions,
and dynamism.””’ Therefore, in addition to the work principle, the Dalton
Plan or the Laboratory Method should be “part of the fundamental elements
of the productive socialist school.”’”* Krupskaia” writes that it is only by
means of such methods of instruction that a new school can be established
which “is radically different from the old school with its military discipline,
its oppression of personality, and its mechanical instruction.”
    Despite the almost unanimous endorsement of these “American” instruc-
tion methods, the Soviet educators critically asked to what extent the new
approaches to didactic method could be implemented in Soviet schools.
Pinkevich*® pointed out the difficulties of implementing the Dalton Plan and
the Project Method “in the poor material conditions of the Soviet school.”
Furthermore, in implementing the American instruction methods, several
changes were proposed stressing the political intentions of the Soviet state.
Thus, Pinkevich asked to consider the “danger that these new methods
might overly foster the students’ individualistic character traits.”*' For this
reason, he recommended to implement both the Dalton Plan and the Project
Method in Russia with greater control over the students and their activities.
In addition, collective work was to be accorded more space than it had been
assigned by the American educators. Rubinstein** also demanded to adapt
the Dalton Plan to Russian conditions. The Dalton Plan, he wrote, has to be
seen in the context of the Russian mass school, otherwise it makes no sense
to implement it. All in all then, although the leading Soviet educators were
in favor of adopting the Dalton Plan and the Project Method in Russia, this
was to happen in a critical reflective way and in a form adapted to Russian
conditions and political goals.
   The approaches to didactic method developed in accordance with Dew-
ey’s educational theory were not only discussed by Russian educational
theorists, but were also considered in several documents on educational
policy issued by the Soviet Ministry for Education. In 1923, the National
Council of Scholars (Gosudarstvennyi uchyonyi sovet [GUS]), or rather its
educational section headed by Krupskaia, published new curricula for the
production school, later to be termed the “Complex Program” |Kompleks-
naia Programma]. The experiences made at the leading reform schools
(e.g., the experimental schools at Shatursk and Gaginsk) were largely taken
into account in these curricula.** The proposals for the curricula were then
extensively discussed in numerous educational institutions of the Soviet
republics and at several educational congresses, before they were passed
by the Ministry for Education.** Thus, they reflected not only the experi-
ences of the Russian experimental schools, but also the results of the debate
around progressive education. Consequently, they represented no less than
a blend of Marxist doctrine and the essential ideas of Russian and interna-
tional progressive education.*°
    The new curricula were characterized by three central ideas: “productive work
as the center around which all other material is arranged, integrated courses

[p. 186] [PDF page 204]

[called “complexes”], and an education that is relevant to the present day.”* It
was in accordance with these guidelines, that the teaching materials were chosen
and arranged for each grade. On the one hand, these were divided in terms of
subject matter, according to Marxist doctrine, into the three fields nature, work,
and society; on the other hand, they were arranged into various “complex sub-
jects” according to the educational idea of interdisciplinary instruction.*”
    The development of the new curricula took place in collaboration with
many leading Soviet educators who were also active recipients of Dewey’s
theory (e.g., Krupskaia, Blonskii, Shatskii, Shul’gin, and Pinkevich). The
new curricula’s relation to Dewey’s educational ideas and the approaches
to didactic method based upon them were emphasized by several writers
at the time.*® Moreover, the American approaches recommended by the
supreme authorities for educational policy were actively used in the prac-
tice of the Soviet school in the first part of the 1920s, as is documented
in numerous    articles in the Soviet educational    literature.*? At this time,
Dewey’s influence on Soviet educational policy and school life could no lon-
ger be overlooked. Apparently, the “bourgeois” origin of these approaches
was not yet seen as an impediment to their use in the Soviet mass school.
However, this was to change dramatically in the second part of the 1920s,
as described in the next section.


The School at the Service of the Bolshevist Party:
The Rejection of Dewey’s Pedagogy
With the “intensification of the class struggle” and the increasing control
over the school by the Bolshevist Party—especially since 1928—political and
ideological criteria began to dominate the assessment of educational ideas.
Since Dewey’s educational theory did not consider such Marxist-Leninist
principles as the class struggle or the dictatorship of the proletariat, he was
increasingly criticized since the mid-1920s. Interestingly, this criticism was in
part voiced by the same educators who, at the beginning of the 1920s, had
actively advocated the adoption of his ideas in Soviet Russia.
   After 1925, Shul’gin, Kamenev, and Pinkevich in particular became
increasingly critical of Dewey’s theory. The central point of their criticism
was that Dewey had failed to set up concrete educational goals,”° for Dewey
did not provide an answer to the question that was then of primary interest to
Marxist educators, namely for which social class he wanted to educate young
people. The only issue that was important for Dewey, Pinkevich and Shul’gin
said, was to create an environment that would foster the child’s growth.”
This was at odds with the views of the Soviet educators, for to them “the
tasks dictated by the state come first; only second come the particulars of
the child’s development.””* In the view of these Marxist educators, Dewey
had evaded the issue of class struggle. Kamenev”® criticized Dewey for not
wanting to change the existing social system. Shul’gin wrote that Dewey was
only interested in resolving social conflict, “quenching class consciousness,
justifying democracy, adjusting school to the existing bougeois society .. . In

[p. 187] [PDF page 205]

doing so he betrays young working people, wants to separate them from the
working class they belong to.”°* “He wants to raise obedient workers, who
love the bourgeoisie and at the same time believe in the social utility of their
work.”” Pinkevich wrote, “Dewey wants to reconcile the working class with
their oppressed situation. The Communist Manifesto said of such democrats
and socialists: They demand of workers to continue to live in bourgeois soci-
ety, but to stop hating this society.”°* From this type of criticism it was only
a small step to claiming, “Dewey’s philosophy . . . is addressed to the past, it
has no future . . Dewey’s education is the education of imperialism.”””
    The position of these Marxist educators on the question of educational
goals was expressed with particular clarity by Shul’gin:

    “It is a matter of fact that there are always educational goals. So we
    should not argue over whether or not we are allowed to set educational
    goals, but over which goals we ought to set up for school. I believe,
    dear Comrades, it is now more important than ever to talk about edu-
    cational goals ... We have to prepare the young people, who are going
    to replace our generation . . . children shall participate in work... on
    behalf of . . . the adult organizations . . . the children shall get into
    closer contact with the class of workers and farmers, adopt their ideol-
    ogy ... We must raise fighters for the ideals of the working class . . .
    and builders of the new society. This will be our job.””8

   Sharp criticism was also directed at the approaches to didactic method
developed on the basis of Dewey’s educational theory—the Dalton Plan
and the Project Method. Welcomed by the Soviet educators at the begin-
ning of the 1920s, the Dalton Plan and the Project Method were now said
to be nothing more than an improved version of “passive book education;”
they do not lead to the formation of a collective, but to the development
of a competitive spirit. The imitation of these approaches would mean to
cultivate the school of the bourgeoisie in Soviet Russia.”
    Retrospectively, it can be said that the Soviet critics misunderstood what
was in fact a revolutionary idea in Dewey’s educational thinking. For by
refusing to formulate pre-determined educational goals and by stating that
“the educational process has no purpose outside of itself,”!°° Dewey offered
a solution to the fundamental dilemma of educational theory—a solution
that was both simple and ingenious: Dewey rejects both the idea of an
absolutely free “development” and the idea of “preparation” or “influence”
which is largely inconsiderate of the child’s experience.'"' Dewey does not
want to educate a “useful” citizen who will guarantee the maintenance of
a particular state system. He does not define any ultimate educational goal
that has to be realized in the process of education. For Dewey, the only
thing that counts is the continuous accumulation of learning episodes and
reconstructable experiences.'*
   This revolutionary idea of Dewey’s was incompatible with the concepts
of the Soviet educators. For, contrary to Dewey, their educational objectives

[p. 188] [PDF page 206]

were not oriented at the individual, but at the political interests of the Com-
munist Party. They put the interests of the state above the interests of the
individual and the school in the service of the state, whereas Dewey was
opposed precisely to any such instrumentalization of education. Hence,
Dewey could not serve these interests of the Bolshevist party. For this rea-
son, he was eliminated from the school political discussion in Soviet Russia
at the end of the 1920s.


CONCLUSION

The Russian reception of Dewey’s educational ideas started out relatively
late. Partly, this may have been due to the difficulties of communication
with distant America. What was probably more important, however, was
the dominant tradition of reception of educational ideas before 1917 that
was primarily oriented towards German models. In pre-socialist Russia,
Dewey’s impact was mainly on the advocates of “Free Education” and the
supporters of “realistic”’education. In the end, Dewey’s educational ideas
even found their way into the school reform plans of the Russian Ministry
for Education and Cultural Affairs. In this way Dewey, despite his (quan-
titatively speaking) less extensive reception, became at least as important
for the Russian school system as the most popular Western educator in pre-
socialist Russia, Georg Kerschensteiner.
    The eve of the Socialist October Revolution saw the emergence a new
trend in the reception of foreign educational ideas in Russia. The Russian
advocates of reform turned increasingly away from Western European
educational models, specifically German ones, and towards American
educational ideas, specifically those of Dewey. For the Russian progres-
sive educators, Dewey’s approach simultaneously combined various
demands of reform and avoided many of the faults of progressive educa-_
tors from Western Europe. However, this turn to Dewey had also political
reasons: Germany had been at war with Russia since 1914. This had also
a cooling effect on German-Russian educational relations. Contrariwise,
not only was there no war against America; but the United States with
their democratic society and their by and large democratically organized
school system aroused increasing interest in Russia—a country of grow-
ing social conflict moving towards a social revolution—as a model to be
emulated. The reception of Dewey’s educational ideas certainly benefitted
from these developments.
      In Soviet Russia, the reception of Dewey’s    works   saw   an enormous
upswing. In the first half of the 1920s, Dewey’s approach was extensively
studied by the leading state educators in Russia and was incorporated
into the development of the Soviet production school. Both Dewey’s edu-
cational theory and the approaches to didactic method developed in its
wake came to be reflected in the curricula of the Soviet Ministry for Edu-
cation and were applied in practice in the Soviet mass school. This was,

[p. 189] [PDF page 207]

on the one hand, due to the fact that, of all approaches to educational
reform, Dewey’s pragmatic education corresponded best to the ideas of
Marxism.    On the other hand, however, it was also due to Dewey’s well-
reasoned pedagogy as such. Finally, it was also due to the influence of
liberal Soviet educators and Russia’s leading educational administrators,
who—mostly for pragmatic reasons—promoted the reception and adop-
tion of international progressive education.
    With the intensification of the dictatorship of the Bolshevist Party in all
spheres of cultural life, Dewey’s educational approach came increasingly
under attack. What was criticized were not so much the specific contents of
his educational theory, but primarily its lack of political intention. Dewey’s
pedagogy could not support the ideas of class struggle, of the dictatorship
of the proletariat, and of communism, that were dear to the Soviet educa-
tors. For Dewey’s approach is centered on the individual and his or her
autonomy, rather than on the interest of a state or a political movement.
    Furthermore, Dewey and his Soviet critics had a very different under-
standing of the relation of means and ends. Surely, one of the most con-
spicuous traits of the social experiment in Soviet Russia was the huge
discrepancy that emerged between the high aims of the new rulers and the
methods they used to achieve them. The goal was to build a socialist—and
that implied a just—society, yet one tried to reach this goal by authoritar-
ian and inhumane means. This peculiarity of the social development in
Soviet Russia also strongly influenced the school political activities there,
and hence Dewey’s reception. Whereas for Dewey, freedom was both the
end and the means of social change,'” the Bolshevists wanted to enforce the
idea of social freedom by authoritarian means—even in school. Thereby,
the idea of social freedom became discredited. The educational ideas of
John Dewey fit badly with the educational system of a totalitarian state.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This chapter is dedicated to the memory of my father, Yuri Mchitarjan.


NOTES

    1. This article was originally published in Studies in Philosophy and Educa-
       tion 19, 2000: 109-31. Reprinted with kind permission from Springer
       Science+Business Media B.V.
   2. W. Klafki, “Die Aktualitat der Padagogik von John Dewey [The Continu-
       ing Relevance of Dewey’s Education],” Zeitschrift fur Padagogik 24 (1978):
       781.
   3. For example B.B. Komarovskii, Pedagogika Dewey [Dewey's Education,
       Part I, (Baku: n. publ. 1926).
   4. Whereas the reception process, i.e. the articles and contributions of Russian
       authors on Dewey and his educational ideas in period between 1900 and
       1930, can be reconstructed from the original sources, the reasons for and the

[p. 190] [PDF page 208]

significance of this reception can only be analyzed against the background of
          the overall social and school political development in Russia. This broader
          context has been reconstructed here on the basis of the extant secondary
          sources.
        _KPSS v rezoliutsiiakh s-ezdov, konferentsii i plenumov TsK, [The Commu-
          nist Party of the USSR in Congresses, Conferences, and Plenary Sessions of
          the Central Comittee], Vol. 2, (Moscow, 1954): 465.
        _L. Froese, Ideengeschichtliche Triebkrafte der russischen und sowjetischen
          Padagogik [Intellectual Springs of Russian and Soviet Pedagogy] (Heidel-
          berg: Quelle & Meyer, 1963), 196.
        . Cf. W.H.E. Johnson, Russia’s Educational Heritage (New York: Ostagon
          Books, 1969), 173 passim.
        Cf Ibid., 196.
     (oe)
    . N.A. Konstantinov, Ocherki po istorii srednet shkoly [Sketches on the His-
      tory of the High School] (Moscow: Uchpedgiz, 1947), 48.
10. See, for more detail, I. Mchitarjan, Der russische Blick auf die deutsche
      Reformpddagogik. Zur Rezeption deutscher Schulreformideen in Rufland
      zwischen 1900 und 1917 [The Russian View of German Progressive Educa-
      tion. The Reception of German Ideas on Progressive Education in Russia
      between 1900 and 1917] (Hamburg: Kovac, 1998).
ial, See for example, K.N. Ventsel’, Kak sozdat’ svobodnuiu shkolu (Dom svo-
      bodnogo rebyonka) [How to Found a Free School (House ofthe Free Child)]
      (Moscow: I. N. Kushnerev i K°, 1908); N.V. Chekhov, Svobodnaia shkola.
      Opyt organizatsti shkoly novogo tipa [A Free School: The Experience of
      Organizing aNew Type of High School] (Moscow: I. D. Sytin, 1907); Otchet
      o deiatel’nosti pedagogicheskogo obschestva [Report on the Activities of the
      Pedagogical Society] (Moscow: n.publ., 1899).
We, Cf. E.D. Medynskii, Istoriia russkoi pedagogiki do Velikoi Oktiabr’skoi
      sotsialisticheskoi revoliutsti [History of Russian Education up to the Great
      Socialist October Revolution]. (Moscow: Gosuchpedgiz Narkomprosa
      RSFSR, 1938), 377 passim, 381; see also “Reforma srednei shkoly [The
      Reform of the High School],” (author unknown), Russkaia shkola [Russian
             School] 5/6 (1915).
 iS Cf. P.F. Kapterev, “Organizatsiia avtonomnoi shkoly [Organization of the
    Autonomous School],” Pedagogicheskaia mysl’ [Pedagogical Thought] 9-12 .
             (1918).
 14. Cf. A.P. Pinkevich, Pedagogika. Trudovaia shkola [Pedagogy. The Produc-
             tion School] Part 2 (Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1925); A.P. Pinkevich,
              Kratkii ocherk istorii pedagogtki [A Short Sketch of the History of Pedagogy]
              (Charkov: Proletarti, 1930); V.N. Shul’gin, Osstovnye voprosy sotsial’nogo
              vospitantia [The Main Questions of Social Education| (Moscow: Rabotnik
              Prosvescheniia, 1925); S.A. Kamenev, Sovetskaia trudovaia shkola [The Soviet
              Production School] (Rostov-na-Donu: Sevkavkniga, 1925).
            . See, for example, K.N. Ventsel’, Otdelenie shkoly ot gosudarstva [The Sep-
              aration of School and State],” Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 6
             (1916/17) and K.N. Ventsel’, “Sovremennyi moment i svobodnoe vospitanie
             [The Current Moment and Free Education],” Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free
     Education] 1-3 (1918).
 16. See, for example, Pinkevich, Pedagogika. Trudovaia shkola, 84-88.
 17 See Chekhov, Svobodnaia shkola; Mchitarjan, Der russische Blick auf die
     deutsche Reformpadagogik; S.T. Shatskii, “Detskii trud i novye puti [Child
     Labour and new Approaches],” Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 6
     (1907/08); S.T. Shatskii, A.U. Zelenko, and N.J. Kazimirov, “Deti—rabot-
     niki buduschego [Children—Working People of Tomorrow],” (Moscow:

[p. 191] [PDF page 209]

n.publ., 1908); K.N. Ventsel’, Bor’ba za svobodnuiu shkolu [The Struggle
    for a Free School], (Moscow: A. P. Pechkovskogo, 1906).
18. Cf. Mchitarjan, Der russische Blick auf die deutsche Reformpddagogik.
19: Cf. e.g. Ventsel’, Kak sozdat’ svobodnuiu shkolu; Shatskii et al. Deti—rabot-
    niki buduschego.
20. K.N. Ventsel’, “Ideal’naia shkola buduschego i sposoby ee osuschestvleniia
    [The Ideal School of the Future and the Means for its Realization],” Svobod-
    noe vospitante [Free Education] 8 (1908/1909): 1-28; 9 (1908/1909): 19-44.
Zi; K.N. Ventsel’, Fond [archival fond]) 23, op. (opis [file]) 1, ed. khr. (edinitsa
    khraneniia [depository]) 13: The personal archive of K. N. Ventsel’, including
    the memoirs of his work of 1912-1915, (Moscow: Scientific Archive of the
    Russian Acadamy of Education [SARAE]).
een Ibid.
23. S.T. Shatskii, 1928 in S. T. Schatzkij: Ausgewahlte padagogische Schriften
    [S. T. Shatskit: Selected Educational Writings], eds. 1. Riittenauer, and B.
    Schiff (Heidelberg: Quelle & Meyer, 1970), 386.
24. Ibid.
DSr F. Gansberg, “Nauka v narodnoi shkole [Science in Elementary School],”
    translated by V. Koshevich, Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 8
    (1907/08); F. Gansberg, “Shkola buduschego [School of Tomorrow],” trans-
    lated by V. Koshevich, Svobodnoe vospitanie |Free Education] 1 (1915/16);
    A. Pabst, “Prakticheskoe vospitanie [Practical Education],” translated by V.
    Koshevich, Svobodnoe vospitante [Free Education] 1 (1909/10).
26. P. Sokolov, Istoriia pedagogicheskikh sistem [History of Pedagogical Sys-
    tems] (St. Petersburg: O. V. Bogdanova, 1913), 589 passim.
Pia Cf. S.A. Levitin, “Trudovaia shkola—shkola buduschego [The Production
    school—School of the Future],” Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Education] 4
    (1912/13): 27 passim; cf. S.A. Levitin, Trudovaia shkola—shkola buduschego
    [The Production School—School of the Future] (Moscow: Prakticheskie
    znaniia, 1916).
28. The All-Russian Congress for National Education, organized by the Com-
      mittee for Elementary Education, was attended by 6500 educators (cf. E.D.
      Medynskii, “Pedagogicheskie techeniia v Rossii kontsa 19—nachala 20 veka
       [The Educational Trends in Russia at the End of the 19th and the Beginning of
      the 20th Century],” in Pedagogicheskaia Entsiklopedua |Pedagogical Enzyk-
      lopaedia, Vol. 1, ed. A.G. Kalashnikov (Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia,
       1927), 394; Medynskii, Istoriia russkot pedagogtki, 441 passim; Dnevnik per-
      vogo Vserossiiskogo s-ezda po voprosam narodnogo obrazovaniia [Journal of
      the First All-Russian Congress on National Education] (St. Petersburg: Ulei,
       1913). The congress, which was presided over by the state educator Mamon-
      tov, turned increasingly into a forum for the progressive educational move-
      ment. It was constantly in danger of being dissolved by the government.
2 S.A. Levitin, “Trudovoi printsip vospitaniia. Doklady, chitannye na Vserossi-
      iskom s-ezde po narodnomu obrazovaniiu [The Work Principle. Lectures Held
      at the First Congress on National Education],” Svobodnoe vospitante [Free
      Education] 3 (1914/15); see also Dnevnik pervogo Vserosstiskogo; Doklady,
      preniia i postanovleniia vtorot sektsti Pervogo Vserossitskogo s-ezda po vop-
      rosam narodnogo obrazovaniia [Lectures, Discussions and Resolutions of
      the Second Section of the First All-Russian Congress on National Educa-
      tion], (Petrograd: n.publ., 1915).
50: Doklady, preniia i postanovleniia vtoroi sektstt Pervogo Vserosstiskogo, 46
      and 51.
Silk Ibid., 78.
    . Ibid.

[p. 192] [PDF page 210]

thee     Irina Mchitarjan
       _ Ibid.; Levitin “Trudovoi   printsip vospitaniia;”   S.A. Levitin, “Trudovaia
         shkola i professionalizm [Production School and Professionalism],” Russkata
         shkola [Russian School] 4 (1915).
       . Rezoliutsiia Pervogo Vserossiiskogo s-ezda po voprosam narodnogo obra-
         zovaniia s 22 dekabria 1913 po 3 ianvaria 1914 goda [Resolution ofthe First
         All-Russian Congress on National Education from December 22, 1913
         through January 3, 1914], (St. Petersburg: Kommercheskaia skoropechatnia,
        1914): 19.
       . Konstantinov, Ocherki po istorii srednei shkoly, 188.
       . “Reforma srednei shkoly.”
       . Cf. Ignatiev in P.N. Ignatiev, D.M. Odinetz, and P.J. Novgorotsev, Russian
         Schools and Universities in the World War (New Haven: Yale University
        Pressalo29) texas
       . Ibid.
     . See “Reforma srednei shkoly,” 78-85.
     . Cf. Mchitarjan, Der russische Blick auf die deutsche Reformpddagogtk.
     . In addition, excerpts from Dewey’s books The School and Society and
       Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Educa-
       tion were published in Mamotov’s Chrestomathy of Current Educational
       Trends. J. Mamontov, Khrestomatiia sovremennykh pedagogicheskikh tech-
       ent [Chrestomathy of Current Educational Trends], preface V. Arnautov
       (Ekaterinoslav: Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo Ukrainy, 1924).
  42. Cf. Polozhenie o edinot trudovoi shkole Rosstiskot Sotsialisticheskoi Fed-
       erativnoi Sovetskoi Respubliki [Decree on the Unified Production School
         of the Russian   Socialist Federal Soviet Republic],   (Moscow:   Vserossiiskii
       Tsentral’nyi Ispolnitel’nyi Komitet, Narkompros po Prosvescheniiu, 1918).
  43. J. Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung. Eine Einleitung in die philosophische
       Padagogik [Democracy and Education: An Introduction to the Philosophy
       of Education] (Weinheim/Basel: Beltz, 1993).
     . Pinkevich, Pedagogika. Trudovaia shkola, 48; cf. Pinkevich, Kratkit ocherk
       istort pedagogtki, 240.
     . Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung, 405 passim, 412 passim.
     . Cf. Klafki, “Die Aktualitat der Padagogik von John Dewey,” 789 passim; see
       also Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung, 406 and 408.
     . Pinkevich, Pedagogtka. Trudovaia shkola, 59; cf. also Pinkevich, Kratkii.
       ocherk istortt pedagogiki, 239 passim.
     . Ventsel’, “The personal archive of K. N. Ventsel’;” Levitin “Trudovaia shkola
       i professionalizm;” Ignatiev et al., Russian Schools and Universities in the
       World War.
     . Already before 1917, Krupskaia had studied the school systems and educational
       reform efforts in western Europe and North America. She had published articles
       on the issue in the most radical reform educational journal of pre-revolutionary
       Russia, Free Education, in which she expressed her great appreciation for the
         Russian movement of reform education, particularly Tolstoi’s educational ideas,
      although on some points she was very critical of his teachings.
  50. N.K. Krupskaia, Soztalistische Padagogik [Socialist Education] Vol. 1 (Ber-
         lin: Volk und Wissen, 1919 in 1972), 331 passim; Pervyi Vserosstiskti s-ezd
     po prosvescheniiu. Zasedanie 26-go avgusta 1918, n. d.:1-S.
  Sk A. Fortunatov, “Bor’ba za trudovoi printsip v Zapadnoi Evrope i Amerike
     [The Struggle for the Work Principle in Western Europe and the US],” in Tru-
     dovatia shkola v svete istorti 1 sovremennosti [The Production School in the
     Past and in the Present], ed. M.M. Rubinstein (Leningrad: Seiatel’, 1925),
         64; Shatskii 1928, in Riittenauer and Schiff, §. T. Schatzkij: Ausgewdablte

[p. 193] [PDF page 211]

padagogische Schriften, 386 passim; A.V. Lunacharskii, Na novykh putiakh
    [Breaking New Ground] (Samara: Gubizdat, 1924), 6.
SY, Shatskii 1918, in Ritttenauer and Schiff, S. T. Schatzkij: Ausgewahlte padago-
    gische Schriften, 264; cf. S.A. Zolotarev, A.V. Golubev, and S.T. Shatskii, Tru-
    Aegs shkola |The Production School] (Moscow: K. L. Men’schova, 1918).
53s Ibid.
54. Shatskii, in Dewey, Vvedenie v filosofiiu vospitaniia [Democracy and Edu-
    cation: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education], preface by S. T.
    Shatskii, (Moscow:   Rabotnik Prosvescheniia,     1921), 6; cf. A. Gerit and A.
    Gotalov-Gottlieb, Sovremennye pedagogicheskie techeniia [|Current Trends
     in Education] (Cherson: Gosudarstvennoe izdatel’stvo Ukrainy, 1925), 89.
Syke A. Fortunatov, Teoriia trudovoi shkoly v ee istoricheskom razvitii [The The-
     ory of the Production School in its Historical Development], Part 1 (Mos-
     cow: Mir, 1926), 13.
56. Pinkevich, Kratkii ocherk istorii pedagogiki, 204 passim.
Dif. Pinkevich, Pedagogtka. Trudovaia shkola, 64; cf. V.N. Shulgin, “Detskaia
     Kommuna [The Children’s Commune],” Narodnoe Prosveschenie [National
     Education| 23-25 (1918): 6 and V.N. Shul’gin, “Shkoly buduschego [Schools
     of Tomorrow] by J. Dewey & E. Dewey,” Svobodnoe vospitanie [Free Edu-
    cation] 19 (1918): 15 passim.
58. Cf. Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung, 409.
SY). Krupskaia, Sozialistische Padagogik, 331; cf. P.P. Blonskii, Pedagogika
     [Pedagogy] (Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1924), 127; Fortunatov,
     Teortia trudovoi shkoly v ee istoricheskom razvitii, 13; Fortunatov, “Bor’ba
     za trudovoi printsip v Zapadnoi Evrope i Amerike,” 73; Shatskii 1922, in
     Ruttenauer and Schiff, S. T. Schatzkij: Ausgewahlte padagogische Schriften,
    283.
  . Cf. Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung, 75.
  . Fortunatov, “Bor’ba za trudovoi printsip v Zapadnoi Evrope i Amerike,” 73
    passim; cf. Shatskii, in Dewey, Vvedente v filosofitu vospitaniia, 5.
  . Shatskii, in Dewey, Vvedenie v filosofiiu vospitaniia, 5.
  . Ibid.
  . Ibid.
  . Ibid.
  . Ibid.
  . J. Dewey and E. Dewey, Shkoly buduschego [Schools of Tomorrow], trans.
    R. Langsberg, (Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1922).
  . Gerit and Gotalov-Gottlieb, Sovremennye pedagogicheskie techeniia, 208.
  . Blonskii 1918, in P.P. Blonskii, Die Arbeitsschule [The Production School]
    (Paderborn: Sch6ningh, 1973), 138.
  _ PP. Blonskii, Novye programmy GUS’a i uchitel’ [New Programs of the
    National Counsel of Scholars, and the Teacher| (Moscow: Rabotnik Prosve-
    scheniia, 1925), 4.
  . Lunacharskii 1927, in A.V. Lunacharskii, “Die Ziele der Sowjetschule [Goals
    of the Soviet School],” in Kommission fiir deutsche Erziehungs- und Schulge-
    schichte der Akademie der Padagogischen Wissenschaften der DDR (ed.),
    Monumenta Paedagogica. Dokumente und Materialien zu den deutsch-
    sowjetischen Beziehungen auf bildungspolitischem und pddagogtschem
    Gebiet 1917--1933 [Monumenta Paedagogica. Documents and materials
    concerning German-Soviet relations in the areas of educational policy and
    pedagogy, 1917--1933], vol. XXII (Berlin: Volk und Wissen, 1984), 213;
   cf. Polozhenie 0 edinoi trudovoi shkole Rossiiskoi Sotstalisticheskot Federa-
   tivnoi Sovetskot Respubliki, S.

[p. 194] [PDF page 212]

Ve In E. Dewey, Dal’tonskii laboratornyi plan [The Dalton Laboratory
    Plan], trans. R. Langsberg, preface N. K. Krupskaia, (Moscow: Novaia
    Moskva,1923), 8.
We Cf. Krupskaia, in E. Dewey, Dal’tonskit laboratornyi plan, 11 passim; N.K.
    Krupskaia, “Evelyne Dewey. Dal’tonskii plan laboratornoi raboty v shkole.
    Helen Parkhurst. Vospitanie pri pomoschi Dal’tonskogo plana [Evelyn
    Dewey. The Dalton Laboratory Plan. Helen Parkhurst. Education on the
    Dalton Plan],” Na putiakh k novoi shkole [Towards the New School] 2-3
    (1922); M.M. Rubinstein, “Dal’tonskii plan i trudovaia shkola [Dalton Plan
    and the Producation School],” in Trudovaia shkola v svete tstortt 1sovremen-
    nosti, ed. Rubenstein, 191 passim; Pinkevich Pedagogika. Trudovaia shkola,
    117 and 191 passim.
  . Krupskaia, in E. Dewey, Dal’tonskit laboratornyt plan, 11 passim; Krup-
    skaia, “Evelyne Dewey,” 165.
  . Rubinstein, “Dal’tonskii plan i trudovaia shkola,” 193.
  . Pinkevich, Pedagogika. Trudovaia shkola, 119 passim.
       Ibid., 123.
      . Ibid.
      . N.K. Krupskaia, “Metod proektov v politprosvetrabote [The Project Method
         in Political Education],” Kommunisticheskoe Prosveschenie [Communist
         Education| 3, no. 9 (1923): 7 passim.
       . Pinkevich, Pedagogika. Trudovaia shkola, 120.
       . Ibid., 121 passim.
       . Rubinstein, “Dal’tonskii plan i trudovaia shkola”, 182, 196 passim, 199
         passim.
     3. Cf. Blonskii, Novye programmy GUSa i uchitel’, 8; V.O. Pal’chinskii, Pro-
         tiv kompleksnoi sistemy 1 0 metodach prepodavantia voobsche [Against
         the Complex System and on Instructional Methods in General], (Odessa:
         Kabinet NOT pri sektsii gigieny Odesskoi nauchno-issledovatel’skoi kafedry
         profelakticheskoi meditsiny, 1928): 100.
       . Cf. Blonskii, Novye programmy GUS'a 1 uchitel’, 7 passim.
      . Ibid., 3-12.
      . Krupskaia, quoted from O. Anweiler, Geschichte der Schule und Padagogik
        in Rufland vom Ende des Zarenreiches bis zum Beginn der Stalin-Ara [His-
        tory of Education and School in Russia from the end of the Zarist Empure .
     to the beginning of the Stalin Era] (Berlin: Osteuropa-Institut, 1978), 263
     passim.
 87. Cf. Ibid., 264; Blonskii, Novye programmy GUS‘a 1 uchitel’, 7 passim.
 88. Cf. B.V. Ignatiev, Dal’tonplan i noveishie techentia russkoi pedagogicheskoi
     mysli [The Dalton Plan and the Newest Educational Trends in Russia,
        (Moscow: Mir, 1925), 11; Zakozhurnikova, in ibid., 145-50; Blonskii, Novye
       programmy GUS‘a i uchitel’, 3-12; Merzon, “Opyt primeneniia Dal’ton-
       plana v trudovoi shkole [Using the Dalton Plan in the Production School],”
       Narodnoe Prosveschente [National Education] 10/11 (1925): 129 passim; L.
       Levin, Novye puti shkol’not raboty (metod proektov) [New Ways in School
        Work (The Project Method)|, (Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1925), 87;
       Pal’chinskti, Protiv kompleksnoi sistemy t 0 metodach prepodavaniia voob-
       sche, 117; Rubinstein, “Daltonskii plan i trudovaia shkola,” 201.
 89. L.V. Moiseev, and M.A. Beskin, Daktonplan v shkolach uchenichestva.
     Opyt raboty Moskovskoi shkoly uchenichestva [The Dalton Plan in Appren-
     tice Schools. Work Experience in the Moscow Apprentice School] (Mos-
       cow: Transpechat NKPS, 1927); I. Finkel, Dal’tonplan v shkole fabzavucha:
        Sborntk statei i materialov [The Dalton Plan in Factory Schools. A Col-
        lection of Articles and Materials] (Moscow: Novaia Moskva, 1925); L.A.

[p. 195] [PDF page 213]

Gentsov, A.I. Dzens-Litovskii, and N.V. Kazmin, Dal’tonplan na rabfake
  [The Dalton Plan at Workers’ Faculties] (Leningrad: Priboi, 1925); V.N.
  Shul’gin, “Obschestvennaia rabota v shkole [Public Work in School],” Naro-
  dnoe Prosveschente [National Education] 10/11 (1925); S.T. Shatskii, “Opyt
  primeneniia programm GUS v shkolach pervoi stupeni [The Application of
  the GUS-Programs in Primary Schools],” Narodnoe Prosveschenie [National
  Education] 10/11 (1925); Ignatiev, Dal’tonplan i noveishie techenia russkoi
  pedagogicheskoi mysli; Levin, Novye puti shkol’noi raboty; Pal’chinskii, Pro-
  tiv kompleksnoi sistemy 1 o metodach prepodavantiia voobsche; Krupskaia,
  “Evelyne Dewey;” Krupskaia, “Metod proektov v politprosvetrabote;” I.S.
  Simonov, and N.V. Chekhov, Dal’tonplan v russkoi shkole [The Daltan Plan
  in the Russian School] (Leningrad: Brockhaus-Ethron, 1924).
. Shulgin, Osnovnye voprosy sotstal’nogo vospitantia, 15 passim.
. Pinkevich, Kratkit ocherk istorii pedagogtk1, 241; see also Shul’gin, Osnovnye
  voprosy sotsial’nogo vospitaniia, 16.
. Kamenev, Sovetskaia trudovaia shkola, 334.
. Ibid., 134.
. Shul’gin, Osnounye voprosy sotstal’nogo vospitaniia, 106 passim.
. Kamenev, Sovetskata trudovatia shkola, 118.
. Pinkevich, Pedagogika. Trudovaia shkola, 60.
. Shul’gin, Osnouvnye voprosy sotstal’nogo vospitantia, 110 passim; cf.
  E.D. Medynskii, Istoria pedagogiki v sviazi s ekonomicheskim razvitiem
  obschestva [History of Pedagogy in Relation to Economic Social Develop-
  ment] vol. 2 (Moscow: Rabotnik Prosvescheniia, 1929), 320 passim; Pinkev-
  ich, Kratkit ocherk istorii pedagogtki, 241.
. Shul’gin, Osnounye voprosy sotsial’nogo vospitantia, 18-25.
. Cf. Kamenev, Sovetskaia trudovaia shkola, 337 passim.
. Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung, 75.
. Cf. ibid., 75-113, 147; Oelkers, in ibid., 504.
. Cf. Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung, 108, 137.
. Cf. ibid., 137-51; F. Bohnsack, Erziehung zur Demokratie. John Dewey’s
  Padagogik und ihre Bedeutung fiir die Reform unserer Schule [Education
  for Democracy. John Dewey’s Pedagogy and its Relevance for the Reform
  of our Schools] (Ravensburg: Otto Maier, 1976), 402.
