The Global Reception of John Dewey's Thought: Multiple Refractions Through Time and Space
Edited by Rosa Bruno-Jofré and Jürgen Schriewer | 2012 | Routledge

Part IV
Chapter 9: A “New Republic”? The Debate between John Dewey and Walter Lippmann and Its Reception in Pre- and Postwar Germany
Norbert Grube
Original print pages 196–214; PDF pages 214–232

[Extracted from the supplied scanned PDF OCR layer. Print page markers are mapped against the contents and chapter opening pages. Original line breaks are retained. OCR spelling and note-number errors may remain; verify exact quotations against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, including original notes
========================================================================

[p. 196] [PDF page 214]

9     A “New Republic”?
      The Debate between John Dewey and
      Walter Lippmann and Its Reception
      in Pre- and Postwar Germany
      Norbert Grube




Today the “Program for International Student Assessment”     (PISA) can be
partially traced back to American pragmatism and John Dewey, because
the application of knowledge and skills that are learned at school dominate
this test. Whether or not this estimation is true,' the discussion about it
reveals that the long-lasting ignorance of American pragmatism by Ger-
man pedagogues has faded away. But were American intellectuals, with
bonds to pragmatism, really ignored in Germany in the decades since the
1920s? To answer this question, this chapter deals not only with the Ger-
man reception of John Dewey (1859-1952), especially after 1945, but also
with the reception of the well-known journalist, author, and public intel-
lectual Walter Lippmann (1889-1974) and their different concepts of pub-
lic education and people’s instruction. Many studies have recently focused
on the reception of Dewey in West Germany and I do not want to repeat
the illuminative findings of Hans Joas, Stefan Bittner, Georg Kamphausen,
Jiirgen Oelkers, or Daniel Trohler.* In fact, the comparison between Dewey —
and Lippmann shall throw new light upon the competition of two differ-
ent approaches of public education and their adjusted transformation into
the German context. But before I come to the point of reception in the
second half of this chapter, I first want to reconstruct both educational
concepts, and their assumptions about the public sphere and its role within
the process of political decision making. This chapter is situated between
communication theory, intellectual history, and history of education, dem-
onstrating the role that education and social sciences play in achieving a
sustainable relationship between government, state, and the people.
    Lippmann and Dewey both tackle the vitalization of old republican vir-
tues and ideals under the condition of a complex society formed by industri-
alization, global capitalist trade, technology, nationwide bureaucracy, and
mass media. The pragmatist philosopher especially, as it will be shown in
the first section, wanted to adopt the republican ideals of Thomas Jefferson
as an alternative to the paralyzed democracy of the 1920s. These aims were

[p. 197] [PDF page 215]

challenged and discussed by some scientific authors of the journal The New
Republic, founded in 1914, especially by its co-editor Walter Lippmann.’
Despite the debate with Lippmann, Dewey was an emulative author of sev-
eral articles in The New Republic.‘ This journal was a stage of the Dewey-
Lippmann debate, as well as a public platform of exchange for intellectuals
and experts as a kind of precondition for educating the people.
   In his article, “Insiders and Outsiders”, published in an early issue of The
New Republic, Lippmann presented basic statements about the relation-
ship between the political elite, the public, and the role of communication
experts. He picked up these statements in his books Public Opinion (1922)
and The Phantom Public (1925). Dewey’s critical review of The Phantom
Public in The New Republic’ was a kind of starting point for the book The
Public and its Problems (1927),° and many aspects of this study Dewey
explored in his book Freedom and Culture in 1939.’ Despite their contro-
versy, both looked for the improved mobilization of the American people
in favor of their nation, of social prosperity in the context of international
crises, and of American progressivism represented by President Woodrow
Wilson (1856-1924) in the first third of the twentieth century.*      The second
section argues, therefore, why it is not astonishing that they came to simi-
lar social-psychological diagnoses about decreasing engagements and the
ability of men to participate in political affairs. The third section illustrates
different conclusions: whereas Lippmann preferred governmental people’s
instruction by experts to restore national unity, Dewey wanted to restore
local communities based on common shared experiences, actions, tradi-
tions, and habits, and furthermore create the great community by public
education, application and improvement of social sciences.
   In the fourth section, I will focus on the historical context of The New
Republic and its role as a “journal of opinion” that aimed to form processes
of opinion, making it an instrument of people’s inducement similar to the
West German journals Der Monat (The Month) or Die politische Meinung
(Political Opinion) after 1945. Concentrating on its editors Herbert Croly
(1869-1930) and Walter Lippmann, I will show how the perception of totali-
tarian and especially fascist movements in Europe influenced their notions
of political leadership, mass society, and community. Referring to these per-
ceptions and having in mind Dewey’s praise of Bolshevism in 1928, I want
to stress that, on the one hand, some aspects of American pragmatism and
other American concepts of mass democracy were generated by observing
European, German, or even Russian social and political developments. On
the other hand, I will demonstrate in the fifth section that from the 1920s
onwards, German or European pedagogues and intellectuals did not only
devaluate the American mass society but thought that it would be worth-
while to observe and adapt partially American concepts of political lead-
ership and governmental people’s instruction. The last section offers some
answers to the following question: after 1945, did the American model of
mass democracy and people’s education become an ideal, and if so, how?

[p. 198] [PDF page 216]

JEFFERSON’S REPUBLICANISM AS AN OVERALL
CONCEPT FOR ANALYSES OF THE PRESENT

In the first and last sections of Freedom and Culture, Dewey elaborated on
the political philosophy of Thomas Jefferson. It seems that Jefferson was
the chief witness for Dewey’s attempt to renovate republican attitudes of
individual freedom and social engagement, local self-government, and to
strengthen democracy even in non-democratically ruled companies, corpo-
rations, bureaucracies, and even in the military. We can detect many hints
of harmonization and idealization in Dewey’s judgements of the past, and in
the era of American settlement and the foundation of the American Consti-
tution. The social philosopher did not have a very distinctive historical per-
spective on these matters. The period of early American settlement did not
serve as analyzing frame to Dewey but as a kind of ideal type of republican
government. To some extent, it seems as if Dewey created a historical myth
or a projection, because he stated that during the eighteenth century, in
rural areas of America, community was established by neighborly brother-
hoods with help available in cases of emergency, and both work and family
life were conducted entirely at home.’ Actions and their consequences were
perceptible because of the coincidence that both approved and traditional
experiences matched expectations.!° Within this social harmony, and given
the unity of thoughts and action, common perceptions of the consequences
of actions constituted the public sphere. But the complexity of the soci-
ety and the interdependency of actions increased. Therefore, competencies,
once in the hand of local communities, were delegated to the state admin-
istration. Governmental power increased and the dimension of bureau-
cratic organizations rose from the monarchic attempts of centralization in
the Middle Ages to the diversity of modern society.''! In his considerations
about the genesis and development of the state, Dewey was close to Norbert
Elias’ explanation of the concentration of power by the monarchic govern-_
ment in France in the early modern period (“K6nigsmechanismus”).'*
    Almost one hundred and fifty years later, rural community has faded
away. Dewey judged Jefferson’s warnings about the harmful effects of
unleashed international commerce and industry on a democratic commu-
nity as a visionary prediction.'’ In Dewey’s view, it was technological inno-
vation, economic dynamics, and global trade that caused social change. In
contrast to these impellent forces, the democratic system remained in its
earlier late- eighteenth-century state and could not cope with the challenges
of modernity.’ Similar to the English social psychologist and educator Gra-
ham Wallas (1858-1932), Dewey analyzed and lamented somewhat that
the value of approved traditional experiences of rural community (Wal-
las spoke of “stimuli”) as guidelines for common actions disappeared in
a complex society.'’ For example, whereas in ancient times citizens had
personal relationships with electoral candidates, by the beginning of the
twentieth century the voting system had become impersonal, abstract,

[p. 199] [PDF page 217]

and anonymous.      As a consequence, the interest and engagement in voting
decreased.'° Instead of directing or even creating social change, democracy
reacts to economic dynamics that influence the way people think. There-
fore, Dewey pled for the revitalization of the democratic mind and atti-
tudes and for their adjustment to the requirements of modernity. In this
point, Lippmann differed from Dewey. He referred to Jefferson too, and
to ancient political philosophers. But, in contrast to Dewey, he rejected
notions that Jefferson’s republicanism could be the example for democratic
and republican renovation. Lippmann noted that most of the ancient theo-
ries of democracy were based on the illusion of a peaceful world and rea-
sonable public opinion. But these assumptions contrasted with reality and
presented an “unattainable ideal”: “No sound scheme of civic education
can come of it.”'’ But whereas Lippmann and Dewey drew different con-
clusions from their references to ancient republicanism, they made similar
social and social-psychological diagnoses of its presence.


CONNECTIONS BETWEEN DEWEY’S “ECLIPSE OF
THE PUBLIC” AND LIPPMANN’S PHANTOM PUBLIC

John Dewey mostly confirmed in The Public and its Problems and espe-
cially in Freedom and Culture Walter Lippmann’s analysis about The Phan-
tom Public, although he had criticized Lippmann’s diagnosis as partially
superficial because it focused only on governmental techniques to restore
the relationship between public and government, instead of presenting solu-
tions to revitalize the democratic community.
    Concentrating on these differences,'* it has often been ignored that both
Dewey and Lippmann perceived the developments of their time, like the
growing mass society, urbanization, industrialization, immigration, poy-
erty, and prevalent uncertainties in cases of disease and unemployment, as
important for social cohesion.'’ In this perspective, the population became
a complex, anonymous crowd living in huge cities, not being able to par-
ticipate in urban affairs, working in big industrial companies, and being
exploited for economic growth.*° The duty of proprietors and entrepre-
neurs for common wealth and benefit faded away in the era of huge cor-
porations, where managers have been exempt from personal responsibility.
Vast mobility and the expansion of railway and subway, as well as the
automation of industrial production, accelerated life, challenged traditional
cultural habits, and threatened Jefferson’s republican ideal of face-to-face
community. The complexity of social relations and interdependencies, the
dependency of an unforeseeable economic boom and slump, had overbur-
dened traditional local self-government. Many human beings were excluded
from the benefits of technological inventions, from economic progress, and
from political participation. Lippmann and Dewey sketched a diverse soci-
ety at risk.   A new communication community or national community had

[p. 200] [PDF page 218]

not yet evolved despite—or better, because of—mass communication, the
rising of the mass press and radio based on huge news agencies, and the
invention of the telephone and telegraph.*! As a consequence of this decou-
pling of ownership and owner, of people and the government, of local,
personal environment and impersonal requests and expectations, the pow-
ers were more and more delegated from local community to the central
government, to the state administration and bureaucracy and its experts,
to circles of businessmen and unions, to special interest groups and associa-
tions. Because the governmental power expanded to upcoming fields like
health care, traffic, and social policy, Dewey asserted the “eclipse of the
Public”. People’s interests in political affairs were more and more absorbed
by superficial media coverage, propensity to consume, and the preference
for an entertainment, rather than an information, media.**
   Dewey’s analysis was quite similar to that of Lippmann. He doubted
the ability of men to rule their affairs in self-government, because many
citizens were alienated from these spheres of decision-making. Therefore,
they were increasingly uninterested in getting knowledge about economic,
technological, and political affairs—a circle that would cause disengage-
ment and would intensify broad requests for media entertainment and
diversion. Media censorship caused selective information and aggra-
vated the lack of knowledge of average Americans and their inability to
overview complex political and economic connections.** In Lippmann’s
view the “great mass of wage-earners and farmers, of clerks and small
managers,” “who get their knowledge through the press and popular
tradition,” stood in opposition to a small group of administrators with
“first-hand access to the men who direct affairs.”*4 As a consequence of
being excluded from real political participation and the decision-making
process, the outsiders reacted doubtfully and skeptically against the exec-
utive and used their power as voters irrationally, sometimes even destruc-
tively.?> In other words, the people participated in public affairs but not
in the way the experts like Lippmann expected. Lippmann regarded the
insiders as responsible for closing the gap between themselves and the
outsiders.Early on, in his book A Preface to Politics published in 1913, he
criticized the routines of the political system which fosterec        indif-
ference, non-participation, and the apathy of the masses.”
   Similar to his academic teacher Graham Wallas, who dedicated his rec-
ognized book The Great Society to him, Lippmann assumed that most of
the citizens were occupied by their own dominant problems in their envi-
ronments, following selfishly their economic interests in everyday life to
get a better standard of living, instead of thinking about political, admin-
istrative, and economic issues. Dewey shared this assumption. But whereas
the pragmatist philosopher believed in the adjustment of habits in local
neighborly community even under the conditions of modern challenges,
Lippmann stated that due to environmental preconditions and cultural
limits, most citizens reconstructed and adopted widespread stereotypes.””

[p. 201] [PDF page 219]

Lippmann did not judge stereotypes as negative but as necessary for average
Americans to arrange complex and unclear reality. They exonerate them-
selves from complicated and time-wasting negotiations in everyday life.2*
Furthermore, broadly accepted stereotypes that were passed down from
generation to generation were the main source for the creation of public
opinion and the guarantee of the unity of society.”? In Lippmann’s opin-
ion, it should not be the aim to convert traditional notions of the people,
especially if they were important for social coherence. The people should
 instead be prepared with only the most necessary skills and knowledge to
 fulfil the duty of citizens, e.g., in elections.
     In Freedom and Culture, Dewey’s former optimism about the mainte-
 nance of common will and of democratic community” has changed to skep-
ticism that is more closely aligned with Lippmann’s position. Here Dewey
 labelled average Americans much more rigorously as double-minded and
 seducible than in Public and its Problems—not because of moral failure,
 but because they form their attitudes less by their own experiences than
 by unconscious imitation of and submission to widespread opinions and
the entertainment media. Opinions lost their validity and reliability. For
Dewey, the upcoming gap between verbal confession and action was the
result of passive accommodation, not of active adjustment to the new cul-
tural requests, because linguistic and intellectual skills could not cope with
the acceleration of social and cultural change.*' The democratic expres-
sions of average Americans collide with contradictory actions, and this
discrepancy endangers democratic culture and atmosphere. An ethical,
intellectual, and mental regeneration of the democratic idea was necessary
for democracy to be attractive and competitive against popular simplifica-
tions and ideological supremacy of totalitarian propaganda that impressed
many people.
     Freedom and Culture can be partially seen as Dewey’s answer to
Marxism, communism, and totalitarianism in general. Impressed by the
Bolshevist revolution, especially in 1928 as a result of his visit to the
Soviet Union,*? Dewey recognized the danger of simplified totalitarian
propaganda satisfying various popular demands for truth and claiming
a pseudo-community. Dewey turned to anti-communism in the early
1930s.3 In a similar way, Lippmann—as the young “wunderkind of pre-
war progressivism”*4—was in favor of Fabian-Socialism due to the influ-
ence of his teacher Graham Wallas. After his short career as chief aide
for the socialist mayor of Schenectady in 1912, Lippmann also detected
that the socialist utopia ideal was idle talk.*> And there was another bio-
graphical parallel with Dewey: Lippmann, the son of second-generation
German-Jewish parents, became involved in academic circles that were
closely connected with American pragmatism. Studying philosophy, his-
tory, literature, political science, and economy at Harvard since 1906,
Lippmann, apart from Wallas, was much influenced by William James
(1842-1910) and George Santayana (1863-1952). After his turn to the

[p. 202] [PDF page 220]

political center ground, Lippmann was intensively engaged with the Wil-
son administration and became the prime father of spin doctoring. As
one of the three editors of the journal The New Republic, he supported in
several articles the United States’ entry into World War I. It was his frus-
tration about the failure of the highfalutin progressive aims of President
Wilson at the beginning of the 1920s that caused Lippmann to became
skeptical about the political competencies of average Americans.


DIFFERENT PROPOSALS FOR SOLUTIONS:
PEOPLE’S INSTRUCTION, PUBLIC EDUCATION,
AND THE ROLE OF SOCIAL SCIENCES

Despite these parallels, Dewey and Lippmann proposed different political,
communicational, and educational concepts to restore face-to-face com-
munities and to create a national community. Lippmann demanded strong
political leadership to improve public activity and engagement. He ascribed
to the government, the political decision makers, and the scientific advisers
(the “insiders”) the leading role to rule the nation, to instruct human beings
about the most important current political decisions and “to gain popu-
lar confidence.”** Wallas too emphazized “the influence of men who can
resist habituation, and therefore originate” in the Great Society and drafted
herewith the concept of opinion leaders who form public opinion.*” But for
Lippmann, forthcoming statesmen should not only act as opinion leaders
but in part as inventors. This concept of strong political leadership might be
influenced by a short fascination with the assumed efficiency of Italian fas-
cism, as Vogt has pointed out (see the fourth section).** In either case, Lipp-
mann’s plea for strong governmental executive power aimed to create “one
general will” by the use of political symbols.*’ Picking up the traditional
stereotypes and strong feelings of the people, these symbols should cre-
ate community more rapidly than long-lasting school education, especially
in times of crises and wars. In this sense, Lippmann’s understanding of
community tended toward allegiance and to notions of political leadership
articulated by the German conservative philosopher Carl Schmitt.*° Rapid
construction of national unity was a precondition for the national survival
against the attacks of ideological or political enemies. And it is obvious that
the liberal state imagined by Lippmann did not function by laissez-faire but
by permanent political instruction.*! Therefore Lippmann suggested that a
governmental ministry of information be founded. This ministry should
convey necessary knowledge to the citizens, with the aim that they control
and substantively support the government. This form of political people’s
instruction had to integrate public opinion and had to mobilize human
resources for economic and national success. To this end, Lippmann asked
for improvements in social sciences to analyze the formation of public opin-
ion and political attitudes reliably. Findings of social-psychological research

[p. 203] [PDF page 221]

should be the guideline for governmental people’s instruction. Lippmann’s
opinion that elite leaders and scientific experts can best discern and enact
public good was not unique. In fact, it represented the Whiggish tradition
like many other Anglo-American journalists and scientists, for example the
American sociologist Edward A. Ross (1866-1951).*2
    In contrast to Lippmann’s approach of strengthening governmental
 techniques and the governmental grasp on public opinion by the people’s
 instruction, Dewey wanted to strengthen the idea and vitality of democracy
 as a precondition of building (local) community.’ He aimed to restore Jef-
 ferson’s model of a local face-to-face-community by the democratization of
 municipal tasks in health care, energy supply, traffic administration, urban
 planning, and the selection of teachers by school boards** that had a long
 and successful tradition in the United States.4’ Dewey was convinced that
 local environments and common shared experiences and actions, as well as
 centuries-old traditions and habits, were the basis for a new Great Com-
 munity. But habits would have to be modified within the context of mod-
 ern developments and by accumulated new knowledge.** Dewey’s credo
 “the cure for the ailments of democracy is more democracy”*’ indicates the
 necessity of democratic renovation and revitalization, as well as of public
education, to enable people to participate in affairs and in communal self-
government. Whereas this solution aimed to renew the republican ideal of
the past, Dewey’s plea for the improvement and application of social sci-
ences for public affairs was future-orientated. Social inquiries should create
 knowledge about thoughts, attitudes of people, their perceptions of diverse
society, and their experiences with complex interdependences of modernity.
Dewey refused Lippmann’s demand to reserve findings of social sciences
to the circle of governmental experts, instructors, and decision makers.
This would consolidate unserviceable scientific specialism, exclusive and
arcane knowledge for experts, and strengthen the power of opinion makers
and political leaders. Democracy would tend towards oligarchy if govern-
mental or economic “promoters of opinion called publicity agents” used
social inquiries for propaganda, advertising, salesmanship, and personal
management.*® Dewey demanded “freedom of social inquiry” and “full
publicity” of its results and interpretations’ to guarantee the equitable dif-
fusion of knowledge and of scientific attitudes as preconditions for partici-
pation in the great community. Similarly, Hans Joas and Sarah Igo stated
recently “that modern survey methods [public opinion polls—NG] helped
to forge a mass public” because surveys privileged “the national over the
local, the aggregate over the individual, the average over the unique.”*’ In
Dewey’s view, “the communication of the results of social inquiry” leads
to “formation of public opinion.”*' Similar to Wallas’ expectation that
applied modern social psychology would generate community, Dewey esti-
mated that the popularization of social research in the great society is the
necessary precondition to organized communication that “alone can cre-
ate a great community.”*? Communication meant reification of subjective

[p. 204] [PDF page 222]

experiences—common shared or communicated experiences were the com-
mon ground to transfer individuals into a great community. In the end,
Dewey hoped that the diffusion of scientific attitudes by scientific publicity
and school education would establish social coherence as well as delibera-
tive public opinion, which would depend on rational comparison, proofs
of facts, and opinions and not on dogmatic statements and propagandis-
tic camouflage.*? Therefore, as early as 1892/93, he supported his protégé,
the former journalist and sociologist Robert E. Park (1864-1944), who
sought to establish a new sort of newspaper—Thought News, a journal
about trends in public opinion.** This plan failed, but Dewey’s insistence
that scientific findings should leave the academic ivory tower and should be
communicated to the public remained. It was challenged by the call of his
former student Randolph Silliman Bourne (1886-1918) who adjured Dewey
to write not only sophisticated scientific books, but to engage himself in
political debates.°*° Perhaps Dewey’s turn to the political sphere modified
his own view of the public. Bourne was a supporter of progressivism and a
public intellectual who often published articles in The New Republic.


THE NEW REPUBLIC: PLEA FOR NATIONAL COMMUNITY
WITH STRONG EXECUTIVE LEADERSHIP?

This weekly for experts and intellectual elites was financially supported
by two philanthropists, Dorothy Payne Whitney (1887-1968) and Wil-
lard Dickerman Straight (1880-1918), and edited by the communication
experts Herbert Croly and Lippmann. The editors regarded themselves
as elite publishers as well as spokesmen for oppressed working men and
women living in urban slums. They aimed to “bring sufficient enlighten-
ment to the problems of the nation and sufficient sympathy to its complexi-
ties”, as they accentuated in the editorial in the first edition on November
7, 1914.°° Self-confidently, they emphasized the non-party-orientation of
The New Republic and they aimed to establish a public in which “the hon-
est and imaginative thought of America can find expression.” Editors and
audience should be one community with the common aim of supporting
the United States “in organizing a safer world.” But this community did
not include equity. In fact, the editors presented themselves as intellectual
leaders and their journal as a guideline and a light beacon of republicanism
to strengthen democracy and to form common sense, a reasonable, a coher-
ent “public opinion . . . which is well-informed, courageous, and sure.”57
Knowledge about the process of opinion-building and the formation of the
“vast body of public opinion”’* were indispensable for a democratic gov-
ernment and especially for the United States, with its mission to organize
a safer world. The elite position of The New Republic contradicted in part
Dewey’s notions of a communication community, but it was combined with
a demand to improve schools and education as an important precondition

[p. 205] [PDF page 223]

to mobilizing America’s economic and popular forces in the context of
international competition.*’ But, like Dewey, they pointed out “that books,
painting, sculpture, plays, games, are not only recreation but the source
from which we draw our sense of what life might be like. Without humour
and beauty now, we shall not be able to imagine the gay and varied civiliza-
tion which may come to exist.”°°
   These widespread aims of The New Republic—the activation of public
participation,   the smoothing   of social distortion, as well as the direc-
tion of public opinion to create a strong national community—can          be
traced back to ambitions of the first editor-in-chief, Herbert Croly, who
sought to reconcile the republicanism of Thomas Jefferson and the plea
of Alexander     Hamilton   (1755-1804)   for a strong central government.
Like Dewey, Croly, the author of the books The Promise of American
Life (1909) and Progressive Democracy (1914), referred to the past of
American settlement or even to the grandness of the universal church in
the Middle Ages as a projection of a glorious future. This idealization of
the Christian church is reminiscent of similar notions of European con-
servatives who were associated with various groups that supported the
revitalization of the “Abendland” as a model of a unified Europe.*! Croly
aimed to transform competitiveness into corporate capitalism within a
virile national welfare state directed by a few men of merit or even one
charismatic political leader. Like his co-founding editors, Walter Lipp-
mann and Walter Weyl, he dreamed of closing the gap between haves and
have-nots and of a vision of a nation with a “stake-in-society.””
    Even if political opinions of The New Republic changed rapidly—
from American nationalism to anti-communism, third way solutions and
debates about equidistance towards communism and German National
Socialism®*—the dominant philosophy remained stable in this period: the
establishment of a strong executive tending to nationalism.** It was the
nation that was in the core of Croly’s ideology. Therefore, it is not sur-
prising that The New Republic soon placed itself in the service of Presi-
dent Wilson. The journal supported the United States’ entry into World
War I, hoping that the war would accelerate democratization all over the
world and renovate and improve community in the United States as well.
The German pedagogue Georg Kerschensteiner (1854-1932) shared this
aspiration by referring to similar notions of William James. Lippmann
and Dewey, to a certain extent, hoped for a new social balance between
“insiders and outsiders” with one holistic public, as well as democratic
participation for everyone.
   New studies of communication history emphasized that World War I
had generated a total mobilization of society using propaganda and mass
press.®° But instead of democratic community, a war community was estab-
lished in favor of Wilson. It is questionable whether or not the war commu-
nity was a pre-totalitarian social coordination like the “Burgfrieden” in the
German Empire, as Wolfgang Schivelbusch pointed out recently: “Warfare

[p. 206] [PDF page 224]

and welfare became convertible, directly equivalent terms in the progressive
propaganda of war.”*” In this context, we must consider Croly’s critique
of liberal decadence, corruption, and unrelated mass society that would
shortly be shared by Lippmann. These pessimistic statements about culture
are similar to the opinions of Giovanni Papini (1881-1956) and Georges
Sorel (1847-1922) and refer to American observations of European totali-
tarian movements. Croly was in some part in favor of the pathos of activity,
of creation and renovation of community, that was proclainied especially
by Mussolini. The “conscious, intelligent ordering of society” by Fascism
held not only an attraction for Croly but also for other American intellectu-
als with bonds to pragmatism like Herbert W. Schneider (1892-1984) and
the historian Charles Beard (1874-1948).°* Schneider, a scholar of Dewey,
as well as Beard, attested Fascism’s historical potential and routed it back
to Jefferson, calling his ideal of a republic of free farmers as “Jefferson’s
Fascism.”® Like Dewey they preferred virtues and vitality, proven in the era
of American settlement and frontiers. But in contrast to Dewey’s aim of cre-
ating a new civic communication community, Schneider, and to a certain
extent Lippmann, and especially Croly regarded national enthusiasm and
historical myth, new heroism, and common intuition as meaningful for the
creation of national community.”


MISREADING OR INTERWEAVING NATIONAL
STEREOTYPES: THE TRANSFORMATION AND
ADOPTION OF DEWEY’S AND LIPPMANN’S
CONCEPTS IN WEST GERMANY AFTER 1945

It was not only the American intellectuals like Croly, Schneider, Dewey,
Beard, and others who detected the partial attractiveness of the observed
ideological enemies and political foes. This transnational orientation has |
often led to an exaggerated perception of the power, strength, and unity
of the enemy, whereas the “own” national resources and social coherence
seem to be weak and inferior.” This inconsistent observation between the
“own” and the “other” characterized the German perception of America
during the 1920s and 1930s too. After the World War I, many German pol-
iticians, entrepreneurs, and scientists admired the leading role of America
in technical innovations and economic prosperity. 2Some of them, like the
leading scientist in American studies, Friedrich Sch6nemann     (1886-1956),
a member of the National socialist party, asked German colleagues for
an open-minded examination of the successful American war community.
But the true and scientific interest to deat with American pragmatism and
the role of public education as it was pronounced by Hugo Miinsterberg™
was overlapped with “the fear that the United States could attain a mental
supremacy.” Georg Kerschensteiner was already promoting Dewey and
American civic education as a model for the German “staatsbiirgerliche

[p. 207] [PDF page 225]

Erziehung”, stating that “our German school system is largely out-dated
 in comparison to our Anglo-Saxon rival.” This anxiety generated a wide-
spread motivation in Germany to have a deeper look at pragmatism. It
prompted Ludwig Gurlitt (1855-1931) and his wife Else to translate “The
School and Society” into German and publish it 1903 under the title “Die
Schule und das 6ffentliche Leben” in the journal Zeitschrift fiir Padagogis-
che Psychologie.
    In Germany especially, the governmental propaganda of the Wilson
administration was regarded as superior to the German one in mobi-
 lizing public opinion.” George Creel’s successful propagandistic effort
to gain popular support for the United States’ entry into World War |
commanded the broad respect of Sch6nemann.” Like many others in
Germany, Sch6nemann mingled Lippmann’s demand for strong politi-
cal leadership and governmental people’s instruction with Dewey’s
approach. In a similar way, but only with reference to Dewey, not to
 Lippmann, Kerschensteiner drafted a concept of German civic education
that aimed to merge the individual with the national community by sub-
ordinating the adored role of state and its leader.”* This implicit combi-
nation of Dewey and Lippmann combined long-lasting German notions
of national community and were not impermissible because there were
many intersections between Dewey’s and Lippmann’s concepts of public
education and people’s instruction as this reconstruction has shown (see
the second section). And it was Dewey, not Lippmann who, while visit-
ing the Soviet Union in autumn 1928, stated that “propaganda is educa-
tion and education is propaganda.”      For Dewey, propaganda could also
have educational impacts if it refers to “the universal good of univer-
sal humanity.”*° It may be this statement that induced Elisabeth Noelle
(*1916), the founder of public opinion research in West Germany after
1945, to regard just Dewey and not Lippmann, whom she received as
well, as a representative of a directed democracy steered by experts.*
Her interpretation of Dewey stood quite in contrast to that of her sec-
ond PhD advisor Friedrich Sch6nemann.
    In the German context of the 1930s, Dewey’s assumptions about men’s
ability to adjust were reinterpreted in a nationalist way, e.g., by Eduard
Baumgarten (1898-1982) and in part by Giinther Jacoby (1881-1969). In
this sense, the creativity of men was to be in accordance with the national
will that was represented by the political leader and the government.”
Similarly, German   intellectuals like Schonemann,   Noelle, and Baumgar-
ten mixed the pragmatist meaning of community, that implicates common
shared experiences and common solved problems, with the nationalist
notions of Croly and Lippmann, dissociated it from the American context
and, converted it partially into the German context of “Gemeinschaft”
(community). In Germany, this term had gained a very positive connota-
tion with the meaning of harmony, of community of will, attitude, and dis-
position, of so-called voluntary subordination of the people under national

[p. 208] [PDF page 226]

morals and convention—at last because of the famous book of Ferdinand
Tonnies.** Helmuth Plessner’s essay about the limits of community and his
plea that multi-optional relationships of society can best cope with the onto-
logical ambivalence of human beings, if the principles of dignity and tact
are respected, could not break down the dominance of “Gemeinschaft” in
the 1930s and 1940s.** In Germany, community has been seen as a guar-
antee for a secure ordering of the masses in contrast to unclear public and
diverse society.*’ But was it only a misreading of the pragmatist meaning
of community? Perhaps one could say that it was a very selective reading,
but it was offered by Lippmann and Dewey themselves. Both legitimized
their holistic aims to create one single public instead of “too much public,
a public too diffused and scattered”** by harmonizing and idealizing the
past, as it was shown in the first section. And it was these phrases com-
bined with Lippmann’s plea for strong governmental people’s instruction
that was adaptable in Germany.
    But there was not only the attractiveness of the pragmatist terms creativ-
ity, action, and community that could be reformulated easily into the Ger-
man context. Lippmann’s and Dewey’s criticism of individualism, unchained
capitalist forces, distraction by superficial entertainment and mass media,
and their doubts about liberalism that is not orientated on common wealth
offered many links to widespread German cultural pessimism, either
nationalist or socialist devaluation of mass society, mass production, and
capitalism. For example, Dewey’s statement about increasing invalidity and
unreliability of opinions of persons in mass society was implicitly picked up
by Theodor Adorno (1903-1969). But Adorno reinterpreted it in an elitist
manner, to exclude the less educated average citizen from public opinion
that he believed should only be represented and forged by well-informed,
excellent intellectuals.*” But this notion tended more towards the views of
Lippmann” than to Dewey’s own, and this example illustrates again that _
Dewey’s concept of the public and public education was transformed into
the German context with interference from Lippmann’s notions.
    Despite these outlined examples that should illustrate the transforma-
tion and adoption of pragmatism in the 1930s, the German devaluation
of pragmatism should not be denied. Like the German pedagogue Edu-
ard Spranger (1882-1963),’' Elisabeth Noelle judged pragmatism as an
opportunistic philosophy of merchants who sought to justify economic
profit.”? Therefore, Dewey was hardly noticed by the German “Geisteswis-
senschaftliche Padagogik,” despite early translations of William James’ lec-
ture about pragmatism by Wilhelm Jerusalem (1854-1923) in 1907 and of
Dewey’s Democracy and Education by Erich Hylla (1887-1976) in 1930.93
Likewise, after 1945, Dewey’s influence on German pedagogy was small. It
would be an exaggeration if one pronounced Dewey as the spiritual father of
the American policy of re-education and its aim to strengthen civic respon-
sibility and democratic lifestyle, as the directive No. 54 of the Allied Con-
trol Council demanded in June 1947." Significantly, it was only the former

[p. 209] [PDF page 227]

national socialist pedagogue Theodor Wilhelm (1906-2005) who, under
the pseudonym of Friedrich Oetinger, presented a new approach of politi-
cal education that was based on partnership. Wilhelm/Oetinger referred
to Dewey, but he remained in pessimistic nationalist and cultural schemes
despite his controversy with Theodor Litt (1880-1962) who maintained
the primacy of fight as a vivid principle of democracy.®’ But, for more than
a decade, a broad reception of Dewey by educational and communication
scientists remained unchanged.
   Instead of school reforms and vitalization of democratic attitudes and
ideas, elitist governmental instruction in favor of an effective democratic
formation of society dominated (since 1950) in the antagonistic era of
the Cold War. Therefore, Lippmann became a kind of spiritual founding
father for various semi-governmental organizations of political instruc-
tion and propaganda. Following implicitly Lippmann’s demand for a min-
istry of information, Erich Peter Neumann      (1912-1973), the husband of
Elisabeth Noelle whom I mentioned earlier, built up several propaganda
organizations to support the West German chancellor Konrad Adenauer in
the 1950s. The Vereinigung fiir staatsbirgerliche Erziehung (Association
for National Instruction), initiated and directed by Neumann, took center
stage of this organizational net.”° Its task was to convince the population
about the advantage of the democratic western welfare state in comparison
to the communist empire. To this end, another association (Verlag Staat
und Gesellschaft) was created and printed a monthly journal to instruct
and inform political experts about the dominant debates and decisions
of the government. This journal, called Die politische Meinung (Political
Opinion), was reminiscent of The New Republic and was a kind of conser-
vative imitation of the journal Der Monat (The Month) that was financed
by the American Secret Service.’’ These journals were written to intensify
political and democratic knowledge and to gain trust in the new (Federal)
Republic (of Germany)—like the monthly Deutsche Lehrerbriefe (German
Teacher Letters). Edited by the Vereinigung fiir staatsbiirgerliche Erziehung
(Association for National Instruction), this journal was sent to 70,000
West German teachers of primary schools. These efforts of elitist govern-
mental people’s instruction owed more to Lippmann than to Dewey. At the
same time traditional German notions of “Gemeinschaft” as a unity of will
and attitude remained stable in influential circles of the Protestant church
(Kronberger Kreis) and of the government of the first West German chan-
cellor Konrad Adenauer.” Also, the first issue of the Deutsche Lebrerbriefe
pronounced a meaning of a holistic European community that was based
on race, occidental culture, and Christian morals.”” These notions were
intermingled with new requirements of economic efficiency and democratic
formation of the society.
   Even if one has the impression that Lippmann had a greater influence
in postwar Germany than Dewey, we must keep in mind that both phi-
losophers and their different concepts of people’s instruction and public

[p. 210] [PDF page 228]

education were often mixed in processes of specific national transforma-
tion and adoption. Therefore it is necessary to reconstruct both concepts
carefully and to outline parallels and differences, as it has been shown in
the second and third sections. The analysis of the historical context and the
genesis of both concepts illuminate their complex, inconsistent, and inter-
woven reception in Germany.


NOTES

      de Jiirgen Oelkers, Wie man Schule entwickelt. Eine bildungspolitische Anal-
          yse nach PISA (Weinheim: Beltz, 2003); Johannes Bellmann, “Der Prag-
          matismus als Philosophie von PISA? Anmerkungen zur Plausibilitat eines
          Deutungsmusters,” Zeitschrift fiir Erziehungswissenschaft 10, no. 3 (2007):
          421-37.
        . Hans Joas, “Amerikanischer Pragmatismus und deutsches Denken. Zur
          Geschichte eines Missverstandnisses,” in Pragmatismus und Gesellschaft-
          stheorie, ed. id. (Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1999), 114-45; Stefan Bittner,
          “Die Wahrnehmung des Pragmatismus nach 1945,” in Pragmatismus und
          Padagogik, ed. Daniel Trohler and Jiirgen Oelkers (Zurich: Pestalozzianum,
          2005), 227-50; Stefan Bittner, “German Readers of Dewey—Before 1933
          and After 1945,” Studies in Philosophy and Education 19, nos. 1-2 (2000),
          83-108; Georg Kamphausen, “Gemeinschaft und Kulturprotestantismus.
          Oder: warum der Pragmatismus in Deutschland nicht viele Freunde hat, in
          Pragmatismus und Padagogik, ed. Daniel Trohler and Jiirgen Oelkers (Zur-
        ich: Pestalozzianum, 2005), 159-78; Daniel Trohler, “The Discourse of Ger-
         man Geisteswissenschaftliche Padagogik—A Contextual Reconstruction,”
         Paedagogica Historica 39, no. 6 (2003): 759-78.
       . David Seideman, The New Republic. A Voice of Modern Liberalism. (New
        York: Praeger Publishers, 1984).
        . David W. Levy, Herbert Croly of The New Republic. The Life and Thought
          of an American Progressive. (Princeton: University Press, 1985), 279.
        . Walter Lippmann, “Insiders and Outsiders,” The New Republic, November .
          13, 1915, 35-6; Walter Lippmann, The Phantom Public. A Sequel to “Public
          Opinion” (New York: Macmillan, 1925); John Dewey, “Practical Democ-
          racy,” The New Republic, December 2, 1925: 52-54.
      6. John Dewey, The Public and its Problems (1927), in John Dewey: The Later
        Works, 1925-1953, vol. 2, eds. Jo Ann Boydston and Bridget A. Walsh (Car-
         bondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984), 235-374.
      7. John Dewey, Freedom and Culture (1939), in John Dewey: The Later Works
         1925-1953, vol. 13, eds. Jo Ann Boydston and Barbara Levine (Carbondale:
        Southern Illinois University Press, 1988), 63-188.
       . Woodrow Wilson, The New Freedom. A Call for the Emancipation of the
         Generous Energies of the People (New York: Doubleday, Page & Company,
        1913).
       . Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 260-62.
      . Reinhart Koselleck, Vergangene Zukunft. Zur Semantik geschichtlicher
        Zeiten, 2nd edition (Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1992)
  iit. Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 260.
  ie Norbert Elias, Uber den Prozess der Zivilisation. Soziogenetische und psy-
        chogenetische Untersuchungen. (Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1990) 15th
        edition.

[p. 211] [PDF page 229]

. Dewey, Freedom and Culture, 45, 68.
. Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 306.
. Graham Wallas, The Great Society.      A Psychological Analysis (New York:
  Macmillan, 1914).
. Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 305, 309-11, 319-20.
A Lippmann, The Phantom Public, 53, 146.
. Friedrich Jager, Amerikanischer Liberalismus und zivile Gesellschaft. Pers-
  pektiven sozialer Reform zu Beginn des 20. Jabrhunderts (Géttingen: Van-
  denhoeck & Ruprecht; 2001), 258-61, 292-99.
. Mark Whipple, “The Dewey-Lippmann Debate Today: Communication
  Distortions, Reflective Agency, and Participatory Democracy,” Sociological
  Theory 23, no. 2 (2005): 156-78, here 158; Udo Sautter, Geschichte der
  Vereinigten Staaten von Amerika (Stuttgart: Kroner, 1976), 255-59.
. Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 321.
. Ibid., 306.
. Ibid., 321-22.
. Lippmann, The Phantom Public, 43-44.
. Lippmann, “Insiders and Outsiders,” 35. Lippmann, The Phantom Public,
  40-S3.
. Lippmann, The Phantom Public, 150.
». Peter Vogt, Pragmatismus und Faschismus. Kreativitat und Kontingenz in
   der Moderne (Weilerswist: Velbriick Wissenschaft, 2002), 92, 94.
 . Walter Lippmann, Public Opinion (New York: Free Press, 1965), 3, 59.
bids (25:
. Ibid., 81-82.
. Dirk Jorkle, Demokratie als Erfahrung. John Dewey und die politische
  Philosophie der Gegenwart (Wiesbaden: Westdeutscher Verlag, 2003),
  103-07.
 . Dewey, Freedom and Culture, 96-98.
 . John Dewey, Leningrad Gives the Clue. Impressions of Soviet Russia (1928),
   in John Dewey: The Later Works, 1925-1953, vol. 3, ed. Jo Ann Boydston
   (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984), 203-07.
. Andrew Feffer, “The Presence of Democracy: Deweyan Exceptionalism and
   Communist Teachers in the 1930s,” Journal of the History of Ideas 66, no.
   1 (2005): 79-97.
. Robert B. Westbrook, John Dewey and American Democracy (Ithaca, Lon-
    don: Cornell University Press, 1991), 294.
  . Susanne Schlaack, Walter Lippmann und Deutschland. Realpolitische
    Betrachtungen im 20. Jahrhundert (Frankfurt/Main u.a.: Peter Lang, 2004),
    23, 39-45.
  . Lippmann, “Insiders and Outsiders,” 36.
  . Wallas, Great Society, X.
 . Vogt, Pragmatismus und Faschismus, 30-31.
 . Lippmann, The Phantom Public, 47-48.
 . Carl Schmitt, Der Begriff des Politischen. Text von 1932 mit einem Vorwort
    und drei Corollarien, 7. Auflage (Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 2002).
 . Michel Foucault, Geschichte der Gouvernementalitat. Bd. 2: Die Geburt
    der Biopolitik (Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 2004), 188.
 . Dorothy Ross, “American Social Science and the Idea of Progress,” in The
    Authority of Experts. Studies in History and Theory, ed. Thomas L. Haskell.
    (Indiana: University Press, 1984), 157-78.
. Daniel Trohler, “The ‘Kingdom of God on Earth’ and Early Chicago Prag-
    matism,” Educational Theory 56, no. 1 (2006): 89-105, here 104.
. Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 304-05.

[p. 212] [PDF page 230]

DP)     Norbert Grube

 45. John W. Meyer and David Tyack, “Public Education as Nation-Building in
     America: Enrollments and Bureaucratization in the American States, 1870—
     1930,” American Journal of Sociology 85, no. 3 (1979), 591-613, here 59S,
       601.
      . Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 334-35.
      Sibidseo27-
      . Ibid., 338, 340-41. Dewey, Freedom and Culture, 56.
      . Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 339.
      . Sarah E. Igo, The Averaged American. Surveys, Citizens, and the Making
        of a Mass Public (Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard University Press,
        2007), 282; Hans Joas, “Von der Philosophie des Pragmatismus zu einer
        soziologischen Forschungstradition,” in Pragmatismus und Gesellschaft-
        stheorie. 2. Auflage. ed. Hans Joas (Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp, 1999): 36.
      . Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 345.
      . Ibid., 324.
      . Dewey, Freedom and Culture, 167-68.
      . Gabriela Christmann, Robert E. Park (Konstanz: UVK, 2007), 12-13.
      . Westbrook, John Dewey and American Democracy, 19S.
      . “Editorial” in The New Republic. A Journal of Opinion 1, no. 1 (November
       14, 1914):1.
      . “Open letter to all friends of The New           Republic,”      The New     Republic
       (November 13, 1915).
      . Ibid.: “It is called a journal of opinion, and it is devoted to analyzing, focus-
        sing, criticising, and suggesting ideas which can help us a little as citizens of
        America to find our way amidst the disasters and threats and confusion of
        the time in which we live. At this period of wreck and ruin the one power
        that can save, can heal, can fortify, is clear and intelligent thought.”
      . “Open letter to all friends of The New Republic.”
      . Ibid.
      . Vanessa Conze, Das Europa der Deutschen zwischen Reichstradition und
        Westorientierung 1920-1970. (Minchen: Oldenbourg, 2005).
      . Seideman, The New Republic, 7
      . In May 1937 Dewey broke with the editorial board of TNR because of its too
        friendly handling of purge trials in the Soviet Union. See Westbrook, John
        Dewey and American Democracy, 484-85.
      . Seideman, The New Republic, ix; Vogt, Pragmatismus und Faschismus,
        68.
      . Georg Kerschensteiner, Der Begriff der staatsbiirgerlichen Erziehung. 6.
        Auflage (Leipzig and Berlin: Teubner, 1929), 84-85.
      . Igo, Average American, 108.
      . Wolfgang Schivelbusch, Entfernte Verwandtschaft. Faschismus, National-
      soztalismus, New Deal 1933-1939 (Miinchen: Hanser, 2005), 50.
     ibid 33
  69. Ibid.
  70. Vogt, Pragmatismus und Faschismus, 57-60.
      - Martin Aust and Daniel Schonpflug, eds., Vom Gegner lernen. Feindschaften
        und Kulturtransfers im Europa des 19. und 20. Jahrhunderts (Frankfurt/
       Main: Campus, 2007).
      . Philipp Gassert, Amerika     im Dritten      Reich.    Ideologie, Propaganda       und
        Volksmeinung    1933-1945     (Stuttgart:    Franz    Steiner,   1997);   Hans   Dieter
       Schafer, “Amerikanismus      im Dritten      Reich,” in Nationalsozialismus und
       Modernisterung, eds. Michael Prinz and-Rainer Zitelmann              (Darmstadt:
       Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1994), 199-215,

[p. 213] [PDF page 231]

Fos Hugo Minsterberg, Psychologie und Wirtschaftsleben. Ein Beitrag zur ang-
    ewandten Experimental-Psychologie (Leipzig: Verlag Johann Ambrosius
    Barth, 1912), 14, 184.
74. Bittner, “German Readers of Dewey—Before 1933 and After 1945”, 88.
VO: Kerschensteiner, Der Begriff der staatsbiirgerlichen Erziehung, vii.
76. Friedrich Schénemann, Die Kunst der Massenbeeinflussung in den Ver-
    einigten Staaten von Amerika (Stuttgart/Berlin/Leipzig: Deutsche Verlags-
    anstalt, 1924), 8, 11-12, 24-27.
ive Schénemann, Kunst der Massenbeeinflussung, 37; Frank Schumacher,
    Kalter Krieg und Propaganda. Die USA, der Kampf um die Weltmeinung
    und die ideelle Westbindung der Bundesrepublik Deutschland, 1945-1955
    (Trier: Wissenschaftlicher Verlag, 2000), 45-49. This was under the auspices
    of the Wilson administration and the “Committee on Public Information,”
    and was instituted in the spring of 1917.
78. Kerschensteiner, Der Begriff der staatsbiirgerlichen Erziehung, 4, 16-17,
    47.
To John Dewey, “A New World in the Making. Impressions of Soviet Russia,”
    in John Dewey: The Later Works, 1925-1953, vol. 3, ed. Jo Ann Boydston
    (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1984), 222.
80. Ibid.
Sos Elisabeth Noelle, Meinungs- und Massenforschung in U.S.A. Umfragen
    ber Politik und Presse (Frankfurt/Main: Verlag Moritz Diesterweg, 1940),
    32-33.
84. Joas, “Amerikanischer Pragmatismus und deutsches Denken”, 129-32.
Hoe Ferdinand Tonnies, Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft. Grundbegriffe der
    reinen Soztologie (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1979),
    Die 216.
86. Helmuth   Plessner, Grenzen der Gemeinschaft. Eine Kritik des soztalen
    Radikalismus (Bonn: Verlag Friedrich Cohen, 1924); Veronika Magyar-
    Haas and Norbert Grube, “Sicherheit. Anspruch—Versprechen—Utopie,”
    Soziale Passagen 1 (2009): 35-48.
87. Kamphausen, “Gemeinschaft und Kulturprotestantismus”, 167; Paul Nolte,
    Die Ordnung der deutschen Gesellschaft. Selbstentwurf und Selbstbes-
    chretbung im 20. Jahrhundert (Munchen: C.H. Beck, 2000) 166-67.
88. Dewey, The Public and its Problems, 320.
o2. Theodor Adorno, “Meinung, Wahn, Gesellschaft,” Der Monat 14, no. 159
    (1961): 17-26, here 19-20. About the misreading of pragmatism by the
    Frankfurt Institute of Social Research see Hans Joas, “Die unterschatzte
    Alternative. Amerika und die Grenzen der ‘Kritischen Theorie’,” in Pragma-
    tismus und Gesellschaftstheorie, ed. Hans Joas (Frankfurt/Main: Suhrkamp,
    1999), 96-113, here 100-02.
3N0). Lippmann, Public Opinion, 121.
Die Daniel Tréhler, “The Discourse of German Geisteswissenschaftliche Pada-
      gogik,” 765.
OI, Noelle, Meinungs- und Massenforschung, 9. So did the Austrian, Jewish
      writer and philosopher Egon Friedell (1878-1938). Egon Friedell, Kulturge-
      schichte der Neuzeit, Bd. 2 (Miinchen: DTV, 1997), 1384.
3}. William James, Der Pragmatismus. Ein neuer Name fiir alte Denkmethoden,
      ed. Klaus Oehler, trans. Wilhelm Jerusalem (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Ver-
      lag, 1997); Jiirgen Oelkers, “Dewey in Deutschland—ein Missverstandnis.
      Nachwort zur Neuausgabe,” in John Dewey, Demokratie und Erziehung.
      Eine Einleitung in die philosophische Padagogik. Aus dem Amerikanischen
      von Erich Hylla, ed. Jirgen Oelkers (Weinheim: Beltz, 2000), 492.

[p. 214] [PDF page 232]

94. Otto Schlander, “Der Einfluss von John Dewey und Hans Morgenthau auf
    die Formulierung der Re-Educationpolitik,” in Umerztehung und Wieder-
    aufbau. Die Bildungspolitik der Besatzungsmdchte in Deutschland und
     Osterreich ed. Manfred Heinemann (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1981), 40-52;
     Rolf Schmiederer, Zwischen Affirmation und Reformismus. Politische Bil-
     dung 1n Westdewieblond seit 1945 (Frankfurt/Main: Europaische Verlags-
    anstalt, 1972), 16
I. Friedrich Oetinger, Partnerschaft. Die Aufgabe der politischen Erziehung. 3.
    Auflage (Stuttgart: Metzlersche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1953), 89, 99; Schmie-
    derer, Zwischen Affirmation und Reformismus, 41-42.
D6: Norbert Grube, “Das Institut fiir Demoskopie Allensbach und die ‘Deutschen
     Lehrerbriefe’ als Instrumente staatsbiirgerlicher Erziehung? Anspriiche und
     Umsetzungen 1947 bis 1969,” in Jahrbuch fiir Historische Bildungsforsc-
    hung 13 (2007), 267-88.
97. Norbert Grube, “‘Begrenztes Maf aller Dinge’. Zum Griindungskonzept
    [der Zeitschrift “Die politische Meinung”] von Erich Peter Neumann,” Die
    politische Meinung, no. 439 (2006), S. 9-10; Michael Hochgeschwender,
    Freitheit in der Offensive? Der Kongress fiir Kulturelle Fretheit und dite
    Deutschen (Minchen: Oldenbourg, 1998), 139-99.
98. Thomas Sauer, “Der Kronberger Kreis,” in Gesellschaftspolitische Neuorien-
     tierungen des Protestantismus in der Nachkriegszeit, ed. Norbert Friedrich
     and Traugott Jahnichen (Miinster: LIT, 2002), 39-62, here 48-50; Heinrich
     Krone, Tagebtcher. Bd. 1: 1945-1961 ed. Hans-Otto Kleinmann        (Dissel-
     dorf: Droste, 1995), 155-56, 280, 328.
XY), “Europa ruft,” in Deutsche Lehrerbriefe 1, no. 2 (1953): 13-36.
