865653
research-article2019

JRI0010.1177/1475240919865653Journal of Research in International EducationBergeron and Rogers

JRIE

Article

Investigating the perspective of
Theory of Knowledge teachers
in International Baccalaureate
World Schools

Journal of Research in
International Education
2019, Vol. 18(2) 169­–185
© The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/1475240919865653
DOI: 10.1177/1475240919865653
journals.sagepub.com/home/jri

Liz Bergeron

Northeastern University, USA

Leslie Rogers

University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, USA

Abstract
As a part of the International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Programme (DP) students participate in the Theory
of Knowledge (TOK) course. This research used a mixed methods design to investigate the perspective of
TOK teachers in IB schools worldwide. To address the research questions, quantitative survey data were
analyzed from 1,534 participants, and focus groups with 33 TOK teachers were conducted in Australia, The
Netherlands, and the United States. Quantitative data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, t-tests,
ANOVA, and linear trends analysis to identify group differences. Qualitative data were coded and analyzed
using an inductive approach. Overwhelmingly, survey results indicated that teachers value the TOK course.
Teachers ranked the main purposes of the TOK course as 1) to develop an awareness of how knowledge
is constructed, critically examined, and renewed by individuals and communities and 2) to help students
make connections among academic disciplines and among thoughts, feelings and actions. Teachers ranked
the main benefits to students as 1) students better able to critically evaluate knowledge and 2) students
better able to identify and reflect on personal assumptions. Teachers strongly agreed that teaching TOK
has been a valuable professional development experience for them. Specifically, they indicated it enhanced
their own critical thinking and developed their interdisciplinary understanding. Survey results and focus
groups suggest the main challenges are 1) assessment, 2) time, and 3) administrative issues (scheduling
and class size). Regarding implementation, approximately half of DP coordinators indicated that TOK
implementation was different than other IB Diploma Programme aspects, specifically that teacher support
and time were different.

Keywords
International Baccalaureate, Theory of Knowledge, critical thinking, mixed methods

Corresponding author:
Liz Bergeron, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.
Email: b.elizabeth@northeastern.edu

170

Journal of Research in International Education 18(2)

Introduction
Background
The International Baccalaureate (IB) is a non-profit educational foundation that offers four education programmes for schools in over 150 countries. All four programmes are designed to develop
inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who help create a more peaceful world through
intercultural understanding and respect (IB, 2015c). The IB Diploma Programme (DP), for students aged 16 to 19, is a two-year programme designed to prepare students for post-secondary
academic success and global society. In addition to six subject groups (Language and Literature;
Language Acquisition; Individuals and Societies; Sciences; Mathematics; The Arts), the curriculum includes a core comprised of three required elements: Theory of Knowledge (TOK); Creativity,
Activity, Service (CAS); and the Extended Essay. The DP core is designed to “broaden students’
educational experience and challenge them to apply their knowledge and skills” (IB, 2015a).
Theory of Knowledge. By using questions in this epistemological course to guide learning, students are
positioned to “gain greater awareness of their personal and ideological assumptions, as well as developing an appreciation of the diversity and richness of cultural perspectives” (IB, 2015a). The course
requires 100 instructional hours over the two years of the DP. TOK is intended to be taught during the
school day, as are subjects in the six groups (IB, 2015d). Students in the TOK course are assessed
through an oral presentation and a 1,600-word essay. The presentation evaluates the application of
TOK thinking, while the essay evaluates theoretical understanding. All DP schools are required to
identify a DP Coordinator to oversee the DP, but a specific TOK Coordinator is not required. Some
schools choose to appoint a TOK coordinator, however, to support the work of the TOK teachers.

Rationale and Purpose of the Study
Previous research has examined individual components of the DP (see for instance Billig, 2013;
Inkelas, Swan, Pretlow, & Jones, 2013; Cole, Ullman, Gannon, & Rooney, 2015) and the DP holistically (see Coates, Rosicka, & MacMahon-Ball, 2007; Coca, Johnson, Kelley-Kemple, Roderick,
Moeller, Williams, & Moragne, 2012). Generally, findings suggest that IB DP participation prepares students for post-secondary coursework (Caspary 2011; HESA, 2011; Coca et al., 2012),
improves secondary school academic performance (Caspary, 2011; Saavedra, 2011; Wade, 2011),
and post-secondary enrollment and persistence (Coca et al, 2011, Caspary & Bland, 2011; HESA,
2011; Inkelas, Swan, Pretlow, and Jones, 2013). Research specific to two of the three required
components of the core suggests areas of improvement for the Extended Essay (Inkelas, Swan,
Pretlow, and Jones, 2013) and CAS (Billig, 2013). The 2013 report of Inkelas et al exploring the
benefits of the Extended Essay (EE) suggests the EE serves as good preparation for universitylevel research, but that IB schools could improve the EE experience by providing more support on
specific aspects of the research process. Similarly, Billig’s 2013 report on CAS suggests that students do develop their civic-mindedness through CAS, but schools could improve the experience
by deepening the reflection process. Large-scale research on implementation, perceptions, and
impact of TOK is needed not only to improve the TOK course, but also to contribute to the gap in
research on this aspect of the core in order to inform the development of the overall programme.
The study was guided by the research questions listed below.

Research questions
Perceptions of the TOK
1.

What are teachers’ views of the TOK course? What are teacher perspectives’ regarding:

Bergeron and Rogers
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
2.

171

the purpose of teaching TOK
the benefits to students and schools of TOK teaching and learning
challenges experienced when teaching TOK
the effort needed to teach TOK
success factors that underpin quality TOK courses?

In what ways do TOK teachers believe that the theory of knowledge course prepares students for future success?

Impact on Teachers
3.
4.
5.

What is the relationship between teaching the Theory of Knowledge course and pedagogical beliefs, intentions, practice, and teacher confidence?
To what extent do IB teachers perceive teaching TOK as being a valuable development
experience as a teacher? And in what ways?
For teachers who chose to teach TOK, what reasons do they give for why they chose to
teach the TOK course?

Implementation Questions
6.

How is the TOK course implemented? How is the implementation of TOK different from
and similar to other core components of the IB Diploma Programme?

Literature Review
The primary purpose of this study was to examine IB DP teachers’ beliefs about the TOK course;
from overall perceptions (e.g. What is the purpose of the TOK course?) to specific perceptions
related to teacher impact (e.g. Did teaching TOK impact teachers’ pedagogical beliefs, intentions,
teaching practices, and/or teacher efficacy?) and implementation (e.g. What implementation
approaches do teachers feel make the TOK course most effective?). The study was guided by the
extant literature related to (1) the construct of teacher beliefs and the impact those beliefs have on
teaching practices, and (2) the implementation, philosophies and approaches inherent to the DP.

Teacher beliefs
Critical to this study is a review of the extant literature related to teachers’ beliefs. Much has been
written about teachers’ beliefs and the impact those beliefs have on pedagogical practices (Bergeron
& Dean, 2013; Fang, 1996; Fives & Gill, 2015). While it is agreed that teachers’ beliefs are not
static, stable or overly simplistic constructs, there are certain links between beliefs and practices
that have been well established in the nearly 700 empirical studies that have been published related
to this topic over the past 60 years (Fives & Gill, 2015). It is clear that a relationship exists between
teachers’ beliefs and teachers’ practices (Buehl & Beck, 2015), and Buehl and Beck (2015)
reviewed research published between 2008 and 2012 that examined this relationship. They concluded that beliefs influence practice and practice influences beliefs. The influence of beliefs on
practice is evident in Wilkins’ (2008) study of 481 elementary teachers who were asked to share
their beliefs about the effectiveness of inquiry-based teaching. Wilkins (2008) found that these
beliefs were the strongest direct predictor of a teacher using inquiry-based instructional practices.
Additionally, Bergeron and Dean (2013) utilized the Teaching Perspectives Inventory (TPI) developed by Pratt, Collins, and Selinger (2001) to examine the relationship between teacher beliefs and
being an effective IB teacher. The results revealed that IB DP teachers’ “beliefs about teaching”
were different from those of their non-IB counterparts and that these specific beliefs (i.e., global or

172

Journal of Research in International Education 18(2)

international perspective or social responsibility) informed their instructional practice. Evidence
supporting the assertion that teachers’ practices influence teachers’ beliefs was primarily drawn
from studies in which the teaching practice included teaching critical thinking skills, the importance of self-efficacy beliefs, or other ability-related skills. Teaching those specific practices has
been shown to positively affect teachers’ beliefs, especially when teachers experience success in
those teaching practices (Buehl & Beck, 2015). Ertmer, Ottenbreit-Leftwich, and Tondeur (2015)
suggest that examining an area in which teachers have agency is a critical context to consider when
evaluating the relationship between teachers’ beliefs and practices.

Previous TOK research
Having examined the construct of teacher beliefs and the significant impact those beliefs have on
teaching practices and student outcomes, it is important to set the stage for this study by reviewing
the relevant findings from previous TOK studies. Two recently published studies have examined the
impact of the TOK (Cole, Ullman, Gannon, & Rooney, 2015; Wright & Lee, 2014). In both cases
TOK effectiveness was, in part, evaluated based on TOK teacher beliefs. Cole and colleagues (2015)
– after surveying 83 TOK teachers and interviewing an additional 22 TOK teachers working at several Australian IB schools – reported that the majority of TOK teachers felt that the TOK course had
positive outcomes, which include improving students’ critical thinking skills. Less clear from the
results was the extent to which TOK teachers felt that the TOK course had positively impacted student learning in other DP subjects. Additionally, it was unclear what specific factors inhibited the
success of the TOK course, although several possible factors were suggested (e.g. the broad scope
of the TOK course, the challenge of teaching the TOK course, and the lack of school community
support when, for instance, the TOK course is not prioritized within a school community).
Wright and Lee (2014) also investigated the effectiveness of IBDP core requirements, including
the TOK course. Their multi-site case study resulted in 27 IBDP teachers and administrators at five
different schools in Beijing and Shanghai sharing their thoughts specifically related to which features of the three IBDP core requirements contributed the most to developing 21st-century skills.
Throughout the interviews, the TOK course “was argued to be highly relevant to cognitive skills,
principally critical thinking” (p. 211). Wright and Lee highlighted that TOK teachers felt that the
TOK course was key to developing 21st-century skills including critical thinking, open mindedness and self-reflection. Another theme reported related to “under-prioritising”: “Teachers and
administrators highlighted that an implication was that “Core Requirements”, which have less
weight in the final IBDP grade, could be under-prioritised” (p. 210). Both research groups sought
to better understand the effectiveness of the TOK course by seeking the views of those closest to it –
the TOK teachers. In our current examination, we advance two lines of research – that related to
teachers’ beliefs, and research related specifically to the perceived effectiveness of the TOK.

Research Design
In order to gain a better understanding of the TOK course, this project uses a mixed methods design
to investigate the impact of the TOK course on teachers and teaching in IB schools worldwide.
Using an explanatory sequential design (Creswell, 2008) the research team collected and analyzed
data in two phases. Phase 1 consisted of collection and analysis of survey data, while Phase 2 consisted of the collection and analysis of qualitative focus group data. The purpose was to use qualitative results to assist in explaining and interpreting the quantitative findings: while Phase 1 data was
mostly quantitative, several open-ended items requiring qualitative analysis were also included,
which were analyzed with the focus group transcripts.

173

Bergeron and Rogers
Table 1. Respondent background information.

Gender
Don’t want to say
Female
Male
Other
Highest degree or level of education
bachelor’s degree
master’s degree
doctoral degree
other
Years of teaching experience (teacher role only)
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
More than 12

Frequency

Percent

16
773
745
1

1.0
50.4
48.5
.1

413
931
145
45

26.9
60.7
9.5
2.9

40
69
98
123
521

4.7
8.1
11.5
14.5
61.2

Survey methods. Research questions were addressed using a researcher-designed survey, The TOK
Survey. This online survey was sent in the three working languages of the IB (English, French,
Spanish) to all Diploma Programme Coordinators with the request that in addition to completing
the “coordinator items” they also forward the survey to TOK teachers. Survey responses were
received from 2,079 participants, but 545 were not included because role was not identified. Background information on the remaining 1,535 is included in Table 1. 960 respondents identified their
primary role as teacher, and approximately 750 of these respondents answered the majority of the
survey items. 585 respondents identified their primary role as DP Coordinator, and approximately
525 of these respondents answered all the items. All available data were included in the analysis.
Survey quantitative analysis. The TOK survey included a set of items intended as a scale measuring
teacher confidence in teaching TOK. Therefore, in addition to the quantitative analysis aimed at
answering the research questions, an additional set of procedures was used to explore the scale.
The research questions were addressed using descriptive statistics, independent samples t-tests,
and an analysis of variance (ANOVA). Prior to addressing the research questions, internal reliability (Cronbach’s alpha) was used to evaluate the constructed scale measuring teaching confidence
(Confidence Teaching TOK, CTT scale). The threshold of Cronbach’s alpha of .7 or higher was
used to determine if the scale items met the reliability criteria for being analyzed as a scale. Following the reliability analysis, exploratory factor analysis (EFA) with principal component extraction was performed to further investigate the nature of the scale and items. Group differences on
confidence teaching TOK, challenges teaching TOK, and success teaching TOK were investigated
using independent samples t-test and ANOVA. Previous research suggests that differences may
exist between countries (Dean & Bergeron, 2015), years of teaching experience (Falk, 2013), and
class size (Chingos, 2012). Therefore, these background factors were investigated. Country was
divided into two categories (US and non-US) because of the sizable percentage of responses from
the US. Because only two populations exist for country (US and non-US), independent samples
t-test was used. ANOVA was used to analyze group differences on selected survey responses with
more than two grouping categories. Categories were merged to create fewer categories based on

174

Journal of Research in International Education 18(2)

logical groupings, although categorizing the data can result in the loss of important information:
the risk of Type I error increases if more than one ANOVA on the same data is performed. Multiple
ANOVAs therefore have their risks, but ANOVA is generally considered robust to violations of the
normality assumption (Mertler and Vannatta, 2009) and appropriate when examining if categories
have different effects. While normality of the data was initially questionable, it was evaluated and
determined trivial. Given the purpose of the analyses and trivial non-normality data transformations and non-parametric alternatives to ANOVA were not performed.
The TOK Survey. The TOK Survey comprised 3 sections. The first section contained 10 background questions for all participants. The second section, Survey A, contained 35 additional
items for TOK teachers, while the final section, Survey B, contained 13 additional items for DP
Coordinators. Contained in Survey A was a set of items intended to measure one single construct: confidence teaching the TOK. Items 31-41 are referred to as the Confidence Teaching
TOK (CTT) scale. Analysis of internal reliability using Cronbach’s Alpha (α= .798) suggests
that the items measure the same characteristic and could be evaluated as a scale, and principal
component extraction (PCA) identified one underlying factor reinforcing evaluation as a single
scale.
Focus group methods. Three separate hour-long focus groups using a 6-item protocol at IB events
in Amsterdam (n=4), Brisbane (n=15), and Chicago (n=14) were conducted with 33 teachers (13
males, 20 females) with a variety of experiences working with the TOK curriculum (either as a
TOK teacher, workshop leader, or administrator). Individuals represented a wide range of experience (total number of years teaching TOK ranged from 1 to 28). All sessions were recorded and
later transcribed for data analysis purposes.
Qualitative analysis. The focus group transcriptions and responses from open-ended survey questions were analyzed collectively using an inductive approach (Maxwell, 2005). Line-by-line open
coding technique (Glaser & Strauss, 2017) was used and each sentence was coded with at least one
code. To maintain authenticity, participants’ own words were used to create the codes as much as
possible. The same codes were consistently used to code text that represented the idea, not necessarily an exact word match. A constant comparison method (Glaser & Strauss, 2017) was used to
systematically compare and allocate codes. Codes were adjusted or created based on new understandings that emerged (Schilling, 2006). Similar codes were combined and organized into descriptive categories, facilitating a more efficient analysis. The emerging themes were analyzed, and
common underpinnings were used to summarize overall themes. In addition to the line-by-line
coding, word frequency query was used to identify the most frequently occurring words in selected
sources. The sensitivity of the word frequency query was adjusted to include results with the same
stem and synonyms.
Limitations. It should be acknowledged that the teachers who chose to respond to the survey and
participate in focus groups might not reflect the overall population of IB teachers, and that this
research relied heavily on self-reported data. Self-report data is vulnerable to social desirability to
report specific perceptions and practices, and possibly report more positively.

Results
This section is organized by research question category: perceptions of TOK, impact on teachers,
and TOK implementation.

Bergeron and Rogers

175

Perceptions of TOK
Descriptive statistics. Survey A items 15-22 and 24-26 address teacher perceptions of TOK. Overwhelmingly, teachers indicated that they enjoy teaching the TOK course (86.5%). Teachers also
indicated that teacher interest was the most important contributor to the success of the TOK course
(this item had the lowest mean rank (2.89, SD=2.26), therefore being ranked first among success
options). The next two highest ranked contributors to TOK success were student interest (4.27,
SD= 2.61) and class size (5.54, SD=2.39). Teachers ranked the main purposes of the TOK course
as 1) to develop an awareness of how knowledge is constructed, critically examined, and renewed
by individuals and communities (M=1.80, SD=1.28) and 2) to help students make connections
among academic disciplines and among thoughts, feelings and actions (M=2.90, SD=1.18). Teachers ranked the main benefits to students as 1) students being better able to critically evaluate
knowledge (M=1.76, SD=1.10) and 2) students being better able to identify and reflect on personal
assumptions (M=2.57, SD=0.99). The main challenges ranked by the teachers were 1) assessing
student progress towards stated goals (M=3.56, SD=2.01); 2) identifying clear objectives (M=3.60,
SD=2.07); and 3) critically evaluating student knowledge (M=3.61, SD=2.00). When asked to rate
the effort required to successfully teach TOK in four key areas, teachers indicated assessing learning (mean effort of 7.47 (SD=2.09)) required most effort, followed by planning (M=7.25, SD=2.53),
providing feedback on learning (M=7.01, SD=2.34) and lastly, implementing lessons (M=6.17,
SD=2.42). Using a 4 point agreement scale with 1 indicating strongly disagree and 4 indicating
strongly agree, teachers agreed that they are usually able to adjust assignments if students are having difficulty (M=3.09, SD=0.67).
T-test. The independent samples t-test was used to analyze significant differences between US
schools and non-US schools on challenges and successes teaching TOK. The difference in mean
scores for “assessing student progress towards goals” for US schools and non-US schools was not
statistically significant (t (713) = -1.065, p = .287), and nor was the difference in mean scores for
“Teacher Interest” for US schools and non-US schools (t (724) = 1.953, p = .051).
ANOVA. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) tests the significance of group differences between two
or more means while evaluating the inter- and intra-variation of each group. Post hoc tests are
used to determine which groups are significantly different. Performing multiple ANOVAs on the
same data can increase the Type I error, so it is important to identify post hoc procedures that can
account for this. Tukey post hoc testing was used because it can mitigate the risk of an increase in
Type I error and still maintain power with large sample sizes (Dunlap & Greer, 1996). Prior to
conducting ANOVA, the data were evaluated to determine if they met the necessary assumptions.
With the exception of normality, the data met the necessary assumptions (independence, outliers,
and homogeneity of variances). Levene’s Test was not significant for each analysis. Normality
was evaluated, and it was determined statistically significant, but with trivial departures. Given
the large sample size (allaying concerns over normality because with large samples non-normality
can be more easily detected, but often trivial) and the results of the QQ-plot, it was determined
non-normality was trivial. The QQ-plot produced nearly a 45-degree line. The highest ranked
items for challenges and success enablers were evaluated for differences regarding years teaching
and class size, as previous research suggests differences may exist in these areas (Falk, 2013;
Chingos, 2012).
Statistically significant differences were not detected in any of the ANOVAs. Scores for “assessing student progress towards goals” did not differ significantly across class size group; F (2, 709) =
.912, p = .402. Scores for “assessing student progress towards goals” also did not differ

176

Journal of Research in International Education 18(2)

significantly across years of teaching experience; F (2, 708) = .972, p = .379., nor did scores for
“most impact the success of the TOK course” across class size group; F (2, 719) = 1.963, p = .141.
Scores for “most impact the success of the TOK course” did however differ significantly across
years teaching the TOK; F (2, 720) = 3.160, p = .043.
Qualitative results. Regarding the purpose of TOK, qualitative analysis of the survey items suggests
that in addition to the options provided on the survey teachers felt that the purpose was to develop
“critical thinking” and “international mindedness”. When describing the main benefits of TOK to
students, 44 respondents selected “other”. In their open-ended responses to this question, “critical
thinking” and “improve writing/communication” were other benefits most commonly proposed by
survey participants – as illustrated by one participant: “it fosters critical thinking, reflection, and
self-awareness.”
Focus groups. Participants responded to questions about perceptions of TOK, benefits to students,
challenges, and impact on student learning. The coding of the focus groups resulted in over 300
unique codes. The most frequent codes and their larger themes related to perceptions of TOK are
displayed in Table 2, together with quotes chosen to illustrate each theme.
The themes of “connections” and “critical thinking” comprise 10 codes that were referenced
over 100 times. These two ideas emerged as primary descriptors of TOK. Participants described the
critical thinking aspects of TOK, specifically the perceived benefits to students. Participants
described their students as capable of viewing sensitive issues from multiple perspectives and
being comfortable with disagreement. The participants described the TOK experience as “being
everywhere”, meaning that the applications of the skills gained in TOK extend to other subjects,
real life, university, and beyond.

Impact on teachers
Descriptive statistics. Survey A items 23, 27, 31-43 address the impact of TOK on teachers. Only
13% of teachers indicated that they did not choose to teach the TOK course. Teachers strongly
agreed that teaching TOK has been a valuable professional development experience for them
(using a 4 point agreement scale with 1 indicating strongly disagree and 4 indicating strongly
agree, mean agreement = 3.72, SD=0.62). Specifically, they indicated that it 1) enhanced their
own critical thinking (60%) and 2) developed their interdisciplinary understanding (52.5%). [Participants were asked to select all that apply from a list of possible benefits, therefore each outcome
percentage is calculated out of 100%. Outcomes with more than 50% support are highlighted here.]
Teacher confidence teaching TOK was analyzed by examining mean confidence ratings on 11
Likert style items (the CTT scale items) in addition to the scale analysis using these items presented below. Using a 4 point agreement scale with 1 indicating not confident and 4 indicating very
confident, the item with the highest mean (M=3.60, SD=0.66) was:
. . . in exploring knowledge questions related to ethics, such as: ‘Is there such a thing as moral knowledge?
Does the rightness or wrongness of an action depend on the situation? Are all moral opinions equally
valid? Is there such a thing as a moral fact?

The item with the lowest mean (M=2.73, SD=1.05) confidence score was:
. . . in exploring knowledge questions related to indigenous knowledge systems, such as: “In what ways are
sense perception and memory crucial in constructing knowledge in indigenous knowledge systems? How do
beliefs about the physical and metaphysical world influence the pursuit of knowledge in indigenous knowledge
systems? How do indigenous people use the concept of respect to relate to their view of the world?”

177

Bergeron and Rogers
Table 2. Themes and codes related to perceptions of TOK.
Theme

Codes

Illustrative quotes

Connections

connects to other subjects,
connects to content, realworld connections, TOK is
everywhere, inclusive

Critical
thinking

analyze, devil’s advocate,
critically evaluate, critical
thinking, learn to handle
controversy
students value TOK, teacher
passion contagious

“I think the focus that we have on making
connections in Theory of Knowledge – once
students begin to make those connections
between areas of knowledge and ways of
knowing, that bell can’t be unrung.”
“They notice some things that they would never
notice before.”

Teacher
passion ignites
student passion
Life changing
course

appreciative, life changing

College
preparation

college preparation, preparation,
university skills

Learner profile

open-minded, reflective, learn to
handle controversy/principled/
multiple viewpoints

“You can’t sit inactive through a class like this; I
mean we can see that ourselves when we’re going
through it. The kind of discussions I think you get
going, are actually quite challenging, I mean we
find it challenging.”
“I have been hearing more and more now that
we’ve been a diploma school for seven years.
I’ve been hearing more and more from students
post-four-year college and into graduate school
who will email even then and say it’s changing my
life in graduate school. I still am remembering, in
graduate school, the sorts of thinking that we did
in high school, junior and senior year.”
“[returning students] talk about how TOK
plays so well into what they’re doing as
undergraduates.”
“I think that the biggest benefit is broadening the
mind, of both the teacher and the students.”

T-test. The independent samples t-test was used to analyze significant differences between US
schools and non-US schools on the CTT scale. The difference in mean CTT scores for US schools
and non-US schools was not statistically significant (t (670) = 1.889, p = .060).
ANOVA. Scores on the CTT scale did not differ significantly across class size group; F (2, 666) =
2.02, p = .118. Scores on the CTT did differ significantly across years teaching the TOK; F (2,
665) = 16.48, p = .00 (Table 3).
Not surprisingly, the respondents with more years teaching TOK have higher general TOK
teaching confidence scores. Generally, teachers with 1-3 years of experience are considered early
career teachers (See NCTQ, 2015). Tukey post-hoc comparisons (Table 4) of the 3 groups indicate that the “10 years or more experience teaching TOK” group (M = 3.40, 95% CI [3.32, 3.48])
scored significantly higher than the “1-3 years experience” group (M = 3.17, 95% CI [3.12,
3.22]), p< .001. The “4-9 years experience” group (M = 3.35, 95% CI [3.30, 3.40]) also scored
significantly higher than the “1-3 years experience” group (p<.001). The mean confidence scores
increase as years of teaching experience increases, but the post-hoc analysis only suggests a statistically significant difference between the two more experienced groups when each is compared
to the least experienced group. The “10 years or more experience teaching TOK” group scored
higher than the “4-9 years experience” group, but the difference was not statistically significant.
Therefore, a linear contrast analysis (test of linear trends) was performed for the mean scores by

178

Journal of Research in International Education 18(2)

Table 3. Descriptives for “years teaching TOK” for the Confidence Teaching TOK (CTT) score.
N

1-3 years
4-9 years
10+ years
Total

289
274
105
668

Mean

3.17
3.35
3.40
3.28

Std.
Deviation

Std.
Error

0.47
0.42
0.40
0.45

0.03
0.03
0.04
0.02

95% Confidence Interval for
Mean
Lower Bound

Upper Bound

3.12
3.30
3.32
3.25

3.22
3.40
3.48
3.31

Table 4. Tukey post-hoc comparisons of “years teaching TOK” for the CTT scale.
(I)
Q13_3cats

(J)
Q13_3cats

Mean
Difference (I-J)

Std.
Error

Sig.

1-3 years

4-9 years
10+ years
1-3 years
10+ years
1-3 years
4-9 years

−0.18*
−0.23*
0.18*
−0.45
0.23*
0.05

0.040
0.050
0.040
0.051
0.050
0.051

.000
.000
.000
.606
.000
.606

4-9 years
10+ years

95% Confidence Interval
Lower Bound

Upper Bound

−.2688
−.3478
.0942
−.1671
.1118
−.0705

−.0942
−.1118
.2688
.0705
.3478
.1671

*The mean difference is significant at the 0.05 level.

years teaching to determine if statistical differences between each experience group existed.
Linear contrast analysis can be applied to determine statistically significant differences between
means associated with groups that follow a linear trend. The test for linear trends indicates a statistically significant positive relationship between experience and confidence; t(214.17) = 4.80,
p < .001.
Qualitative results. Responses for teaching philosophy included multiple descriptions within 1 survey response, resulting in 1,629 individual descriptions of teaching philosophy. The wording of the
question requested teachers to provide phrases or terms to describe their teaching philosophy.
Teacher responses included phrases that were easily interpreted: “discussion based”, “reflective
listening practices”, “relational”, “engaging”, “high expectations”, “always room for improvement”, “all students learn differently”, “encouraging exploration”, and “teach through activity not
lecture”. Responses also included phrases that were more challenging to interpret such as “no
failure - just a new learning experience”. The responses were coded. Some phrases could be coded
as more than one category. For example, phrases such as “recognizing alternative views”, “devil’s
advocate” and “often the obvious is wrong” were coded as both ‘open’ and ‘questioning’. The most
frequent descriptors of teaching philosophy were: discussion-based, student-focused, reflective,
connections/ grounded in real life situations, exploration, collaborative, challenging, questioning/
question assumptions, critical/analysis, open-minded, adaptive, student-led, current, open (exercising all points of view but with valid arguments), flexible. Teacher open-ended responses describing
“other” types of professional development gained by teaching TOK included: critical thinking,
international mindedness, student-centered philosophy, not judge others, and connect to content.

179

Bergeron and Rogers
Table 5. Themes and codes related to impact on teachers.
Theme

Codes

Illustrative quotes

Improves
teaching

improves teacher
understanding; improves
teaching pedagogy

Methods

student-centered philosophy;
teach skills explicitly; texts to
support; use TOK methods in
other teaching; connections;
discussion based

Collaboration

collaboration in the
development of materials and
activities; guest lecturers; guest
speakers; share expertise;
partnerships; team teaching

“I think the TOK also develops the pedagogy
of teaching. I know how much I have grown
when it comes to the methods that I use during
classes. I graduated from psychology, I did a
PhD in psychology. So I thought that I knew
quite a lot about how to, I don’t know, work
with the group and what methods should I use.
But then I discovered so many things, when I
started working with the IB, and when I started
to immerse myself into the IB philosophy. I
discovered that they are thinking routines, so a
structured way of inquiry.”
“(TOK) is an opportunity to be reflective of what
(students are) learning and oftentimes students
view their subject areas as discrete and what
happens in their math class doesn’t necessarily
have an impact on what happens in their biology
class, and so this is an opportunity to make crosscurriculum connections and get them reflecting
on knowledge itself and also the fundamental
underpinnings of what constitutes knowledge and
what it’s all about.
“I think that it’s fun actually to sit in groups . . .
where we’re actually trying to develop ideas
together and see it from different perspectives.”

Focus groups. Participants were asked in the focus groups to share their thoughts about the impact
of TOK on teachers and the impact of teaching methods and efficacy on the success of TOK. The
most frequent codes and their larger themes related to perceptions of TOK are displayed in Table
5. The theme of ‘improves teaching’ includes teachers’ thoughts on ways they have developed their
pedagogical approach and understanding. The theme of ‘methods’ refers to the explicit instructional strategies gained. And, the theme ‘collaboration’ refers to the strategies for working with
colleagues developed.

TOK implementation
Descriptive statistics. Survey A items 28-30, 44, and Survey B items 11-22 address implementation.
TOK teachers were asked how they collaborate with non-TOK teachers (Table 6). [They were
asked to “select all that apply” from a list, therefore each row percentage is independent and calculated out of 100%.] Interestingly, of the collaboration options provided, none were selected by
more than 50% of the participants. Analysis of the open-ended comments given by respondents
regarding collaboration is presented in the qualitative results section below.
Survey questions concerning how the Theory of Knowledge course is implemented in IB
World schools were included in Survey B items for DP Coordinators. According to responses
from the DP coordinators, TOK teachers receive unique training (84%) and unique information

180

Journal of Research in International Education 18(2)

Table 6. Collaboration activities.

coordinate teaching so that topics align
coordinate assignments so that student
work overlaps between courses
coordinate assignments so that deadlines
are manageable for students
other _______________

Frequency

Percent

Total

225
141

23.4
14.7

960
960

417

43.4

960

223

3.2

960

(89%). Of the coordinators who reported that teachers receive unique support prior to teaching
TOK (48%), the most common type of support received was additional materials (69%) followed by planning time (36%). When asked about the planning time that teachers are given,
Coordinators most frequently indicated (74%) planning time was provided during the day. Of
those Coordinators who indicated TOK implementation was different than other IB programme
aspects (58%), most cited that teacher support (63%) and time (61%) were different than other
IB programme aspects.
Qualitative results. On the teacher survey, respondents were provided the opportunity to identify
“other” main challenges in addition to seven items presented in the survey. A total of 73 individuals
described an assortment of challenges of which “Assessment issues”, “time” and “differentiating”
were the most frequent codes. As illustrated in one teacher response, time issues are often related
to the challenges of assessing and differentiating within TOK: “having the time to grade/evaluate/
give feedback on all of the writing/presentations/projects that give me concrete evidence of their
thinking [is the biggest challenge]”.
Assessment issues were also the most frequent code in the open-ended “other” category when
teachers explained why they did not enjoy teaching TOK. However, it should be noted that even
though this was the most frequent code for “other” it was only coded 8 times, as only 22 (2.3%)
respondents indicated “no” – they don’t enjoy teaching TOK.
Focus groups. Participants responded to questions about the challenges with teaching TOK and
enablers of successful TOK teaching. The most frequent codes and their larger themes related to
implementation are displayed in Table 7.
Overwhelmingly, participants explained that the school sends the message about the importance
of TOK through administrative decisions. Two types of messages were discussed frequently: 1)
time of day the course is offered, and 2) grading. The time of day was brought up because participants argued that when the course is offered after school, it undermines its academic importance.
Some participants articulated that the TOK has an “add on” mentality because it is offered as an
extra class period, extending the school day for TOK students. Others explained that it is treated
the same as other DP courses and taught during the school day. TOK is not assessed on the same
scale as the other course components of the DP. In other courses from the six subject groups, students are externally assessed and earn a score on 1 – 7 scale, while TOK students are internally
assessed through an oral presentation, and assessed externally through a 1,600-word essay.
Variations on how the individual school treats the oral presentation can also result in different messages about the importance of TOK. Additionally, participants shared that assessments can be
problematic because of a lack of clarity regarding scoring. As suggested by several participants,
this lack of clarity about scoring is due to the nature of the TOK course. It is a course focused on

181

Bergeron and Rogers
Table 7. Themes and codes related to impact on teachers.
Theme

Codes

Illustrative quotes

Administrative
challenges

Class size, class timing, summer
assignments

Assessment
challenges

grading difficult, limited activities to
grade, limited external accountability,
grading is hard because not one
right answer; students want numeric
grade
challenging for teachers because
of content background, the benefit
to having a choice in content,
understanding of the IB DP required

“But also it’s connected with small things, like
moving it into the morning and the schedule,
so that it will – for example this year I had
lessons from 10 to 11:30 and it’s the perfect
time for having TOK. But we needed to fight
really hard to have it somewhere during the
day. . .”
“Because they want to have grades, because they
need to know how they are doing. With the
feedback, even if it’s an extended feedback, they
don’t really know how they are doing, they want
the number.”
“I think it’s also time-consuming . . . if you’re
going to do a good job of it, you’re going to
have to read and teach yourself the stuff in these
other subjects.”

Teacher
background

examining knowledge from multiple perspectives, not necessarily about identifying a single right
answer. The third challenge that was identified, ‘teacher background’, suggests that TOK teachers
personally feel underprepared to teach the course. The focus groups suggest that the perception of
“required” background differs among participants. Essentially, each teacher felt others had better
qualifications than they did. In the other courses taught in the DP that are located in the six subject
groups, teachers typically have academic background aligned with their teaching assignment. It
emerged that this provides some reassurance to teachers that they are a good fit for the teaching
assignment.

Discussion
The findings from this research aim to offer insights into the perceptions, teacher impact, and
implementation of the TOK course and, more generally, to contribute to the research on teaching
perspectives in the larger educational community. Research questions were organized into three
categories: perceptions of TOK, teacher impact, and TOK implementation.

Perceptions of TOK
Assessment was clearly identified as a challenge. The top three challenges identified on the survey
are all assessment-related: 1) assessing progress towards a goal, 2) identifying objectives, and 3)
critically evaluating student knowledge. Participants ranked effort associated with ‘assessing
learning’ more highly than ‘planning’ and ‘implementing’ instruction. It was suggested that the
course materials are not as explicit about assessment in TOK as they are in other subject areas. Two
resources were discussed by the TOK teachers: 1) Theory of Knowledge guide (IB, 2015a) and 2)
Theory of Knowledge teacher support materials (IB, 2015d). The Theory of Knowledge guide (IB,
2015a) dedicates 9 pages to assessment in TOK, specifically addressing: 1) expectations for the
two assessment tasks in TOK (the externally marked essay and the internally marked and externally moderated oral presentation) and 2) rubrics for each assessment task. The Theory of

182

Journal of Research in International Education 18(2)

Knowledge teacher support materials (IB, 2015d) include two sections dedicated to assessment: 1)
a guide to TOK assessment and 2) assessed samples of the student work. The guide to TOK assessment includes possible formative assessments aligned to teaching objectives. The qualitative data
suggest there is a disconnect between what is provided and the support teachers need to implement
the assessment strategies.

Impact on teachers
Teachers describe experiencing the same gains they desire for their students: seeing things from
multiple viewpoints, being open, not judging others. Teaching TOK seems to strengthen teaching approaches used not only in TOK, but also in other courses. Teachers described studentcentered, reflective, interdisciplinary, real-world lessons as an essential part of their TOK
teaching approach. Descriptions such as “opening minds and hearts” and “expose thinking”
illustrate common underpinnings. Overwhelmingly, teachers felt confident in their abilities to
successfully teach TOK. Not surprisingly, confidence in teaching TOK improved with years of
experience teaching TOK. This aligns with findings from other studies examining teaching
confidence and teaching self-efficacy (see Klassen & Chiu, 2010). Teacher confidence has been
associated with positive outcomes for students (Hudson, Kloosterman, & Galindo, 2012;
Munby, Russell, & Martin, 2001).

TOK implementation
The implementation successes and challenges were identified using data from the teacher survey
and coordinator survey, as well as focus group transcripts. Survey items were examined to see if
differences existed across regions and no differences across regions were identified, suggesting
that TOK is implemented and perceived similarly regardless of school location.
Teacher background. Many of the teachers discussed that it was challenging to teach TOK because
they felt they didn’t have the content background necessary. However, the same teachers discussed
the joys of collaborating with colleagues and learning new content. Teachers explained that they
often invited colleagues to be guest teachers or team teachers when they needed support with the
content. Because the majority (76%) of coordinators indicated that teachers were not hired specifically to teach the TOK course, it makes sense that they would be pulled from a variety of disciplines. Based on the survey responses it seems that the most common selection method for TOK
teachers is to ask for volunteers. Only 13% of teachers indicated that they did not choose to teach
TOK.
Administrative challenges. The challenges surrounding TOK implementation involve class size, time
of day, and workload. With a large class size, it is difficult to build the relationships with the students necessary for the reflective dissection of knowledge essential to teaching TOK, and to accurately and frequently use formative assessment. The timing of the TOK course was discussed at
length during the focus groups. It seems some schools schedule TOK after school, like an extracurricular activity, sending the message that TOK is not an equal component of the DP. It is not
clear how frequently this scheduling strategy is used. It is evident the teachers would appreciate
scheduling TOK in the same manner that subjects in groups 1-6 are scheduled. TOK is classified
as a component of the IB DP “core” along with the extended essay (EE) and Creativity, Activity,
Service (CAS), but it is the only core requirement structured as a course, in a similar way to the
subjects of the six IB DP groups.

Bergeron and Rogers

183

Funding
The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was supported by the International Baccalaureate.

References
Bandalos DL and Boehm-Kaufman MR (2009) Four common misconceptions in exploratory factor analysis.
In: Lance C.E. and Vandenberg RJ (eds) Statistical and Methodological Myths and Urban Legends:
Doctrine, Verity, and Fable in the Organizational and Social Sciences. New York, NY: Taylor &
Francis: pp.61–87.
Bandura A (1989) Multidimensional scales of perceived self-efficacy. Unpublished test, Stanford: Stanford
University.
Bandura A (1997) Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Bandura A (2006) Guide for constructing self-efficacy scales. In: Pajares F and Urdan T (eds) Self-efficacy
beliefs of adolescents, Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing, pp.307–337.
Baxter J, Ruzicka A, Beghetto R and Livelybrooks D (2014) Professional development strategically connecting mathematics and science: The impact on teachers’ confidence and practice. School Science &
Mathematics, 114(3), 102-113.
Bergeron L and Dean M (2013) The IB teacher professional: Identifying, measuring and characterizing pedagogical attributes, perspectives, and beliefs. Bethesda, MD: International Baccalaureate.
Billig SH (2013) Impact of participation in CAS on students’ civic-mindedness and civic engagement. Denver,
CO: RMC Research Corporation.
Billig SH, Fredericks L, Swackhamer L and Espel E (2014) Case studies of learner profile implementation
and impact in the United States. Bethesda, MD: International Baccalaureate.
Buehl MM and Beck JS (2015). The relationship between teachers’ beliefs and teachers’ practices. In: Fives H
and Gill MG (eds), International handbook of research on teachers’ beliefs. New York, NY: Routledge,
pp.66-84.
Caspary K (2011) Postsecondary enrollment patterns of IB certificate and diploma candidates from international high schools. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Caspary K and Bland J (2011) First college courses taken by Florida IB students. Menlo Park, CA: SRI
International.
Chan CH (1994) Operationalization and prediction of conceptions of teaching in adult education. Unpublished
dissertation, the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia.
Chingos M (2012) The impact of a universal class-size reduction policy: Evidence from Florida’s statewide
mandate. Economics of Education Review 31(5): 543-562.
Coates H, Rosicka C and MacMahon-Ball M (2007) Perceptions of the International Baccalaureate Diploma
Programme among Australian and New Zealand universities. Melbourne: Australian Council for
Educational Research.
Coca V, Johnson D, Kelley-Kemple T, et al. (2012) Working to My Potential: Experiences of CPS Students
in the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme. Chicago: The Consortium on Chicago School
Research.
Cole DR, Ullman J, Gannon S and Rooney P (2015) Critical thinking skills in the International Baccalaureate’s
“Theory of Knowledge” subject: Findings from an Australian study. Australian Journal of Education
59(3): 247–264.
Collins JB and Pratt DD (2010) The teaching perspectives inventory at 10 years and 100,000 respondents:
Reliability and validity of a teacher self- report inventory. Adult Education Quarterly 61(4): 358-375.
Creswell JW (2008) Educational Research: planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and qualitative research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Dean M and Bergeron L (2015) Teaching perspectives in an International context: Multivariate analysis of
responses to the Teaching Perspectives Inventory. Global Education Journal 2015(2): 24-43.
Dombrowski E, Rotenberg L and Bick M (2007) Theory of Knowledge: Course Companion- IB Diploma
Program 1st Edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

184

Journal of Research in International Education 18(2)

Dunlap WP and Greer T (1996) A Monte-Carlo study of Type I error rates and power for Tukey’s pocket test.
Journal of General Psychology 123(4): 333-339.
Ertmer PA, Ottenbreit-Leftwich AT and Tondeur J (2015) Teachers’ beliefs and uses of technology to support
21st-century teaching and learning. In: Fives H and Gill MG (eds), International handbook of research
on teachers’ beliefs. New York, NY: Routledge, pp.403-418.
Falk B (2013) Early career teachers: Dilemmas and challenges. The New Educator 9(2): 95-97.
Fang Z (1996) A review of research on teacher beliefs and practices. Educational Research 38: 47-65.
Glaser BG and Strauss AL (2017) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research.
New York, NY: Routledge.
Greene J (2007) Mixed Methods in Social Inquiry. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley and Sons.
Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) (2011) International Baccalaureate Students studying at UK
Higher Education Institutions: How do they fare? UK: HESA.
Huckfeldt R, Johnson P and Sprague J (2004) Political Disagreement: The Survival of Diverse Opinions
within Communication Networks. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hudson R, Kloosterman P and Galindo E (2012) Assessing preservice teachers’ beliefs about the teaching and
learning of mathematics and science. School Science & Mathematics 112(7): 433-442.
Hughes C (2014) Theory of Knowledge aims, objectives and assessment criteria: An analysis of critical thinking descriptors. Journal of Research in International Education 13(1): 30–45.
Hutcheson G and Sofroniou N (1999) The multivariate social scientist: Introductory statistics using generalized linear models. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Inkelas KK, Swan A, Pretlow J et al. (2013) Exploring the Benefits of the International Baccalaureate
Extended Essay for University Study at the University of Virginia. Charlottesville, VA: Center for
Advanced Study of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, University of VA.
International Baccalaureate (IB) (2008) IB Learner Profile Booklet. Cardiff, Wales: IB.
International Baccalaureate (IB) (2015a) Diploma Programme: Theory of Knowledge Guide. Cardiff, Wales:
IB.
International Baccalaureate (IB) (2015b) IB Fast Facts. Available at: http://www.ibo.org/en/about-the-ib/
facts-and-figures/ (accessed 10 November 2015).
International Baccalaureate (IB) (2015c) About the IB. Available at: http://www.ibo.org/ (accessed 10
November 2015).
International Baccalaureate (IB) (2015d) Theory of Knowledge teacher support material. Published online via
the International Baccalaureate Online Curriculum Center (restricted access).
Jamieson S (2004) Likert scales: How to (ab)use them. Medical Education 38: 1212-1218.
Klassen RM and Chiu MM (2010) Effects on teachers’ self-efficacy and job satisfaction: Teacher gender,
years of experience, and job stress. Journal of Educational Psychology 102(3): 741-756.
Lubke GH and Muthen BO (2004) Applying multigroup confirmatory factor models for continuous outcomes
to Likert scale data complicates meaningful group comparisons. Structural Equation Modeling 11: 514534.
Lucas T, Villegas AM and Martin AD (2015) Teachers’ beliefs about English language learners. In: Fives H
and Gill MG (eds) International handbook of research on teachers’ beliefs. New York, NY: Routledge,
pp.453-474.
Maxwell JA (2005) Qualitative research design: An interactive approach (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Mertler CA and Vannatta RA (2009) Advanced and Multivariate Statistical Methods: Practical Application
and Interpretation. Glendale, CA: Pyrczak Publishing.
Munby H, Russell T and Martin AK (2001) Teachers’ knowledge and how it develops. In: Richardson V
(ed) Handbook of research on teaching. Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association,
pp.877–904.
National Council on Teacher Quality (NCTQ) (2015) District Policy. In the NCTQ database. Available at:
http://www.nctq.org/districtPolicy/contractDatabase/district.do?id=11 (accessed 20 November 2014).
Pratt D, Collins J and Selinger SJ (2001) Development and Use of The Teaching Perspectives Inventory (TPI).
Unpublished paper presented at the 2001 AERA annual conference, Seattle, WA.

Bergeron and Rogers

185

Rosental R and Jacobson L (1968) Pygmalion in the classroom: Teacher expectation and pupils’ intellectual
development. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Saavedra A (2011) The Academic Impact of Enrollment in International Baccalaureate Diploma Programs:
A Case Study of Chicago Public Schools. Paper presented at the annual conference of the American
Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA.
Schilling J (2006) On the pragmatics of qualitative assessment: Designing the process for content analysis.
European Journal of Psychological Assessment 22(1): 28-37.
Stevens JP (1992) Applied multivariate statistics for the social sciences (2nd edition). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wade J (2011) Student Performance and Student Engagement in the International Baccalaureate Middle
Years Programme. Bethesda, MD: International Baccalaureate.
Weber S and Dixon S (2010) Growing Up Online: Young People and Digital Technologies. Montreal:
Macmillan Press.
Wilkins JLM (2008) The relationship among elementary teachers’ content knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and
practices. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education 11: 139-164.
Wright E and Lee M (2014) Developing skills for youth in the 21st century: The role of the elite International
Baccalaureate Diploma Programme schools in China. International Review of Education 60: 199-216.

Author biographies
Liz Bergeron teaches Assessment in Education in the Graduate School of Education at Northeastern University.
Teaching experiences include US public K-12 schools and university courses in curriculum/instruction,
research methods, and assessment. Research expertise includes conducting a broad range of projects utilizing
qualitative and quantitative methods to explore the impact of educational interventions, with a specific focus
on assessment, International Baccalaureate programmes, and project-based learning. Dr. Bergeron earned her
PhD from George Mason University in 2011.
Leslie Rogers has been an Assistant Professor in the Department of Educational Studies at the University of
Wisconsin-La Crosse since 2013. Her expertise relates to high incidence disabilities, parent-teacher relationships, formative assessments, and self-regulation. Dr. Rogers earned her PhD in Special Education from
Vanderbilt in 2010. She also has experience working with diverse students at international locations, working
as a Behavior Management Consultant for Pk-12 students and their families in Belgium, the Netherlands and
Germany, and working as an Assistant Professor of Education in the Republic of Korea.

