JRIE

A RT I C L E

An examination of
Hegelian and Spinozian
philosophy and their
relationships with the
International
Baccalaureate subject,
Theory of Knowledge

JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN
I N T E R N AT I O N A L E D U C AT I O N
& 2 0 0 5 I N T E R N AT I O N A L
B A C C A L A U R E AT E O R G A N I Z A T I O N
(www.ibo.org)

and S A G E P U B L I C A T I O N S
( w w w.s ag ep u bl ic a ti o n s. co m )

VOL 4(2) 211–226 ISSN 1475-2409
DOI: 10.1177/1475240905054391

DAV I D R . C O L E
University of Tasmania, Australia
One concern for teachers of the
International Baccalaureate Diploma
Programme is how to balance academic
study with a need for the development of
the imagination. This article examines the
subject at the heart of the IB Diploma,
Theory of Knowledge, and looks at the
contrasting philosophies of Spinoza and
Hegel and their relationship with this area.
Through such an investigation, one may
understand how the balance between
academic study and the expansion of the
imagination may be achieved to the benefit
of the student and teacher alike.
Hegel, IB, imagination, Spinoza,
Theory of Knowledge

K E Y WO R D S

Les enseignants du Programme du diplôme de l’Organisation du
Baccalauréat International s’efforcent entre autres de trouver un
certain équilibre entre l’étude théorique et le besoin de développer
l’imagination. Cet article analyse la théorie de la connaissance,
matière-phare du Programme du diplôme du BI et s’intéresse aux
philosophies de Spinoza et Hegel, ainsi qu’à leurs relations avec cette
matière. À travers cette recherche, il est possible de comprendre
comment atteindre l’équilibre entre l’étude théorique et le
développement de l’imagination au profit de l’élève et de l’enseignant.
Un aspecto que preocupa a los profesores del Programa del Diploma
del Bachillerato Internacional es cómo encontrar un equilibrio entre
el estudio teórico y la necesidad de desarrollar la imaginación. Este
artı́culo examina Teorı́a del Conocimiento, materia esencial del
Programa del Diploma del BI, y analiza las filosofı́as contrastantes
de Spinoza y Hegel, ası́ como su relación con esta materia. Mediante
esta investigación, es posible entender cómo lograr el equilibrio entre
el estudio teórico y el desarrollo de la imaginación para beneficio del
estudiante y del propio profesor.

Prologue
This article will involve three movements in educational thought. The first
we may bracket within experience. That is, my teaching of the International
Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma programme and specifically the Theory of
211

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Journal of Research in International Education 4(2)
Knowledge (TOK) course. The second area that I will address may be
defined by the title, ‘Hegel and Education’. The third element of this article
concerns Spinoza. I have chosen Spinoza as his ideas could be taken as a
counter movement against Hegelianism, and may be used in this context
as an attempt to position the philosophical imagination at the centre of
the pre-university, international curriculum and the TOK course.
When teaching TOK to IB students, one is struck by the fundamental
change in emphasis between the six academic, time consuming and curriculum laden (in terms of content) subjects required as part of this programme, and the questioning nature of the TOK course. The students
come into the TOK classroom expecting to be given more knowledge to
learn and to reproduce this knowledge under examination conditions.
They are, on the whole, receptive to a certain type of teacher–pupil
relationship that is dominated by a passive/active dynamic between the
pupil and the teacher. It could be said that ‘breakthrough’ TOK learning
happens when the normative rules governing educational behaviour are
broken, and constructive questioning of the assumptions that underlie
the activity of learning has begun. In other words, the pupils are being continually ‘redirected’ and asked to reconstruct their primary manner of intellectual inquiry with an opposite focus in the TOK classroom. This leads to
the conclusion that there is a ‘resonant oscillation’ at the heart of the IB
curriculum, which one might use to figure a definition of the academic
becoming that the IB instigates. The pupils move forwards in terms of
more efficient digestion and reproduction of learnt knowledge and learnt
thinking skills from the six academic areas, and go backwards in terms of
formulating questions and structured answers that challenge the assumptions that were set through the knowledge of these academic areas.

The empty ‘knower’
It is to this extent that the International Baccalaureate instigates bildung.
According to Hegel (Wood, 1998), as he described in the Phenomenology of
Spirit, education happens through experience; this is a conflict-ridden
process in the course of which a spiritual being discovers its own identity
or selfhood, while striving to actualize the selfhood it is in the process of
discovering. In the context of the IB TOK programme (see Appendix), the
child studying for his or her qualification is an empty ‘knower’. They are
necessarily rational, self-directed and not merely constructed in a process
of conditioning through environmental stimuli or the accumulation of
information presented by experience. Although the concept of ‘the empty
212

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Cole: International Spinozian curriculum
knower’ may seem to be problematic and contradictory to, for example,
the way in which Alec Peterson (1987) respected the inner life of the
student and specifically made provision for inner development in the
CASS programme, I am using it here as a central metaphor for the nonreflective student who may overlook the power of the imagination and
incorporate the learning patterns of the IB in a strictly academic fashion.
In this case, the emptiness of the knower allows for the spiritual dimension
of Hegelianism to take hold in a fundamental sense. The knower is devoid
of substance, and full of spirit, that may tend towards that which is not
familiar, and grasp the universality of concepts (Wood, 1998). Hegel
defined education as being the ‘laborious emergence from the immediacy
of substantial life’ (Wood, 1998: 5). The IB succeeds in this enterprise to
the extent that the knower is replete with knowledge processing resources,
and is able to explain them in universal terms.
What alternatives are there to this model of knowledge, and why might
we wish to depart from the course of Hegelian education? The first and
most basic objection to Hegelianism comes at the level of the empty
knower, who is to be filled with curriculum details and consequently
asked to question this ‘filling’. Such an educational schema is fundamentally contradictory and idealistic. I find myself as a pre-university teacher
having to impart knowledge in terms of ‘snapshots’ of philosophy and
logic, which serve in the minds of the students as extra knowledge content,
and some even try to learn this content in preparation for examinations.
Other students do have the requisite reflexivity to question the knowledge
processes that are being initiated through the IB. My search in this essay
is to find a model of knowledge that offers help to students without the
natural capacity to question the authority of the academic disciplines in
which they are enmeshed. To enable this model I have turned to Spinoza,
whose ideas may be employed in order to challenge the status of the empty
knower, and who has prioritized the imagination as fundamental to intellectual processes.

The immanence of desire
Hegel clearly tried to outplay Spinoza through his use of the dialectics that
transcend material substance and take the novice on the road to Absolute
Spirit. However, I tend to agree with Macherey and Holland, and the suggestion that Spinozian substance is not subsumed by Hegelian negation and
the dialectics, but that Spinoza’s philosophy is a path that has not been
taken in the course of western thought (Holland, 1998: n7). I intend to
use Spinoza for our international teaching purposes, and in the process
213

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Journal of Research in International Education 4(2)
to challenge Hegelian assumptions of learning and their concomitant
effects in the construction of the international curriculum as they emerge.
First, in order to sketch the Spinozian alternative for the international curriculum (which I shall refer to henceforth as the ‘international Spinozian
curriculum’), it could be said that one should not oppose thought and
matter, because, according to Spinoza, they are part of the same substance
that does not define a subject, but offers an immanent field that provides
no negativity, and for which no contradiction is possible or necessary
(Holland, 1998: n9). Consequently, the development of adequate ideas
depends upon the imagination being able to distance the intellectual processes of the students from the distortion of subject-centred thinking. In
other words, the basis of international Spinozian education is to stimulate
and extol the imagination, or, as Gilles Deleuze has expressed it: ‘The
faculty of imagination is defined by the conditions in which we naturally
have ideas, inadequate ideas; it is nonetheless in one of its aspects a virtue;
it involves our power of thinking even though it is not explained by it –
an image involves its own cause, even though it does not express it’
(1992: 150).
At this point, we should stop and reflect upon several of the consequences of such a starting point for a revised international curriculum
based upon Spinozian philosophy. It could be said that the pupils in the
classroom are no longer empty ‘knowers’ set to be filled with knowledge
and put on the path to irrefutable truth; they define a plane of immanence.
This is because in the international Spinozian curriculum we are challenging the assumption of ‘self-hood’ and instead appreciating that the
students are full of desire. The job of the teacher is to take heed of the
plane of immanence that the students represent, and to provide the conditions whereby the students may produce ideas in relation to this plane.
Perhaps these ideas will be inadequate ideas; in whatever form the ideas
of the students emerge from the plane of immanence produced by their
desire, they will at least be images that express affective processes that
are present in the classroom. In a sense, the classroom is a chance encounter
between bodies, and as the Deleuzian critic Michael Hardt has written,
these random moments present ‘corporeal relationships that are representable through the work of the imagination, and that are open to the
laws of composability. They may be true and adequate’ (Hardt, 1993: 102).

The politics of affection
In terms of international educational philosophy, a broad political frame is
already forming around this article. The international Spinozian curriculum
214

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Cole: International Spinozian curriculum
that is at issue is following in the post structural vein of educationalists such
as Megan Boler or Mary Leach, who have taken the ideas of Moira Gatens,
Genevieve Lloyd and Gilles Deleuze, and used them in order to analyse
emotions in education in terms of ‘inscribed habits of inattention’ (Boler,
1997). In contrast to the disciplined other of verbally correct, nondistracted learning behaviour, Boler posits her analysis as being within the
area of educational ‘fall-out’. In other words, we, as educators of the international Spinozian curriculum are in the business of examining in detail
the desires and the emotions of the pupils as they actually occur in the
classroom, and not as we think they should occur according to pre-set
curriculum or behavioural concerns. This ‘scheme of work’ is clearly
problematic for the ambitious, goal-driven teacher. Yet an important
aspect of the international Spinozian curriculum is the examination and
consequent reflection on this ‘problem’. We cannot turn away from the
educational truth of the affective environment in which our knowledge
dissemination is based. Indeed, it could be argued that the vestiges of
Hegelianism in the international curriculum are there in order to take
the educator away from the direct emotional and desirous environment
and into a self-conscious idealism that values knowledge in its own terms
and in so doing dispenses with that which is immediately at hand. I am
proposing that to centralize the imagination in the temporal and emotionally-dependent affective classroom, offers the educator significant and
heterogeneous opportunities for teaching and learning. But before we
continue to immerse ourselves in this international Spinozian alternative, we must systematically proceed with the exploration of Hegelianism
in order to enable further differentiation between the two models of
education.
One of the principle objections to the international Spinozian curriculum from a Hegelian perspective is that it does not allow the opportunity
to gather the truth. In the Phenomenology of Spirit, Hegel argues that consciousness is shaped by two fundamental moments: (1) ‘the being of something for consciousness or knowing’; and (2) ‘the being in itself of this
same thing which is called truth’ (Wood, 1998: 6). To attain genuine
knowledge, a shape of consciousness must ascertain that its moment of
knowledge agrees with its own moment of truth. It need not appeal to
any criteria outside of itself, it has found the truth; but if its own proper
conceptions are in disharmony with one another, then spirit is impelled
to go beyond it and to seek the truth in a different shape (Wood, 1998).
This is the Hegelian schema for the perception of genuine knowledge
which has, at its heart, the notion that negation is a necessary principle that
determines knowing. In Hegel’s terms, the disharmony of the conceptions
215

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Journal of Research in International Education 4(2)
of knowledge and the truth leads to a breakdown of each shape of consciousness and the form of a determinate negation; this in turn results in
a specific new shape which appears in its way as being higher or deeper,
one step closer to the truth than the shape that has gone before (Wood,
1998). This process of bildung is depicted in the Phenomenology of Spirit as
being an ideal course of philosophical method leading to a genuine science
but, through allusions of varying specificity and explicitness, it can also be
seen to be the course that human spirit has taken through history.
The extension of bildung in the Phenomenology of Spirit exemplifies, through
contrast, some of the important features that the international Spinozian
curriculum exhibits. The student of the international Spinozian curriculum
is not required to negate previous shapes of consciousness in order to
demonstrate one closer to the truth; instead they are asked to participate
in the immanence of the plane of becoming as defined by the group.
In the case of the TOK class, the student will be required to develop a
philosophical imagination. It could be stated that in this context there is
no one ideal course of inquiry leading to a ‘nexus’ of TOK knowledge
(such as notions of higher rationality); in the international Spinozian
curriculum there are the heterogeneous material effects of desire that signify a plane of change, and a dynamic feeder mechanism to stimulate, in
this instance, the philosophical imagination. One might reasonably interject at this point that the international Spinozian curriculum will suffer
from a lack of direction, and at least the force of idealism gives the educator
a definite focus through which he or she may lead the class, and not wait
for the vagaries of the philosophical imagination to develop in the flux of
desire in the TOK classroom. Yet this is precisely the difference in teaching
practice that the use of the international Spinozian curriculum is striving to
open up. Philosophical inquiry is heterogeneous, in that control of its logic
from a fixed non-material direction may lead to the sense that it is an
imposed and therefore disconnected subject (in terms of student emphasis).
Perhaps a better question to ask at this point is: Do we merely overlay one
idealism with another through the suggestion that heterogeneity should
replace a singular path to the truth?

Conjecture, superstition and gossip
It is clear that this offers a more stinging criticism of the international
Spinozian curriculum. Another way of expressing this argument is that
by allowing many paths to the truth (through the heterogeneity of
desire) we are denying any access to any truth and are, in fact, confusing
the issues under scrutiny through the overlay of idealisms. The example
216

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Cole: International Spinozian curriculum
of scientific education, where clear and distinct knowledge is sought to
construct ideas beyond the spurious and random, shows how the international Spinozian curriculum may be doubted in terms of its ‘inscribed
habits of inattention’ and the immanence of desire. We may wonder
how rigourous definitions of the natural world may be achieved when
we are proposing the use the mode of imagination as fundamental to learning and the combined structuring educational methodology of conjecture,
superstition and gossip in an affective classroom. However, Spinoza did
make a distinction between the mode of apprehension of the imagination,
rationality that requires a distance from subjectivity and the mode of
intuition that makes possible a complete rational grasp of the real. It
should be noted that in Spinoza’s Ethics, rationality is firmly based in the
imagination as a complementary attribute. Or, as Deleuze has expressed
it: ‘Reason profits from one of the features of imagination; the more we
understand things as necessary, the less we feel the strength or intensity
of passions rooted in the imagination’ (Deleuze, 1992: 295). In other
words, we do not lose the sensible and the rational by basing our curriculum in the imaginative and the affective, but in fact we are developing a
relationship between the two. This relationship may be lost or written
over in a homogenized and closed environment, which would set Hegelian
idealism in the form of negation to discern the truth, and in so doing
would negate the ‘maelstrom of emotionality’. The vital distinction that
is at stake in the international Spinozian curriculum is that there is no
one pre-determined educational model, which ‘directs’ the teaching and
learning of the classes. In its place we as educators should be continually
working on the conditions for the production of ideas, and the relationships that define this production in the affective environment.
We have taken perhaps what could be termed an instinctual educational
path due to the influence of the international Spinozian curriculum. In contrast, we find that in the Phenomenology, the ‘natural self ’ is cancelled (aufheben)
by a process through which modern culture forms the modern self, whose
main aim is the actualization of its own freedom. This is a process through
which a human being becomes not merely a self, but a particular kind of
self, deriving a sense of self-worth from a chosen way of life and from
living according to self-given rules or principles (Pinkard, 1994: 302).
Or to use the language that Hegel employed in the Philosophy of Right, early
modern culture (bildung), was to shape the ‘moral subject’ that finds
its self-actualization in ‘subjective freedom’ (Wood, 1998). One could
at this point look at a certain cultural and historical moment, and in
so doing compare the actualized, modern Hegelian position with the
romantic of the early 19th century. This may lead to the question: Does
217

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Journal of Research in International Education 4(2)
the international Spinozian curriculum, by rejecting the Hegelian schema,
retain what may be termed as ‘the natural’, and allow no escape to subjective freedom? However, one might say that there is no clear-cut or necessary distinction between the ordered, moral, conventional modern and the
chaotic, immoral, unconventional romantic, which defines the difference
between Hegelian education and the international Spinozian curriculum,
respectively. A better question to help understand what the international
Spinozian curriculum might signify is: What is the international cultural
formation that we seek to promote through our pre-university lessons?

Civil society and the force of the group
It could be said that the international Spinozian curriculum promotes a
wholly positive educational format. This is not to say that students may
not have negative attitudes, or produce weak or confusing ideas. The
point is that the force of negativity is to be realigned from a position of
contradiction (Hegelianism), to one of productivity. One might notice
that even the most nihilistic ideas may be appreciated from the perspective
of being constitutive of the affective imagination. The elimination of
contradiction from the basis of learning opens up the type of culture
and society that the international Spinozian curriculum induces. Unlike
the precepts of education we find, for example, in Hobbes (1996); the
students and educators are not obliged to hand over their natural rights
to a sovereign power in order to safe-guard their private interests and
found a political society. Conversely, one may point out that interpersonal
relations were already political to begin with, and the political force of the
particular educational units that are present in the international Spinozian
curriculum depend upon how extensively, intensively and harmoniously
these passionate relations are composed. This composition represents a
rejection of the social contract (à la Rousseau) and denies any need for
transcendent authority (potestas) and alternatively grounds politics immanently (non-dialectically) in the force of the group (potentia multitudine)
(Holland, 1998: n24). It should also be added that there is no educational
justification or motive according to the international Spinozian curriculum
for submitting to the external control of the State in the classroom. In so
far as relations are grounded in passion, there is no necessity that these
passions are sublimated in contractual agreements such as the notion of
citizenship or in the portrayal of individuals with rights.
Such an obligatory factor was one of the intentions of Hegelian education. Through the use of the principle of negation and the diminution of

218

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Cole: International Spinozian curriculum
the imagination, Hegel and his followers organized a system that sought a
rational progression from the family through civil society to the State.
Essential to this conception of progress is the idea of civil society. It is
the link between the personal and the public, consisting of two conceptions
of the self, the subject and the person. Civil society is based in the modern
market economy, or what Hegel called the ‘system of needs’ (Wood,
1998). This system is responsible for developing a legal hierarchy of
rights around the private individual, and the network of civil institutions
including education, that protect the economic realm and develop it into
a genuine social home in which individual freedom may flourish
(Wood, 1998). It is in this respect that the IB system of education closely
relates to the principles of Hegelianism. The idea that the institutions of
education are protectors of economics and that education leads to greater
subjective freedom is played out on a daily basis in terms of discussing
the IB Diploma with the students. The TOK root of the IB Diploma
places questioning of the status and nature of knowledge at the centre of
the programme. In synthesis, this placement may be summarized by the
indicative phrase ‘you are what you think that you know’, which suggests
the development of the relationship between the private individual and a
public figure with rights. It is also at the heart of the universal conception
of civil society, or the idea that a global economy is run by professionals
defined by their knowledge skills.
Hegel considered that the modern market economy promoted a
deepened interdependence between people and ways of life that, even
prior to reflection, are systematically orientated towards the common
good. He thought that those who reject modernity in favour of natural
simplicity are akin to the ancient Cynics, whose life was actually ‘unfree’ because their rejection of civilization was ‘merely a consequence of
these same social conditions, and in itself an unprepossessing product of
luxury’ (Wood, 1998: 17). In addition, when modern civil society
expands people’s needs, this is a sign that individuals are being encouraged
to value their own opinion, even their own arbitrariness; and this is the
social medium through which they also augment the inner life of moral
subjectivity, and the subjective freedom which is the proper contribution
of the modern world to the development of spirit (Wood, 1998). One
might state that the expansion of needs in terms of education leads to
the greater valuing and interdependence of knowledge skills and the subsequent articulation of that knowledge. Also, this use of knowledge is
necessary in terms of the pursuit of technical employment to satisfy the
expansion of desire that the market economy provokes and enables.

219

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Journal of Research in International Education 4(2)
Post-modern education
It could be argued, at this point in this discussion of Spinozian and
Hegelian philosophy and their underpinning of the international curriculum, that the Hegelian alternative is practical and apposite in that civil
society is the dominant cultural form that IB students will progress into
and be part of. Also, this society conforms to the general tenets of
modern democracy, which should be a central concern of the IB teacher.
However, as Jean-François Lyotard has argued in the Post-modern Condition,
the new arrangements of data in post-modern society must be connected in
order to articulate the knowledge problems that confront us. This capacity to
express that which was formerly separate is called the imagination. It is possible
to conceive of the world of post-modern knowledge as governed by a game of
perfect information in the sense that the data is in principle accessible to any
expert: i.e., there is no scientific secret. Given equal competence, what extra
perfomativity depends upon in the final analysis is ‘imagination’ which
allows one either to make a new move or to change the rules of the game.
(Lyotard, 1984: 52)

In other words, we are saying that the emphasis on the articulation of technical knowledge in civil society has been played out through the movement
of modernism, and this system has now been exhausted in a post-modern,
electronically connected environment (even though the institutions and
machinery of modernism clearly still survive). This environment is the
one in which the pupils increasingly find themselves. If you know where
to look, technical knowledge is freely available, yet making sense of it,
using it, applying it to other fields of enquiry (for example, the connection
between sociology and geography come together in the post-modern field
of ‘urbanism’) all require imaginative thought.
It is precisely these imaginative thinking processes that the international
Spinozian curriculum centralizes in teaching and learning. I perceive the
international Spinozian curriculum to be a sort of ‘feeder mechanism’ to
establish and determine the new areas of intellectual inquiry that are
emerging in contemporary society. It is not that the international Spinozian
curriculum denies the educative purpose of making students ‘fit into’ civil
society, but that it directs the educator to use imaginative resources in order
to link knowledge areas and in so doing open up new intellectual terrain
for exploration. It may well be that the Hegelian diagnostic of the
market economy being responsible for a system of needs and knowledge
necessities of the pupils is sound. Yet the educational tendency resulting
from this Hegelian logic is to consequently make the ‘knowledge market’
220

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Cole: International Spinozian curriculum
an overwhelming and dominant consideration, which clouds all other
possibilities and might obscure less obvious ‘truths’ about education. For
example, it may well be that the educational separation from funding
matters that has been set into place by the bureaucracies of liberal democracy and by the power of the State begins to unwind as the post-modern
reality of immensely powerful corporations and the importance of international commerce changes our notion of the free market and takes us
into the unprecedented period of globalization that sets new knowledge
challenges distinct from civil society.
Hegelians would perhaps counter at this point in the discussion about
the ‘founding’ of an ‘international Spinozian curriculum’ that we are
misunderstanding spirit, reason and the ethical nature of education. In
the Philosophy of Right, Hegel argued that education (bildung) in its absolute
determination is liberation and work towards a higher liberation; it is the
absolute transition to the infinitely subjective substantiality of ethical life,
which is no longer immediate and natural, but spiritual and at the same
time raised to the shape of a universality (Wood, 1998). The cultivation
of universality, if thought of in Hegel’s terms is the absolute value of
education; it is the purification of the crude and barbaric manner and
the natural drives of ‘Mankind’. It could be said that the rational processes
of representation, estimation and comparison bestow an external perspective on the internality of desire. This perspective according to Hegelianism
contributes towards happiness, and the infinite aim of understanding desire
through the educative passage to the universal.

Conatus
It is at this moment that we arrive at the crux of Hegelian education and the
crucial conjunction between Hegelianism and the IB Diploma programme.
This is because at the heart of both schemes is the notion of reason as the
arbitrator and controlling force in the development of the pupils. The position of the empty knower as the subject of the IB Diploma precludes and
externalizes the force of reason as the ‘prime mover’ in a developmental
ideology designed to provide subjects that reflect the power of the international community. It is in this sense that reason is a disciplinary and
ordering power that lends itself to the containment of desire through the
knowledge ‘stack-system’ of the IB and the regulation of the imagination
through universality (internationalism, which, it could be argued, is understood by the IB as the celebration of diversity). Spinoza has shown us a way
out of this logic by reinstating the imagination as the focal, internally-based
221

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Journal of Research in International Education 4(2)
process that provides the key to intellectual development. This reinstatement of the interactions of the imagination with the central emotions of
desire yields systematic variations in the intensity of attachment and aversion present in the immanence of desire (Gatens and Lloyd, 1999). These
fluctuations are different from the ordered relations between clear and distinct ideas of reason; but they nonetheless have an order of their own
which lends itself to rational investigation. The international Spinozian curriculum will therefore make the investigation of the affective its ‘knowledge core’, augmenting the imagination of the group and following the
practical and ethical orientation that is derived in part from the Hellenistic
tradition of philosophical education, the ideal of radical criticism of
convention (Lloyd, 1998).
This central concern of the international Spinozian curriculum in the
emotional and the imaginative also directs us to one of Spinoza’s main
ideas, that of conatus. This is the endeavour or struggle to persist in being,
which informs Spinoza’s treatment of individuality. This type of individuality is sharply contrasted with the Hegelian individual made out of
‘bildung’, as it directs the educator inwards towards unconscious affects
where learning actually takes place (and is not forced externally through
reason into the universal). The international Spinozian curriculum will
therefore importantly examine the way in which the conditioning and
habitual practices of communities and institutes of society have placed
knowledge into determined places. Or, as Michael Hardt has noted: ‘The
investigation of power constitutes the end of speculation and the beginning
of practice, it is the moment in which we stop striving to think the world
and begin to create it’ (1993: 59). The international Spinozian curriculum
should take us in this direction as it has the power of conatus as its root and
the teaching of the imaginary in an affirmative classroom atmosphere. The
explanation of the workings of contemporary power is a complex problem
that will tax any educator or cohort under his or her charge. Yet the treatment of this problem, without necessary resolution, may provide a vital
and combinatory factor that ‘makes sense’ of the plethora of intellectual
knowledge fields that lay before the student.
Contemporary theorists of international education such as Patrick
Sherlock have dealt with similar themes from a distinct angle in terms of
presenting some of the ways in which global educators should integrate
the training of affective capacities in an academic environment (emotional
intelligence). However, the message of such work parallels the Hegelian
model of education as the emotions are fundamentally ‘curtailed’ by
reason in that the self is taught to accept international frontier crossing
values of peace and tolerance (Sherlock, 2002). While the international
222

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Cole: International Spinozian curriculum
Spinozian curriculum does not exclude such ideas, it is also not a necessary
aspect of its teaching. One might also say that the Hegelian educational progression through bildung into civil society and the end of universal rationality does not solely figure in the imaginative examination of the affective
educational environment. As such, the international Spinozian curriculum
takes away the pressure that arises from seeing education as an end in itself.
While Hegelians promote the end of a wholly ordered, rational society,
Spinozians posit it as one of many possible outcomes. The international
Spinozian curriculum will ‘limit’ itself to the exploration of desire, yet
this limitation is also the opening up of possibility according to the workings of the imaginary.

An educational plateau
In conclusion, it may be stated that the international Spinozian curriculum
is about joy as it ‘proposes a singular conception of being animated by an
absolutely positive and internal difference’ (Hardt, 1993: 63). The process
of imagining is fundamental to this conception as the model of development contained is embedded in frameworks of desire and power that
can in turn be subjected to critique (Gatens and Lloyd, 1999). Therefore
negativity does not figure in this educational model. Even though the
‘hardy’ educator may well encounter diametrically opposed students, displaying disruptive, rebellious, uninterested or alienated behaviour, the
international Spinozian curriculum gives the teacher the freedom to explore
and critique these affective mechanisms, and not simply to discount them.
To end on a personal note, I have found this strategy to be useful in the
TOK classroom, as many epistemological problems are intrinsically
entwined with affective behaviours. It could be said that the empty
‘knower’ is not at fault if they do not understand the knowledge problem;
rather the fault is with the affective and imaginative force that is present in
the educational environment, and the place that we have properly called
‘school’.
References
B O L E R , M . (1997) ‘Taming the labile other: disciplined emotions in popular

and academic discourses’, Philosophy of Education 1997. Available at:
http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/EPS/PES-yearbook/97_docs/boler.html (accessed
22 February 2004).
D E L E U Z E , G. (1992) Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza. New York: Zone Books.
G AT E N S , M . A N D L L OY D, G. (1999) Collective Imaginings: Spinoza, Past and Present.
London: Routledge.

223

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Journal of Research in International Education 4(2)
H A R D T, M . (1993) Gilles Deleuze: An Apprenticeship in Philosophy. London: University

College London.
H O B B E S , T. (1996) Leviathan, R. Tuck (ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press.
H O L L A N D, E . (1998) ‘Spinoza and Marx’. Cultural Logic 2(1).
L L OY D, G. (1998) ‘Spinoza and the education of the imagination’, in A. Rorty

(ed.) Philosophers on Education, pp. 157–72. London: Routledge.
LYOTA R D, J. - F. (1984) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Minneapolis,

MN: University of Minnesota Press.
P E T E R S O N, A . D. C. (1987) Schools Across Frontiers: The Story of the International Baccalaureate

and the United World Colleges. Chicago: Open Court.
P I N K A R D, T. (1994) Hegel’s Phenomenology: The Sociality of Reason. New York: Cambridge

University Press.
S H E R L O C K , P. (2002) ‘Emotional intelligence in the international curriculum’.

Journal of Research in International Education 1(2).
WO O D, W. (1998) ‘Hegel on education’, in A. Rorty (ed.) Philosophers on Education.

London: Routledge.

Biographical note
DAV I D R . C O L E is currently working at the University of Tasmania as a lec-

turer in literacy and English Education. Between 2000 and 2003 he was the
head of English and TOK (Theory of Knowledge) at St George’s College
North (Argentina). Before that he successfully read for a PhD in Education
at the University of Warwick (UK) in addition to gaining an MA in continental Philosophy and Literature at the same university. He has also worked
in international schools in Egypt, Colombia, France and Germany.
[email: david.cole@utas.edu.au]

224

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Cole: Appendix
Appendix

225

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

Journal of Research in International Education 4(2)

226

Downloaded from jri.sagepub.com at TEXAS SOUTHERN UNIVERSITY on December 13, 2014

