Number of pages: 20
=== PAGE 1 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
1 
 
From an age of measurement to an evidence era?  Policy-making in 
teacher education in England 
Jo B. Helgetuna * & Ian Menterb 
aGIRSEF, UC Louvain, Louvain la Neuve, Belgium 
b Department of Education, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 
*Corresponding author.  
Institute for the Analysis of Change in Contemporary and Historical Societies UC Louvain, Place Montesque 1, 
bte L2.08.04, 1348 Louvain la Neuve, Belgium.  
Email: jo.helgetun@uclouvain.be  
 
Jo B. Helgetun, is Doctoral Research Fellow at the University of Louvain. His current research focuses on the 
national trajectories of education policy reform and their embeddedness in the global education policy field, 
particularly teacher education policy in England and France. While his past work was on the new governance of 
Educational Research, comparing trajectories, turns and transformations in the United Kingdom, Germany, and 
Norway.  
 
Ian Menter, is Professor Emeritus of Teacher Education at the University of Oxford and a Senior Research 
Associate at Kazan Federal University, Russia. His current research focuses on knowledge production, policy 
issues, and practices in teacher education, as well as the labour market for teachers and teacher’s work. He is a 
former president of both BERA (2013-15) and SERA (2005-07) 
 
 
Abstract: 
The Department for Education (DfE) in England1 seeks to determine the actions of 
educationists in both the public and private sectors through the use of targeted instructive 
documents and white papers where broader policy intention are presented. Since 2010, as we will 
show, there has been a shift in the nature of such papers towards justification with ‘evidence’ and 
transparency through referencing in a ‘scientific’ style, with ramifications for both how policy is 
justified and the contestation of practices in education. This leads us to suggest that we are in an 
‘evidence era’ where a dominant rationalized myth centres on the use of ‘evidence’ to justify 
practice. Meanwhile, how ‘evidence’ is constructed as research is undertaken, and how it is 
transformed as it enters a political environment, are important questions that are often overlooked. 
In this text, we analyse the change in ‘evidence’ practices before and after 2010, consider why the 
practices changed, and infer the effects the changes have had on the wider education environment.  
Keywords: Evidence, Policy, Teacher Education, New Public Management 
 
                                                           
1 As education is a devolved matter in the United Kingdom, even though we are talking of a Department (and 
cabinet ministry) in the Parliament of Westminster, the policies of the Department for Education only applies 
to England.  
=== PAGE 2 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
2 
 
Introduction 
In this paper, we consider the case of education policymaking in England, particularly relating 
to teacher education.  We are interested in the processes of policy making, in particular what Bowe 
and Ball (1992) called the 'context of influence'.  How is evidence of various different forms (including 
research) used by policymakers?  Who and how do particular actors have an influence on the 
processes?  How are processes of influence changing not least in the era of ‘new media’ such as blogs 
or the twittersphere? 
The time period in which we are especially interested is that following the emergence of the 
Coalition Government in the UK, in 2010, and the apparent upsurge of commitment to 'evidence 
based policymaking'.  This had certainly been foreshadowed by a discussion on the value, impact, 
and quality of much educational research in the 1990s and particularly the New Labour governments' 
emphasis on ‘what works’ after 1997 (Gardner, 2011; Whitty, 2006), as well as the use of evidence 
(Clegg, 2005), but appeared to take on new forms after 2010 as we discuss further below.  It is 
perhaps no coincidence that this also developed at the same time as greatly increased interest in 
'evidence-based teaching', which is now more colloquially called ‘evidence-based practice’2. We 
extend and build on criticism of ‘evidence’ in its current form (e.g. Biesta, 2009; Malone and Hogan, 
2019; Steiner-Khamsi, Karseth and Baek 2019), by articulating ‘evidence’ as a rationalized myth, by 
focusing on policymaking and the governing of teacher education, and by providing empirical insights 
into recent changes in the role and use of ‘evidence’ in English teacher education policymaking. As 
such, we aim to contribute both to a general discussion on the use of scientific evidence in policy, 
and to the specific context of ‘evidence’ in teacher education in England. 
In short, through this paper we argue that we are now in an ‘evidence era’, where actions are 
justified through a language shrouded in talk of research, data, and best practice. If measurement 
usually relates to quantitative large scale data and related instrumentation, evidence is a much 
broader term that encompasses different forms of “research shows” types of argumentation that lay 
claim to a form of rational legitimacy, that is distinguished from argumentation rooted in broader 
value driven normative, philosophical, and purpose inclusive discourse in teacher education. 
Measurement continues to be important - we are not arguing that it has disappeared.  However, a 
broader concept of evidence is now the dominant feature of the prevailing educational discourse in 
England.  “Evidence” has connotations rooted in clues, observations, and experience that can be 
applied to other contexts, shifting how public discourse may be undertaken and problematized (see 
Tröhler 2014 on the importance of connotations). Hence, under an “evidence” paradigm 
                                                           
2 'Evidence-based practice' was a term furiously debated in England by Martyn Hammersley and David 
Hargreaves during the first decade of this century - see Hammersley, 2007. 
=== PAGE 3 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
3 
 
disentangling what we may call scientific evidence rooted in good research practices from politically 
constructed evidence rooted in dogmatic ideology and popular ideation becomes a critical 
endeavour. Here we limit ourselves to the place and use of evidence in teacher education 
policymaking, thus, we look at the use of ‘evidence’3 in policy and practice, and what the internal 
discourse on evidence-based policy seems to be, then discuss this in light of current practices and 
norms in both academia and the wider teacher education environment.  This discussion in turn raises 
important questions about the ontology/ies and epistemology/ies of the research that is being used 
as ‘evidence’, but yet are rarely explicitly articulated. 
Importantly, as Lesley Saunders (2007) points out, it is the responsibility of politicians and 
policymakers to make value decisions and develop practices using evidence. This argument can be 
seen in relation to how any form of ‘good’ education and what we ought to do in education, what 
‘evidence’ attempts to denote, relates to purpose and values (Biesta 2009), while the democratic 
legitimacy of policymakers is arguably greater than that of an academic, which is of importance if we 
acknowledge that policy is by its nature very much based on social appropriateness not pure 
consequentiality (Campbell 2002). 
We are drawn to Sayers' (2010) epistemological concept of "adequate knowledge", Scott's 
(2013) views on the importance of using comprehensive frameworks in theorization, as well as 
adherence to the importance of triangulation and scepticism to observations (e.g. King et al. 1994; 
George & Bennett 2005; Checkel 2007; Tansey 2007). However, this article is not concerned with 
academic discussions on "good research", rather we limit ourselves to call for robustness in 
adherence to methodology and scientific rigour in the extrapolation of evidence from observations, 
and the transformation from research to application in policy. Scientific rigour is important in all 
forms of research, from anthropological ethnographic accounts and interviews in sociology to 
randomised control trials. What we are concerned with in this paper is the seeming lack of attention 
from some researchers, influential bloggers, and policy-makers to coherence between methodology, 
analysis, and conclusions, while acknowledging how and where normative concerns and observer 
bias might also be at play.  
We begin by defining some key uses of ‘evidence’, specifically ‘evidence’ as a rationalized 
myth centred on New Public Management, and ‘evidence’ as a cultural-cognition embedded and 
taken for granted in policy processes today - certainly in England and possibly elsewhere - before 
                                                           
3 We should note that due to the many meanings of the word ‘evidence’ depending on who uses it and in what 
context, we here consequently use quotation marks to denote that it is a fluid, unfixed, concept that we do not 
attempt to pin down. 
=== PAGE 4 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
4 
 
discussing briefly our methodology and presenting some empirical findings to underpin the 
arguments that are then presented.  
 
Rationalized myths: New Public Management ideations and policy 
Institutions and institutionalised environments, such as the public policy environment, 
encourage conformity towards dominant ‘rationalized myths’ of perceived optimal behaviour 
(Schriewer, 2012). Rationalized myths arise when past behaviour is perceived to have yielded 
desirable results (Pierson and Skocpol, 2002) or when a practice has become so ingrained in daily 
routines that it is taken for granted and provides culturally supported legitimacy to existing 
behaviour (Scott, 2013). Hence, once a perceived ‘best practice’ has become dominant, and 
sufficiently taken for granted as ‘good’, it arguably becomes a myth that constrains actors and tends 
to ossify (through mimesis) the environment. Central in English policymaking is the ‘myth’ of 
economic rationality, outputs and outcomes being seen only in relation to and measured against 
inputs, and the importance of targets to establish ‘value for money’.  Later in the paper we discuss 
how this myth developed in the aftermath of the second world war, but more recently the myth may 
be seen as having made a significant contribution to ‘New Public Management’ (NPM) reforms (Ball, 
2008; Keraudren, 1999). At the heart of the NPM discourse, we find the centrality of ‘evidence’ to 
establish what works and what constitutes ‘best practice’.  
 A further reading of the existing literature also supports the creation of an ‘evidence’ centred 
myth in education. Through what has been coined 'governing by numbers' (Rose, 1991; Ozga, 2009), 
a new form of government control over social policy related to ‘audit-cultures’ has arguably 
emerged, legitimizing the government's control through large scale data collection (Graf, 2009; 
LeTendre. 2018), and arguably bringing in an ‘age of measurement’ in education (Biesta, 2009). 
However, we would argue that the evidence era, at present, is also distinct from a mere age of 
measurement, or an audit-culture, as it goes beyond that, involving a whole range of efforts to justify 
policy in terms of ‘evidence’, for example through referencing what works elsewhere (Chung, Atkin, 
& Moore, 2012; Chung, 2016), through comparisons with medical research (Goldacre, 2013; 
McKnight & Morgan, 2019) or through aspirations for Randomised Control Trials such as those 
favoured by the Education Endowment Foundation to become the basis of policy (Menter, 2013; 
Gale, 2018).  
In teacher education, we suggest that the origin of this myth can be traced to the creation of 
the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (CATE), that was instructed to work with Her 
Majesty’s Inspectorate (HMI) and base decisions on information from HMI inspections upon its 
=== PAGE 5 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
5 
 
creation in 1984 (Childs and Menter, 2013). To our knowledge, this is the first official iteration of 
explicit evidence-guided decisions in teacher education. 
Furthermore, we may argue the audit culture has in part led to ‘self-referral’ as a central 
characteristic of the English education policy environment, including in teacher education, where the 
system looks to internal data furthering existing trends.  Increasingly, more data internal to the 
system are collected, and referred to as the evidence base of new decisions. This works through the 
establishment of ‘best practice’ within the system in the form of OFSTED rankings of teacher 
education providers, the use of internal reviews of the system to identify 'what works' and what does 
not (e.g the 2014/15 Carter review – see Mutton, Burn, and Menter, 2016), and a peer-to-peer 
system of teacher education improvement for  School Centred Initial Teacher Training (SCITT) 
providers, recently sometimes associated with the concept of Teaching Schools. We may therefore 
imagine that the system not only looks abroad to justify policy in a form of ‘policy-borrowing’ 
(Steiner-Khamsi, 2012), but also increasingly inwards towards internal reviews, national censuses of 
the teacher workforce, and inspections (Whiting, Whitty, Menter et al. 2018).  
 Additionally, it is important to remember that even though policy is seemingly based on 
forms of evidence, research has found it too often lacks sufficient contextualisation, particularly 
when imported from abroad.  For example, Chung (2016) suggests that some attempts to model 
English education on Finnish 'successes' in PISA, can lead to  'evidence-based policy-making' 
becoming 'policy-based evidence-making' (Chung (2016)). Nor are citations and excerpts from 
scientific research always correct or accurate representations of that research.4 Importantly, the 
practice of ‘academic style’ citations in policy documents appeared to be much more significant 
following the establishment of the Coalition Government in 2010. Prior to that, what ‘evidence’ was 
behind decisions was more obscure, even though large scale projects were funded to improve both 
policy and practice under Labour (1997-2010) (see e.g. Rickinson, Sebba and Edwards, 2011; 
Saunders, 2007).  
We will now present the theoretical implications of ‘evidence’ as a rationalized myth, as it 
forms part of a cognitive framework that is both socially embedded and taken for granted in practice.  
 
Possible implications of evidence as a rationalized myth 
A first step in theorizing the implications of ‘evidence’ as a rationalized myth is to consider 
how it forms an integral part of common beliefs and shared understandings that legitimise cognitive 
                                                           
4 See this 2016 (https://www.timeshighereducation.com/blog/use-misuse-and-abuse-research-education-
white-paper accessed 15.07.2019) blog post of Professor Ian Menter for an instance of this occurring in the 
white paper ‘Educational Excellence Everywhere’ (DfE 2016) 
=== PAGE 6 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
6 
 
expression. Although fallible and contested, the concept of a rationalized myth may be seen as an 
integral part of a cognitive frame (Verger, Steiner-Khamsi, and Lubienski, 2017) or as a blueprint of 
best practice (Zapp, Helgetun and Powell, 2018), in essence both denote awareness raising and 
agenda setting through comprehensive plans of action including both perceived problems and 
proposed solutions, while cognitive frames emphasise types of ideas that social, political and 
economic actors may mobilise to advance their vision, cognitive blueprints are more rooted in global 
scripts of ‘what works’. In spite of minute differences, they both constitute central carriers of 
mimetic change (Scott 2013), that we may believe it to be a powerful tool for shaping practices and 
bestowing legitimacy to action. These phenomena we may talk of as cultural-cognitions, that is to say 
cognitive frames and blueprints of best practice are culturally constructed and supported, while 
enabling cognition and legitimizing expressed thought, recognising the interdependence between 
culture, ideation, and the ideas articulated.  
 A second step in theorizing the significance of rationalized myths is how cultural-cognitions 
have been found to shape norms and policies in an education environment (Marques, Powell, Zapp 
and Biesta 2017), and in turn to be shaped by them (Zapp, Helgetun and Powell 2018). Through the 
entwined processes of institutional change and maintenance, we note an interdependence between 
cultural-cognitions, norms, and policies (Helgetun, Powell, and Zapp, 2018). Thus, changes in one of 
these dimensions should reverberate across the other two, meaning policy is dependent on norms 
and cultural-cognitions while it is also capable of shaping them.  
Importantly, the phenomenon of selective use of ‘evidence’ as it moves from a research to a 
policy environment has been observed elsewhere, and may be considered a general phenomenon of 
policymaking (Steiner-Khamsi, Karseth and Baek, 2019), particularly as different sources of ‘evidence’ 
may actually be contradictory. Moreover, looking at the concept of ‘consequentiality’, the forming of 
action based on perceived consequence (what evidence in policy claims to do), we may note that 
logically it is an inherent impossibility (we cannot be absolutely certain about the future (e.g. Sayer, 
2010). Due to this uncertainty, decisions cannot be made based on a pure logic of consequentiality, 
therefore policy decisions are by logical necessity  based on a logic of social appropriateness, what is 
perceived as the right thing to do based on the norms regulating a particular (social) context 
(Campbell, 2002), that can be contested in different guises. Meanwhile, if we consider that perceived 
consequences in policy terms relate to desired outcomes, there are already elements of social 
appropriateness present in defining what is desired, leading to a high risk of valuing what we can 
measure in a ‘data’ paradigm (Biesta, 2009).  
Even scientific evidence should be seen as something that can be contested and is possibly of 
a political or socially appropriate nature (see e.g. the book ‘Science in Action’ by Bruno Latour (1987) 
for a series of examples, or Zapp, Helgetun, and Powell (2018) on the political nature of educational 
=== PAGE 7 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
7 
 
research – or the ontological and epistemological debates often raging within the science 
community). For example, recent work by Malone and Hogan (2019) for example attempts to push 
for ‘evidence’ as rooted in John Dewey’s pragmatist approach to both education and research, 
stating the importance of ‘action research’ in informing policy. Others, such as Burn and Mutton 
(2015) emphasise the strengths of research, particularly ‘research-informed clinical practices’, in 
teacher education, while Pamela Lomax in her 1998 BERA presidential address lamented the lack of 
constraint in disagreement regarding research and education (Lomax, 1998). Of interest then is how 
contestation over what constitutes ‘evidence’ and what the ‘evidence’ says, and what are the 
outcomes from the contestation, shapes the use of ‘evidence’ in policy.   
 Meanwhile, one of the main producers of both cultural-cognitions and contestable 
‘evidence’, the universities (Powell, Baker and Fernandez, 2017), are in England stratified in terms of 
quality and quantity of research output and are reported to have a ‘fear’ of appearing to be opposed 
to government policy in education (Furlong, 2013), which may be of concern when the use of 
research and data in policy is discussed.5 Meanwhile, historically government tended to put much 
more emphasis on the expertise of its own bodies such as the Teacher Training Agency or OFSTED 
than on Higher Education Institutions in questions of the professional development of teachers 
(Bates, Gough, and Stammers, 1999), leaving room for contestation over ‘evidence’ and denying 
academia any monopoly over research. In addition, ‘international’ actors of various kinds, such as 
McKinsey (based in England), the OECD, the EU and UNESCO have all at different times and with 
different goals and methods promoted different kinds of ‘evidence’ in an attempt to shape practices 
through the promotion of what we have called cultural-cognitions in education (Ball, 2016); 
Normand, 2017).Thus there is a range of actors with an opinion of what constitutes best practice 
rooted in ‘evidence’. All of these actors are arguably attempting to shape policy and contest the 
meaning of ‘evidence’.   
 Moving beyond the production of ‘evidence’, there are also questions related to the status of 
research as it informs policymaking. To quote Oates (2007): ‘If policy-makers and politicians are 
encouraged to rely on knowledge generated by educational research (Davies et al. 2000; Sebba 2004) 
they have a right to know the status of that knowledge – and I contend that this issue  
has been grossly neglected, leading to frustration on the parts of both researchers and of those in 
the policy community.’ (p.150). Here we see the dilemma of the status of research, but arguably also 
                                                           
5 An example here would be the attacks on academia by Michael Gove both as shadow Secretary of State for 
Children, Schools and Families (2007-2010) and later Secretary of State for Education (2010-14), through terms 
such as ‘enemies of progress’ and the ‘blob’ – see:  Adamson, Forestier, Morris, & Han 2017;Childs & Menter 
2013) 
=== PAGE 8 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
8 
 
questions relating to both ontology and epistemology as different research findings are often taken 
out of context and repurposed.   
 Furthermore, there is arguably a need for intermediaries as mediators of research (Saunders 
2007).  But we may also question how well such mediation may work and how intermediaries may 
cause a disconnect between researchers and policymakers, and they themselves become a form of 
central node controlling what informs policy or not. Hence, one may argue there are epistemological 
challenges regarding the very concept of evidence-based policymaking that often go untreated, and 
become more evident as we move from a research environment to one of policy.  
In short, it appears as if dialogue between policymakers and researchers is far from 
straightforward, and causes tensions in the system. Hence, any notion of research informed practice 
or evidence based policy is likely to involve translation, that is to say the research has had its 
meaning changed to varying degrees as new ideas come into contact with existing practices 
(Campbell, 2004; Maroy, Pons and Dupuy, 2016), and thus altered that meaning from its original 
state as it moves from a research environment to a political environment. 
  
Methodology 
To ensure a thorough understanding of the role of evidence in English teacher education 
policy, we conducted 20 open ended elite interviews (Aberbach and Rockman, 2002; Berry, 2002) 
with people who had varying levels of ‘insider’ access to the policymaking process (Adamson, 
Forestier, Morris and Han., 2017)(see annex). Additionally we undertook an in-depth reading of 46 
central documents between 1983 (when CATE was first proposed) and 2019, related to teacher 
education.6 The analysis was structured by a circular method of constantly moving between data 
sources, theory, and the field to illuminate what was going on and to infer the processes of 
policymaking in relation to the use of evidence as we triangulated between different sources of 
information (Checkel, 2006; Flick, 2009). The policy documents were coded using MAXQDA to track 
referencing, conduct word searches, and sort documents in accordance with type and purpose.  
We turn now to our findings, attempting at first to establish the current practices and justify 
the concept of an ‘evidence era’ as more than an age of measurement, while also presenting the use 
of ‘evidence’ in teacher education policymaking. We then address the role of government in 
controlling and shaping ‘evidence’ and the implications this has both on modes of dissemination and 
the validity of research as it informs practice.  
                                                           
6 An overview of the documents analysed can be seen at https://www.teacherscareers.eu/research -material/ 
(accessed 21.03.2020) 
=== PAGE 9 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
9 
 
Referencing and Evidence in Teacher Education policy documents 
Since 2010, ostensibly to enhance transparency, according to a DfE civil servant we spoke 
with (A12), there has been an increased possibility to track where the rationale for policy comes 
from, whilst changing the contestation over how a policy is legitimized, arguably in an even more 
evidence driven direction than before. In the 1983 White Paper ‘Teaching Quality’ (DES 1983) (which 
foreshadowed the creation of CATE), seven references are listed, all with an internal origin.  Three 
were committee reports, two were HMI reports, one was from The Royal Society, and one was an 
‘internal report’. By contrast, the 2010 White Paper ‘The Importance of Teaching’ (which 
foreshadowed the creation of School Direct and the marginalisation of higher education) had 34 such 
references,  within the paragraphs directly related to teacher education, that come from a range of 
sources, ranging from academics (e.g. Ehri et al. 2001) to the BBC (ICM, 2010 bbc.co.uk/news, last 
accessed 28th June 2010.). Importantly, there was no distinction offered between what we may 
consider research-based ‘evidence’ and non-systematic ‘evidence’, nor are questions raised of an 
epistemological nature pertaining to the construction of the ‘evidence’ and its generalizability to the 
English context. Of further note, in the 46 documents we analysed, the only use of traceable 
references to where ‘evidence’ came from between 1983 and 2010 was in Circular 24/89 with five. 
Meanwhile, all documents that we looked at between 2010 and 2019 used a high amount of 
references to signal where ‘evidence’ came from. This is indicative of a paradigm change that pushes 
‘evidence’ beyond measurement, especially if we look at how ‘evidence’ is presented and used in the 
texts, as we explore below.  
 Furthermore, as mentioned in the theoretical section above, in 2010 English policymakers 
looked towards Finland to provide some ‘evidence’ of how to conduct teacher education. In fact, 
Finland was mentioned nine times in the 2010 White Paper ‘The Importance of Teaching’ (DfE 2010), 
and was employed as a central justification for proposed new initiatives surrounding research 
informed teaching.  However, an emphasis on ‘Finnish’ style teacher education was for the most part 
subsequently dropped due to perceived cost issues, according to our interviews, thus how well 
thought out it was, and thereby its merit as ‘evidence’ in a major policy drive is a matter of some 
doubt.   Beyond Finland however, there were also several references to other PISA high performing 
countries in different policy and political documents.  For example, Singapore was mentioned 79 
times in the House of Commons Education Committee report ‘Great teachers: attracting, training and 
retaining the best’ (2012). 
 Additionally, the main national sources of ‘evidence’ for policy are seemingly two-fold. One 
centres on reviews such as the 2014 Carter Review of Initial Teacher Training (Carter 2015; DfE 2015) 
or the round-table discussions leading up to the Early Career Framework (DfE 2019a) and 
=== PAGE 10 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
10 
 
Recruitment and Retention Strategy (DfE 2019b). The other key source appears to be data from 
Ofsted inspections and evaluations of national data such as test and exam performance, school 
workforce census, and other large scale data sets enabling 'governing at a distance' through the use 
of numbers, all centred on the aforementioned logic of value for money – outputs being evaluated  
only in relation to inputs.    
 
Government and the Department for Education as gatekeepers  
An important characteristic of teacher education policymaking in England today is that 
government, or rather the DfE, acts as a kind of gatekeeper to policy reviews, round-tables, and 
national dialogue on teacher education. Through our interviews, actors were of the opinion that the 
DfE selectively chose who would conduct reviews and fact-finding missions based on perceived 
political leanings (in favour of either school-based teacher education or university-based for 
example), but also in some cases people who possessed skills the DfE lacked internally. Along the 
lines outlined by Ball and Junemann (2012) in their work on networks and new governance in 
education, this has seemingly evolved over the past few years to a system where government 
promotes desired ‘voices’ of the profession and sector as seen through the government-established 
Chartered College of Teaching or the Teaching Schools Council, both given central places alongside 
‘invited’ organisations in the recent early career framework (DfE 2019a) and recruitment and 
retention strategy (DfE 2019b). One external advisor to government we spoke with stated something 
we found to be representative of the consensus amongst those external to the department but with 
inside access to the policy process:  
‘You have to work with them, you have to be part of the team, you can’t just be sitting on the 
sidelines criticizing and complaining about everything.’ (A18). 
Although the main view is one of cooperation, there are some who see a need to resist:  
‘whatever policy comes out, the response is: how can we work with the politicians and never 
standing up and say ‘no, you’re wrong.’ Because the argument and the approach is it’s better 
to be in the room discussing, influencing where you can than standing up against nonsense. I 
think sometimes if it’s ridiculous nonsense, you have to stand up against it.’ (A1).  
However such resistors often find the only means is to threaten withdrawal and deal with the 
subsequent negative news headlines (A1; A7). Perhaps this indicates both the necessity to gain 
access, and to cooperate with government to get something done, whilst the means of resistance are 
seemingly limited at present. One interviewee (A6) made the central observation that she could 
=== PAGE 11 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
11 
 
either put her name on a report, or see the report published without her name on it but with the 
name of others, there was no way of pressuring government directly. This we may imagine has great 
implications for the scientific quality of ‘evidence’ used in policymaking.   
 
Policy based evidence-making: the importance of ‘how it will land’ 
With government as a gatekeeper, actors seem more worried about how a policy will ‘land’ 
with ministers and the DfE than with whether or not it is the best thing to do. In our interviews this 
was stated surprisingly straightforwardly as an accepted and central part of the policy process, but 
with implications for how this might distort the ‘evidence’ process. For instance, one government 
advisor stated in our interview with him:  
‘We have to see how it will land. How it will land with the politicians. So, if I had written a 
report that was different, the government could just say: ‘Thank you very much for your 
report.’ It would never get published.’ (A14).  
In a sense then there is a 'bottom line', and it must be adhered to. Another advisor (A6) echoed this 
sentiment of social appropriateness and ‘rebranding’ of observations by referring to a fact-finding 
review the person had worked on:  
‘It had no validity, reliability or really… You know’ 
 but also highlighted that it was informative nonetheless and something the people involved learned 
from even if it was anecdotal:  
‘I personally learned quite a lot from it’  
further mentioning how people's minds were changed throughout the process, but also pointing out  
‘I don’t know if he realises he has changed’.  
Thus, opinions were shaped through the fact-finding mission, even though it had no scientific rigour.  
Still the review in question was, and is, framed in a language of ‘evidence’ and research-informed 
policy in policy documents and policy discourse, which may also be problematic.  
Some further nuances must be observed, one external advisor had mixed experiences 
ranging from feeling she had to fall in line, to contributing constructively. Speaking of an early fact 
finding mission she was part of she noted:  
‘I definitely experienced that as they already had the outcome and were just going through 
the processes.’ (A18).  
=== PAGE 12 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
12 
 
However, the experience on a more recent series of round tables was much more positive:  
‘...they were genuinely listening and I tried myself to constantly play a proactive role in modelling that 
we should be listening and build on each other’s ideas and evolve in the idea and a solution in those 
rooms, not just saying the things that we’d always be saying.’ (A18).  
This can arguably also be seen in how our interviewees felt there had been a shift in political 
involvement in teacher education following the departure of Michael Gove and his strongly 
ideologically driven approach and the subsequent appointments of Nicky Morgan (2014-16) Justine 
Greening (2016-18), Damian Hinds (2018-19) and eventually Gavin Williamson (2019-) as Secretaries 
of State for Education, but can also be in relation to the person ‘working with’ government rather 
than against them as seen in the section above. In any regard, the ITT Core Content Framework, 
published just after the end of our analysis appears to be more ‘open’ to focusing on academic 
research. Hence, ‘how it will land’ may be dependent on the personalities and views on education of 
the political echelon. However, regardless of political leanings the centrality of ‘evidence’ and 
establishing value for money remains a key theme. Thus we may also infer that these concepts have 
become somewhat taken for granted in the environment. Importantly, while there were several 
political concerns addressed there were none regarding what the actual data can tell us, what are the 
limits of the research, issues with methodology or lack of scientific consensus regarding what 
generalizations can be made, how observations in one context can be applied to others, nor how 
analyses were conducted and the limitations of findings.  These are seemingly foreign concepts. 
Here, evidence appears to be what can we plausibly claim data supports that fits ministerial views on 
teacher education. In other words, ‘evidence’ from national reviews was cherry picked to fit the 
(emerging) policy. Issues of communication in the evidence era 
So far, we have presented some evidence of problems in communicating research findings 
directly without first ‘politicising’ them in order to ensure they ‘land’ correctly. The issue also extends 
to how research of any kind is and can be disseminated. As an illustration we found representative of 
the current climate, two of our interviewees (A5;A16) found they had the most influence on policy 
through writing blogs which policy advisors occasionally read, having abandoned any notion of 
pushing ‘pure’ academic literature on the civil-service, special policy advisers, or ministers. We also 
found that these two respondents appeared to have had some noticeable impact on recent policy 
discourse. In addition, one senior academic (A1) suggested, after noting that he might speak with the 
DfE officials almost on a weekly basis, that he had no influence there:  
 ‘...it’s not long-term stability because people change roles quite frequently and that’s the 
frustration that when you start to engage and understand and discuss with policy makers and 
=== PAGE 13 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
13 
 
somebody’s not there anymore. All the work[] building the relationship and the 
understanding just goes.’  
The main concern was centred on communication. He also made the interesting observation relating 
to how one may get a message across, echoing the mentioned emphasis on blogs with a slight twist: 
‘I think people who have influence in policy are a small group of people who are heavily 
involved with Twitter, and that’s quite influential, you know.’  
Arguably, this signals issues arising from communicating research of a complex nature, particularly 
with the rise of new forms of media and technology. No time within the policy process is actually 
explicitly devoted to increase the understanding of issues and problems. Meanwhile, while we 
interviewed a government employee (A19), she spoke about the influence of an article by two 
members of Oxford University academic staff,  Burn and Mutton (2015), on clinical practices, 
following a citation of their work in the Carter Review, but was unaware of the articles' authors, only 
knowing of the work through intermediaries who had the ear of the DfE. By contrast, the named 
intermediary was acquainted with the articles' authors, this perhaps being symbolic of issues in 
communication between academia and policymakers. Word of mouth then, is more central than 
robust scientific rigour while at the same time it is claimed policy is based on scientific evidence. We 
should not forget that the Atlantic magazine (a news and idea magazine focused on ‘thought 
leaders’) was also cited in the same style as peer-reviewed academic research in ‘The Importance of 
Teaching’:  ‘Ripley, A.(2010), What makes a great teacher? The Atlantic Magazine January/ February 
2010’ (DfE 2010).  
 
Discussion  
 In this paper, we have presented a case for teacher education as dominated by ‘evidence’ as 
a central rationalized myth. As such, we find that ‘evidence’ has become a fully incorporated 
rationalized myth, and share the general observations of both Verger, Steiner-Khamsi, and Lubienski 
(2017) and Zapp, Helgetun, and Powell (2018) on the centrality of ‘evidence’ of what is claimed 
‘works’ in the rhetoric policymakers employ to justify their political approaches. Even though it is not 
readily possible, from an epistemological standpoint, to observe when a myth is created and 
rationalized, what we have observed is its increasing presence in public life. The evidence myth in 
England seems to have developed from the earlier myth of measurement during the New Labour 
years, and to have come to fruition during the early Gove years (as far as teacher education is 
concerned). The indicators of this myth are the obsessions over measured value for money, and a 
scientification of public discourse where 'evidence' takes the place of moral or philosophical thought.  
=== PAGE 14 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
14 
 
As such, we may infer that the myth relates to NPM and bears has some continuity with an observed 
scientification or even  medicalization of society following World War Two (see Tröhler 2014). Thus, 
we may argue the current iteration of evidence as a rationalized myth originates with new politico-
administrative thinking in the 1940s, and a gradual articulation through a period of medicalization 
and measurement into evidence as the heart of public discourse on teacher education. 
We have observed that there seem to have been a move towards justification of policy not only in 
terms of "large scale data" but also of "what works elsewhere" such as references to Singapore and 
Finland.  Our point is that "evidence" is a broader and more apt term than measurement because 
new forms of justification of policy seemingly rooted in both research and empirical observations as 
well as in reflective argumentation on education, which goes beyond large scale measuring, can be 
observed. Therefore, we believe that the term 'evidence era' has become more apt than 'age of 
measurement' to indicate how even though large-scale data uses are still central, they are not alone, 
and require new forms of problematization. 
In that regard, we have argued that, at present, the role of ‘evidence’ in policymaking has moved the 
environment from an age of measurement to an ‘evidence era’. Furthermore, we have showed how 
‘evidence’ has become a tool of government to justify policy, but also to grant speaking rights to 
selected actors whom ministers deem to have the right ideological leanings. This takes place under a 
tight central control with ‘evidence’ translated through an emphasis on how it will be received by 
politicians and the general public, not through any academic notions of rigour, robustness or 
reliability. Moreover, we have noted a lack of epistemological discourses in the ‘evidence’ project as 
findings move from a research environment to a political one7.  
Our ideas on the need to separate politics and science as concepts in order to avoid falling into a trap 
of “technological solutions to life’s-problems”, and to think long and hard about what and how 
science may inform policy are not new. Max Weber expressed similar concerns in his lectures on 
Science as a Vocation in 1917 and Politics as a Vocation in 1921 (Weber 2004). However, what has 
changed is the context, that has arguably undergone several stages of change both in terms of 
evidence production (it is by no means the exclusive domain of the research university) and in terms 
                                                           
7 We should note that after completing our analysis for this article, the DfE published a paper setting out an 'ITT 
Core Content Framework' which was written by a working group including at least two leading education 
academics.  This document is unusual in including as an appendix an extensive list of research references which 
apparently underpin each section of the document (DfE, 2019).  ‘A full bibliography is provided with suggested 
reading, which can be shared with trainee teachers to support their critical engagement with research. This 
evidence includes high-quality reviews and syntheses, including meta-analyses and rigorous individual studies.’ 
(p.4) This provides yet more evidence of the evidence era we are outlining in our paper! Once more, it arguably 
is a continuation of a weak trend first observed in the recruitment and retention strategy, where key actors in 
the education sector promote and justify government policy by granting their ‘seal of approval’ 
=== PAGE 15 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
15 
 
of policy construction and political discourse. As Weber pointed out, a researcher is lucky if his/her 
theories hold after 10, 20, or 50 years (Weber 2004), thus we must constantly re-evaluate old claims, 
particularly as the context changes. Moreover, we must ensure the context of one policy area is 
similar to another. What we have argued in this paper is that, in line with wider shifts in public policy, 
there has been a shift in teacher education, and that this has some distinctive features, particularly 
when the sequence of events is considered. To draw a comparison, school education arguably 
became centralised through standards and inspections from 1988 onwards (Alexander 2001), 
whereas by contrast, teacher education became centralised through inspections and demands of 
evidence relating to a provider's fitness to educate as early as 1984 (Barton et al. 1993). Teacher 
education and education are intertwined domains, but also distinct in their particular details and 
contexts. Thus, this paper should be understood as relating mainly to the context of teacher 
education policy. To follow our own advice on denoting epistemological limitations, we argue that 
this may inform a general understanding of public policy, but that the details of the case only pertain 
to teacher education policymaking. To return to Weber, "To ascribe a unified national character to 
the Englishmen of the seventeenth century would be simply to falsify history." ... "On the other hand, 
a difference of character between the English merchant adventurers and the old Hanseatic 
merchants is not to be found." (Weber 2003[1952] p.44). In other words, we must generalize only 
with attention (scientific rigour) as to what we may generalize and how, regardless of the source of 
information.  
 Other researchers have pointed out that the goal of research is to use evidence to investigate 
phenomena, but that conducting research on something is not the same as advocating it (Wiseman, 
Astiz and Baker, 2014). Meanwhile, research is also (arguably) fundamentally about uncovering 
something and learning/enhancing our knowledge, not normative prescription tout-court. It is indeed 
our view that  politicians and policymakers have a responsibility to make value decisions and develop 
practices using evidence. This view is based on the idea of education as a social good within 
democratic societies. Therefore, we assert that the evidence which is used should relate the purpose 
and values of education (Biesta 2009).  Thus, the democratic legitimacy of policymakers is arguably 
greater than that of researchers or academics, which is of importance if we acknowledge that policy 
is by its nature based on social appropriateness not pure consequentiality. Furthermore, we should, 
as Robin Alexander (2001) argues, likely not assume academics are any more objective than 
administrators and politicians. Therefore, producers of research should perhaps not ‘pre-translate’ 
‘evidence’ to ensure it ‘lands’ with the ministers, but rather provide as accurate an estimate of what 
the current state of the evidence may or may not inform. Hence, when discussing ‘evidence’ one 
should likely be more careful with what is said and how, bearing in mind that policymakers should 
=== PAGE 16 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
16 
 
know the limits of research (Saunders, 2007), and that ‘evidence’ can have wider ramifications as 
cultural-cognitions transform practices (Scott, 2013).  
Moreover, one may discuss whether perhaps thinking of ‘evidence’ as internal or external 
can be misleading, as whether or not justification for practice comes from within the English teacher 
education system or not is not the only contextual sin that may be committed as ‘evidence’ informs 
practice. At the very least, discussions should be had regarding what evidence has bearing on 
causation, what is a descriptive account, and what is early 'soaking and poking' at the frontiers of 
science (George and Bennett, 2005).  Important in this regard, we believe coherent logic should 
extend from the start of evidence production (a coherent logic of the research process from 
inception to observation to analysis) to application (evidence informed policy continuing with the 
same logic), if not the full research process from inception to application cannot be considered 
robust, regardless of the validity of each individual step. Epistemologically speaking, this form of 
coherence must be applied for any research, be it done by academics, civil-servants, teachers, or 
journalists, if the goal is to separate episteme from doxa and to construct valid evidence for 
informing any practice. The epistemological limitations relating to generalization and application of 
results from singular RCTs for example ought to be adhered to. 
The importance of having scientific rigour in mind when using ‘evidence’ to inform practice 
does however move beyond the incorporation of academic texts in DfE policy documents. It also 
implies a responsibility of other actors, be it bloggers, twitterers, or journalists, to ensure they do not 
use ‘evidence’ to promote an ideology, but rather use it to change their ideology. Central then is an 
acceptance to look beyond dogma, to be critical and sceptical, but not for the sake of being critical 
and holding government to account, but to help inform government of ‘evidence’. Therefore, if 
academics must cooperate with government to have an impact, they should do so but with vigour, 
rigour, and epistemological clarity, not just to stand up to nonsense, but to identify what is nonsense, 
how is it nonsense, and how can we avoid it. Meanwhile, if the way to be heard is through blogs and 
twitter, then universities should likely encourage staff to be more active in these new media, and use 
them to take control over the important concept that is Evidence.  
 
Funding details: The project leading to this article has received funding from the European Research 
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant 
agreement No 714641) 
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank the TeachersCareers team for insightful 
discussions and helpful advice during the analysis. We would particularly like to thank Katharine Burn 
=== PAGE 17 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
17 
 
(University of Oxford) for her help in identifying and obtaining documents for the analysis, as well as 
Tore Sørensen and Xavier Dumay (UC Louvain) for their comments and feedback on drafts of this 
paper.  We would also like to thank our interviewees for sharing their time with us and providing 
valuable insights.   
 
 
References 
Aberbach, J. D., & Rockman, B. A. (2002). Conducting and Coding Elite Interviews. PS: Political Science 
and Politics, 35(4), 673-676.  
Adamson, B., Forestier, K., Morris, P., & Han, C. (2017). PISA, policymaking and political pantomime: 
education policy referencing between England and Hong Kong. Comparative Education, 
53(2), 192-208. doi:10.1080/03050068.2017.1294666 
Alexander, R. J. (2001). Culture & Pedagogy: International comparisons in primary educationOxford: 
Blackwell. 
Ball, S. J. (2008). The education debate. Bristol: the policy press university of Bristol. 
Ball, S. J. (2016). Following policy: networks, network ethnography and education policy mobilities. 
Journal of Education Policy, 31(5), 549-566. doi:10.1080/02680939.2015.1122232 
Ball, S.J. and Junemann, C. (2012) Networks, New Governance and Education. Bristol: Policy Press. 
Barton, L., A. Pollard and G. Whitty (1993). Change in teacher education: the case of England. In T. 
Popkewitz (Ed.) Changing Patterns of Power: Social Regulation and Teacher Education 
Reform. New York, State University of New York Press: 303-341. 
Bates, T., Gough, B., & Stammers, P. (1999). The role of central government and its agencies in the 
continuing professional development of teachers: an evaluation of recent changes in its 
financing in England. Journal of In-Service Education, 25(2), 321-335. 
doi:10.1080/13674589900200086 
Berry, J. M. (2002). Validity and Reliability Issues in Elite Interviewing. PS: Political Science and 
Politics, 35(4), 679-682.  
Biesta, G. (2009). Good education in an age of measurement: on the need to reconnect with the 
question of purpose in education. Educational Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 
21(1), 33-46. doi:10.1007/s11092-008-9064-9 
Bowe, R., & Ball, S. J. (1992). Reforming Education and Changing Schools. London: Routledge. 
Burn, K., & Mutton, T. (2015). A review of ‘research-informed clinical practice’ in Initial Teacher 
Education. Oxford Review of Education, 41(2), 217-233. 
doi:10.1080/03054985.2015.1020104 
Campbell, J. L. (2002). Ideas, Politics, and Public Policy. Annual Review of Sociology, 28(1), 21-38. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.soc.28.110601.141111 
Campbell, J. L. (2004). Institutional change and globalization. Princeton, New Yersey: Princeton 
University Press. 
Checkel, J. T. (2006). Tracing Causal Mechanisms. International Studies Review, 8(2), 362-370. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2486.2006.00598_2.x 
Childs, A., & Menter, I. (2013). Teacher education in 21st century England. A case study in neoliberal 
public policy. Revista Española de Educación Comparada, 22, 93-116.  
Chung, J. (2016). The (mis)use of the Finnish teacher education model: ‘policy-based evidence-
making’? Educational Research, 58(2), 207-219. doi:10.1080/00131881.2016.1167485 
=== PAGE 18 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
18 
 
Chung, J., Atkin, C., & Moore, J. (2012). The rise and fall of the MTL: an example of European policy 
borrowing. European Journal of Teacher Education, 35(3), 259-274. 
doi:10.1080/02619768.2011.633996 
Flick, U. (2009). An introduction to qualitative research (4th ed.). Los Angeles: Sage. 
Furlong, J. (2013). Education - An anatomy of the discipline: Rescuing the university project? London 
and New York: Routledge. 
Gale, T. (2018) 'What's not to like about RCTs in education?' In Childs, A. & Menter, I. (Eds.) 
Mobilising Teacher Researchers.  London: Routledge. 
Gardner, J. (2011). Educational research: what (a) to do about impact! British Educational Research 
Journal, 37(4), 543-561. doi:10.1080/01411926.2011.596321 
George, A. L., & Bennett, A. (2005). Case studies and theory development in the social sciences. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: MIT press. 
Goldacre, B. (2013) Building Evidence into Education. Available online: 
http://media.education.gov.uk/assets/files/pdf/b/ben%20goldacre%20paper.pdf 
Graf, L. (2009). Applying the Varieties of Capitalism Approach to Higher Education: comparing the 
internationalisation of German and British universities. European Journal of Education, 44(4), 
569-585. 
Hammersley, M. (Ed.) (2007) Educational Research and Evidence-based Pracice. London: Sage.  
Helgetun, J. B., Powell, J. J. W., & Zapp, M. (2018). Governing Educational Research in Norway: 
coercion, cooperation or consensus? In M. Zapp, M. Marques, & J. J. W. Powell (Eds.), 
European Educational Research (Re)Constructed: institutional change in Germany, the United 
Kingdom, Norway, and the European Union (pp. 91-111). Oxford, England: Symposium Books. 
Keraudren, P. (1999). Entre nouveau management public et gouvernance : les spécificités de la 
réforme de l’administration centrale en Grande Bretagne. Politique et Management Public, 
17(1), 59-92.  
LeTendre, G. K. (2018). Neo-institutional Theory, Education Policy and Teachers. Paper presented at 
the ECER, Bolzano, Italy.  
Lomax, P. (1998) ‘Working together for educative community through research.’ BERA presidential addresses. 
Available at: https://www.bera.ac.uk/publication/1998-pamela-lomax-bera-presidential-
address (Accessed 14.11.2019) 
Malone, A., & Hogan, P. (2019). Evidence and its consequences in educational research. British 
Educational Research Journal. doi:10.1002/berj.3580 
Maroy, C., Pons, X., & Dupuy, C. (2016). Vernacular globalisations: neo-statist accountability policies 
in France and Quebec education. Journal of Education Policy, 32(1), 100-122. 
doi:10.1080/02680939.2016.1239841 
Marques, M., Powell, J. J. W., Zapp, M., & Biesta, G. (2017). How does research evaluation impact 
educational research? Exploring intended and unintended consequences of research 
assessment in the United Kingdom, 1986–2014. European Educational Research Journal, 
16(6), 820-842. doi:10.1177/1474904117730159 
McKnight, L. & Morgan, A. (2019) A broken paradigm? What education needs to learn from evidence-
based medicine.Journal of Education Policy. doi: 10.1080/02680939.2019.1578902. 
Menter, I. (2013). From interesting times to critical times? Teacher education and educational 
research in England. Research in Teacher Education, 3(1), 38-40.  
Mutton, T., Burn, K., & Menter, I. (2016). Deconstructing the Carter Review: competing conceptions 
of quality in England’s ‘school-led’ system of initial teacher education. Journal of Education 
Policy, 32(1), 14-33. doi:10.1080/02680939.2016.1214751 
Normand, R. (2017). The Changing Epistemic Governance of European Education: The Fabrication of 
the Homo Academicus Europeanus? : Springer. 
Ozga, J. (2009). Governing education through data in England: from regulation to self-evaluation. 
Journal of Education Policy, 24(2), 149-162. doi:10.1080/02680930902733121 
Pierson, P., & Skocpol, T. (2002). Historical institutionalism in contemporary political science. In K. I. 
& H. V. Milner (Eds.), Political Science: State of the Discipline. New York: W. W. Norton. 
=== PAGE 19 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
19 
 
Powell, J. J. W., Baker, D. P., & Fernandez, F. (2017). The Century of Science: The Global Triumph of 
the Research University (Vol. 33). Howard House, Wagon Lane, Bingley BD16 1WA, UK: 
Emerald Publishing Limited. 
Rickinson, M., Sebb, J., & Edwards, A. (2011). Improving Research through User Engagement. London 
& New York: Routledge. 
Rose, N. (1991). Governing by numbers: figuring out democracy. Accounting Organizations and 
SocieQ, 16(7), 673-692.  
Saunders, L. (Ed.) (2007). Educational Research and Policy-Making: Exploring the Border Country 
Between Research and Policy. London & New York: Routledge. 
Sayer, A. (2010). Method in Social Science: a realist approach (2nd ed.). London & New York: 
Routledge. 
Schriewer, J. (2012). EDITORIAL: Meaning constellations in the world society. Comparative Education, 
48(4), 411-422. doi:10.1080/03050068.2012.737233 
Scott, W. R. (2013). Institutions and Organizations: ideas, interests, and identities (4th ed.). Los 
Angeles: Sage. 
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2012). Understanding Policy Borrowing and Lending: Building comparative policy 
studies. In G. steiner-Khamsi & F. Waldow (Eds.), World Yearbook of Education 2012: Policy 
Borrowing and Lending in Education (pp. 3-18). London and New York: Routledge. 
Steiner-Khamsi, G., Karseth, B., & Baek, C. (2019). From science to politics: commissioned reports and 
their political translation into White Papers. Journal of Education Policy, 1-26. 
doi:10.1080/02680939.2019.1656289 
Tröhler, D. (2014). The medicalization of current educational research and its effects on education 
policy and school reforms. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education 36(5): 749-
764. 
Verger, A., Steiner-Khamsi, G., & Lubienski, C. (2017). The emerging global education industry: 
analysing market-making in education through market sociology. Globalisation, Societies and 
Education, 15(3), 325-340. doi:10.1080/14767724.2017.1330141 
Weber, M. (2003[1958]). The protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. Online, Dover. 
Weber, M. (2004 [1917/1919]). The vocation lectures: science as a vocation, politics as a vocation. 
Indianapolis, Indiana, Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. . 
Whiting, C., G. Whitty, I. Menter, P. Black, J. Hordern, A. Parfitt, K. Reynolds and N. Sorensen (2018). 
Diversity and complexity: Becoming a teacher in England in 2015-2016. Review of Education 
6(1): 69-96. 
Whitty, G. (2006). Education(al) research and education policy making: is conflict inevitable? British 
Educational Research Journal, 32(2), 159-176. doi:10.1080/01411920600568919 
Wiseman, A. W., Astiz, M. F., & Baker, D. P. (2014). Comparative education research framed by neo-
institutional theory: a review of diverse approaches and conflicting assumptions. Compare: A 
Journal of Comparative and International Education, 44(5), 688-709. 
doi:10.1080/03057925.2013.800783 
Zapp, M., Helgetun, J. B., & Powell, J. J. W. (2018). (Re)shaping educational research through 
‘programmification’: Institutional expansion, change, and translation in Norway. European 
Journal of Education, 53(2), 202-217. doi:10.1111/ejed.12267 
 
Annex: 
List of Interview subjects: 
A 1: Senior academic, Russell Group university 
A2: Academic Russell Group university 
A3: ITT interest group organization representative, former TTA, external government advisor 
=== PAGE 20 ===
  From an age of measurement to an evidence era?   JBH, IM  
20 
 
A4: ITT interest group organization representative, former head of teacher education in a SCITT, 
external government advisor 
A5: Local councillor and analyst 
A6: Senior academic, post-92 university, external government advisor 
A7 Senior Civil servant, DfE 
A8: State employee working on education 
A9: Interest organization employee 
A10: Researcher in education 
A11: Head of a MAT and SCITT, works with the teaching schools alliance 
A12: Senior civil servant, DfE – former TDA 
A13: Senior civil servant, DfE – former TDA 
A14: Head of a MAT and SCITT, external government adviser 
A15: Researcher in education 
A16: Academic, government adviser 
A17: Senior academic, Russell Group, involved in British teacher education policy 
A18: Responsible for ITT and CPD at a major MAT, former Teach First employee 
A19: Civil servant, DfE 
A20: Union policy adviser 
 
