=== PAGE 1 ===
https://doi.org/10.1177/08959048221127989
Educational Policy
2024, Vol. 38(1) 161 –185
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions 
DOI: 10.1177/08959048221127989
journals.sagepub.com/home/epx
Article
Does ESSA Assure the 
Use of Evidence-based 
Educational Practices?
Yuan Chang Ginsberg1, Fiona M. Hollands1 ,  
Venita R. Holmes2, Robert Shand3,  
Pamela Evans2, Ryan Blodgett2, Yixin Wang4, 
and Laura Head1
Abstract
The Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) of 2015 requires that K-12 
educational agencies invest federal education funds in evidence-based 
practices. We estimated what percentage of Title I funds at a large school 
district are invested in practices supported by a single study meeting one 
of the top three tiers of evidence as defined by ESSA. Over 95% met this 
bar. When studies about each practice from four research repositories 
were considered, the percentage of funds invested in practices with overall 
positive or mostly positive ratings fell below 60%. These proportions did not 
change substantially after the introduction of ESSA.
Keywords
educational policy, evaluation and assessment, evidence, federal policy, 
public education, school districts
1Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
2Houston Independent School District, Houston, TX, USA
3American University, Washington, DC, USA
4UNICEF, New York, NY, USA
Corresponding Author:
Fiona M. Hollands, Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th Street, New 
York, NY 10027, USA. 
Email: fmh7@tc.columbia.edu
1127989EPXXXX10.1177/08959048221127989Educational PolicyGinsberg et al.
research-article2022


=== PAGE 2 ===
162 Educational Policy 38(1)
In recent years, the U.S. federal government has allocated $41 billion to 
$58 billion to K-12 education under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), 
the 2015 reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 
1965 (ESEA) (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018, 2019, 2020). An additional 
$190 billion has been provided by the Elementary and Secondary School 
Emergency Relief (ESSER) Fund (Office of Elementary and Secondary 
Education, 2021). ESSA encourages investment of federal funds in evidence-
based activities, strategies, or interventions. These are defined as practices 
which have been shown to improve “student outcomes or other relevant out-
comes” (ESSA, 2015, p. 388) by at least one well-designed and well-imple-
mented experimental study (Tier I evidence), quasi-experimental study (Tier 
II evidence), or correlational study (Tier III evidence). Absent such studies, 
and to accommodate innovative practices (Jochim & Gross, 2016), Tier IV 
evidence requires a “rationale based on high-quality research findings or 
positive evaluation” and “ongoing efforts to examine the effects of such 
activity, strategy, or intervention” (p. 388–389).
ESSA’s tiered evidence approach differs substantially from the prior itera-
tion of ESEA: the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) of 2002. NCLB 
exhorted education agencies to offer educational activities based on scientifi-
cally based research, defined as experimental or quasi-experimental studies. 
Despite the apparent demand for rigor, the lack of such studies at that time 
effectively rendered this requirement difficult to meet or enforce (West, 
2016). Proponents of ESSA’s more permissive definition anticipated greater 
compliance by education agencies because it is more feasible to meet the 
evidence requirement and, at least for Tiers I–III, clearer what constitutes 
acceptable evidence. Supporters also anticipated education agencies would 
spend ESSA funds on producing local evidence by evaluating activities in 
which they invested the funds (e.g., Kane, 2017). Other commentators cau-
tioned that ESSA could instead harm the evidence-based movement because 
almost any activity could be implemented under Tier IV (Slavin, 2017). 
Alternatively, the pressure to use evidence might encourage adoption of evi-
dence-based practices unsuitable for the local context (Yoshizawa, 2021).
Use of evidence to inform education agency decisions is expected to 
improve academic and other outcomes for students (Heinrich, 2007; Massell 
et al., 2012; U.S. Department of Education, 2016). In addition to setting stan-
dards for what counts as evidence and when it should be used, ESSA asks 
education agencies to provide activities that are responsive to the needs of 
their local populations. The U.S. Department of Education’s guidance inte-
grates these two requirements by recommending that the evidence used to 
guide investment of federal funds be based on studies of similar types of 
students in similar settings. Ideally, the evidence must be both rigorous and 

=== PAGE 3 ===
Ginsberg et al. 163
relevant to local conditions. In addition, the U.S. Department of Education 
recommends consideration of the full body of evidence regarding the effec-
tiveness of an activity, in contrast to the ESSA requirement which allows a 
single study to justify an investment of funds. No explanation is given for 
why the full body of evidence should be considered rather than a single study 
and the U.S. Department of Education acknowledges that its guidance is 
“nonbinding and does not create or impose new legal requirements” (p. 2).
Despite the federal emphasis on use of evidence-based practices, no prior 
research has established what proportion of federal education funds are 
invested in evidence-based practices according to ESSA’s definition, the 
degree to which applying the U.S. Department of Education’s more rigorous 
definition yields a different answer, or whether this proportion changed after 
the introduction of ESSA. Answers to these questions could help assess the 
effectiveness of federal policy in influencing the use of evidence-based prac-
tices by local education agencies (LEAs) and inform policymakers how use 
of evidence should be defined and encouraged.
In this paper, we first briefly address the research on use of evidence in 
education decision-making and review the relationship between the largest 
category of federal education funds, Title I, and student achievement. Given 
inconsistent findings on the association between federal funding amounts and 
student achievement, but mostly positive findings when the funds are used to 
support implementation of specific practices, we designed a study to estab-
lish the extent to which Title I funding is allocated to practices which may be 
reasonably expected to improve student achievement. We describe our col-
laboration with a large, southern, urban district (SUD) to examine what pro-
portion of its Title I funds are spent on activities for which there is evidence 
of effectiveness; how the answer differs depending on whether only one 
study is deemed sufficient to support the use of funds or whether multiple 
studies are considered; and whether the proportion changed after ESSA went 
into effect in 2017–2018. We did not aim to ascertain whether evidence was 
used to make these investment decisions but to quantify the proportion of 
Title I funds spent on activities for which we ourselves could find evidence 
meeting ESSA’s top three tiers of evidence. We focused on the top three tiers 
because the fourth tier is vaguely defined: it is unclear what counts as an 
adequate research-based rationale or ongoing evaluation.
Use of Evidence in Education Decision-Making
Many scholars have documented the relatively limited extent to which 
research-based evidence is used in education decision-making and the many 
barriers precluding greater use (Asen et al., 2013; Farley-Ripple et al., 2018; 

=== PAGE 4 ===
164 Educational Policy 38(1)
Farrell & Coburn, 2017; Finnigan et al., 2013; Honig & Coburn, 2008; Honig 
et al., 2017; King & Pechman, 1984; Neal et al., 2018; Nutley et al., 2007; 
Penuel et al., 2016, 2018; Spillane, 2012; Tseng, 2012; Tseng & Nutley, 2014; 
Weiss, 1977). However, none of these studies have quantified the proportion 
of education agency funds that are actually invested in evidence-based activi-
ties. Several efforts have been made to assess the extent to which education 
agencies are working to meet ESSA requirements (Duff & Wohlstetter, 2019; 
Results for America, 2017, 2018; Stark Rentner et al., 2019; Troppe et al., 
2020) and have documented actions taken in this direction. For example, 
Results for America (2017, 2018) evaluated the 51 state “ESSA plans” 
approved by the U.S. Department of Education for implementation in the 
2017–2018 school year and found that 46 of the plans included at least one 
promising practice for building and using evidence to improve student out-
comes. These practices were concentrated on Title I funding which consti-
tutes the largest portion of ESSA funding, totaling $16.5 billion for fiscal year 
2021 (ESEA Network, n.d.; U.S. Department of Education, 2021). But again, 
the extent to which Title I funds are invested in evidence-based activities, and 
whether ESSA has changed this, has not yet been quantitatively evaluated.
Title I Funds
Title I of ESEA is designed to help children from families of low socio-eco-
nomic status (SES) meet state academic standards (Dynarski & Kainz, 2015; 
Stullich et al., 2007; U.S. Department of Education, 2015). According to the 
U.S. Department of Education (2018), national spending on Title I increased 
from $14.5 billion in 2010 to $15.9 billion in 2019, reaching over 13,000 
LEAs across all states. ESSER funds have been awarded to state education 
agencies in the same proportion as Title I funds were distributed in 2019. 
ESSA repeatedly emphasizes the need to invest Title I funds in evidence-
based practices, limiting the use of certain streams to practices supported by 
the top three tiers of evidence.
Pre-ESSER, Title I funding accounted for 2% of total school funding (U.S. 
Census Bureau, 2018) and added approximately 5% more funding per stu-
dent than would otherwise be available (Dynarski & Kainz, 2015). The U.S. 
Government Accountability Office (2011) demonstrated that school districts 
spend Title I funds on instructional staff, professional development, after-
school and summer programs, technology, supplemental services including 
interventions and tutoring, and class size reductions. Contreras (2011) cate-
gorized Title I investments into eight spending categories including person-
nel, staff development, reading programs, and math programs, but found no 
significant relationship between the proportion of funds allocated to each 

=== PAGE 5 ===
Ginsberg et al. 165
category and student achievement. However, Contreras did not investigate 
whether the specific practices on which the funds were spent were effective 
for improving student learning.
Studies investigating the impact of Title I funds on student achievement 
have, overall, been inconclusive. While some have found positive effects 
(e.g., Borman & D’Agostino, 1996; Torgesen et al., 2007) others have not 
(e.g., Deke et al., 2012; Puma et al., 1997; Sousa & Armor, 2016; van der 
Klaauw, 2008). Dynarski and Kainz (2015) propose two explanations for the 
mixed evidence: first, Title I funding is not enough to substantially improve 
the learning experience for students; second, a large proportion of the funding 
has been spent on ineffective practices. Additionally, Gordon (2004) demon-
strated that local contributions to education funding fall in reaction to receipt 
of Title I funds, yielding no overall increase in revenues.
Studies evaluating the effectiveness of Title I-funded practices at a more 
granular level indicate that certain programs or activities are more effective 
than others. For example, Kainz (2019) found that students in classrooms 
with a large proportion of low-income Black and Latinx students showed 
greater gains in reading when Title I funds were used for class size reduction, 
whereas they showed greater gains in math when funds were used for profes-
sional development. Cook et al., (2015) found that intensive, individualized 
academic intervention programs for struggling 9th and 10th graders improved 
math scores. Even among relatively low-cost schoolwide interventions that 
are the focus of the majority of Title I investments, there is evidence for sig-
nificant variation in effects. For example, researchers found substantial varia-
tion in the effectiveness of math curricula and textbooks in California (Koedel 
et al., 2017; Koedel & Polikoff, 2017). These studies suggest that highly cus-
tomized investments, tailored to the needs of particular student populations, 
age groups, subjects, and teacher and school contexts, accompanied by rigor-
ous evidence to justify an investment, could enhance the impact of Title I and 
school funding in general.
Using SUD’s investment of Title I funds as a case study to investigate the 
extent to which federal education funds are expended on evidence-based 
practices and how ESSA has affected this, we designed a descriptive study to 
address the following research questions:
1) What proportion of Title I funds are spent by a large, urban school 
district on practices supported by a single study that meets ESSA Tier 
I–III evidence requirements?
2) What proportion of Title I funds are spent by a large, urban school 
district on practices supported by a wider body of evidence?

=== PAGE 6 ===
166 Educational Policy 38(1)
3) Did the proportion of Title I funds spent by a large, urban school dis-
trict on evidence-based practices increase after the introduction of 
ESSA?
We believe the analytical strategy we demonstrate could be adopted by any 
LEA as a means to evaluate its own progress toward investing in evidence-
based strategies. Such a self-evaluation could serve as a needs assessment to 
determine the extent to which efforts are warranted to support school and 
district office administrators in using or producing evidence to inform invest-
ment of educational funds. Furthermore, the approach provides a means to 
test the theory that schools or districts investing in evidence-based practices 
will produce better student outcomes.
Methods
Setting
SUD is a large, urban school district in the U.S. with an enrollment of over 
210,000 students. In comparison to the average demographics of American 
urban school districts serving over 100,000 students (National Center for 
Education Statistics [NCES], 2021, n.d.), SUD serves more non-white stu-
dents (91% vs. 78%), in particular Hispanic and Latinx students (62% vs. 
42%). SUD also serves a higher percentage of English language learners 
(29% vs. 17%) and economically disadvantaged students (80% vs. 67%). The 
graduation rate at SUD is 79%, four percentage points lower than the aver -
age. The district’s Title I funding allocation in 2018 was $599 per student 
compared with an average of $580 per student in any large, urban district 
serving over 100,000 students (U.S. Department of Education, 2018). The 
authors have established an informal, ongoing research-practice partnership 
(RPP) with SUD. The RPP’s focus on improving the availability and use of 
evidence in SUD’s decisions about the programs implemented in its schools 
made it a suitable and convenient choice of site for this study which demands 
a high level of trust given the nature of the information being shared.
SUD schools serving at least 40% of students from low-SES backgrounds 
are eligible for Title I schoolwide programs which serve all students as 
opposed to only targeting students from low-income families (U.S. 
Department of Education, 2015). At SUD in 2017–2018, this rule applied to 
156 elementary, 52 middle, and 46 high schools. Only 20 SUD schools 
received no Title I funds. SUD provides substantial training and monitoring 
related to use of Title I funds, including clear and specific guidance on types 
of allowable expenditures. As a result, we expected use of the funds would be 
similar across schools, varying most by age of students served. A sample of 

=== PAGE 7 ===
Ginsberg et al. 167
four of SUD’s Title I schools, selected by the Title I Director as typical of 
how SUD schools spend Title I funds, participated in our study in addition to 
the central district office. To include the range of practices in which Title I 
funds are invested across the continuum of schooling, the school sample con-
sisted of two elementary, one middle, and one high school.
Each year, approximately two-thirds of SUD’s $90 million–$100 million 
Title I funds are distributed to school campuses which they can invest in cer-
tain personnel positions and in non-personnel items such as contracted ser -
vices (e.g., professional development), classroom supplies, reading materials, 
and technology. The SUD central office uses the remaining funds to support 
programs which school campuses can opt into based on their student and 
community needs. Figure 1 provides an overview of Title I fund distribution 
between the SUD district office and schools.
Overview of Analytic Strategy
Our first step toward associating Title I expenditures with evidence was to 
obtain line-item financial records documenting all outlays of Title I funds by 
the SUD central office and the sample of four schools over 3 years. For each 
Figure 1. Approximate distributions of annual title 1 funding at SUD.

=== PAGE 8 ===
168 Educational Policy 38(1)
line item, we identified one or more associated educational practices. To 
identify research evidence associated with each practice, we followed 
Alexander’s (2020) recommendations for conducting systematic reviews, 
including specifying the corpus of search terms, delimiting the search, estab-
lishing inclusion and exclusion criteria, adhering to quality standards, and 
tying back to critical questions. For each practice, we assigned one or more 
search terms that we used in each of four reputable research repositories. We 
first determined whether at least one study returned by the search term con-
stituted ESSA Tier I–III evidence. We also assigned a summary rating to each 
search term based on all studies meeting our criteria. In a final step, we tied 
the evidence ratings back to each line item dollar amount to calculate the 
proportion of funds that were spent on evidence-based practices. Below, we 
describe each step in greater detail.
Data
SUD provided summary and line-item spreadsheets documenting SUD’s 
Title I expenditures for school years 2016–2017, 2017–2018, and 2018–2019. 
Most expenditures were already categorized by program such as teacher 
coaching, summer school, and staff development. The exception was General 
Administration, which accounted for $14.9 million total over the 3 years and 
included district office services such as Accounting, Budgeting, Research 
and Accountability, and the External Funding departments. Research and 
Accountability evaluates programs funded by Title I, documenting outcomes 
based on the program goals and objectives. The other departments manage 
the state reimbursement process, ensure grant compliance, check for bal-
anced and accurate budgets, and monitor expenditures to ensure they are 
spent on allowable items.
The largest category of funds was for Title I schoolwide programs, an 
amount of $48 million to $49 million per year (approximately 50% of the 
SUD total) which is allocated to individual eligible schools, as described in 
the Setting section. Because these spreadsheets included no further details on 
how schoolwide program funds were used by schools, we requested Title I 
expenditure records over the same 3 years from the sample of four schools. 
The four school spreadsheets, detailing a total of $3.97 million in Title I 
expenditures, were organized by items purchased, but no specific educational 
activity was associated with each item. In addition to the expenditure records, 
SUD provided documents related to Title I funds, including a several-hun-
dred-page manual detailing how funds could be spent, annual accountability 
reports, and SUD evaluations of programs implemented with the Title I 
funds.

=== PAGE 9 ===
Ginsberg et al. 169
Associating Expenditures With Educational Practices
For each Title I program funded using the central office’s Title I allocation, 
we reviewed SUD’s annual reports and other Title I documentation such as 
internal program evaluations for program descriptions. Staff from SUD’s 
Title I office and Research and Accountability department also contributed 
their knowledge of the programs via ongoing electronic and verbal commu-
nications. We specifically aimed to document which types of students were 
targeted by each program (elementary, middle, or high school; special or gen-
eral education; English Learners) and what educational practices were 
involved so that we could label each expenditure with one or more 
practices.
Some expenditures were for items that were too vague or broad to assign a 
specific practice. In some of these cases, the SUD Office of External Funding 
was able to provide more detailed information on the practices supported. For 
example, 79% of the expenditure on private-non-profit schools was split evenly 
across four practices: pull-out interventions for reading and math, push-in 
interventions for reading and math, academic counseling, and summer school; 
8% was spent on professional development, and less than 1% was assigned to 
five named reading or math programs. The remaining 11% supported general 
administration which could not be associated with a specific educational prac-
tice. For general administration and other items for which we could not identify 
a specific educational practice, including the aforementioned $14.9 million in 
general administration, we labeled the spending “Title I funding.”
We pursued two approaches for associating the approximately $48 million 
in expenditures on Title I schoolwide programs with educational practices. 
First, we assigned the eponymous practice of “Title I schoolwide programs” 
to the entire amount and treated it as a single lump sum. As an alternative 
approach, we assumed that all SUD Title I schools invested their individual 
allotments of funds for schoolwide programs in the same practices as the four 
sample schools.
We broke out expenditures and their associated practices by the relevant 
school levels: elementary, middle, and high. This allowed us to later apply 
evidence ratings specific to the age group(s) targeted because, for some prac-
tices, the research evidence may be positive for one school level and mixed, 
negative, or absent for other levels. For practices that targeted all three school 
levels such as summer school and student health care programs, we split the 
expenditures to reflect the proportion of SUD’s total student enrollment at 
each school level.
For Title I expenditures at the individual schools, we first reviewed each 
expenditure and associated it with an educational practice based on allowable 

=== PAGE 10 ===
170 Educational Policy 38(1)
uses prescribed in SUD’s Title I manual or using information from other 
internal documents, or from the SUD and vendor websites. Subsequently, we 
conducted semi-structured interviews with administrative assistants and prin-
cipals at the two elementary schools in our sample to confirm our assump-
tions and fill in gaps where it was unclear how the purchased item might have 
been used. These two schools had the most diverse investments of the four 
schools in our sample and there was high overlap in items purchased across 
all four schools so we assumed they were used for similar practices at each 
school unless informed otherwise. We interviewed the principal at the high 
school who provided information about items that were unique to the second-
ary schools such as A VID and a test-prep item.
Assigning Evidence Search Terms to Practices
Each program or practice funded by the central office Title I allocation 
(approximately $30 million) was labeled with one to seven terms that we could 
use to search for studies on effectiveness at improving student outcomes. If an 
expenditure supported a well-recognized practice (e.g., tutoring intervention 
for reading, professional development, summer school), this practice name 
alone was used as a search term. For investments in vendor-provided pro-
grams (e.g., Imagine Learning), we used the program name as a search term. 
Some SUD programs were developed in-house and delivered as packages of 
activities and practices, for example, turnaround efforts or parent engagement 
initiatives. In these cases, we assigned search terms to reflect any of the edu-
cational practices involved. For the practice of “Title I schoolwide programs,” 
we assigned the search terms “Title I schoolwide programs” and “Title I fund-
ing.” In total, we assigned 52 search terms to 35 practices on which the central 
office Title I allocation was spent (see Supplemental Table 1).
Expenditures in the four school spreadsheets were not organized by edu-
cational practice or program but were simply associated with the actual item 
purchased. For example, $620.98 was spent on batteries at an elementary 
school in 2016–2017. We associated a total of approximately 1,300 personnel 
and non-personnel expenditures with one or more of 109 educational prac-
tices. The batteries, for example, were associated with a robotics program 
based on information from our interviewees. Most personnel expenditures 
and a few non-personnel expenditures supported just one educational prac-
tice but others were associated with multiple practices. For instance, colored 
paper was used for home-school communication, for experiential learning, 
and as general supplies. Unless otherwise directed by our interviewees, we 
split the dollar amount for these items evenly among the uses (one third each 
in the case of colored paper). Each of the 109 educational practices was then 

=== PAGE 11 ===
Ginsberg et al. 171
labeled with one or more of 129 search terms (see Supplemental Table 2). A 
single educational practice might be associated with multiple search terms 
because it involves several activities at once. For example, the Reading Mini-
lessons series was initially described as a professional development practice, 
but it encompasses three more specific educational practices: professional 
learning communities, professional book study, and mini-lesson delivery. We 
used multiple search terms for these compound activities to capture all poten-
tially relevant evidence.
Searching for Evidence
After associating each Title I expenditure with one or more educational prac-
tices and related search terms, we entered the search terms in each of four 
reputable databases of educational research to identify relevant studies: What 
Works Clearinghouse (WWC), Evidence for ESSA, Education Endowment 
Foundation, and Education Resources Information Center. We limited our 
search to these sources partly due to time and funding constraints but also 
because these sources of research studies are freely available to the public 
and therefore represent what is likely to be accessible for the typical K-12 
decision-maker. For each search term, we identified studies that employed 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs), quasi-experimental designs (QEDs), or 
correlational designs to investigate the effects of the associated educational 
practice. We also collected meta-analyses of studies that used correlational or 
more rigorous research designs. Although ESSA refers to “student outcomes 
and other relevant outcomes” (p. 388), there is no specification as to what 
constitutes other relevant outcomes so we only retained studies reporting on 
academic, behavioral, socio-emotional, or other outcomes for students. We 
did not consider studies that might serve as ESSA Tier IV evidence because 
it is not clear what counts as an adequate “rationale based on high quality 
evidence or positive evaluation” (ESSA, 2015, p. 388).
We reviewed each study to identify the target student population, target out-
comes, and findings regarding the effectiveness of the practice at improving the 
stated target outcomes. To answer our first research question, for each search 
term, we determined whether any single study based on an RCT, QED, corre-
lational study, or meta-analysis that included studies using correlational or 
more rigorous approaches, indicated statistically significant improvements in 
one or more of the target outcomes at the school level (elementary, middle, 
high) in which the associated educational practice was implemented at SUD. 
To address our second research question, we assigned one of the seven sum-
mary evidence ratings shown in Table 1 to each search term based on all the 
studies we found meeting our criteria for the relevant school level. In both 

=== PAGE 12 ===
172 Educational Policy 38(1)
cases, we only included studies targeting the same general population of stu-
dents for which SUD used the practice (elementary, middle, or high school; 
special or general education; English Learners) and that aimed to improve out-
comes similar to those targeted by SUD (e.g., reading or math achievement).
Tying Evidence Back to Expenditure Amounts
After assigning an evidence rating to each search term, we connected the 
evidence ratings back to the expenditure amounts. For example, a district 
Table 1. Ratings Applied to Evidence on Educational Practices Based on a Wider 
Body of Evidence.
Evidence rating
Ratings based on all studies meeting our criteria 
in four research repositories
Positive All studies based on RCTs, QEDs, correlational 
analyses, or meta-analyses based on studies 
using these designs, find only positive effects 
of the practice (i.e., T performs significantly 
better than C or correlational models suggest a 
positive relationship between the practice and 
student outcomes).
Mostly positive Most of the studies find positive effects while 
some show either mixed results or no 
difference between T and C. Also, no studies 
find a purely negative impact. If only one study 
is found, the evidence shows partially positive 
effects.
Mixed Effects include some mix of positive, negative, 
mixed, and/or null results.
Mostly negative
a The majority of studies find negative impacts 
while some show no difference.
Negative All studies find negative effects (i.e., C performs 
significantly better than T, or correlational 
models suggest a negative relationship between 
the practice and student outcomes).
No significant positive or 
negative evidence
All studies find no significant difference between 
T and C or no significant correlation between 
independent variables and outcome variables.
No studies No studies were found about the practice at the 
relevant school level.
Note. T = treatment group; C = comparison group.
aThis rating did not apply to any of the practices we investigated. Additionally, there were no 
practices for which there was some negative evidence and some showing no difference.

=== PAGE 13 ===
Ginsberg et al. 173
office expenditure of $1,606,669 for a mentoring program offered at all 
school levels was labeled with the search term “mentoring for female stu-
dents.” It was assigned an evidence rating of “no studies” for elementary 
school, “positive” for middle school, and “positive” for high school based on 
one correlational study (Stoeger et al., 2019). For practices associated with 
multiple search terms, we assigned the strongest level of evidence found 
among the relevant search terms to the full dollar amount. Using the example 
of the Reading Mini-lessons series, an elementary school expenditure of 
$1,188 for this line item was labeled with four search terms: “professional 
development,” “professional learning community,” “professional book 
study,” and “professional development for mini-lesson delivery.” We found 
positive evidence for professional learning communities, mixed evidence for 
professional development at the elementary school level, and no studies on 
professional book study or professional development for mini-lesson deliv-
ery. We therefore assigned the highest level of evidence found—positive—to 
the $1,188 expenditure. In a sensitivity analysis, we assigned the lowest level 
of evidence found among the relevant search terms to determine how this 
would affect the results.
Once each line item for the four schools was assigned an evidence rating, 
we calculated the percentage of the total school-based expenditures sup-
ported by one study meeting ESSA evidence Tiers I–III. We also calculated 
the percentage supported by positive or mostly positive evidence according 
to our summary rating which considered all studies reviewed for each prac-
tice associated with an expenditure. We did the same for the district office 
expenditures but, in each case, using each of the two approaches described 
above for the Title I schoolwide programs category of funds: first assigning 
the evidence rating attributed to “Title I schoolwide programs” or “Title I 
funding” to the full amount; and, second, assuming that the ratings assigned 
to Title I expenditures at the four schools were, on average, applicable pro-
portionally to all SUD Title I schoolwide expenditures.
Results
Proportion of Title I Funds Spent on Practices Supported by a 
Single Study Meeting ESSA Tier I–III Evidence Requirements
As described in the methods section, we used two approaches to assign evi-
dence to the large portion of SUD’s Title I funds that were distributed to 
school campuses for schoolwide programs. Under the first approach in which 
we reviewed studies returned by the search terms “Title I funding” and “Title 
I schoolwide programs,” we found positive evidence at all school levels. 

=== PAGE 14 ===
174 Educational Policy 38(1)
Applying this rating to the full $48 million–$49 million amount allocated to 
schoolwide programs, we found that 99% of the SUD’s Title I investments 
were supported by at least one study meeting ESSA Tier I–III evidence 
requirements (see Figure 2, left panel). Under the second approach, we 
applied our findings for the sample of four schools to the full $48 mil-
lion–$49 million amount. Ninety-five percent of the schools’ expenditures 
were spent on practices supported by at least one study meeting ESSA Tier 
I–III evidence requirements. Applying this percentage to all SUD Title I 
schoolwide program expenditures resulted in an overall percentage of 96% of 
SUD’s total Title I investments being supported by at least one study meeting 
ESSA Tier I–III evidence requirements (see Figure 2, right panel).
Proportion of Title I Funds Spent on Practices Supported by a 
Wider Body of Evidence
When we applied evidence ratings to each expenditure based on all relevant 
studies in the four repositories, many of the ratings were downgraded from 
positive to mixed or below due to inconsistent findings across studies. This 
includes the ratings for Title I schoolwide programs for middle and high 
schools. Using these ratings, under the approach in which we applied the 
evidence ratings for Title I schoolwide programs and Title I funding to the 
Figure 2. Percentage of SUD’s title I funds invested in evidence-based practices 
applying ESSA’s definition of evidence.
Note. Left panel shows results when a single rating is applied to all SUD Title I schoolwide 
program funds. Right panel shows results when ratings from investments at four schools are 
generalized to all SUD Title I schoolwide program funds.

=== PAGE 15 ===
Ginsberg et al. 175
$48 million–$49 million portion of SUD’s Title I funds distributed to schools 
for schoolwide programs, we found positive or mostly positive evidence to 
support 49% of SUD’s total Title I expenditures, down from 99% based on 
ESSA evidence Tiers I–III (see Figure 3, left panel).
When considering the wider body of evidence, the percentage of Title I 
investments at the four sample schools supported by positive or mostly posi-
tive evidence dropped from 95% to 74%. Applying this percentage to the full 
amount of SUD’s Title I schoolwide funds resulted in an overall percentage 
of 58% of SUD’s total 2016–2019 Title I spending being supported by posi-
tive or mostly positive evidence (see Figure 3, right panel).
Proportion of Title I Funds Spent on Evidence-based practices 
After the Introduction of ESSA
The percentage of SUD’s Title I funds invested in practices supported by 
ESSA Tier I–III evidence dropped one to two percentage points from 2016–
2017 to 2017–2018, the year in which LEAs were first expected to adhere to 
the ESSA evidence requirements. In 2018–2019, the proportion increased 
one percentage point. This pattern was the same regardless of whether we 
used a single evidence rating for all Title I schoolwide program funds or gen-
eralized the ratings from the four schools. In our analysis based on a wider 
Figure 3. Percentage of SUD’s title I funds invested in evidence-based practices 
according to a wider body of evidence.
Note. Left panel shows results when a single rating is applied to all SUD Title I schoolwide 
program funds. Right panel shows results when ratings from investments at four schools are 
generalized to all SUD Title I schoolwide program funds.

=== PAGE 16 ===
176 Educational Policy 38(1)
body of evidence and generalizing evidence ratings from the four schools to 
all SUD funds allocated to Title I schoolwide programs, the percentage of 
funds expended on practices supported by positive or mostly positive evi-
dence increased from 56% in 2016–2017 to 60% in 2017–2018 and 59% in 
2018–2019. The left panel in Figure 4 shows the percentage of funds invested 
in practices supported by ESSA Tier I–III evidence when we generalized the 
school ratings to Title I schoolwide programs. The right panel shows the 
results for practices supported by a fuller body of evidence.
Our sensitivity analysis in which we assigned the lowest level of evidence 
instead of the highest to practices for which varying levels of evidence were 
found for multiple search terms resulted in lower percentages of Title I funds 
being invested in practices supported by positive or mostly positive evidence. 
For our first approach in which we assigned an evidence rating to “school-
wide programs” as a single practice, 6 out of 35 summary ratings changed 
from positive or mostly positive to mixed. These changes accounted for a 
total of approximately $84 million ($80 million of which is schoolwide pro-
grams at the elementary school level) out of the total $288 million Title I 
funds, and led to a large drop in the overall percentage of funds invested in 
practices supported by positive or mostly positive evidence from 49% to 
20%. For the second approach in which we assigned evidence ratings to all 
schoolwide program funds based on the results from the four schools, using 
the lowest evidence rating instead of the highest caused 5 of the same 6 rat-
ings to change from positive or mostly positive to mixed. These changes 
accounted for a total of approximately $3.6 million. For the practices at the 
individual schools, 28 of 109 dropped in evidence rating, resulting in a fall in 
the percentage of practices supported by positive or mostly positive evidence 
from 74% to 68%. Applying the lower evidence ratings for practices at the 
Figure 4. Percentage of SUD’s title I funds invested in evidence-based practices 
over a 3-year period.
Note. Left panel: Evidence-based as defined by ESSA; Right panel: evidence-based according to 
a wider body of evidence.

=== PAGE 17 ===
Ginsberg et al. 177
four schools to the overall district allocation of $146 million for schoolwide 
programs, $8.9 million was associated with less positive evidence. In total, 
over $12.5 million out of the total $288 million Title I funds was no longer 
supported by positive or mostly positive evidence when the lowest evidence 
rating was prioritized. This led to a drop in the overall percentage of funds 
invested in practices supported by positive or mostly positive evidence from 
58% to 54%.
Discussion
Our study demonstrates strategies for documenting the extent to which LEAs 
invest funds in evidence-based practices. Depending on whether evidence-
based practices are defined as those supported by evidence meeting the top 
three tiers of evidence according to ESSA, or as being supported by a wider 
body of evidence—more in alignment with the U.S. Department of 
Education’s (2016) guidance—the results vary dramatically at SUD from 
over 95% to under 60%. The results also vary, but much less so, depending 
on whether funds allocated by the central district office to schools are catego-
rized simply as “Title I schoolwide funds,” or whether they are assigned evi-
dence ratings based on how the schools actually use the funds. Overall, our 
findings suggest that SUD is complying with ESSA’s evidence requirements 
but that, even after ESSA went into effect, 42–51% of Title I funds are still 
invested in practices that are not supported by a wider body of evidence. If 
this finding is typical of other school districts, it may help explain why it is 
difficult to show consistently that greater investment in education leads to 
better outcomes (Jackson, 2020).
The study highlights a number of limitations in the evidence base for edu-
cational practices. We found no studies at the relevant school level for 26 
practices in which the four sample SUD schools invest Title I funds. For the 
district office Title I expenditures, we found no evidence for seven practices 
at one or more of the relevant school levels served and no evidence for five 
practices at any school level. It was also difficult to find studies relevant to 
SUD’s particular implementation of a practice. For example, a rigorous study 
demonstrating positive impacts of small-group tutoring on the mathematical 
problem-solving performance of third-grade children with math difficulties 
(e.g., Jitendra et al., 2013) does not assure that a parallel strategy would be 
equally effective for other subjects or grade levels as implemented in SUD.
For some practices, while studies are available for a generalized form of 
the practice, there is no evidence on more specific forms. For example, hun-
dreds of studies have been conducted on professional development for teach-
ers, but we could find none on on-site consulting for teachers, motivational 

=== PAGE 18 ===
178 Educational Policy 38(1)
speakers, or conferences. A similar challenge is that, in some instances, sev-
eral educational practices are bundled to create a program and evaluated as a 
package, making it difficult to pinpoint which components are effective. For 
example, field trips are a component of youth programs that have been evalu-
ated and reviewed by WWC (e.g., Cardenas et al., 1992; Herrera et al., 2013; 
Snipes et al., 2015). While the youth programs show positive outcomes, it is 
impossible to determine whether field trips contributed significantly to the 
outcomes. We could find only one correlational study specific to field trips 
(Whitesell, 2016) and this was for middle school while the practice was used 
at an elementary school in SUD.
Limitations and Future Directions
There are a number of limitations in our analysis which could be improved 
upon in future studies. First, we only investigated use of Title I funds by one 
school district central office and a sample of four schools. Our results may be 
typical of other large, urban districts because the guidelines for Title I fund-
ing substantially constrain the types of investments that can be made. 
However, further studies at districts of different sizes and in a variety of geo-
graphical locations would better illustrate variations in the extent to which 
Title I funds are invested in evidence-based practices. We note that such work 
requires close collaboration with the school district because publicly-avail-
able records of LEA expenditures would not permit the depth of analysis we 
were able to pursue based on line-item expenditure data and access to person-
nel who could explain how items were used for specific educational activi-
ties. Even with the collaboration of the district, for items that were used for 
multiple purposes, we had to make assumptions about how to split their value 
across the various uses.
Secondly, we limited our definition of an evidence-based practice to ren-
der the study feasible. We only retained studies that reported student out-
comes and we did not assess whether a practice was supported by the lowest 
tier of ESSA evidence. However, including Tier IV evidence could only add 
1–4% to the already high percentages of practices that met ESSA evidence 
Tiers I–III. Our definition of a wider body of evidence was limited to studies 
in four research repositories which exclude the most recent studies due to the 
time required for review and inclusion in a repository. To determine whether 
a study was relevant to the SUD context, we considered a number of factors: 
grade level of the study population; whether the students were designated as 
general or special education students, or English Learners; and whether the 
outcomes measured aligned with SUD’s targeted outcomes. However, we did 
not eliminate studies on the basis of racial composition or SES of the student 

=== PAGE 19 ===
Ginsberg et al. 179
population. While the latter variables are clearly important contextual factors 
(Kao & Thompson, 2003; Roscigno & Ainsworth-Darnell, 1999), the evi-
dence base is currently too limited to allow for this level of matching.
Another avenue for investigating the effects of ESSA on evidence use that 
we did not pursue is to document the number of local evaluations that have 
been conducted by state or local education agencies of their ESSA-funded 
programs and determine what percentage constitutes ESSA evidence Tiers 
I–III. SUD conducts internal annual evaluations of a number of its Title I and 
other programs and nine of these appeared among the studies we found in the 
four research repositories, in addition to two external evaluations of SUD’s 
programs.
Recommendations
To assist district office administrators and school principals in investing Title 
I and other funds in evidence-based practices, we recommend that the U.S. 
Department of Education or state education agencies survey LEAs to identify 
the most widely implemented activities and direct research funding to inves-
tigate the effectiveness of these activities in a variety of contexts. Such 
“transferability studies” or “modified replications” (Schneider, 2021) would 
vary one or more factors such as student groups served, grade level, urbanic-
ity of location, or delivery mechanism. For practices found to be consistently 
ineffective, funding should be directed to identify, develop, or scale up more 
effective alternatives, or to find ways to improve effectiveness of the existing 
practice if the underlying theory of change is sound.
The utility of repositories of research could be increased by allowing users 
to search by practice, by eligibility for investment of specific streams of fed-
eral funding, by student characteristics and needs, and by specific outcomes 
targeted. These repositories should also include information about the practi-
cal demands of implementation including resource requirements, costs, and 
other contextual or political factors that may influence likelihood of attaining 
positive results.
Researchers who study interventions for which evidence is mixed could 
aim to explain apparent contradictions or inconsistent findings by investigat-
ing differences in implementation, context, and populations served. More 
attention to subgroup analysis could highlight for which students certain 
interventions are more or less effective. Identifying the key components of 
programs and practices that lead to better student outcomes could help school 
administrators focus efforts on implementing these aspects with high fidelity. 
Economic evaluations could help assess the feasibility of implementation as 
well as informing the most efficient use of limited resources. For districts that 

=== PAGE 20 ===
180 Educational Policy 38(1)
must provide services to meet a certain student need or a state mandate with-
out evidence on the effectiveness of the services, the district office research 
department can take advantage of the ability to use Title I funds for ongoing 
evaluation of programs to develop its own evidence base. Districts without 
internal capacity could contract with outside researchers for this purpose. 
Sharing results across districts or collaborating with other districts on studies 
could help build a more locally-relevant repository of evidence.
A future reauthorization of ESEA should provide a more rigorous standard 
for what counts as evidence of program effectiveness, directing decision-
makers to consider multiple studies in addition to context and feasibility of 
implementation. Most critically, research is needed to determine whether use 
of evidence in decision-making does indeed lead to better student outcomes.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was supported in part by the 
William T. Grant Foundation under Grant number 187095 awarded to Teachers 
College, Columbia University.
ORCID iD
Fiona M. Hollands  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1172-9310
Supplemental Material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.
References
Alexander, P. A. (2020). Methodological guidance paper: The art and science of qual-
ity systematic reviews. Review of Educational Research, 90(1), 6–23. https://doi.
org/10.3102/0034654319854352
Asen, R., Gurke, D., Conners, P., Solomon, R., & Gumm, E. (2013). Research evidence 
and school board deliberations: Lessons from three Wisconsin school districts. 
Educational Policy, 27(1), 33–63. https://doi.org/10.1177/0895904811429291
Borman, G. D., & D’Agostino, J. V. (1996). Title I and student achievement: A 
meta-analysis of federal evaluation results. Educational Evaluation and Policy 
Analysis, 18(4), 309–326. https://doi.org/10.3102/01623737018004309
Cardenas, J. A., Montecel, M. R., Supik, J. D., & Harris, R. J. (1992). The Coca-Cola 
valued youth program: Dropout prevention strategies for at-risk students. Texas 
Researcher, 3, 111–130.

=== PAGE 21 ===
Ginsberg et al. 181
Contreras, H. (2011). The relationship between Title I funding allocations and stu-
dent achievement. [Doctoral dissertation, California State University]. ProQuest 
Dissertations Publishing.
Cook, P. J., Dodge, K., Farkas, G., Fryer, R. G., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mayer, S., 
Pollack, H., & Steinberg, L. (2015). Not too late: Improving academic outcomes 
for disadvantaged youth. (Working Paper WP–15–01). Institute for Policy 
Research, Northwestern University. https://www.ipr.northwestern.edu/our-work/
working-papers/2015/ipr-wp-15-01.html
Deke, J., Dragoset, L., Bogen, K., & Gill, B. (2012). Impacts of Title I supplemen-
tal educational services on student achievement (NCEE 2012–40530). U.S. 
Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center 
for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance. https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/
pubs/20124053/pdf/20124053.pdf
Duff, M., & Wohlstetter, P. (2019). Negotiating intergovernmental rela-
tions under ESSA. Educational Researcher, 48(5), 296–308. https://doi.
org/10.3102/0013189X19854365
Dynarski, M., & Kainz, K. (2015). Why federal spending on disadvantaged students 
(Title I) doesn’t work. Evidence Speaks Reports, 1(7), 1–5. https://www.brook-
ings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Download-the-paper-2.pdf
ESEA Network. (n.d.). Federal education programs summary. Author. Retrieved 
November 12, 2021, from https://www.eseanetwork.org/about/esea-programs-
summary
ESSA. (2015). Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, Pub. L. No. 114–95 § 114 Stat. 
1177 (2015–2016).
Farley-Ripple, E., May, H., Karpyn, A., Tilley, K., & McDonough, K. (2018). 
Rethinking connections between research and practice in education: A con-
ceptual framework. Educational Researcher, 47(4), 235–245. https://doi.
org/10.3102/0013189X18761042
Farrell, C. C., & Coburn, C. E. (2017). Absorptive capacity: A conceptual framework 
for understanding district central office learning. Journal of Educational Change, 
18(2), 135–159. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10833-016-9291-7
Finnigan, K., Daly, A., & Che, J. (2013). Systemwide reform in districts under 
pressure. Journal of Educational Administration, 51(4), 476–497. https://doi.
org/10.1108/jea.2013.07451daa.002
Gordon, N. (2004). Do federal grants boost school spending? Evidence from Title 
I. Journal of Public Economics, 88(9–10), 1771–1792. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpubeco.2003.09.002
Heinrich, C. J. (2007). Evidence-based policy and performance management: Challenges 
and prospects in two parallel movements. The American Review of Public 
Administration, 37(3), 255–277. https://doi.org/10.1177/0275074007301957
Herrera, C., Grossman, J. B., & Linden, L. L. (2013). Staying on track: Testing 
higher achievement’s long-term impact on academic outcomes and high school 
choice. A Public/Private Ventures project distributed by MDRC. https://doi.
org/10.15868/socialsector.15918

=== PAGE 22 ===
182 Educational Policy 38(1)
Honig, M. I., & Coburn, C. (2008). Evidence-based decision making in school district 
central offices: Toward a policy and research agenda. Educational Policy, 22(4), 
578–608. https://doi.org/10.1177/0895904807307067
Honig, M. I., Venkateswaran, N., & McNeil, P. (2017). Research use as learning: The 
case of fundamental change in school district central offices. American Educational 
Research Journal, 54(5), 938–971. https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831217712466
Jackson, C. K. (2020). Does school spending matter? The new literature on an old 
question. In L. Tach, R. Dunifon, & D. L. Miller (Eds.), Confronting inequal-
ity: How policies and practices shape children's opportunities (pp. 165–186). 
American Psychological Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/0000187-008
Jitendra, A. K., Dupuis, D. N., Rodriguez, M. C., Zaslofsky, A. F., Slater, S., Cozine-
Corroy, K., & Church, C. (2013). A randomized controlled trial of the impact 
of schema-based instruction on mathematical outcomes for third-grade students 
with mathematics difficulties. The Elementary School Journal, 114(2), 252–276. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/673199
Jochim, A., & Gross, B. (Eds.). (2016). Maximizing opportunities under ESSA. (The 
SEA of the Future, Volume 6). Building State Capacity & Productivity Center 
at Edvance Research, Inc. http://www.bscpcenter.org/resources/publications/
SEAF_6_11.2016_r2.pdf 
Kainz, K. (2019). Early academic gaps and Title I programming in high poverty, high 
minority schools. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 47, 159–168. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2018.08.012
Kane, T. J. (2017). Making evidence locally. Education Next, 17(2), 52–58.
Kao, G., & Thompson, J. S. (2003). Racial and ethnic stratification in educational 
achievement and attainment. Annual Review of Sociology, 29(1), 417–442. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100019
King, J. A., & Pechman, E. M. (1984). Pinning a wave to the shore: Conceptualizing 
evaluation use in school systems. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 
6(3), 241–251. https://doi.org/10.3102/01623737006003241
Koedel, C., Li, D., Polikoff, M. S., Hardaway, T., & Wrabel, S. L. (2017). Mathematics 
curriculum effects on student achievement in California. AERA Open, 3(1), 1–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858417690511
Koedel, C., & Polikoff, M. (2017). Big bang for just a few bucks: The impact of math 
textbooks in California. Evidence Speaks Reports, 2(5), 1–7.
Massell, D., Goertz, M. E., & Barnes, C. A. (2012). State education agencies’ acquisi-
tion and use of research knowledge for school improvement. Peabody Journal of 
Education, 87(5), 609–626.
National Center for Education Statistics. (2021). Table 215.10. Selected statistics on 
enrollment, teachers, dropouts, and graduates in public school districts enrolling 
more than 15,000 students in 2018: Selected years, 1990 through 2018. Author. 
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d20/tables/dt20_215.10.asp
National Center for Education Statistics. (n.d.). Common core of data public school 
districts search tool. Author. https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/districtsearch/
Neal, J. W., Neal, Z. P., Lawlor, J. A., Mills, K. J., & McAlindon, K. (2018). What 
makes research useful for public school educators? Administration and Policy in 

=== PAGE 23 ===
Ginsberg et al. 183
Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, 45(3), 432–446. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10488-017-0834-x
Nutley, S. M., Walter, I., & Davies, H. (2007). Using evidence: How research can 
inform public services. The Policy Press.
Office of Elementary and Secondary Education. (2021). Elementary and secondary 
school emergency relief fund. Author. https://oese.ed.gov/offices/education-sta-
bilization-fund/elementary-secondary-school-emergency-relief-fund/
Penuel, W. R., Briggs, D. C., Davidson, K. L, Herlihy, C., Sherer, D., Hill, H. C., 
Farrell, C. C., & Allen, A-R. (2016). Findings from a national survey of research 
use among school and district leaders (Technical Report No. 1). National Center 
for Research in Policy and Practice.
Penuel, W. R., Farrell, C. C., Allen, A.-R., Toyama, Y., & Coburn, C. E. (2018). What 
research district leaders find useful. Educational Policy, 32(4), 540–568. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0895904816673580
Puma, M. J., Karweit, N., Price, C., Ricciuti, A., Thompson, W., & Vaden-Kiernan, 
M. (1997). Prospects: Student outcomes. Final report (ED 413411). ERIC. 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED413411.pdf
Results for America. (2017). Leverage Points: Thirteen opportunities for state 
education agencies to use their ESSA state plans to build and use evidence to 
improve student outcomes. Author. http://results4america.org/wp-content/
uploads/2017/05/R4A_LP_REV_May-2017.pdf 
Results for America. (2018). ESSA leverage points: 50-state report on promising prac-
tices for using evidence to improve student outcomes. Author. http://results4amer-
ica.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/RFA-ESSA-50-State-Report_final.pdf 
Roscigno, V. J., & Ainsworth-Darnell, J. W. (1999). Race, cultural capital, and edu-
cational resources: Persistent inequalities and achievement returns. Sociology of 
Education, 72(3), 158–178. https://doi.org/10.2307/2673227
Schneider, M. (2021, November). Gathering speed with SEERNet, prize competi-
tions, and more [Blog post]. https://ies.ed.gov/director/remarks/11-9-2021.asp
Slavin, R. E. (2017, December 6). Evidence and the ESSA. Huffington Post. https://
www.huffpost.com/entry/evidence-and-the-essa_b_8750480?
Snipes, J., Huang, C.-W., Jaquet, K., & Finkelstein, N. (2015). The effects of the 
Elevate Math summer program on math achievement and algebra readiness 
(REL 2015–096). U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, 
National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional 
Educational Laboratory West. http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs
Sousa, S., & Armor, D. (2016). The effectiveness of Title I: Synthesis of national-
level evidence from 1966 to 2013. Universal Journal of Educational Research, 
4(1), 205–311. https://doi.org/10.13189/ujer.2016.040126
Spillane, J. P. (2012). Data in practice: Conceptualizing the data-based decision-mak-
ing phenomena. American Journal of Education, 118(2), 113–141. https://doi.
org/10.1086/663283
Stark Rentner, D., Kober, N., & Braun, M. (2019). State leader interviews: How 
states are responding to ESSA’s evidence requirements for school improvement. 
Center on Education Policy. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED597203.pdf

=== PAGE 24 ===
184 Educational Policy 38(1)
Stoeger, H., Debatin, T., Heilemann, M., & Ziegler, A. (2019). Online mentoring for 
talented girls in STEM: The role of relationship quality and changes in learning 
environments in explaining mentoring success. New Directions for Child and 
Adolescent Development, 2019(168), 75–99. https://doi.org/10.1002/cad.20320
Stullich, S., Eisner, E., & McCrary, J. (2007). National assessment of Title I, final 
report: Volume I: Implementation. U.S. Department of Education, Institute of 
Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional 
Assistance. https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pdf/20084012_rev.pdf
Torgesen, J., Schirm, A., Castner, L., Vartivarian, S., Mansfield, W., Myers, D., 
Stancavage, F., Durno, D., Javorsky, R., & Haan, C. (2007). National assessment 
of Title I, final report: Volume II: Closing the reading gap, findings from a ran-
domized trial of four reading interventions for striving readers. U.S. Department 
of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education 
Evaluation and Regional Assistance. https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pdf/20084013.pdf
Troppe, P., Isenberg, E., Milanowski, A., Garrison-Mogren, R., Rizzo, L., Gill, B. 
P., Ross, C., Dillon, E., & Li, A. (2020). The transition to ESSA: State and dis-
trict approaches to implementing Title I and Title II-A in 2017–18 (NCEE 2021-
002). U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National 
Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance. https://ies.ed.gov/
ncee/pubs/2021002/
Tseng, V. (2012). The uses of research in policy and practice and commentaries. 
Social Policy Report, 26(2), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2379-3988.2012.
tb00071.x
Tseng, V., & Nutley, S. (2014). Building the infrastructure to improve the use and 
usefulness of research in education. In K. S. Finnigan & A. J. Daly (Eds.). Using 
research evidence in education: From the schoolhouse door to Capitol Hill  
(Vol. 2, pp. 163–175). Springer Science & Business Media.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2018). 2018 public elementary-secondary education finance 
data. Author. https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2018/econ/school-finances/
secondary-education-finance.html
U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). 2019 public elementary-secondary education finance 
data. Author. https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2019/econ/school-finances/
secondary-education-finance.html
U.S. Census Bureau. (2020). 2020 public elementary-secondary education finance 
data. Author. https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2020/econ/school-finances/
secondary-education-finance.html
U.S. Department of Education. (2015). Improving basic programs operated by local 
educational agencies (Title I, Part A). Author. https://www2.ed.gov/programs/
titleiparta/index.html
U.S. Department of Education. (2016). Non-regulatory guidance: Using evidence to 
strengthen education investments. Author. https://www2.ed.gov/policy/elsec/leg/
essa/guidanceuseseinvestment.pdf
U.S. Department of Education. (2018). Estimated ESEA Title I LEA allocations—
FY 2018. Author. https://www2.ed.gov/about/overview/budget/titlei/fy18/index.
html

=== PAGE 25 ===
Ginsberg et al. 185
U.S. Department of Education. (2021, January 8). Education appropriations. ED 
Review. Author. https://www2.ed.gov/news/newsletters/edreview/2021/0108.
html
U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2011). Disadvantaged students: School 
districts have used Title I funds primarily to support instruction. Report to 
Congressional Committees. https://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11595.pdf
van der Klaauw, W. (2008). Breaking the link between poverty and low student 
achievement: An evaluation of Title I. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 731–
756. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2007.05.007
Weiss, C. H. (1977). Research for policy’s sake: The enlightenment function of social 
research. Political Analysis, 3(4), 531–545.
West, M. R. (2016). From evidence-based programs to an evidence-based system: 
Opportunities under the Every Student Succeeds Act. The Brookings Institution. 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/from-evidence-based-programs-to-an-evi -
dence-based-system-opportunities-under-the-every-student-succeeds-act/
Whitesell, E. R. (2016). A day at the museum: The impact of field trips on middle 
school science achievement. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 53(7), 
1036–1054. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.21322
Yoshizawa, L. (2021). Fidelity, rigor, and relevance: How SEAs are approach-
ing the ESSA evidence requirements. Educational Policy. https://doi.
org/10.1177/08959048211029025
Author Biographies
Yuan Chang Ginsberg is a researcher in the Department of Education Policy & 
Social Analysis at Teachers College, Columbia University.
Fiona M. Hollands is a senior researcher in the Department of Education Policy & 
Social Analysis at Teachers College, Columbia University.
Venita R. Holmes is a manager in the Houston Independent School District, 
Department of Research and Accountability.
Robert Shand is an assistant professor in the School of Education at American 
University.
Pamela Evans is a director in the Houston Independent School District, External 
Funding Department.
Ryan Blodgett is a Grants Administrator in the Houston Independent School District.
Yixin Wang is an education data consultant at UNICEF.
Laura Head is a researcher in the Department of Education Policy & Social Analysis 
at Teachers College, Columbia University.

