=== Page 1 ===
CaliforniaManagement
Review
Fall 1998 | Vol.41, No.1 | REPRINT SERIES
Reversal of Fortune?
The Recovery of the U.S.
Semiconductor Industry
Jeffrey T. Macher
David C. Mowery
David A. Hodges
© 1998 by The Regents of 
the University of California
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 2 ===
The Alfred P . Sloan Foundation supported the research on which this article is based. We are indebted
to our fellow participants in the Berkeley Competitive Semiconductor Manufacturing Project, and
especially to its director, Professor Rob Leachman, for invaluable data, advice and support.We also
appreciate the assistance of Jerry Karls and Howard Dicken of Integrated Circuit Engineering (ICE) Inc.,
Doug Andrey and Lynn Lehsten of the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA), Dan Hutcheson of
VLSI Research, Inc., and Jodi Shelton and Debra Scoggin of the Fabless Semiconductor Association
(FSA) in providing data for this article.This article has beneﬁted greatly from the comments of Melissa
Appleyard, Rose Marie Ham, and Bill Spencer.The authors are solely responsible for any errors or
omissions.
Reversal of Fortune?
THE RECOVERY OF THE U.S.
SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY
Jeffrey T. Macher
David C. Mowery
David A. Hodges
T
he international economic competitiveness of a number of U.S. manu-
facturing industries has improved signiﬁcantly since the early 1990s.
One of the most dramatic reversals of fortune—which is particularly
remarkable because of its reliance on strengths formerly regarded by
many analysts as weaknesses—is that of the U.S. semiconductor industry.
Although evidence of this industry’s improved performance is abundant, expla-
nations for it are surprisingly scarce. This article draws on previously unpub-
lished data on manufacturing performance, along with other indicators, to
examine the reasons for the recovery of the U.S. semiconductor industry since
the early 1990s.
This analysis is important because of the economic signiﬁcance of the U.S.
semiconductor industry and because of this industry’s role as a “poster child” for
U.S. competitive decline during the 1980s and resurgence during the 1990s. 
The economic importance of this industry needs little elaboration—semiconduc-
tor devices are the basic building blocks of many electronics industries. Declines
in the price/performance ratio of semiconductor components have propelled
their adoption in an ever-expanding array of applications, and semiconductor
107CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 3 ===
technology has increased the variety of products offered in industries such as
consumer electronics, personal communications, and home appliances.
During the 1980s, the competitive difﬁculties of the U.S. semiconductor
industry were used in several analyses of U.S. competitiveness to illustrate the
competitive problems of the broader U.S. economy.
1 Both “impatient capital,” a
tendency by U.S. high-technology entrepreneurs to develop innovative products
that they were unable to manufacture in commercial volumes with high quality,
and predatory foreign-ﬁrm trade practices ﬁgured prominently in gloomy assess-
ments of the future of this and other U.S. manufacturing industries. Moreover,
the semiconductor industry was the focus of attention from senior federal poli-
cymakers, and many of the broad competitiveness-related policy measures of 
the 1980s and early 1990s were motivated by concern over this industry’s per-
formance and supported by evidence from its history. Finally, this industry was
among the ﬁrst to implement a number of the technology management practices
that now characterize other U.S. manufacturing industries, such as increased
domestic and international collaboration and greater “vertical specialization” by
ﬁrms. Our assessment of these new approaches therefore is germane to evalua-
tions of these other sectors.
This discussion of the changing competitive performance of the U.S. semi-
conductor industry examines the 1980-1997 period in some detail in order to
establish the dimensions of the “fall and rise” of this industry during this period.
The recovery of U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms since 1989 rests on improvements in
product quality and manufacturing process yields, as well as their withdrawal
from the ﬁercely competitive Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM) seg-
ment of the semiconductor industry. U.S. ﬁrms have reoriented their strategies
since the mid-1980s to concentrate on logic and microcomponent products,
2
where foreign competition was less intense and they could pursue new product
opportunities by exploiting their proximity to developers of computer software
and other complementary products. Other successful U.S. ﬁrms have entered 
the industry as specialists in innovative device designs.
3 Meanwhile, the Japan-
ese ﬁrms that dominated DRAMs now face a domestic recession and entry by
low-cost producers from South Korea and Taiwan. Although the Asian economic
crisis that began in 1997 is likely to depress global demand for semiconductors in
the near term and has eroded the ﬁnancial performance of U.S. producers, the
relative performance of U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms remains strong, as their con-
tinuing leadership in global market share indicates.
Much of the “renaissance” of U.S. competitive advantage in semiconduc-
tors reﬂects exploitation by U.S. ﬁrms of long-standing strengths in product
innovation. Many of the new opportunities that appeared in the late 1980s for
such product innovation reﬂected developments in other industries such as tele-
communications and computers, in which U.S. ﬁrms demonstrated renewed in-
novative and competitive vigor. Moreover, many of the factors cited in the 1980s
by expert and scholarly analyses as sources of competitive weakness in this in-
dustry have instead contributed to its competitive revival. The repositioning of
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998108
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 4 ===
U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms was, if anything, aided by the “fragmentation” of the
U.S. industry’s structure that the MIT Commission and others4 criticized. The
inaccuracies in these analyses raise serious problems for both managers and poli-
cymakers seeking speedy diagnoses and solutions to competitive problems in
high-technology industries.
A number of federal government initiatives, ranging from trade policy 
to ﬁnancial support for university research and R&D consortia such as
SEMATECH,
5 played a role in the industry’s revival. However, the speciﬁc links
between these undertakings and improved manufacturing performance are difﬁ-
cult to measure. Industry managers are virtually unanimous in emphasizing that
the crisis of the 1980s forced them to devote much more attention to improving
their development and management of manufacturing process technology. It is
not clear how much of the overall improvements reﬂected this renewed focus 
by managers, nor is it clear why poor performance was tolerated for so long.
In a complex industry such as semiconductors, no single explanation for
improved U.S. performance is likely to sufﬁce. All of the factors discussed above
have contributed to this industry’s revival, and it is futile to attempt to assign
weights to individual causes. At the same time, the foundation for this competi-
tive revival is fragile. U.S. producers’ success in repositioning their product lines
and developing innovative products does not guarantee enduring dominance.
The MIT Commission’s grim diagnosis of the “structural crisis” of the U.S. semi-
conductor industry contains important insights, and at least some of the negative
consequences of the U.S. industry’s unusual structure have not been addressed.
Many of the large corporations that supported much of the basic research that
propelled the semiconductor industry’s early growth have reduced the scope 
of their in-house basic research, and public funding for long-term R&D is more
uncertain in the wake of the Cold War. Without a clearer understanding of the
factors that gave rise to it, maintaining interﬁrm collaboration may prove
difﬁcult.
Industry Performance, 1980-1997
Our discussion of industry performance begins with a summary of the
development of the global semiconductor industry during the 1980-1997 period,
highlighting trends in the market shares of U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor
manufacturers. Our market share data are measured in terms of revenues and
therefore confound trends in output quantity and the price per unit of that out-
put. This effect is not entirely undesirable—one of the primary factors behind
the resurgence of U.S. manufacturers’ market share in semiconductors is pre-
cisely the higher average selling prices of their output during the 1990s.
Market Share Measures
The ﬁrst transistors, and subsequently the ﬁrst integrated circuits (ICs),
were developed and manufactured in the United States for military and space
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 109
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 5 ===
programs. By the mid-1960s, the computer and communications industries
surpassed the U.S. military as the primary markets for semiconductors, and 
the market for semiconductor components has been dominated by commercial
applications ever since.
6 From the invention of the IC in 1959 through 1985, the
combined market share of U.S. producers exceeded that of ﬁrms from all other
nations.
7
A combination of circumstances—including abundant venture capital,
widespread licensing of key patents, and the willingness of U.S. military and
space agencies to purchase semiconductor devices from new ﬁrms—produced an
industry structure that by the 1960s contrasted with those of the Japanese and
Western European semiconductor industries. The leading commercial producers
of semiconductors in the U.S. included a number of relatively young “merchant”
ﬁrms that specialized in semiconductor manufacture.
8 In contrast, the Japanese
and Western European semiconductor industries were and continue to be domi-
nated by subsidiaries of large, diversiﬁed electrical equipment ﬁrms.
Foreign semiconductor producers challenged the dominant position of
U.S. ﬁrms in the late 1970s. Japanese ﬁrms had been active in the semiconduc-
tor industry since the 1950s, but lagged behind U.S. ﬁrms in product and process
technology. But in the mid-1970s, the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry (MITI), NTT (at the time, Japan’s state-owned telecommunications
ﬁrm), and Japanese producers of semiconductor devices and manufacturing
equipment launched several research programs to improve the semiconductor
manufacturing capabilities of domestic ﬁrms. These initiatives included the well-
known VLSI Program overseen by MITI and a parallel program for its semicon-
ductor suppliers sponsored by NTT. Paradoxically, the VLSI program sought to
improve Japanese semiconductor capabilities in order to strengthen the interna-
tional competitiveness of Japan’s computer industry.
These technology development programs focused on memory devices,
which were important in computer systems and whose relative design simplicity
facilitated the testing of new process technologies. The market outlook for these
devices appeared to be favorable, a projection that was amply borne out by sub-
sequent trends. In addition, “Moore’s Law”
9 provided a clear “roadmap” of the
path of future developments in DRAM technology, enabling Japanese ﬁrms to
focus their efforts to “catch up” in semiconductor technology. By 1979, Japanese
producers accounted for almost 42 percent of global DRAM sales.
10
By the mid-1980s, Japanese producers were the dominant global suppli-
ers of semiconductor memory devices. U.S.-Japanese competition in DRAM
production took on the characteristics of a “capacity race”—ﬁrms in each nation
invested aggressively in production capacity for next-generation products. Aided
by their access to internal sources of ﬁnance, Japanese semiconductor manufac-
turers were able to dominate this investment competition. The U.S. share of
capital spending in the world semiconductor industry declined from nearly 60
percent in 1980 to roughly 30 percent in 1990.
11 The enormous capital require-
ments of the investment capacity race, combined with ﬁerce price competition
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998110
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 6 ===
in DRAMs and a U.S. industry recession,
forced many U.S. merchant ﬁrms (with
the notable exceptions of Texas Instru-
ments and Micron Technology) out of the
DRAM market by 1985. By 1990, Japanese
ﬁrms accounted for 98 percent of sales 
of 4-megabit DRAMs, then the most
advanced memory product (See Table 1).
Reﬂecting their declining fortunes
in memory devices, U.S. merchant semi-
conductor producers lost considerable
market share in semiconductors during
this period (See Figure 1). From a leading
share of almost 62 percent in 1980, U.S.
chipmakers’ global market share declined
to a low point of 37 percent by 1989.
Japanese semiconductor ﬁrms by 1989
were responsible for more than half of
global semiconductor revenues.
Remarkably, this dire competitive
situation began to change in the late
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 111
TABLE 1. Maximum Market Share (%)
By Device Type
Device Volume Maximum
Type Production Market Share
U.S. Japan
1K 1971 95 5
4K 1974 83 17
16K 1977 59 41
64K 1979 29 71
256K 1982 8 92
1M 1985 4 96
4M 1990 2 98
Source: Dataquest, cited in David T. Methé,Technological Com-
petition in Global Industries: Marketing and Planning Strategies for
American Industry (Westport, CT: Quorum Books, 1991), p. 69;
and R. Langlois and W.E. Steinmueller,“The Evolution of Com-
petitive Advantage in the Global Semiconductor Industry: 1947-
1996,” in D.C. Mowery and R.R. Nelson, eds.,The Sources of
Industrial Leadership (New Y ork, NY: Cambridge University Press,
1998), p. 31.
FIGURE 1. Worldwide Semiconductor Market Share, 1980-1997
0%
25%
50%
75%
19801981
19821983198419851986
19871988198919901991
19921993199419951996
1997
Year
Semiconductor Market Share (%)
US
JAPAN
RoW
EUROPE
Source: SIA 1997 Annual Databook; Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation (ICE),“Status: A Report on the Integrated Circuit Industry,”
1980-1998.
Semiconductor Market Share (%)
Year
U.S.
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 7 ===
1980s. U.S. producers reversed their global market share decline in 1990 for the
ﬁrst time since 1975.12 But this reversal in market share occurred in areas other
than memory products, where U.S. ﬁrms’ global market share has grown only
slightly since 1990 (See Figure 2). Instead, U.S. ﬁrms shifted away from low-
margin products such as DRAMs in favor of products that enabled them to
exploit their strengths in product innovation. Having largely exited DRAMs 
by 1985, U.S. semiconductor manufacturers in the 1990s concentrated on logic
devices and “mixed-signal” and other digital signal processor (DSP) components
for the burgeoning market in computer networking equipment. Strong demand
for these “design-intensive” components propelled U.S. chipmakers back to mar-
ket share leadership in the global semiconductor industry by 1993 (See Figure
1). By 1997, U.S. producers controlled over 50 percent of the total semiconduc-
tor market, well above the 29 percent held by Japanese ﬁrms. Contradicting the
predictions of analysts who argued that DRAM production was an indispensable
“technology driver” for semiconductor manufacturing, U.S. ﬁrms’ enduring mar-
ket share losses in DRAMs did not prevent this revival in their competitive
fortunes.
The post-1990 decline in Japanese ﬁrms’ global market share also
reﬂected entry by South Korean and Taiwanese ﬁrms into the DRAM market.
Rather than shifting to logic products, Japanese ﬁrms sought to be technology
leaders in introducing next-generation DRAM devices. But DRAMs now are
essentially “commodity” products, and Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea are
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998112
FIGURE 2. Worldwide Memory Market Share, 1980-1997
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
19801981
19821983198419851986
19871988198919901991
19921993199419951996
1997
Year
Memory Market Share (%)
US
JAPAN
EUROPE
RoW
Source: ICE,“Status A Report on the Integrated Circuit Industry,” 1980-1998.
Memory Market Share (%)
Year
U.S.
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 8 ===
engaged in a global battle for market share based upon low production costs and
high yields. As Figure 2 indicates, Japan no longer dominates the memory mar-
ket as it did in the 1980s, having lost market share to Korean and Taiwanese
semiconductor ﬁrms (the primary components of the “RoW” category in Figure
2). Indeed, Japanese ﬁrms no longer are the consistent leaders in the introduc-
tion of next-generation DRAMs—Samsung has matched industry-leader NEC in
the introduction and commercial production of 64MB and 256MB DRAMs, and
it appears to have surpassed NEC in development and prototype fabrication of
1GB DRAMs.
13
Product Quality Measures
Japanese semiconductor ﬁrms’ dominance of DRAM markets during the
1980s rested on low prices and high quality. Drawing in many cases on practices
they had long followed in their other product divisions, Japanese semiconductor
manufacturers applied Statistical Process Control (SPC), Total Quality Manage-
ment (TQM) and Total Preventive Maintenance (TPM) to their operations.
14 This
resulted in signiﬁcant quality differences between Japanese and U.S. semicon-
ductor products. Users of U.S. and Japanese devices discovered that Japanese
memory products had defect rates that were one-half to one-third those of com-
parable U.S. memory products;
15 in 1980, leading Japanese memory producers
averaged 160 defective parts per million (PPM) while U.S. producers averaged
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 113
FIGURE 3. Defective Parts per Million (PPM) in U.S. Firms’ Integrated Circuits
0
100
200
300
400
1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992
Year
Defect PPM
Source: SIA Quarterly Quality Survey (1992), cited in W. Finan,“Matching Japan in Quality: How the Leading U.S. Semiconductor Firms Caught
Up With the Best in Japan,” MIT -Japan Working Paper, 1993.
Defect PPM
Year
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 9 ===
780 PPM for the same devices.16 Their skills in managing the development and
introduction of new process technologies also enabled Japanese semiconductor
manufacturers to “ramp” output of new products more rapidly than their U.S.
counterparts. Faster achievement of high production volumes gave Japanese
ﬁrms advantages in deﬁning product standards for leading-edge memory
devices, strengthening their market position.
17
By the mid-1980s most of the leading U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms recog-
nized the strategic importance of quality and had initiated quality improvement
programs. Some U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms devoted considerable effort to learn-
ing from Japanese ﬁrms, and those with operations in Japan, particularly TI and
Motorola, were among the ﬁrst to apply Japanese quality management tech-
niques. Confronted with evidence of improvement in the performance of these
domestic competitors, other U.S. ﬁrms began to emulate their practices. A sur-
vey in 1990 by the National Institutes of Standards and Technology (NIST) of 11
U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms’ quality assurance investments revealed a doubling of
the share of spending related to quality in the previous ﬁve years.
18 According to
industry managers, the formation of SEMATECH also supported more effective
collaboration between U.S. manufacturers and equipment suppliers on quality
and reliability problems.
These and other efforts were associated with a reduction in average 
defect rates in U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms’ products to less than 400 PPM by 1986,
according to the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA), the U.S. semicon-
ductor manufacturers’ trade group.
19 Defect rates continued to decline through
the rest of the decade and by the early 1990s, leading U.S. ﬁrms had matched
Japanese memory producers’ defect levels at less than 100 PPM (See Figure 3).
Manufacturing Performance Measures
In addition to improving product quality, U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms
strengthened their performance in manufacturing process management. Data
from the UC Berkeley Competitive Semiconductor Manufacturing (CSM) Pro-
gram
20 suggest that U.S. ﬁrms have improved manufacturing “yield” and direct
labor productivity in some product lines since the early 1990s,21 although they
still lag behind the best Japanese and other Asian ﬁrms in most of these perfor-
mance measures. Nevertheless, narrowing this gap in manufacturing
performance appears to have been sufﬁcient—in combination with U.S. ﬁrms’
product innovations and strategic repositioning—to improve their competitive
performance.
A key measure of semiconductor manufacturing performance is die yield,
the number of usable die per silicon wafer that emerge from the manufacturing
process. Die yield is a measure of manufacturing “process quality” that differs 
in at least one important respect from the product defect data discussed earlier.
Product defects can be reduced by investments in “end-of-line” inspection,
which enables producers to discard defective components (or in some cases, 
to repair defects) after manufacture and before distribution to the market. Our
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998114
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 10 ===
measure of die yield, however, is not directly affected by such inspection pro-
cedures. Instead, this yield measure is sensitive to the execution of the numer-
ous steps involved in the production of a semiconductor component, and its
improvement reﬂects improved manufacturing methods—in many respects a
more difﬁcult achievement.
We present data only for logic products, because we lack a sufﬁcient
number of observations for U.S.-located, domestically owned memory produc-
tion capacity to support a comparison of performance in U.S.- and Japanese-
owned memory production facilities for this period. The CSM data for logic
devices reveal signiﬁcant improvements in U.S. ﬁrms’ performance during this
period. U.S. ﬁrms reduced their defect densities from as many as 2.5 fatal defects
per square centimeter in 1991 to levels comparable with the 1993 performance
of Japanese fabs by 1994 (See Figure 4).
22
Along with Finan, Leachman and Leachman attribute improvements in
U.S. manufacturing performance to increased use of quality-management tech-
niques.
23 Widespread adoption of SPC methodologies by U.S. ﬁrms appears to
have lowered defect densities and improved die yields. In addition, U.S. ﬁrms
improved the speed of collection, the reliability, and the accessibility of data on
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 115
FIGURE 4. Defect Density in 0.7–0.9 CMOS Logic Processes*
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Jan-91
Mar-91
May-91
Jul-91
Sep-91
Nov-91Jan-92Mar-92May-92Jul-92Sep-92Nov-92Jan-93Mar-93May-93Jul-93Sep-93Nov-93Jan-94Mar-94May-94Jul-94Sep-94Nov-94
Japan
Taiwan
USA
* The ﬁgure reports defect density for CMOS logic processes, the largest single category of MOS manufacturing processes. During the period of
the sample, CMOS represented more than 90% of MOS technology used in IC manufacturing [Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation
(ICE),“Status: A Report on the Integrated Circuit Industry,” 1989-1994]. CMOS is the acronym for Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor
and is a transistor-based circuit or device. MOS refers to the type of transistor that comprises the circuit. Complementary refers to two speciﬁc
types of transistors that “complement” each other in the circuit in that one can be turned on while the other is turned off.
Source: R. Leachman and C. Leachman,“National Performance in Semiconductor Manufacturing,” University of California, Berkeley Competitive
Semiconductor Research Program working paper #CSM-40, 1997.
Fatal Defects per Sq. Cm.
U.S.
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 11 ===
manufacturing performance, all of which enabled rapid identiﬁcation and diag-
nosis of problems in manufacturing yields. These steps included the use of “end-
of-line” yield analysis that relies on rapid transmission of data from probe tests
of wafers to engineers; the increased use of data collection systems that provide
statistical correlation of in-line data on process steps and lot characteristics with
end-of-line yield tests; the increased automation of manufacturing process infor-
mation;
24 and the improved collection of equipment performance and control
parameters.
Other measures of die yield indicate signiﬁcant improvement in U.S.
semiconductor ﬁrms’ manufacturing performance by the end of the 1980s.
According to the U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce, U.S. ﬁrms had fallen behind
Japanese ﬁrms in “probe yield”
25 by 1981, but U.S. ﬁrms’ performance in this
quality measure improved signiﬁcantly during the 1986-1991 period.26 By 1991,
U.S. manufacturers had narrowed but had not eliminated the gap between their
performance and that of Japanese manufacturers (See Table 2).
Although U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms have narrowed the gap with Japanese
ﬁrms in die yield for some devices, they continue to lag in other areas, such as
direct labor productivity. The CSM data support comparisons of productivity
performance among fabs in Europe, Japan, Taiwan, and the United States. Pro-
ductivity is measured as the number of wafer layers processed per operator per
day, and captures differences in physical productivity—the value of output per
worker is not captured by this measure.
27 As such, differences in the price per
die on wafers produced in different fabs may partially or entirely offset the
ﬁnancial consequences of differences in this measure of performance.
At CMOS logic fabs, U.S. ﬁrms’ direct labor productivity improved during
the 1991-1994 period, but U.S. ﬁrms still lag behind Taiwanese and Japanese
ﬁrms (See Figure 5). The importance of scale economies in semiconductor man-
ufacturing means that the smaller average size of U.S. fabs, relative to those in
Japan and Taiwan, depresses U.S. ﬁrms’ performance in this comparison.
28 Nev-
ertheless, as was noted above, the consequences of these differences in physical
productivity are mediated by the prices and margins per die in each region’s
product mix. U.S. ﬁrms have specialized in relatively high-margin products 
and therefore are somewhat insulated from the ﬁnancial consequences of their
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998116
TABLE 2. Average Probe Yield: U.S. and Japanese Semiconductor Manufacturers
Average Probe Yield (%)
Country 1981 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991
U.S. 55 60 60 67 74 80 84
Japan 45 75 79 81 85 89 93
Source: U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce,“Federal Research: SEMATECH’s Technological Progress and Proposed R&D Program,”
July 1992.
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 12 ===
relatively low physical productivity. However, as and if non-U.S. ﬁrms streng-
then their capabilities in product innovation and shift their output mix to
become direct competitors with U.S. ﬁrms in these newer, more design-intensive
products (see below), the relatively low direct labor productivity of U.S. fabs
could produce competitive difﬁculties.
During the late 1980s and 1990s, U.S. ﬁrms also improved their manage-
ment of the development and introduction of new process technologies into
high-volume manufacturing.
29 Increases in the design complexity of semicon-
ductor devices during the 1980-1997 period made it much more difﬁcult to pre-
dict the performance of new process steps and equipment through simulation 
or laboratory-scale experimentation and complicated the “debugging” of new
process technologies in the manufacturing environment. At the same time,
intensiﬁed competition in many product lines meant that rapid expansion of the
output of new products was essential to maximize sales in the increasingly brief
period prior to entry by competitors. A prolonged period of “learning”—during
which yields are low and/or product quality is unreliable—reduces proﬁts. The
difﬁculties associated with new process development and introduction thus have
grown simultaneously with the competitive and ﬁnancial penalties of a poorly
managed introduction. Evidence from the CSM study and other sources suggests
that U.S. ﬁrms were slow to respond to these new realities until forced to do so
by Japanese competition.
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 117
FIGURE 5. Direct Labor Productivity at CMOS Logic Fabs
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Jan-90Apr-90Jul-90Oct-90Jan-91
Apr-91
Jul-91
Oct-91
Jan-92Apr-92Jul-92Oct-92Jan-93Apr-93Jul-93Oct-93Jan-94Apr-94Jul-94Oct-94Jan-95
Europe
Japan
Taiwan
USA
Source: R. Leachman and C. Leachman,“National Performance in Semiconductor Manufacturing,” University of California, Berkeley Competitive
Semiconductor Research Program working paper #CSM-40, 1997.
Wafer Layers per Operator per Day
U.S.
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 13 ===
There is no single best practice for managing the development and intro-
duction of new process technologies. Many U.S. ﬁrms have expanded their use
of “development facilities,” which are similar in many respects to pilot process
plants in the chemicals industry. These facilities support the development and
debugging of new process technologies and equipment in an environment that 
is insulated from the demands of high-volume manufacturing, yet is designed 
to reproduce as many characteristics of that environment as possible.
30
But much more than a development facility is needed for performance
improvements in process development and introduction. Introducing a radically
new manufacturing process (for which 75-90 percent of the hundreds of indi-
vidual steps is new) and attempting to simultaneously begin large-scale produc-
tion of a new product design with this process is formidable. Many U.S. ﬁrms
instead introduce incremental advances in manufacturing processes and debug
these modiﬁed processes on new versions of existing product designs (e.g., a
smaller version or “shrink” of an established logic or memory chip). This more
incremental approach to new process development and introduction requires
close coordination among product design, process development, and equipment
procurement over multiple generations of existing and new products. 
Summary: Factors Behind U.S. Decline and Revival
The performance of the U.S. semiconductor industry during the 1980-
1997 period reﬂected shifts in both product and process technology manage-
ment. U.S. ﬁrms proved to be relatively agile—especially by comparison with
Japanese ﬁrms—in repositioning their product portfolios to emphasize new
products that were relatively design-intensive. At the same time, however, 
U.S. ﬁrms improved their manufacturing performance, which enabled them 
to exploit their long-standing strengths in product innovation more effectively.
From a position of substantial inferiority in the development and management
of semiconductor process technologies in the early 1980s, U.S. chipmakers nar-
rowed the gap between U.S. and Japanese manufacturing capability and produc-
tivity in some product lines by the early 1990s.
Both repositioning and improved manufacturing performance almost
certainly were necessary; neither was sufﬁcient. Improvements in both of these
dimensions of performance reﬂected improved technology management prac-
tices, where these practices are deﬁned to include management of process tech-
nologies on the shop ﬂoor, as well as improvements in the development and
adoption of new process and product technologies. In addition to these changes
in their internal management of innovation and production, U.S. ﬁrms
expanded collaboration among one another, with equipment ﬁrms, and with
non-U.S. ﬁrms. Finally, the entry of specialized design ﬁrms into the U.S. semi-
conductor industry signaled the development of new approaches to the organi-
zation of the innovation process.
Although U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms’ performance during the 1993-1997
period has been impressive, it has been aided in part by Japanese and South
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998118
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 14 ===
Korean semiconductor ﬁrms’ failure to shift their product portfolios away from
DRAMs to design-intensive components. The 1998 industry downturn, which
reﬂects the continuing economic problems in Asia and excess capacity in
DRAMs, may bring new competitors to semiconductor markets that have tradi-
tionally been dominated by U.S. producers. Indeed, some Taiwanese DRAM
producers have recently entered product markets led by U.S. semiconductor
ﬁrms, such as ﬂash memory.
31 Drawing on their experience in operating
“foundry” production facilities, other Taiwanese ﬁrms now are able to switch
from memory to advanced logic components, depending on market conditions.
The ﬂexibility gives them an advantage over South Korean and Japanese semi-
conductor ﬁrms, and may foreshadow the development of a formidable future
challenger to U.S. ﬁrms. 
Changing T echnology Strategies
The structure and management of technology and new-product develop-
ment in the U.S. semiconductor industry has changed since 1980 in ways that
anticipate similar trends in other U.S. industries. Perhaps the most important of
these structural changes is increased reliance on collaborative strategies. Collabo-
ration has been both “vertical” (linking suppliers of equipment with semicon-
ductor manufacturers) and “horizontal” (linking semiconductor manufacturers
with one another); it has been both domestic and international; and it has been
supported by public and by private funds. In addition, collaboration in the semi-
conductor and other industries (e.g., computer hardware and software, or even
long-distance trucking and logistics management) has been associated with spe-
cialization by ﬁrms in different phases of the vertical “value chain” that links
product development and manufacturing. In semiconductors, as in these other
industries, collaboration and vertical specialization reﬂect the higher costs and
risks of new product development and the spiraling costs of new production
capacity,
32 as well as the ability of modern information technology to support
complex, arm’s-length collaborations in product development and
manufacturing. 
Producer-Designer Collaboration
One strategy to reduce ﬁnancial risks that has been adopted by recent
entrants into the U.S. semiconductor industry is specialization in design. These
so-called “fabless” semiconductor ﬁrms design semiconductor components, but
rely on specialized “foundries” for the production of their designs. The fabless
ﬁrm is largely a North American phenomenon—more than 300 of the world-
wide population of roughly 500 fabless ﬁrms were located in North America 
in 1998.
33 By contrast, most state-of-the-art foundries are located in Asia.34
Fabless ﬁrms serve a variety of fast-growing industries, especially per-
sonal computers and telecommunications, and seek to dominate their markets
by offering more innovative designs and shorter delivery times than merchant
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 119
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 15 ===
ﬁrms.35 Constant-dollar industry revenues have grown at an average annual rate
of 32 percent since 1991, almost twice the average for the global semiconductor
industry as a whole. The fabless industry’s trade association estimates 1997 fab-
less industry revenues at $7.8 billion,
36 and Dataquest forecasts fabless industry
revenues will grow to $11.7 billion in 2000 and 40% of the world’s chip produc-
tion by 2010.
37
International Collaboration
U.S., Japanese, and European semiconductor manufacturers have
increased offshore R&D spending since 1980, but all still perform the majority 
of ﬁrm-ﬁnanced R&D in their home regions.
38 During the past 20 years, a num-
ber of non-U.S. ﬁrms have established R&D facilities in the United States and
other developed nations outside their home region.
39 These foreign R&D invest-
ments are motivated by the same factors that drive U.S. offshore R&D invest-
ment, although many foreign ﬁrms are especially interested in tracking new
semiconductor product and process developments in the U.S. market and in 
U.S. universities.
Although U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms have not signiﬁcantly expanded 
their foreign R&D operations, alliances among U.S. and non-U.S. semiconductor
ﬁrms have grown rapidly since 1980. Indeed, the costs and risks of new-product
development and production capacity meant that U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms 
were among the ﬁrst U.S. high-technology ﬁrms to pursue extensive alliances
with foreign ﬁrms.
40 Many alliances focus on speciﬁc product or process devel-
opment projects, and frequently involves some exchange by U.S. ﬁrms of prod-
uct technology for foreign (often Japanese) expertise in process technology.
Such partnerships also facilitate access to international markets that are other-
wise impeded by tariffs or political mechanisms. Many of these international
collaborative agreements focus on a single product area (e.g., nonvolatile mem-
ory or microprocessors) and many involve no U.S. partners.
A number of expert groups have expressed concern over the “export” of
technology and know-how by U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms to foreign competitors
through these arrangements,
41 but most evidence suggests that U.S. ﬁrms have
reaped considerable technical and commercial beneﬁts from alliances through a
two-way ﬂow of technology and managerial know-how, including the advanced
quality manufacturing techniques discussed above. But the growing “interna-
tionalization” of the R&D process that is implied by these alliances and by other
forms of international collaboration in the U.S. semiconductor industry, such as
expanded support for U.S. university research by foreign ﬁrms, raise complex
questions for public policy in this and other high-technology industries. Simply
put, formulating and implementing a “national” technology policy requires new
approaches in industries whose technology development, manufacturing, and
marketing operations are global in structure and scope.
42
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998120
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 16 ===
Domestic Collaboration
Expanding domestic collaboration, some of which is supported with pub-
lic funds, has paralleled international collaboration in the semiconductor indus-
try. Japanese ﬁrms’ growing domination of the global market for semiconductor
memory chips in the late 1980s contributed to an unusual initiative to streng-
then U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms’ commercial-device manufacturing capabilities.
43
SEMATECH was formed in 1987 by 14 U.S. semiconductor manufacturing ﬁrms
that together accounted for more than 80 percent of U.S. semiconductor manu-
facturing capacity,
44 and was ﬁnanced jointly by member ﬁrms and the federal
government.45
SEMATECH’s original objectives—improving member ﬁrms’ semicon-
ductor manufacturing process technology—underpinned its decision to build a
large-scale fabrication facility in Austin. However, SEMATECH’s research agenda
shifted in 1990-1991 to improving the technological capabilities of U.S. sup-
pliers of semiconductor manufacturing equipment.
46 SEMATECH focuses on
“medium-term,” rather than long-term, research, and a 3- to 5-year time hori-
zon typiﬁes most of its R&D investments.
The period following the formation of SEMATECH is characterized by
improvements in U.S. semiconductor manufacturing performance and in the
market shares of U.S. semiconductor equipment suppliers. It is difﬁcult at best,
however, to ﬁnd direct cause-and-effect links between SEMATECH’s activities
and these developments. In the case of semiconductor manufacturing equip-
ment, for example, a signiﬁcant portion of the improved market share of U.S.
suppliers reﬂects the decline in Japanese semiconductor ﬁrms’ capital invest-
ments, which has depressed the growth of equipment demand in a market long
dominated by Japanese equipment ﬁrms.
47 Nevertheless, SEMATECH member
ﬁrms have continued to support and participate in SEMATECH since the cessa-
tion of federal support, which is a strong signal that industry managers believe
that the consortium provides important beneﬁts. Although it is the best-known
example, SEMATECH is by no means the only U.S. collaborative program in
semiconductor R&D; a number of other programs now are funded jointly by
industry and federal and state government funds.
48
Publicly and privately funded R&D collaboration has expanded signiﬁ-
cantly within the U.S. semiconductor industry since 1980. The U.S. semicon-
ductor industry was among the ﬁrst to establish such consortia, and as the
discussion of SEMATECH suggests, the evaluation of their effects on industry
performance is difﬁcult. The operation of SEMATECH also points out the com-
plexities of public funding for technology development by ﬁrms whose opera-
tions are global in scope. SEMATECH’s defense-related funding and sponsorship,
along with broader political concerns, led to the exclusion of non-U.S. ﬁrms
from membership.
49 Yet many non-U.S. ﬁrms have been able to beneﬁt from
SEMATECH-supported R&D, either through their purchase from U.S. equip-
ment vendors of new products that have been improved in SEMATECH pro-
grams, or through their collaborative relationships with U.S. semiconductor
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 121
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 17 ===
manufacturing ﬁrms. As Ham et al. point out, SEMATECH’s most recent initia-
tive for the development of “next-generation” (300mm wafer-compatible) man-
ufacturing equipment and methods now enlists a number of non-Japanese
foreign ﬁrms.
50
In the semiconductor and other U.S. high-technology industries, both
failures and successes are likely in R&D collaboration, and the essential point 
is to try to capture sufﬁcient knowledge from each to improve performance.
Collaboration is not a panacea, but it may offer some solutions to the competi-
tive weaknesses associated with the fragmented industry structure cited by the
MIT Commission. At the same time, however, collaboration thus far has not
addressed another weakness in this industry mentioned by the MIT Commission
and other analyses—insufﬁcient industrial investment in long-term research.
Who Will Fund and Perform Basic Research?
However useful, collaborative R&D in the U.S. semiconductor industry
has supported little long-term industrial research. The large U.S. corporate
laboratories of the 1950s and 1960s, most notably those of AT&T, GE, and IBM
performed much of the fundamental research that underlies modern semicon-
ductor technology. Those laboratories now focus on near-term corporate goals
and applied research, and no U.S. organization has emerged to fund the basic
research needed for the future. Federally funded R&D in the U.S. semiconductor
industry, most of which was funded by the Defense Department and related
agencies, has declined from nearly 25% of total R&D spending in the industry
(imperfectly deﬁned in this case as SIC 367, “electronic components”) in 1980 
to slightly less than 7% in 1992.
51 Defense-related federal R&D funding is likely
to continue to decline in the aftermath of the Cold War.
Although the leading U.S. merchant semiconductor ﬁrms (such as Intel,
TI, Micron, and AMD) spend 10-15 percent of revenues on R&D, the bulk of
these expenditures focus on new product development. Intel has announced its
intention to expand its long-term research program, but few other semiconduc-
tor manufacturing ﬁrms conduct much R&D beyond development of next-gen-
eration products. None of the new leaders in digital communications perform
any fundamental research or maintain much internal semiconductor R&D,
instead focusing their efforts on the development and marketing of next-
generation semiconductor products.
The U.S. semiconductor industry is not alone in its low levels of invest-
ment in long-term R&D. Data from the National Science Foundation suggest
that U.S. ﬁrms overall have reduced their constant-dollar funding of basic
research, while increasing investment in development, during the 1991-1995
period. But the challenges for U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms in this area are particu-
larly signiﬁcant, since major non-U.S. semiconductor manufacturers—such as
NEC, Hitachi, Toshiba, Philips, and Siemens, most of which are larger and far
more diversiﬁed than U.S. merchant semiconductor ﬁrms—still conduct consid-
erable long-range R&D.
52 Despite these apparent advantages over their smaller
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998122
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 18 ===
U.S. merchant and fabless competitors, these large, diversiﬁed foreign ﬁrms thus
far have been relatively slow or ineffective in exploiting new opportunities for
innovative products. Nevertheless, they could re-emerge as formidable competi-
tors in product lines in which the pace of innovation has slowed or assumed a
more incremental and capital-intensive character, as was the case in DRAMs
during the 1980s. 
The Role of Nontechnological Factors 
in the U.S. Industry’s Revival
The performance of the U.S. semiconductor industry during the 1980-
1997 period was inﬂuenced by an array of other public policies, such as federal
trade and antitrust policies that affected all U.S. industries. Indeed, the U.S.
semiconductor industry’s competitive crisis of the 1980s was widely cited as an
illustration of the failure of both government policies and other economic fac-
tors, such as the environment for capital formation, to support competitive high-
technology industries in the United States. A number of broad policies that
affected all U.S. industries were adopted during the 1980s in part because of
their perceived importance to the semiconductor industry and because of the
belief by policymakers and others that the semiconductor industry’s difﬁculties
were representative of those faced by other U.S. industries. The development by
the U.S. semiconductor industry of an inﬂuential political voice in the Semicon-
ductor Industry Association (SIA) also played an important role in changes in
U.S. government policy. As such, some assessment of the inﬂuence of these
“nontechnological factors”—which we deﬁne to include new public policies—
on this industry’s competitive revival is important for what it reveals about the
sources of this revival in semiconductors and its implications for evaluation of
these factors’ inﬂuence in other industries. This section discusses the contribu-
tions to the U.S. semiconductor industry’s improved performance since 1980 of
the domestic environment for capital formation, as well as the changes in federal
antitrust, trade, and intellectual-rights protection policies implemented during
this period.
Capital Formation
A recurrent theme in debates and analyses of the competitive difﬁculties
of the U.S. semiconductor and other industries during the 1980s and 1990s has
been the asserted high cost of capital for industrial investment. A corollary cri-
tique emphasizes the lack of “patient” capital, and the resulting myopic invest-
ment behavior of U.S. high-technology ﬁrms. A number of changes in federal
tax policy, including the R&D tax credit and reductions in capital-gains taxation,
have been justiﬁed in terms of their contributions to capital formation in U.S.
industry. What role has capital formation played in the fall and rise of the U.S.
semiconductor industry?
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 123
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 19 ===
Any discussion of the cost and availability of capital in competitive perfor-
mance within this industry confronts a paradox. On the one hand, this issue is
important in some segments of the industry, where the costs of a single com-
mercial-scale production facility signiﬁcantly exceed $1 billion. Indeed, as noted
earlier, U.S. ﬁrms faced signiﬁcant handicaps in the DRAM “capacity races” that
developed in the early 1980s.
On the other hand, capital expenditures by U.S. merchant semiconductor
producers amounted to more than $14 billion in 1996 and $13 billion in 1997.
53
Investments of this size suggest that constraints on the supply of capital to U.S.
ﬁrms are scarcely binding. Moreover, the U.S. semiconductor industry has an
abundant supply of venture capital, which has supported the foundation of liter-
ally hundreds of semiconductor ﬁrms since this industry’s inception four decades
ago. The data in Figure 6 suggest that this high “birthrate,” which has contrib-
uted signiﬁcantly to the industry’s technological dynamism, show few signs of
declining. The recent competitive performance of the large ﬁrms active in both
the Japanese and South Korean semiconductor industries, especially those spe-
cializing in DRAMs, suggests that an excess of inexpensive capital for investment
in physical plant and equipment may lead to poorer performance. In both of
these nations’ semiconductor industries, low-cost capital has been associated
with over-investment in production capacity for commodity products that yield
low proﬁts.
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998124
FIGURE 6. Formation of New U.S. Semiconductor Firms
0
5
10
15
20
25
1980-82 1983-85 1986-88 1989-91 1992-94
Year
Number
Source: FSA,Fabless Forum, 2/1 (1995).
Number
Year
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 20 ===
Although there are few reliable estimates of the risk-adjusted cost of cap-
ital in the U.S., Japanese, South Korean, and other semiconductor industries,
U.S. ﬁrms may well face a higher cost of capital. Nevertheless, any such cost
differential has not deterred the formation of new U.S. ﬁrms, nor has it deterred
large-scale capital investments by U.S. ﬁrms that have developed successful com-
petitive strategies that rely on their strengths in product design and innovation.
For established U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms, competitive success appears to lead to
abundant capital for investment in plant and equipment, rather than vice versa.
A higher cost of capital may contribute to the low level of investment in long-
term, basic research by many U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms. Nevertheless, given the
competitive realities of this industry, especially the short product cycles and high
costs of R&D for maintaining near-term competitiveness, the risk-adjusted cost
of capital would have to be very low indeed to produce higher levels of such
investment.
Trade Policy
Yet another policy experiment whose political currency and feasibility
were advanced signiﬁcantly by the competitive crisis of the U.S. semiconductor
industry during the 1980s was “managed trade”—bilateral policies and negotia-
tions pursued by the U.S. government that sought to go beyond specifying the
“rules of the game” to focus more explicitly on trade outcomes. Among the most
widely publicized and discussed initiatives was the U.S.-Japan Semiconductor
Trade Agreement of 1986, which responded to accusations by U.S. ﬁrms that
Japanese DRAM producers were “dumping” their products in the U.S. market.
54
By preventing the imposition of heavy antidumping duties on U.S. imports of
DRAMs, the Agreement sought to avoid a policy that would drive up the domes-
tic prices of components that were essential to U.S. manufacturers of electronic
systems, creating strong incentives for them to shift production to foreign loca-
tions. A system of “fair market value” prices for DRAMs was created under the
terms of the Agreement that was intended to prevent dumping in the U.S. and
third-country markets. The Agreement also included an “understanding” that
foreign-sourced components would achieve a 20 percent share of the Japanese
domestic market within ﬁve years. An extension of the Agreement in 1991
retained the market share language but dropped the price-monitoring system.
Although the Agreement was negotiated in response to the competitive
crisis facing U.S. producers of DRAMs, its effects on these ﬁrms’ activities in
DRAM production were limited. Most of the major U.S. DRAM producers had
exited from this product line by 1985, well before the Agreement was ﬁnal-
ized.
55 The Agreement’s price ﬂoors and the associated implementation by MITI
of controls on production and capacity investment by Japanese DRAM produc-
ers, however, had several interesting effects, few of which directly beneﬁted U.S.
semiconductor manufacturers or were foreseen in 1986.
56 Higher prices for
DRAMs provided an opportunity for South Korean ﬁrms to expand their pro-
duction of these devices, sowing the seeds for more intense competition in this
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 125
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 21 ===
product line in the future. Flamm argues similar restrictions on production of
erasable programmable memory chips (EPROMs) reduced Japanese exports of
these devices and enabled U.S. producers of EPROMs to remain in this product
line.
57
Although the Semiconductor Trade Agreement may have provided some
beneﬁts to U.S. EPROM producers, the effects of its pricing provisions seem to
have had little effect on the overall U.S. industry. These provisions did not
attract U.S. manufacturers back into DRAM production and imposed heavy
short-term costs on major U.S. consumers of DRAMs. The market-share pro-
visions of the 1986 and 1991 Agreements, however, were eventually followed 
by a signiﬁcant increase in U.S. semiconductor manufacturers’ market share 
in Japan, and the Agreement is viewed as a key factor in expanded Japanese
imports of foreign components.
58 The Agreement’s market-share provisions thus
contributed to the revival of U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms after 1990, but the timing
of this revival is such that the lack of an import target would not have prevented
the U.S. industry’s recovery, which was well underway by 1990. 
Antitrust Policy
The competitive crises of the semiconductor and other U.S. industries
contributed to a far-reaching shift in U.S. antitrust statutes and enforcement
policy in the 1980s. Despite (or possibly, because of) the historical inﬂuence of
antitrust policy on the semiconductor industry’s development,
59 U.S. antitrust
policy was widely criticized in the late 1970s for discouraging R&D collaboration
in this and other industries. The U.S. Justice Department issued guidelines in
1980 that were intended to clarify the antitrust statutes and the Department’s
enforcement philosophy toward R&D collaboration in order to remove impedi-
ments to such collaborative undertakings. Nevertheless, continuing industry and
Congressional dissatisfaction resulted in the 1984 passage of the National Coop-
erative Research Act (NCRA), and Justice Department enforcement of antitrust
statutes was relaxed somewhat to account for the importance of non-U.S. mar-
kets, non-U.S. producers, and the beneﬁts of innovation in determining the costs
and beneﬁts of market power in the U.S. semiconductor and other industries.
The NCRA is credited with facilitating the formation of SEMATECH, among
other industry-wide collaborations; the Act was amended in 1993 to extend its
coverage to joint production ventures.
An evaluation of the “real” effects of the NCRA and the broader shift 
in antitrust enforcement policy on the U.S. semiconductor industry’s decline 
and revival is difﬁcult without some clearer speciﬁcation of the counterfactual:
Would SEMATECH have been formed without the NCRA? Has R&D collabo-
ration contributed to increased market power and/or poorer industry perform-
ance? Given the size of the ﬁrms that joined together to create SEMATECH 
and the sustained acquaintance of several of them with the federal antitrust
authorities, the legislative endorsement of R&D collaboration under the terms 
of the NCRA almost certainly did aid in the creation of this consortium. The
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998126
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 22 ===
semiconductor industry’s performance suggests that R&D collaboration need not
result in cartelization and a weakening of competitive forces, although the large
share of the U.S. semiconductor equipment market represented by SEMATECH
member ﬁrms means that this consortium’s vertical relationships deserve contin-
ued monitoring. Indeed, collaboration may provide one mechanism for combin-
ing the beneﬁts of the U.S. industry’s atomized structure and technological
dynamism with those ﬂowing from closer user-supplier relationships. Neverthe-
less, very few production joint ventures have been formed since the passage of
the 1993 amendments to the NCRA, suggesting that this policy shift thus far has
had little effect.
Intellectual Property Rights
A ﬁnal area of major policy change since 1980 that has affected the U.S.
semiconductor and other industries is intellectual property rights. Shifts in U.S.
policy toward intellectual property rights began with the 1982 legislation that
established the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (CAFC), which strength-
ened the protection granted to patentholders.
60 The U.S. government also pur-
sued stronger international protection for intellectual property rights in the
Uruguay Round trade negotiations and in bilateral venues.
In addition to these shifts in federal policy affecting all U.S. industries, the
Semiconductor Chip Protection Act (SCPA) of 1984 established protection for
the design or “mask work” used in semiconductor manufacturing.
61 Although it
is an interesting experiment in sui generis protection of new forms of intellectual
property, the SCPA’s economic signiﬁcance appears to be limited—only one case
has ever been litigated under its provisions.
62 The SCPA’s unanticipated insigniﬁ-
cance appears to be one result of the increasing complexity of manufacturing
process technologies in the semiconductor industry. Copies of a device design
and maskwork are necessary, but by no means sufﬁcient, to enable large-scale
production of infringing products.
63 As a result, semiconductor ﬁrms during the
1980s and 1990s continue to rely on trade secrets and patents, the value of
which has been highlighted by the policy shifts noted above.
64
The SCPA nevertheless may play an important, albeit unintended, eco-
nomic role in the fabless segment of the U.S. semiconductor industry. In order 
to maintain short design cycles, fabless ﬁrms must extensively reuse design data,
“porting” designs from one product to another or contracting with another ﬁrm
for all or some part of the design. Reusable design components are generally
referred to as “intellectual property (IP) blocks,” and protection for these “IP
blocks” under the SCPA facilitates the licensing process. The growth of licensing
of IP blocks has supported further specialization by some design ﬁrms in speciﬁc
components of overall device designs.  These “virtual companies” operate by
licensing their proprietary designs and architectures to other semiconductor
ﬁrms that produce an integrated design, contract with a foundry, and (in many
cases) market the ﬁnal product.
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 127
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 23 ===
The broader shift of federal policy toward stronger enforcement of patent-
holder rights has been associated with a dramatic increase in patenting and
licensing among integrated semiconductor manufacturers in the U.S. industry.
65
Licensing has become an important component of proﬁts for some leading man-
ufacturers. The royalty income of Texas Instruments (TI) grew from roughly
$200 million in 1987 to more than $600 million in 1995, but has decreased 
since the expiration of several key patents.
66 Other ﬁrms, such as Intel, IBM, 
and AT&T, now rely on licensing to generate revenues and protect product and
process technologies.
The historic strengths of U.S. ﬁrms in product design and rapid innova-
tion should be reinforced by stronger enforcement of patents and trade secrets.
The distribution of these beneﬁts within the industry, however, is less clear.
Stronger intellectual property protection appears to have beneﬁted established
ﬁrms. Intel’s strong position in its microprocessor product line relies in large part
on the ﬁrm’s intellectual property rights. Another historic strength of the U.S.
industry, however, is the ease with which new ﬁrms can enter. The effects of
stronger intellectual property rights on rates of new-ﬁrm formation and entry
are less clear. On the one hand, new ﬁrms with strong patent positions often
ﬁnd it much easier to attract ﬁnancing. On the other hand, the costs (in terms of
litigation and patent prosecution expenses) of establishing such a patent position
are very high. The empirical evidence on the social beneﬁts from stronger intel-
lectual property protection is thin and equivocal. In the semiconductor industry,
as in others, the U.S. is conducting an experiment in the effects of stronger intel-
lectual property protection, and the implications of these new policies for long-
term industry performance are surprisingly uncertain.
Summary
Based on the experiences of the U.S. semiconductor industry, a tentative
assessment of the inﬂuence of these factors on the competitive revival of U.S.
industry since the 1980s would conclude that their inﬂuence has been modest
but broadly positive. Certainly, this assessment provides little support for the
argument that U.S. industry was or is starved for “patient capital,” while it sug-
gests that managed trade policies can open markets rather than restrict U.S.
imports. Finally, the effects of the far-reaching changes in U.S. antitrust and
intellectual property rights policies instituted during the past 18 years are only
gradually being felt and remain uncertain.
Conclusion
Forecasts of the impending demise of the U.S. semiconductor indus-
try in the late 1980s were considerably overstated. After declining through 
much of the 1980s, U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms undertook corrective actions on
several fronts. They exited from product lines in which their historic skills at
product innovation provided limited competitive advantage and their foreign
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998128
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 24 ===
competitors’ superior access to capital made long-term competition difﬁcult. 
U.S. ﬁrms also improved their product quality and enhanced their manufactur-
ing performance, narrowing the gaps between them and foreign competitors,
rather than moving ahead. The results of these steps have been dramatic. The
U.S. semiconductor industry has regained its formerly dominant global market
share, and the ﬁnancial performance of U.S. semiconductor manufacturers now
outstrips that of their South Korean and Japanese competitors. Moreover, the
revival of the U.S. semiconductor manufacturing industry has reinvigorated the
U.S. semiconductor equipment industry. Simultaneously, the South Korean and
Japanese ﬁrms that specialize in the production of DRAMs are experiencing
serious ﬁnancial losses.
In many respects, the revival of the U.S. semiconductor industry relied 
on the elements of its structure that were criticized in the 1989 report of the MIT
Commission on Industrial Productivity. The structure of the U.S. semiconductor
manufacturing industry remains very different from that of the Western Euro-
pean or Japanese industries, although the emergent Taiwanese semiconductor
industry is based on the U.S. model and still bears a passing resemblance to it.
Populated by numerous, relatively small (by comparison with foreign competi-
tors), highly innovative ﬁrms and exposed to competition by new entrants pur-
suing new product opportunities and new approaches to the semiconductor
business, the U.S. industry remains adept at product innovation and rapid strat-
egic repositioning. In addition, U.S. ﬁrms have relied on collaboration among
semiconductor manufacturers—and between manufacturing ﬁrms and suppliers
of equipment—to improve their manufacturing performance. The links between
the collaborative initiatives of the 1980s and 1990s and the industry’s improved
performance remain elusive, however, and further research on these issues is
essential if the current strengths of U.S. manufacturers and equipment producers
are to be maintained.
Although the MIT Commission’s overall prognosis of the industry’s future
was inaccurate, its analysis of the U.S. industry’s weaknesses in manufacturing
and long-term R&D investment highlighted other issues that could lead to future
competitive difﬁculties. The very best U.S. semiconductor manufacturers appear
to be capable of matching the yield and productivity of the best non-U.S. pro-
ducers, but there is little evidence of consistently superior U.S. manufacturing
performance. As a result, U.S. ﬁrms are likely to do best in periods of rapid prod-
uct innovation, especially because of their ability to exploit their presence in one
of the world’s most dynamic markets for applications of new products that use
semiconductor components. But U.S. ﬁrms may have trouble competing on the
basis of their manufacturing skills alone and therefore are likely to face chal-
lenges in future periods where they and foreign competitors are pursuing simi-
larly incremental innovations within a well-deﬁned technological “trajectory.”
The U.S. industry structure is enormously effective in exploiting scientiﬁc
advances for rapid commercialization, but may under-invest in the basic
research supporting these advances.
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 129
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 25 ===
During the 1980s, the semiconductor industry was almost without equal
(steel and automobiles are among the few that approach its salience) in the
amount of attention devoted to its welfare and competitive prospects by federal
policymakers. As pointed out above, many of the policy initiatives that sought to
respond to this industry’s difﬁculties have had signiﬁcant economy-wide effects.
Nevertheless, the federal policies that sought to target semiconductors in partic-
ular avoided a number of alternatives that would have been far more detrimen-
tal for the industry’s competitive prospects. For example, consider the costs and
consequences of a public-private venture like U.S. Memories (which specializes
in DRAMs), during the 1990s. Policymakers and industry managers might well
have faced some very unpleasant choices between erecting trade barriers against
competing imports or allowing this venture to slide into insolvency. The pro-
posal of the National Advisory Commission on Semiconductors for a govern-
ment-backed Consumer Electronics Capital Corporation—which would have
been charged with ﬁnancing the revival of a U.S. industry to consume the prod-
ucts of the domestic semiconductor industry—experienced an even more rapid
and fortuitous demise. In hindsight, the avoidance by federal policymakers in
the Executive and Congressional branches of government of programs that
would involve the support with public funds of speciﬁc designs of commercial
products was wise and was consistent with well-established principles of tech-
nology policy.
The complex history of the U.S. semiconductor industry’s fall and rise
since 1980 illustrates another very important point that both industry managers
and public policymakers need to consider carefully. In hindsight, it seems clear
that many of the diagnoses of this industry’s competitive weaknesses and
strengths during the 1980s were misguided. As Rosenberg,
67 among others, has
pointed out, the process of technological innovation is fraught with fundamental
uncertainties, and these uncertainties characterize many other aspects of the
environment and outlook within high-technology industries. Regardless of the
quality or quantity of data, the rapid pace of technological and market-driven
change in these industries means that the “signal-to-noise” ratio in these indica-
tors is likely to be quite low, creating abundant opportunities for costly or coun-
terproductive responses. Over-commitment to any speciﬁc commercial vision of
the future of an industry is no less hazardous to policymakers than to industry
managers in such surroundings.
Finally, given its status as a key source of evidence for all sides in the
“industrial competitiveness” debates of the 1980s and 1990s, what does the
improved performance of the U.S. semiconductor industry suggest for the analy-
sis of competitive trends in other U.S. industries? The U.S. semiconductor indus-
try shares a common set of strengths and weaknesses with a number of other
U.S. high-technology industries. In industries ranging from biotechnology to
pharmaceuticals and computer software, U.S. competitive strength (or revival)
has relied on:
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998130
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 26 ===
▪ substantial federal investments in R&D, especially in fundamental
research in academia and industry, rather than in federal laboratories;
▪ the enormous, uniﬁed U.S. domestic market, which provides a large,
demanding group of users for new products and processes and supports 
a robust ﬂow of new technologies among different industrial sectors;
▪ a system of corporate ﬁnance and governance that supports the formation
and entry of numerous new ﬁrms to experiment (and frequently, to fail)
in the exploitation of new commercial products;
▪ federal trade, antitrust, and intellectual property rights policies that tend
to favor competition among ﬁrms and open markets; and
▪ particularly since the early 1990s, ﬁscal and monetary policies that pro-
mote economic stability, low interest rates, and low inﬂation.
These factors were ignored or downplayed in much of the most critical
assessment of U.S. competitiveness of the 1980s, which was inﬂuenced heavily
by the performance of Japanese industry during that decade. Some, but by no
means all, of the policy shifts inspired by the semiconductor industry’s competi-
tive difﬁculties are consistent with these elements. Furthermore, the industry’s
crisis failed to produce any political consensus on one of the most important of
these factors: the role and appropriate structure for the federal R&D infrastruc-
ture in a post-Cold War world.
The resurgence of the U.S. semiconductor industry is an impressive feat,
for which government policymakers and industry managers, engineers, and
researchers should share credit. But the unexpected nature of this revival, its
complex causes, the contributions to it of cyclical factors, and the fragility of its
foundation all suggest that competitive strength in this industry cannot be taken
for granted. Indeed, some foreign producers, notably Taiwanese semiconductor
ﬁrms, now are entering markets traditionally dominated by U.S. producers, a
development that will intensify pressure on U.S. ﬁrms and increase the impor-
tance of manufacturing performance for competitive leadership. In other words,
U.S. semiconductor ﬁrms must maintain their strategic agility and strength in
product innovation while avoiding signiﬁcant erosion in their manufacturing
capabilities in order to maintain their strength. This task will require imagination
and collaboration among government, industry, and academia.
Notes
1. A representative comment was that of the MIT Commission on Industrial Pro-
ductivity: “The traditional structure and institutions of the U.S. [semiconductor]
industry appear to be inappropriate for meeting the challenge of the much
stronger and better-organized Japanese competition… The technological edge 
that once enabled innovative American companies to excel despite their lack of
ﬁnancial and market clout has disappeared, and the Japanese have gained the
lead.” MIT Commission on Industrial Productivity. Working Papers of the Com-
mission on Industrial Productivity, two volumes (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1989), p. 261.
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 131
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 27 ===
2. Microcomponents include microprocessors, microcontrollers, DSP devices, and
microperipheral devices.
3. These ﬁrms are called “fabless” semiconductor ﬁrms, as they design new micro-
electronic products but subcontract out the manufacture of these products to
other ﬁrms (“foundries”) specialized in wafer fabrication.
4. See, for example, R. Florida and M. Kenney, “Silicon Valley and Route 128 Won’t
Save Us,” California Management Review, 33/1 (Fall 1990): 68-88.
5. The SEmiconductor MAnufacturing TECHnology (SEMATECH) consortium was
created in 1987 to develop semiconductor manufacturing technology, using a
combination of industry and federal government funding (see below).
6. J. Tilton, International Diffusion of Technology: The Case of Semiconductors (Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institute, 1971), p. 61; E. Braun and S. MacDonald, Revolution in
Miniature: The History and Impact of Semiconductor Electronics (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1978), p. 113.
7. Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation (ICE), “Status: A Report on the Inte-
grated Circuit Industry,” Integrated Circuit Engineering, 1976-1998.
8. Merchant semiconductor ﬁrms sell most of their production on the open market,
in contrast to captive semiconductor ﬁrms who produce semiconductor devices
principally for internal “parent” systems divisions.
9. Moore’s Law was articulated in 1965 by Dr. Gordon Moore, one of the founders of
Intel, who pointed out that the number of transistors integrated on semiconductor
devices tend to double every 18 months.
10. Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation (ICE), “Status: A Report on the Inte-
grated Circuit Industry,” Integrated Circuit Engineering, 1980.
11. Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation (ICE), “Status: A Report on the Inte-
grated Circuit Industry,” Integrated Circuit Engineering, 1981-1991.
12. Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation (ICE), “Status: A Report on the Inte-
grated Circuit Industry,” Integrated Circuit Engineering, 1976-1991.
13. Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation (ICE), “Status: A Report on the Inte-
grated Circuit Industry,” Integrated Circuit Engineering, 1998.
14. See W. Finan, “Matching Japan in Quality: How the Leading U.S. Semiconductor
Firms Caught Up With the Best in Japan,” MIT-Japan Working Paper, 1993.
15. C.A. Barron, “Microelectronics Survey: All That Is Electronic Does Not Glitter,”
Economist, March 1, 1980, pp. 3-4.
16. Finan, op. cit.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid. Finan measures this increased spending on product quality as a doubling in
the share of total ﬁrm expenses (operating, R&D, and capital outlays) devoted to
quality improvement programs.
19. Ibid.
20. This multi-year research effort is a joint project of the College of Engineering, the
Haas School of Business, and the Berkeley Roundtable on the International Econ-
omy at U.C. Berkeley. The Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and semiconductor produc-
ers from Asia, Europe and the United States have supported the project. Program
directors are Dave Hodges and Robert Leachman of U.C. Berkeley’s College of
Engineering.
21. In a CSM working paper, Robert Leachman and Chien Leachman report fab per-
formance in logic and memory devices for sub-micron CMOS processes using
eight different performance metrics. National statistics are tabulated based upon
fab location, rather than the nationality of the owner ﬁrm, but the data reported
here contain no “transplants.” The next several paragraphs draw on Leachman
and Leachman, and the interested reader is referred to their paper for a more
thorough discussion. R. Leachman and C. Leachman, “National Performance in
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998132
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 28 ===
Semiconductor Manufacturing,” University of California, Berkeley Competitive
Semiconductor Research Program working paper #CSM-40, 1997.
22. Japanese defect density data for logic products are available only for 1993, but
during this period, their defect densities are far lower than those are for U.S. or
other ﬁrms.
23. Leachman and Leachman, op. cit.
24. Such as “downloading” of recipes for speciﬁc device types to operators, helping to
reduce errors.
25. Probe yield is the percentage of good die on a silicon wafer after the last electrical
test for functionality before semiconductor devices are cut from the wafer, pack-
aged, and assembled. It is similar to defect density, although it does not control for
variation in die size.
26. The GAO study cited unpublished data from VLSI Research in this assessment.
U.S. General Accounting Ofﬁce, “Federal Research: SEMATECH’s Technological
Progress and Proposed R&D Program,” July 1992.
27. Signiﬁcant differences within the sample in fab organization and relationships
with other corporate functions, such as R&D, process development, and the like
mean that the amount of “indirect” labor, i.e., engineering and management 
staff, is likely to vary among fabs in this sample. “Direct” labor productivity 
should reduce the inﬂuence of these differences in the comparison of fab-level
productivity.
28. Leachman and Leachman, op. cit.
29. For further discussion of these issues, see N.W. Hatch and D.C. Mowery, “Process
Innovation and Learning by Doing in Semiconductor Manufacturing,” Manage-
ment Science (forthcoming 1998); M.M. Appleyard, N. Hatch, and D.C. Mowery,
“Managing New Process Introduction in the Semiconductor Industry,” in G. Dosi,
R. Nelson, and S. Winter, eds., Corporate Capabilities and Competitiveness (London:
Pinter, forthcoming).
30. Intel’s integrated process development facility in northwest Oregon dramatically
improved manufacturing yields from roughly 50% in the 1980s to nearly 90% 
by the mid-1990s, and it accelerated the “ramping” of production of new device
designs. R.C. Cole, Managing Quality Fads: How American Business Learned to Play the
Quality Game (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 1998).
31. D. Takahashi, “Chip Makers Enter Slump; Sales Fall 13%,” Wall Street Journal, July
6, 1998.
32. Modern chip facilities now cost more than $1 billion per plant, and many semi-
conductor ﬁrms have found it impossible to invest in new products or manufac-
turing capacity without some arrangement for risk-sharing.
33. The estimate of North American fabless ﬁrms was provided by the Fabless Semi-
conductor Association’s Fabless Forum, 5/2 (July 1998). The estimate of the world-
wide population of fabless ﬁrms was provided by the FSA through personal
communication on August 1, 1998.
34. Major “pure-play foundries” include TSMC and UMC (both Taiwan), Chartered
Semiconductor (Singapore) and Tower Semiconductor (Israel). New pure-play
foundries include Anam (a Korean startup) and WSMC (a Taiwanese startup). The
prevalence of Southeast Asian pure-play foundries is subsiding as merchant semi-
conductor producers from all nations are converting older facilities or dedicating
entirely new facilities to provide foundry services to this industry. IBM Microelec-
tronics (US), LG Semicon (Korea), Samsung (Korea), Winbond (Taiwan) and VLSI
(US) are notable examples.
35. Access by fabless ﬁrms to foundry capacity was aided by rise to dominance of
Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (MOS) manufacturing processes, which effectively
standardized manufacturing technologies for commercial semiconductor devices.
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 133
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 29 ===
The diffusion of MOS production technology facilitated the division of labor
between device designers in fabless ﬁrms, who were able to operate within rela-
tively stable design rules, and foundries, who were able to incrementally improve
their process technologies to accommodate a succession of new device designs.
36. Fabless Semiconductor Association, “State of the Fabless Business Model,” mimeo,
September 1997.
37. Semiconductor Business News, “Foundries May Build 40% of World’s Chips by
2010,” 1998.
38. Examples of departures from this pattern by U.S. ﬁrms are long-established, rela-
tively small R&D organizations maintained for ten to thirty years by TI in Bedford,
England, by IBM in Zurich and Tokyo, by Motorola in Hong Kong, and by Intel in
Israel.
39. Philips, Siemens, NEC Hitachi, and Fujitsu are examples.
40. See W. Steinmueller, “Industry Structure and Government Policies in the U.S. 
and Japanese Integrated-Circuit Industries,” in J.B. Shoven, ed., Government Policy
Towards Industry in the United States and Japan (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1988).
41. See National Research Council, Committee on Japan, U.S.-Japan Strategic Alliances
in the Semiconductor Industry: Technology Transfer, Competition, and Public Policy(Wash-
ington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1992).
42. See R.M. Ham and D.C. Mowery, “Improving the Effectiveness of Public-Private
R&D Collaboration: Case Studies at a U.S. Weapons Laboratory,” Research Policy,
26/6 (February 1998): 661-675.
43. This discussion of SEMATECH draws on P. Grindley, D.C. Mowery, and B. Silver-
man, “SEMATECH and Collaborative Research: Lessons in the Design of High-
Technology Consortia,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. (1994).
44. SEMATECH’s founders included the following ﬁrms: Advanced Micro Devices;
AT&T; Digital Equipment Corporation, Harris Corporation, Hewlett-Packard Com-
pany, Intel Corporation, IBM, LSI Logic, Micron Technology, Motorola, National
Semiconductor, NCR, Rockwell International, and Texas Instruments. Three of the
founding members of SEMATECH (Harris Semiconductor, LSI Logic, and Micron)
left the consortium in 1991.
45. SEMATECH’s federal funding ceased in 1996.
46. (Katz and Ordover, 1990; U.S. Congressional Budget Ofﬁce, 1990) M.L. Katz and
J.A. Ordover, “R&D Cooperation and Competition,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1990; U.S. Congressional Budget Ofﬁce, “SEMATECH’s Efforts to
Strengthen the U.S. Semiconductor Industry,” Washington, D.C., 1990.
47. U.S. equipment producers have not increased their share of the Japanese market
signiﬁcantly during the 1990s but have beneﬁted from the rapid growth in South
Korean and Taiwanese markets, which were far easier to penetrate.
48. The Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) is funded by industry, the
Defense Department, and more recently, by SEMATECH, to support university
research that seeks to bolster an important portion of the U.S. research infrastruc-
ture, to attract faculty and students to work on problems of relevance to industry,
and to attract high-quality students to seek employment opportunities in the U.S.
semiconductor industry. State-level programs, such as the California MICRO pro-
gram, pursued similar objectives through a combination of public and industry
support. Finally, the Microelectronics Advanced Research Corporation (MARCO)
is a new industry-ﬁnanced collaborative research initiative that will support long-
range university research on silicon IC technology.
49. In addition to paying dues totaling $100 million per year (which were matched by
$100 million from federal sources), the member ﬁrms contributed roughly two-
thirds of SEMATECH’s 300-member research staff through temporary (usually 2-
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998134
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 30 ===
year) rotation of “assignees” at the consortium. Concurrently with the foundation
of SEMATECH, U.S. semiconductor materials and equipment (SME) suppliers
formed SEMI/SEMATECH to facilitate linkages between U.S. SME suppliers and
SEMATECH. SEMI/SEMATECH has more than 100 members who account for
more than 85 percent of U.S. SME sales.
50. R.M. Ham, G. Linden, and M.M. Appleyard, ““The Evolving Role of Semiconduc-
tor Consortia in the United States and Japan,” California Management Review, 41/1
(Fall 1998).
51. National Science Foundation, National Patterns of R&D Resources (Washington, D.C.:
National Science Foundation, 1996).
52. These ﬁrms are integrated from materials and components to system-level prod-
ucts, and their varied internal customers for semiconductors allow them to extend
the productive life of their semiconductor production facilities. Their other busi-
nesses produce generous cash ﬂows that help to offset the heavy R&D and invest-
ment costs of the capital-intensive semiconductor business.
53. Integrated Circuit Engineering Corporation (ICE), “Status: A Report on the Inte-
grated Circuit Industry,” Integrated Circuit Engineering, 1998.
54. Flamm provides the most objective account of the Agreement, and these para-
graphs draw on his analysis. K. Flamm, Mismanaged Trade? Strategic Policy and the
Semiconductor Industry (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1996).
55. The Agreement’s “price ﬂoor” nevertheless may have aided the remaining U.S.
domestic producer of DRAMs, Micron Corporation.
56. The period following the Agreement was also associated with severe shortages of
256K DRAMs, then a vital component of personal computer and other electronic
systems. U.S. computer producers, among others, blamed the Agreement and the
informal, MITI-guided domestic production cartel that oversaw the Agreement’s
implementation within Japan for the shortages. Concern over DRAM shortages
and the alleged Japanese cartelization of the DRAM market (a condition to which
U.S. policy, in the form of the bilateral Trade Agreement, arguably had
contributed) led to the proposal by a group of U.S. computer manufacturers to
jointly fund the creation of a DRAM manufacturing consortium, U.S. Memories.
As supplies of DRAMs became more abundant, this proposal was abandoned in
early 1990.
57. Flamm, op. cit.
58. In late 1992, the foreign share of Japan’s domestic consumption of semiconductor
components increased beyond 20 percent, and recent data suggest that this share
now is at roughly 25 percent. U.S. semiconductor components account for
roughly 20 percent of domestic Japanese consumption, a signiﬁcant increase 
from their 12.3 percent share in 1990. According to Flamm, this increase cannot
be attributed solely to growth in Japanese consumption of microcomponent
devices in which U.S. ﬁrms have a strong competitive advantage, but includes
signiﬁcant growth in other product areas. Flamm, op. cit.
59. U.S. antitrust policy played an important role in the earliest years of the semicon-
ductor industry, as Bell Laboratories’ liberal licensing of the original transistor and
related patents was motivated in part by concern over the outcome of the federal
government’s antitrust suit against the ﬁrm that was settled in 1956. The 1956
settlement also led AT&T to manufacture semiconductor devices solely for internal
consumption, rather than entering the commercial market. These early actions by
the technological pioneer in semiconductors powerfully inﬂuenced the subse-
quent development of the U.S. semiconductor industry.
60. According to Katz and Ordover, at least 14 Congressional bills passed during the
1980s focused on strengthening domestic and international protection for intellec-
tual property rights. The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit created in 1982
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry
CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 41, NO. 1 FALL 1998 135
--- PAGE BREAK ---
=== Page 31 ===
California Management Review
University of California ▪ F501 Haas School of Business #1900 ▪ Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
(510) 642-7159 ▪ fax: (510) 642-1318 ▪ e-mail: cmr@haas.berkeley.edu ▪ web site: www.haas.berkeley.edu/cmr/
has upheld patent rights in roughly 80% of the cases argued before it, a consider-
able increase from the pre-1982 rate of 30% for the Federal bench. Katz and
Ordover, op. cit.
61. Mask works represent the three-dimensional pattern of the layers (the “topogra-
phy”) of a semiconductor component. H. Brown, “Fear and Loathing of the Paper
Trail: Originality in Products of Reverse Engineering Under the Semiconductor
Chip Protection Act as Analogized to the Fair Use of Nonﬁction Literary Works,”
Syracuse Law Review (1990); R. Stern, Semiconductor Chip Protection (New York, NY:
Law & Business, 1986).
62. This case, Brooktree Corporation v. Advanced Micro Devices, resulted in the award 
of $26 million in damages for AMD’s infringement under the SCPA and several
patents.
63. While semiconductor ﬁrms, particularly second sourcers, continue to study
selected features, full copies of mask art are not practical anymore for the reasons
stated. S. Kasch, “The Semiconductor Chip Protection Act: Past, Present and
Future,” High Technology Law Journal (1993).
64. The registration of mask works under the SCPA provisions has advantages over
patent ﬁlings, which require the disclosure of proprietary information and a time-
consuming search through prior art to assert validity. Mask work ﬁling provides
immediate registration at minimal cost without a time-consuming search.
65. The number of patents granted in the category “Semiconductor Devices and Man-
ufacture” increased from 1,655 in 1981 to 5,427 in 1994. U.S. Department of
Commerce: Patent & Trademark Ofﬁce, “Technology Proﬁle Report: Semiconduc-
tor Devices and Manufacture: 1/1969-12/1994,” February1995.
66. P. Grindley and D.J. Teece, 1997. “Managing Intellectual Capital: Licensing and
Cross-Licensing in Semiconductors and Electronics,” California Management Review,
39/2 (Winter 1997): 8-41.
67. N. Rosenberg, “Uncertainty and Technological Change,” in R. Landau, T. Taylor,
and G. Wright, eds., The Mosaic of Economic Growth (Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer-
sity Press, 1996).
Reversal of Fortune? The Recovery of the U.S. Semiconductor Industry