=== PAGE 1 ===
NOVEMBER 2013 1
American Journal of Education 120 (November 2013)
/H170152013 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0195-6744/2013/12001-0001$10.00
Evidence Use and the Common Core State
Standards Movement: From Problem
Deﬁnition to Policy Adoption
LORRAINE M. MCDONNELL
University of Californi a, Santa Barbara
M. STEPHEN WEATHERFORD
University of Californi a, Santa Barbara
Despite calls for research-based policies, other types of evidence also inﬂuence
education policy , including personal experience, professional expertise, and nor-
mative values. This article focuses on the Common Core State Standards (CCSS)
initiative, examining how research use varied over stages of the process and how
it was integrated with other types of evidence. By drawing on elite interviews,
we ﬁnd that CCSS promoters and developers used evidence in much the way
that policy analysis research would predict and that while research evidence was
a major resource, it was combined with other types of evidence depending on
political and policy goals at different stages of the CCSS process.
From the provisions of No Child Left Behind (NCLB) to the Investing in
Innovation grants competition, the expectation in recent federal policies is
that states, local districts, and schools will design their programs based on
research. Increasingly , state and local initiatives echo the federal call for re-
search-based policy . Y et decades of policy analysis suggest that even ofﬁcials
predisposed to acting on research knowledge do not rely solely on it to inform
their decisions or to build a case in support of particular policy options.
1 That
validated research is not the sole ground for policy choice comes as no surprise
to students of politics. Majone (1989) emphasizes that evidence is intended not
only to inform but also to persuade, and he casts the net widely , including “[any]
information selected from the available stock and introduced at a speciﬁc point
in the argument in order to persuade a particular audience of the truth or falsity
of a statement” (10). Evidence, then, is a much broader category than research,
ranging from the results of formal research studies to statistical data, judgments
Electronically published August 23, 2013
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 2 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
2 American Journal of Education
based on professional expertise, the personal experience of practitioners, and
appeals to values ar ticulated through stories and symbols.
Research is an important but variable component of this mix and, as such,
raises two questions: How does the use of research vary over stages of the
policy process? How is it integrated with other types of evidence in policy
deliberations? Findings from policy analysis suggest that several factors inﬂu-
ence decisions about whether and how to use research, including its availability
and perceived usefulness, along with the incentives policy makers have for
guiding and justifying decisions using alternative warrants such as constituent
preferences and political ideology . However , because political and policy goals
differ over the course of policy development, the factors shaping research use
also vary depending on the s tage of the policy process.
This article explores the question of how the use of research and other
types of evidence differs as policy evolves from an idea to a set of prescriptions
or incentives that are considered for formal enactment. The article’s focus is
the use of research in the development of the Common Core State Standards
(CCSS) in K–12 mathematics and English-language arts (ELA) and their
subsequent adoption in 45 states. In the ﬁrst two sections, we describe the
special role of policy entrepreneurs and then summarize assumptions drawn
from research about evidence use during different stages of the policy process.
The following section brieﬂy describes our research. We then assess the extent
to which evidence use in the Common Core is consistent with these patterns.
2
The Role of Policy Entre preneurs in Evidence Use
Policy research has consistently demonstrated the critical role that policy en-
trepreneurs play in bringing new ideas into different policy arenas and in
advancing those ideas, sometimes for many years before they reach decision-
makers’ agendas (Baumgartner and Jones 1993; Kingdon 1995; Mintrom
2000; Sheingate 2003). Policy entrepreneurs are “advocates who are willing
to invest their resources—time, energy , reputation, money—to promote a
position in return for anticipated future gain in the form of material, purposive,
L
ORRAINE M. M CDONNELL is a professor of political science at the Uni-
versity of California, Santa Barbara. Her research focuses on the politics of
education policies, their design and implementation, and effects on school
practice. M. S
TEPHEN WEATHERFORD is a professor of political science at
the University of California, Santa Barbara. His research focuses on policy
history and political leadership, including studies of how local activists and
parents mobilized in response to school desegregation and citizen deliberative
forums in school politics.
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 3 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 3
or solidary beneﬁts” (Kingdon 1995, 179). They can occupy a variety of formal
and informal policy-making roles, but the most effective ones typically have
a claim to a public hearing, are known for their political connections or
negotiating skills, and ar e persistent (Kingdon 1995).
One of the resources that policy entrepreneurs draw upon is research.
Entrepreneurs are advocates, however , and they use research strategically in
deﬁning a policy problem, framing it, and then shaping and promoting a
particular solution. Although these strategic and persuasive uses of research
are at odds with the rational choice models that dominated policy analysis in
its early years, they represent a more valid depiction of the actual use of
research in policy-making venues (Majone 1989; Stone 2012). A simplistic
version of this assumption is that policy entrepreneurs use research results
selectively and even distort ﬁndings to advance their case. Entrepreneurs may
certainly misuse research, but the competitive nature of the political process
and the fact that credibility is the policy advocate’s most important resource
minimizes outright distortion. At the same time, the inevitable complexity of
real-world policy making allows ample room for uncertainty and interpreta-
tion. For instance, in some cases, such as school choice, research results are
inconsistent and contested. Even in cases where the research base is solid,
however , as with early literacy acquisition or the determinants of student
retention, its application to problem deﬁnition and policy solution is open to
interpretation and framing, depending on the context and feasibility factors
such as political, organizational , and resource conditions.
How policy entrepreneurs use research knowledge also depends on who
the entrepreneurs are. In some instances, they may be knowledge producers
such as university researchers or think-tank staff who choose to disseminate
their work directly as it relates to particular policy issues and venues. Alter-
natively , they may be intermediary organizations that act as research brokers
and translators in the course of pursuing their organizational mission (e.g.,
foundations, nonproﬁts, interest groups). Policy entrepreneurs may be current
or former elected ofﬁcials, whose political status lends their advocacy an ad-
ditional claim to the attention of their colleagues. Regardless of whether they
function from an ofﬁcial position inside government or an unofﬁcial one
outside, policy entrepreneurs have to be sensitive to the differing types of
evidence needed throughout the policy development cycle.
Stages of the Policy Process and Evidence Use: Assumptions
from Policy Analysis
Policy making is rarely linear—moving from problem deﬁnition to design,
agenda setting, enactment, and ﬁnally implementation. Rather , policy options
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 4 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
4 American Journal of Education
may exist before a problem is deﬁned, and during implementation, policies
may cycle back for new enactments or fall off the agenda altogether . Never-
theless, despite nonlinearity and limited predictability about direction and
duration, most policies move through well-deﬁned stages, and past research
suggests that evidence use varies across phases of the policy cycle.
3 The current
analysis focuses on three distinct stages: (1) problem deﬁnition and promoting
a solution, (2) policy design , and 3) policy enactment.
4
Problem Deﬁnition and Promotion of a Solution
In his seminal work on agenda setting, John Kingdon (1995) details the inter-
play between disparate facts and their interpretation in the process of deﬁning
a given situation as a policy problem. Indicator data or a body of research
may , for instance, identify a problem—for example, highway deaths are rising,
childhood immunizations rates are declining, program costs are increasing—
or research might indicate that a current policy is not producing its intended
effects. Typically , most members of a policy network will accept such research-
based information as valid. At the same time, “there is a perceptual interpretative
element” in deﬁning policy problems (Kingdon 1995, 110). That element is man-
ifested in what data are highlighted, how they are interpreted, and in what factors
are identiﬁed as causing the problem.
As Stone (2012) notes, problem deﬁnition is the strategic representation of
situations. It is strategic and interpretative for several reasons. First, whether a
given situation constitutes a policy problem depends on how participants perceive
the discrepancy between it and some ideal state or social goal. What that goal
is and the distance between its attainment and the status quo depend on their
value preferences. Second, part of problem deﬁnition is identifying causes, and
“to identify a cause in the polis is to place burden on one set of people instead
of another” (Stone 2012, 207). How the cause is deﬁned has dir ect implications
for who will bear the costs of a policy and who will beneﬁt from it. Therefore,
those likely to be affected by a policy have a strong incentive to inﬂuence the
selection and framing of relevant evidence. Finally , how a problem is deﬁned
shapes the policy solution proposed. So policy entrepreneurs promoting a
particular policy option will select evidence that allows them to deﬁne a prob-
lem in such a way that their policy proposal becomes the preferred solution.
The nature of problem deﬁnition, then, suggests that although research
results and indicator data play a role, other types of evidence may be equally
important. These include appeals to values such as equality , liberty , and eco-
nomic security . Metaphors may also be used to evoke strong political and
cultural symbols (e.g., bureaucratic red tape, invasion of privacy; Stone 2012).
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 5 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 5
Policy entrepreneurs also often try to put a human face on a problem through
the use of anecdotes and other narrative devices.
The likelihood that a range of evidence will be used at this stage of the
process increases for major policies that embody signiﬁcant ideas. Ideas in the
policy arena are speciﬁc policy alternatives (test-based accountability , school
ﬁnance reform) as well as the organized principles, values, and causal beliefs
in which policy proposals are embedded (democratic representation, distri-
butional equity; Beland 2005, 2). Because ideas typically embody a set of
desired ends and the strategy or theory about how to produce those results,
they capture normative and instrumental dimensions of policy . In promoting
their ideas, policy entrepreneurs frame arguments that combine normative
theories and empirical evidence from a variety of sources—for instance, about
what education ought to achieve an d how it ought to be delivered.
Signiﬁcant policy ideas grounded in a combination of research and other
evidence are critical in altering well-established policy regimes. Sometimes
called “policy monopolies,” these institutional arrangements have several ad-
vantages that allow them to resist changes even when they have outlived their
usefulness. They ( a) are supported by powerful policy ideas that are connected
to core political values, ( b) combine empirical information and emotive ap-
peals, ( c) can be easily understood, and ( d ) are communicated directly and
simply through image and rhetoric. Policy entrepreneurs can disrupt a policy
monopoly and effect major change, but to do so they need to redeﬁne the
dominant policy image using ideas that challenge it and capture the imagi-
nation of the media, policy makers, and the public. Entrepreneurs provide
new understandings of policy problems and new ways of conceptualizing so-
lutions (Baumgartner and Jones 1993).
In sum, the policy analysis literature suggests that during the problem def-
inition and solution identiﬁcation stage, research-based evidence is likely to be
combined with evidence appealing to elected ofﬁcials’ and their constituents’
core values and that evokes positive emotional responses. Normative evidence
is especially important when the option being advocated embodies a signiﬁcant
idea and requires a major policy change. However , even in these cases, some
evidence is necessary that demonstrates there is a reasonable likelihood the
proposed policy option will result in the expected outcome.
5 That evidence may
be selectively framed and interpreted, but it needs to be derived from system-
atically collected and analyzed data g enerally viewed as r eliable and valid.
Policy Design
This stage of the policy process consists of technical tasks undertaken in a
politicized context. A policy option has now moved to the decision agenda
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 6 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
6 American Journal of Education
and is being considered for formal enactment. At this point, legislative language
is drafted, specifying such details as the funding mechanism and administrative
arrangements. Legislative staff are primarily responsible for the work, and they
draw on legal and ﬁscal expertise to ensure that the resulting language is
consistent with existing policy and legislative authority . Related policies often
serve as templates for how to structure the new policy . Staff may also draw on
evaluations of past policies and on research documentingthe relationship between
different types of intervention strategies and educational outcomes. Major sources
of evidence at this stage are research, past policies, and the professional judgment
of legislative and executive branch staff (Quirk and Nesmith 2011).
The political context in which the details of a policy are developed has
several implications for what additional evidence is used. First, those advancing
the policy need to maintain support and blunt opposition. They also need to
consider the interests and concerns of the agency staff and street-level bu-
reaucrats who will be implementing the policy , and thus other evidence will
come from these individuals and the groups that represent them. The evidence
might be research ﬁndings and other data, if available, as well as professional
judgment and personal experience. It can be presented formally in legislative
hearings and also discussed in informal meetings with elected ofﬁcials and their
staffs. Often the most persuasive evidence will be local knowledge from an
ofﬁcial’s own constituents—for example, conversations with hometown edu-
cators about their classroom experience. A second political dimension involves
timing. The opportunities for action on a policy proposal—the open policy
window—may not be available for long (Kingdon 1995). Policy entrepreneurs,
forced to move quickly before the window closes, may bring forward policy
proposals that are not fully developed and that miss or ignore evidence suggesting
problems or unintended effects.
The evidence used at this stage, then, is less likely to include the type of
normative and emotional arguments that are often central in the ﬁrst stage.
Evidence grounded in legal analysis, evaluation studies, and basic or applied
research on the relationship between policy interventions and learning out-
comes is likely to play a central role in drafting speciﬁc policy provisions.
However , the political context means that less systematic sources of evidence
are also considered and that some research may be ignored.
Policy Enactment
The imperative at this stage is to build a minimal winning coalition in favor
of the policy . The evidence brought to bear is basically a reprise of what was
used in the ﬁrst stage to deﬁne the policy problem and promote a particular
solution. However , because the policy has subsequently been developed from
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 7 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 7
a general idea into a detailed legislative proposal, the evidence is likely to be
more speciﬁc and to be targeted to address the questions and concerns of
individual legislators, especially those who are still undecided about the policy
(Mucciaroni and Quirk 2006, 24). At this point, legislators will continue to
consult with relevant interest groups and constituents. But they will also look
to colleagues who are experts in the policy domain (e.g., committee chairs)
and to leaders of their partisan caucuses for cues about how to vote and for
evidence to justify th e vote (Kelman 1987).
Rationale for Focusing on the Common Core and Study Data
The CCSS is an especially appropriate research site for observing the use of
evidence for three reasons. First, it has the potential to become one of the
most signiﬁcant policy shifts in American education in more than a century ,
for it fundamentally alters a long-standing policy regime of academic content
standards unique to each state. Second, the Common Core’s advocates ex-
plicitly promoted it as “research and evidence-based” and established pro-
cedures to encourage the use of research in drafting and validating the stan-
dards. Finally , the Common Core is an ongoing policy that moved from the
idea stage to adoption within 5 years. As such, it provides the opportunity to
examine research use in real time rather than ex post , as has been typical of
earlier studies. Because our primary interest is in mapping the use of evidence
over the development of this policy , we employ the predominant approach to
within-case qualitative causal analysis in political scien ce—process tracing
(Bennett and Elman 2006; George and Bennett 2005; Mahoney 2000). The
goal of process tracing is to gather information about speciﬁc events and
outcomes, especially through a close examination of the intervening processes
that link the multiple features and individual actors involved in the case. For
instance, process tracing has been used to explore causal relationships un-
derlying key foreign and domestic policy decisions (Collier et al. 2005; George
1979).
The analysis draws on extensive interviews with leaders of the Common
Core movement and their supporters, members of the work groups and com-
mittees charged with writing and validating the CCSS, national and state
education policy makers and researchers, as well as groups critical of the CCSS.
6
Over the past 2 years, 111 interviews have been conducted at the national level
and in four states. These structured interviews focus on the politics and process
of Common Core promotion, development, and adoption; why participants
chose to use certain types of evidence; and what other types were either un-
available or not used.
7 Potential interviewees were identiﬁed through multiple
sources, including a large database of documents related to the CCSS and its
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 8 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
8 American Journal of Education
development;8 consultation with staff at the James B. Hunt Jr . Institute for
Educational Leadership and Policy ,who were active participants in the CCSS
process;9 and additional names of potential informants offered by interviewees.
Our primary method for analyzing the interview data was to identify the
stages of the policy cycle in which respondents participated and then to com-
pare their reports of the types of evidence used with hypotheses derived from
the policy analysis literature. We found few inconsistencies among respondents
about evidence use by stage of the policy cycle. Differences in the interpretation
of evidence or the weight given evidence types and sources were largely ex-
plained by role position (e.g., CCSS critics interpreted the relationship between
standards and achievement differently than proponents; academic curriculum
experts gave greater weight to research results and less to judgments about
feasibility based on administrative exper ience than state agency staff).
10
The Stages of the Common Core I nitiative and Evidence Use
Deﬁning the Problem and Promoting Common Standards as the Solution
Although more than 20 national organizations and their members would
eventually become involved in promoting adoption and implementation of
the Common Core, a small group of policy entrepreneurs initially promoted
the idea of similar academic content standards across multiple states. This
group included several former governors, education advocacy groups, and
organizations representing state and local ofﬁcials. The origins of the Common
Core movement can be traced back to several unsuccessful attempts 2 decades
earlier , including efforts spearheaded by organizations representing subject-
matter specialists and the National Council on Education Standards and T ests
(NCEST), chaired by Roy Romer , then Governor of Colorado.
11 These at-
tempts, introduced in both the G. H. W . Bush and Clinton adm inistrations,
foundered, enmeshed in controversies over the curricular values underlying
state standards and assessments. They were opposed in Congress by Repub-
licans who feared possible federal encroachment and Democrats concerned
about the impact of assessments on students who had not had adequate op-
portunities to learn the required content.
Although these controversies made top-down national standards a non-
starter , the idea of voluntary , shared standards gained momentum with an
initiative begun by a group of states. In 2001, Achieve, in collaboration with
the Education Trust and the Thomas B. For dham Foundation, established
the American Diploma Project (ADP) to try to ensure that high school di-
plomas signiﬁed that students are prepared academically for entry into higher
education and the workforce. These standards were based on surveys of higher
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 9 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 9
education faculty and businesses indicating what knowledge and skills students
needed to pass college-level courses and workplace training programs. Sixteen
states agreed to align their high school graduation requirements with the
benchmarks derived from the surveys. Subsequently , 15 states agreed to de-
velop a common assessment in Algebra II, and later ﬁve states agreed to
develop and administer an Algebra I exam. As one organizational represen-
tative involved in the effort noted, “the ADP was the existence proof that you
could get common standards” (personal interview).
In 2006, two former governors, James B. Hunt Jr . of North Carolina and
Bob Wise of West Virginia, decided that what had seemed impossible 10 years
earlier was now a realistic aspiration. In their view , policy makers, educators,
and the public had become accustomed to the idea of content and performance
standards. Opinion polls indicated support for national standards, and state policy
makers were beginning to see potential cost advantages to common standards,
particularly given the requirements of NCLB. Hunt and Wise became the policy
entrepreneurs most responsible for persuading key decision makers and constituent
organizations to support the idea of national (subsequently renamed “common”)
standards (Hunt 2009; Rothman 2011; personal interviews). They identiﬁed their
audience as the national policy community—governors, chief state school ofﬁcers,
other state ofﬁcials, members of Congress, civil rights groups, foundations that
might support the effort, and the media (personal interviews). Their deﬁnition of
the problem was strategically crafted to point to common K–12 standards across
multiple states as the solution. T ogether with the organizations they lead, Hunt
and Wise drew together the ﬁndings of several lines of research to shape a clear
image of the policy challenge:
12
• The achievement of US students is low compared with the nation’s global
economic competitors.
• The United States has an unacceptable achievement gap among students
depending on their race and ethnicity , social class, and place of residence.
• US students leave high school inadequately prepared to succeed in college
and employment.
• Countries with high-achieving students have focused, rigorous, and co-
herent national standards.
• US standards vary considerably across states and are “a mile wide and
an inch deep.”
• Academic content standards common to multiple states are a critical
ingredient in solving these problems.
T ogether with the proviso that the Common Core is an initiative led by states
for states, these arguments have continued to form the essence of the Common
Core rationale.
Although the competitiveness of the United States in the global economy
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 10 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
10 American Journal of Education
was central to the narrative, research showing dramatic variation among states
came to play an increasingly prominent role in the problem deﬁnition phase. 13
A National Research Council (NRC) report sharpened the issues and brought
two important lines of research to the attention of the policy community .
14
One was research by Andrew Porter and his colleagues—a ﬁne-grai ned anal-
ysis of 31 state standards in three subjects, comparing state standards to each
other and measuring their alignment with the National Council of T eachers
of Mathematics mathematics standards and the science standards developed
by the NRC. Focusing on topic coverage and the level of cognitive demand,
the researchers found little evidence to support the assumption that a de facto
national curriculum existed as a result of states’ use of national documents
such as the NCTM standards or the widespread adoption of similar textbooks.
In fact, overlap in topic coverage across grade levels within the same state
was greater than the alignment across states at the same grade level (National
Research Council 2008). The implications that policy entrepreneurs drew from
Porter’s work were considerable state-to-state variability and substantial re-
dundancy in current state standards.
This evidence of variability in content standards gained additional force as
further research analyzed state-by-state variation in assessments and perfor-
mance standards (National Center for Education Statistics 2007). Mapping
state proﬁciency standards in mathematics and reading for grades 4 and 8
onto the appropriate National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP)
scale, researchers found that state differences in the percentage of students
scoring at the proﬁcient level on state assessments did not represent real
differences in achievement as measured by NAEP but reﬂected where a state
set its proﬁciency levels. Most state cut points, moreover , fell below the equiv-
alent of the NAEP proﬁcient standard, and some even fell below the NAEP
basic standard. A telling example, presented at the NRC workshop, was that
a North Carolina student performing at the same level on the NAEP reading
assessment as one in South Carolina would be deemed proﬁcient in North
Carolina but performing at a basic level in South Carolina, with the possibility
of having to attend a remedial class because South Carolina’s proﬁciency
standard (cut score) was higher (National Research Council 2008, 23). For
advocacy groups supporting national standards, this discrepancy between stu-
dent performance on state assessments and NAEP was powerful information
in efforts to persuade state ofﬁcials because it contributed to a picture of states
with signiﬁcantly different, and typically low , expectations of students (personal
interviews).
The case for common standards was crystallized in a report published by
the National Governors Association (NGA), the Council of Chief State School
Ofﬁcers (CCSSO), and Achieve (NGA et al. 2008). Authored by an Inter-
national Benchmarking Advisory Group, chaired by then-Governor Janet Na-
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 11 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 11
politano (AZ), then-Governor Sonny Perdue (GA), and Craig R. Barrett, the
chairman of the Intel Corporation board, the report drew heavily on research
using data from the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA)
and Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS).
15 The
report focused on US students’ low achievement, compared with international
competitors, and documented the achievement gap separating US students
from different socioeconomic backgrounds, noting that the distribution of US
students’ scores puts the country among the most unequal in the world. It
warned that “the United States is falling behind other countries in the resource
that matters most in the new global economy: human capital” (NGA et al.
2008, 5). The report recommended that states upgrade their standards “by
adopting a common core of internationally benchmarked standards in math
and language arts for grades K–12 to ensure that students are equipped with
the necessary knowledge and skills to be globally competitive” (6). The advisory
group grounded its rationale for international benchmarking in William
Schmidt’s research on TIMSS, showing that standards in high-performing
countries are characterized by focus (fewer topics covered at greater depth),
rigor , and coherence (an orderly progression of topics following the logic of
the discipline and minimizi ng repetition; 24).
Evidence use during this phase of the CCSS process was quite consistent
with what would be predicted by the policy research literature. The challenge
for the entrepreneurs promoting national standards was to dismantle one of
the most deeply entrenched and strongest policy regimes in US education:
the tradition of each state and its local districts deciding separately what
students should be taught. In doing so, they had to deﬁne a set of problems
to which their alternative policy idea was the solution. Research-based evi-
dence was used to demonstrate that state-speciﬁc standards policies had re-
sulted in considerable variability in curricular goals across states. Evidence of
variability in content and performance standards across states, and differing
levels of student achievement on standardized tests, was strong and generally
accepted. There was, however , less agreement about the relationship between
the two and the cause.
The resultant need for interpretation allowed proponents to represent the
situation strategically , attributing low achievement to states’ variable and low-
quality standards. Other researchers—especially those who study policy im-
plementation—drew a different conclusion, emphasizing the lack of system
capacity , especially supports for teachers and students (Cohen and Mofﬁtt
2009). They argued that the shortcomings documented in research ﬁndings
are less the result of standards themselves than how policies have been im-
plemented. Where the standards-based accountability ideal envisioned that
curriculum and instructional materials, teacher training, and assessment would
be closely coordinated, in practice the assessment portion had come to dom-
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 12 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
12 American Journal of Education
inate, and many schools lacked the capacity to bring all students to proﬁciency
(Goertz 2007; Ravitch 2010).
These alternative inferences lead to different policy solutions, but all re-
searchers could say with any certainty is that, at best, common standards might
be a necessary , but not sufﬁcient, condition forimproved educational outcomes.
16
The enabling conditions necessary for standards policies to work as envisioned
are the various supports in which policy makers had underinvested in the past.
Common Core advocates understood what researchers were telling them about
enabling conditions. However , during this stage of the policy process, they chose
to downplay them because they would complicate the agenda at a time when
a policy window was opening but might not be open for long.
17 The Common
Core’s policy entrepreneurs also used research evidence strategically in how
they framed its rationale, emphasizing global competitiveness because it car-
ried great appeal among governors concerned about the economic health of
their states—even though educators were less persuaded that this was a com-
pelling reason for major curricular change. During this stage of the process,
then, one particular set of inferences, among the differing ones that could be
drawn from research and indicator data, were selected and framed in such a
way as to persuade key policy audiences that common standards held the
potential to rectify pressing educational and economic problems.
In one respect, the initial phase of the CCSS process differed from what
happens typically when policy entrepreneurs deﬁne problems and promote
solutions. The CCSS process did not rely heavily on the use of symbols and
emotional appeals. Strongly held values, such as ensuring equality of educa-
tional opportunity and keeping the United States globally competitive, were
prominent in the discourse on national standards, and at one point, Governor
Hunt likened the challenge to World War II (National Research Council 2008,
73). However , perhaps because most of the appeals at this stage were to political
elites and organizational leaders and not to the general public, data rather
than symbols and stories were more prominent.
Developing and Validating the CCSS
Because of past opposition to standards issued by the national subject-matter
organizations and the federal government’s role in sponsoring those efforts,
it was agreed that states would have to take the lead this time. Consequently ,
CCSSO and NGA assumed leadership during this stage of the process. It
began when 48 states signed a memorandum agreeing to participate in a
process of developing a common core of state standards in ELA and math-
ematics and to support the development of common assessments to measure
progress toward the standards. The process proceeded in two phases: a set of
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 13 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 13
college-and-career-ready (CCR) standards were ﬁrst developed to deﬁne what
students should know at the end of high school in order to be prepared to
enter college or a workforce training program, followed by the design of K–
12 standards that essentially map back from the CCR standards to grade-by-
grade ones that allow students to build toward mastery of the CCR standards
by the end of high school.
The second stage of the CCSS process can best be described as technical
tasks undertaken in a political context, or , as one leader of the development
process described it, “I would argue that the standards development was
primarily a political process informed by evidence” (personal interview). Four
factors shaped evidence use during this stage. The ﬁrst was CCSSO and NGA’s
assertion that one guiding principle of the development process “is being driven
by evidence and research. In the past, standards were largely based on personal
judgment. By allowing personal judgment to determine what concepts are in
or out of standards, the process often becomes a negotiation, rather than a
reﬂection on what the evidence and research tells [ sic] us about the connection
between K–12 experiences and success in higher education and promising
careers” (Wilhoit 2009).
Leaders of the CCSS initiative acknowledged that their commitment to
ground the effort in research and evidence was a strategy to avoid past ideo-
logical debates stemming from the “curriculum wars” of the 1990s (personal
interviews). So, in essence, reliance on research operated as a political strategy
to depoliticize the standards development process. Consistent with the com-
mitment to research-based evidence, a variety of sources were used. These
included research syntheses published by organizations such as the NRC,
expert panels convened by federal government agencies, and national subject-
matter associations; scholarly journal articles, chapters, and conference pre-
sentations; reports by Achieve, ACT , and the College Board based on faculty
surveys and analyses of the relationship between student performance on
admission tests and their grades in lower division course work; and reviews
of international test data and the standards of high-performing countries. The
standards writers also reviewed existing state standards and the NAEP frame-
works. Although they were not formal research studies, these reviews consti-
tuted a form of applied policy analysis in that the policy document under
development was systematical ly compared with ex isting policies.
The limited supply of relevant research was a second factor shaping evidence
use. When asked why the standards documents note that they are based on
“research and evidence,” a leader of the development effort replied, “we wanted
to be able to cite non-peer-reviewed research because there’s not enough research
available, and often the ﬁndings are inconclusive” (personal interview). The type
of evidence used in the ab sence of appropriate research was expert judgment.
A notable example emerged in the development of the mathematics stan-
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 14 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
14 American Journal of Education
dards. Research on learning trajectories in mathematics is quite robust at the
K–2 level but not at higher grade levels. 18 Learning trajectories in the early
grades are better developed for several reasons, including the ability to draw
on a rich research base by developmental psychologists about children’s early
learning and the relative simplicity of concepts and skills at the early childhood
level as compared with the complexity of topics and how they might be related
and sequenced in more advanced mathematics (Clements 2011, 20). Conse-
quently , the standards writers asked several researchers who study math ed-
ucation for their best judgments about what trajectories might look like in
higher grades based on how students learn. They then used those inferences
in deciding where to place topic and skill standar ds. Similarly , mathematicians
were also asked what progressions of standards made sense in terms of the
logic of mathematics as a discipline and the foundations for higher-level math-
ematics study .
19
Those directly responsible for drafting the standards viewed their task as
drawing on available research evidence to the extent that they could and
ensuring that major concepts were grounded in research: “It’s not as if every
word of every standard is based on [research] evidence, like the difference
between the [ELA] central idea standard in grade seven versus six—but the
guardrails, the unities, the thread, the core principles that guide them and
develop through them are based on the evidence” (personal interview). In
their attempts to move the process along, leaders of the standards development
assumed that “if we waited for the perfect research to inform the development
of the standards, we would never have the standards today . So the goal was
to use the best available research with the understanding that as we move
deeper and deeper into implementation, researchers, academia will produce
further research, and that further research will inform future iterations of the
standards” (per sonal interview).
A third factor shaping the CCSS leaders’ evidence use was the desire to
ensure that the expert judgments relied upon were more than just those of
researchers. Both NGA and CCSSO had to maintain support among their
state-level constituents and also among key groups such as teachers unions,
whose members would be critical to whether the CCSS would ultimately be
implemented in classrooms. Although only one draft of the CCR standards
and one of the K–12 standards were available for public comment, state
education agencies were asked to comment on multiple drafts. Six states (Cal-
ifornia, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Minnesota) that had
highly regarded standards were speciﬁcally asked to recommend standards
writers and to review drafts.
20 State department of education (SDE) personnel
in states with standards that had been judged rigorous by external groups,
such as the AFT and the Fordham Foundation, reviewed the draft CCSS to
ensure that they met or exceeded their current standards in terms of parsimony ,
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 15 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 15
coherence, and rigor (the “fewer , clearer , and higher” promised by CCSS
developers). However , SDE staff in all participating states were also given an
opportunity to review several drafts. In exercising their professional judgment,
they were most concerned about clarity and logic of presentation based on
their experience organizing and formatting standards to facilitate their use in
classrooms.
Both the AFT and the NEA convened groups of teachers to review CCSS
drafts. The AFT drew its group of reviewers from members involved in pro-
viding professional development to colleagues and the NEA from national-
board certiﬁed members. The AFT math review team met four times and the
ELA team three times. After an extensive review of drafts, they communicated
their concerns in face-to-face meetings with the standards writers.
21 Like the
SDE personnel, the teachers focused on how their colleagues were likely to
respond to the draft standards. Consequently , they were particularly attentive
to a logical presentation of the standards and to the language not being overly
academic. The NEA group used a similar process, submitting multiple reviews
and meeting with the standards writers. Its concerns centered around the
inclusion of ELA standards focused on students “judging the worthiness and
relevance of information” and standards that distinguish “enabling skills from
goals” (perso nal interviews).
The SDE staff, teacher organization representatives, and those from other
organizations who reviewed early drafts and whom we interviewed, reported
that they felt their input was taken seriously and that they could see some of
it reﬂected in the ﬁnal versions of the CCSS. However , the tight time con-
straints of a process that lasted less than a year meant that changes made after
each successive draft were not annotated or explained: reviewers of successive
drafts could see that they had been changed but could not tell precisely in
what ways. Nevertheless, with a few notable exceptions, individual participants
and groups whose members would be affected by the standards felt that
CCSSO and NGA staff were acting in good faith and trusted the standards
writers because several had assisted individual states in the past in developing
their own standards.
22
The fourth factor shaping evidence use during this stage was the role of
the validation committee. The NGA and CCSSO convened a 29-member
committee, including 17 university faculty and 6 others working in research
positions. The committee also included three teachers, two principals, and
one urban superintendent. Their charge was to review the process by which
evidence was used to create the CCR and K–12 standards and to determine
whether the standards writers had adhered to a set of principles including “a
grounding in available research and evidence.”
23 The committee could provide
feedback to the standards writers, but it could not rewrite the standards. After
meeting twice in person and through e-mail exchanges with the NGA and
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 16 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
16 American Journal of Education
CCSSO staff, all but four members of the committee signed a statement
certifying that the CCSS are consistent with the criteria established in the
committee’s change. Those who did not sign off argued that the CCSS are
not sufﬁciently rigorous and that current standards in states such as California
and Massachusetts were superior .
For other members of the validation committee, professional judgment was
a major source of evidence. The compressed time frame and a realization
about the limits of the research base meant that they had to fall back on
judgments based on inferences drawn from their general store of expert knowl-
edge rather than from a review of speciﬁc studies or even bodies of research.
One member of the validation committee described the process in this way:
“It was pretty clear from the start that nobody thought there was sufﬁcient
evidence for any of the standards ....T h er eview process, in short, was
inclusive and involved feedback from a lot of different perspectives. This is
not ‘sufﬁcient research evidence,’ but it is thoughtful professional judgment,
applied systematically” (personal interview). Several members of the validation
committee noted that familiarity with those drafting the standards was also a
factor in the decision to validate them. Like the SDE staff, validation committee
members reported knowing the standards writers and having worked with
them in the past. Their work was known to be rigorous, and they were trusted.
Another aspect of the validation committee’s professional judgment was based
on their knowledge of current state standards and international standards and
their belief that the CCSS are better .
The second stage of the CCSS process differed somewhat from the typical
design phase of policy making. The standards writers were not preparing
legislation in the traditional sense, and states had only agreed to participate
in a drafting process and not to adopt the new standards or even to put
consideration of them on their decision agendas. Nevertheless, to a consid-
erable extent, standards development was akin to the policy design stage, and
evidence use was similar . Political support had to be maintained, and the
process had to move quickly to take advantage of an open policy window and
opportunity for action. Grounding the standards as much as possible in re-
search was an inspired political strategy that avoided not only past ideological
controversies but also the negotiations and “horse trading” that had led to
bloated state standards in the past. At the same time, drawing on research
ensured that the relationship between standards as a policy intervention and
the desired goal of improved student learning was systematically considered
during the development process, even if that relationship could not be com-
pletely and validly speciﬁed. As with policy design generally , development of
the CCSS relied heavily on comparisons with past policies, evaluations of
seemingly effective policies in other places, and on the professional judgment
of those who would be responsi ble for implementing the policy .
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 17 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 17
State Adoption of the Common Core State Standards
In most states, adoption of the CCSS to replace the state’s existing standards
required a vote by the state board of education (SBE) because of its authority
over curriculum. Three factors explain the kinds of evidence that were used
in anticipation of the SBE vote. First, the adoption stage was truncated. Even
the Common Core’s strongest supporters assumed that it would take 3 years
or more for a majority of states to adopt the standards. They based that
estimate on the extensive consultation and deliberation usually required when
states adopt new content standards. However , the deadlines for the federal
Race to the T op competition, which awarded up to 70 points (14% of the
total) on applications from states that adopted common standards and as-
sessments meant the adoption process in most states was shortened to only a
few months. Consequently , the process often resembled a political campaign
targeted at individuals and groups who were likely to try to inﬂuence the SBE
vote. The CCSSO and NGA provided their constituents with a “messaging
tool kit” that included answers to frequently asked questions, template letters
to the editor , and a sample op-ed article that could be adapted depending on
whether the author was a business leader , teacher , civil rights leader , or a
parent. The substance of these communication strategies highlighted central
parts of the CCSS narrative: the focus on students’ CCR preparation, US
global competitiveness, the potential for commonality across states and local
communities, the voluntary nature of state participation, and the inclusive
state-led development process (Common Core State Standards Initiative 2010).
The national educator , parent, education advocacy , and civil rights groups
supporting the CCSS worked with their state afﬁliates and allies in providing
information and other assistance.
24 The policy entrepreneurs who had pro-
moted the Common Core and the writers who had developed the standards
made numerous appearances in states to brief policy makers on the content
and rationale for the CCSS. As a result, evidence during this phase was a
version of the Common Core narrative that had been used in the ﬁrst two
stages now customized to various state audiences.
Federalism was a second factor shaping evidence use, requiring that evi-
dence use be tailored to particular states. Policy makers and the attentive
public in states with especially rigorous standards had to be convinced that
the CCSS are at least as rigorous as their current ones. So systematic, side-
by-side analyses were prepared for a number of states comparing the CCSS
with state standards. In some instances, these were done by in-state agencies,
and in others, organizations such as Achieve and WestEd prepared the detailed
comparisons showing topic and skill co verage arrayed by grade.
A third factor was that except for a small group of CCSS opponents, there
was little scrutiny of the research base during this stage. State policy makers
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 18 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
18 American Journal of Education
and their staffs assumed that CCSSO and NGA had used the validation
committee and other mechanisms to ensure that the CCSS had been ade-
quately vetted and were grounded in relevant research. In addition, SDE staff,
state teacher organizations, and other education-related groups knew that their
colleagues had provided feedback and that it was substantially reﬂected in the
ﬁnal standards. So trust in how the standards were developed, coupled with
a fast-moving adoption process, meant that the research base was rarely a
topic of discussion at the state level.
The adoption stage of the CCSS was quite consistent with what typically
occurs during policy enactment. Instead of moving a policy proposal from a
legislative committee to a ﬂoor vote, the CCSS were considered for adoption
in more than 40 states, each with slightly different information needs. Few
state participants were concerned about the research supporting the CCSS.
Rather , policy makers and groups whose members were likely to be affected
by the CCSS wanted detailed comparisons between the Common Core and
the state’s status quo standards, and they sought persuasive arguments that
the beneﬁts would outweigh the substantial costs of such a major change.
Conclusion
Our examination of the Common Core movement suggests that its promoters
and developers have used evidence in much the way policy analysis research
would predict and that use has varied over stages of the CCSS process. The
factors that best explain when and how research-based evidence was used are
political context and the availability of relevant research. The political context
shaped how research was used strategically at different stages. In the ﬁrst stage,
policy entrepreneurs used research primarily in deﬁning a set of problems for
which they already had a solution. In doing so, their political task was to
shape the inferences and policy implications that were drawn from multiple
studies and data sources. In the second stage, the political context provided
a powerful incentive for the use of research-based evidence beyond the func-
tional one of legitimating the CCSS as grounded in research knowledge about
the determinants of students’ post–high school success and the cognitive and
developmental pathways that characterize effective learning. The promise to
base the Common Core on research and evidence allowed its promoters to
avoid past ideological battles and to produce streamlined standards. Drawing
on participants’ professional judgment and experience was a way to build and
maintain support for the Common Core, but it also allowed the enterprise to
move forward in the absence of a sufﬁciently robust research base. By the
third stage, the rationale for the CCSS was well developed and generally
accepted, so the political context only required that the narrative be tailored
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 19 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 19
to speciﬁc audiences. The new evidence introduced at this stage provided
systematic comparisons of the CCSS with existing state standards.
The Common Core represents a “best-case” example of research use in
education policy making, because the nature of the policy is such that there
was a strong likelihood research would inform its development. Although the
relevant research base is inadequate in several key areas, its major ﬁndings
are largely uncontested, unlike in other areas of education policy such as
school choice. The promoters and developers of the CCSS recognized that
their commitment to standards grounded in research and evidence would
produce clear educational and political beneﬁts. Nevertheless, even under these
advantageous conditions, they found it necessary and desirable to integrate
research with other types of evidence depending on the political goals to be
accomplished during each st age of the policy cycle.
The major implication from this “best case” is that researchers need to
develop a more nuanced theory of research use in education policy making.
Even under the most favorable conditions, research will be combined with
other types of evidence. Part of the reason will be political, but integrating
research and other types of evidence can also serve policy and educational
purposes. The research base may be inadequate or incomplete for the policy
task, it may be inconsistent or contested, and wise policy may require that
basic research be combined with knowledge based on professional judgment
about how best to teach students in different educational and cultural contexts.
Earlier studies demonstrated that assuming a straight line between research
results and policy design was naive (Weiss 1977, 1982). Now the challenge is
to build on that fundamental insight by specifying the conditions under which
research and other types of evidence are integrated during policy deliberations.
Understanding how evidence use varies over stages of the policy cycle is a
critical step in developing a theory of how research and other types of evidence
together inform policy .
Notes
1. We deﬁne research-based evidence as evidence grounded in one or more system-
atic studies characterized by identiﬁable questions, an explicit design for collecting and
analyzing data that is attentive to issues of reliability and validity , and some type of
peer review .
2. The study on which this article was based is supported by a grant from the
William T . Grant Foundation as part of its Uses of Research Evidence Program. An
essential goal of the initiative is to connect studies of research use to broader disciplinary
frameworks. For that reason, we have grounded our examination of evidence use in
the Common Core initiative in the policy analysis and political science literature.
3. The discussion in this section draws on policy research literature, but similar
patterns of variation in the use of evidence acr oss stages of the policy cycle are apparent
in political science research on national institutions and processes. For example, the
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 20 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
20 American Journal of Education
legislative process in Congress is more open to new information (e.g., from interest
groups, social movements, the White House, or research entrepreneurs) at the early
stages, when the need for action is being established or the agenda of concrete alter-
native proposals is being shaped, than at later stages, during ﬂoor debate and voting
(Kollman 1998; Light 1999; Mucciaroni and Quirk 2006).
4. We chose not to include the implementation phase in this analysis because we
are still collecting data on the Common Core’s implementation. Also, our initial ex-
amination suggests that evidence use may vary signiﬁcantly during implementation as
compared with earlier stages because it is a process that moves beyond policy making
into school and classroom practice with different opportunities and incentives for re-
search use.
5. Policies are often portrayed as “if, then . . .” statements that assume if a policy
mandates or offers incentives for certain actions to be taken, the change will occur .
These theories of action are essentially predictive causal statements, and usually decision
makers require some systematic, research-based evidence supporting the assumed link
between policy and effects.
6. In conducting the interviews, we beneﬁted from the able assistance of Jeanette
Yih Harvie of UC Santa Barbara and Stephanie E. Dean at the Hunt Institute.
7. At the national level, we conducted 49 interviews, including interviews with
representatives of the organizations developing the draft standards (the National Gov-
ernors Association, the Council of Chief State School Ofﬁcers), think tanks and policy
research organizations (e.g., the Brookings Institution, Center for Education Policy),
congressional and executive branch staff, as well as interest groups involved in education
policy (e.g., National Education Association [NEA], American Federation of T eachers
[AFT], Council of Great City Schools, National Council of La Raza, Education Trust).
T o track the process of policy development at the state level, we undertook detailed
case studies in California, Indiana, Massachusetts, and T ennessee. These four states
were selected to provide regional variation and to include representation from states
receiving and not receiving Race to the T op funding.
8. Included in this database is an extensive collection of research reports, policy
briefs, speeches, blog posts, press releases, media accounts, and congressional testimony
related to the CCSS. These artifacts, which number approximately 1,500, provide
historical and documentary background on the type of evidence cited, intended au-
dience, salient policy issues, and links among organizations. Subsequent analyses of
these data will focus on mapping information networks among various groups and
individuals. However , in this analysis, they were used to verify that the full range of
CCSS policy actors had been identiﬁed and to conﬁrm interviewees’ recollections about
the speciﬁc documents they reported co nsulting during the CCSS process.
9. Among sources that the Hunt Institute staff drew upon are participant observer
notes from weekly conference calls the institute convened among groups engaged in
implementing the CCSS. The calls began in September 2010 with 7–14 “advocacy
partners” typically participating each week. They included organizations representing
elected ofﬁcials, teachers and administrators, higher education, parents, and nonproﬁt
third-party providers.
10. Interviewees were assured that their responses would be conﬁdential and not
be attributed to them, so only their role positions are noted in citing interview data.
For a detailed discussion of sample selection and elite interviewing in process tracing
research, see Tansey (2007).
11. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, several subject matter organizations, most
prominently the National Council of T eachers of Mathematics (NCTM), developed
academic content standards. Although controversial because of their constructivist ped-
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 21 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 21
agogical approach, NCTM’s standards were inﬂuential in shaping individual state
standards. For a summary of unsuccessful efforts to promote national standards during
the 1990s, see Rothman (2011, 29–52).
12. The James B. Hunt Jr . institute for Educational Leadership and Policy (the Hunt
Institute) assists governors and other state leaders in impr oving their education policies
and programs, largely through convening state leaders, disseminating information, and
providing expert consultation. The Alliance for Excellent Education is a national ad-
vocacy organization working to improve high schools so that all students graduate
prepared for postsecondary education and employment, especially those at risk of
leaving high school without a diploma. Although both organizations work at all levels
of the education system, the Alliance focuses primarily on federal policy and the Hunt
Institute on working with state ofﬁcials. They each receive ﬁnancial support from a
variety of funders, with founda tions a major source for both.
13. We recognize that for a policy initiative as broad and far reaching as the Com-
mon Core, multiple bodies of research are potentially relevant, including ones focused
on curriculum content, teaching and learning, assessment, and evaluations of the effects
of a variety of policies in the United States and internationally on different groups of
students. However , our purpose is not to catalog the supply of applicable research that
could have informed the Common Core initiative. Rather , based on interview data
and conﬁrming documentary analysis, we identify what was reported as actually used
in the process. For a number of sources that were central to policy deliberations, such
as international comparisons of academic content standards and student achievement,
participants in the CCSS process cited syntheses of original research rather than versions
published in scholarly venues.
14. In 2007, the Hunt Institute requested that the NRC organize two workshops
to examine available evidence on the ways in which stan dards-based accountability
was currently functioning, criteria to use in evaluating common standards options, and
the issues such an approach might raise. Although an NRC committee planned the
workshop and commissioned papers, it was not intended to reach any conclusions or
make any recommendations. However , the Hunt Institute drew on the research evi-
dence presented at the workshops as an information source in advancing the case for
common standards (Hun t Institute 2008a, 2008b).
15. Former governors Hunt and Wise were members of the group, as were Chester
Finn Jr ., the president of the Fordham Foundation; Kati Haycock, the president of the
Education Trust; and William Schmidt, a university distinguished professor at Michigan
State University and the director of TIMSS. Schmidt is the academic most associated
with promoting the need for national content standards, and he functioned as a policy
entrepreneur in advancing that argument.
16. Subsequently , after the CCSS were issued, critics began to argue that there is
no research evidence documenting a causal relationship between standards and student
performance on assessments and that there is no correlation between quality ratings
of state standards and NAEP scores. States with content standards rated as weak by
external bodies score about the same on NAEP as those with strong standards (Loveless
2012; Whitehurst 2009). Using a different analytical approach, Schmidt and Houang
(2012) dispute this conclusion as it applies to the Common Core mathematics standards.
Building on techniques developed as part of TIMSS, they ﬁrst compare the proximity
of state standards in 2009 to the CCSS in mathematics, and after adjusting for cut
points on state assessments and controlling for state demographics related to poverty ,
they ﬁnd that states with standards more like the CCSS in mathematics had higher
performance on the 2009 NAEP . These analyses represent different ways of predicting
the likely effect of the CCSS on student achievement, but the precise nature of that
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 22 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
22 American Journal of Education
relationship will not be known until the CCSS standards are actually implemented in
classrooms across the country .
17. Although the systemic requirements and enabling conditions of standards policies
were not given much prominence during the initial phase, policy e ntrepreneurs did
acknowledge their role. For example, Governor Hunt (2009) noted in congressional
testimony , “standards need to be supported by an integrated system, including curric-
ulum, assessment, instruction, teacher preparation, and professional development. Un-
less our efforts reach the on-the-ground activity of teaching and learning, they will
have been in vain. Standards-based reform was meant to be systemic reform.”
18. Learning trajectories or progressions are deﬁned as “empirically supported hy-
potheses about the levels or waypoints of thinking, knowledge, and skill in using knowl-
edge, that students are likely to go through as they learn mathematics and, one hopes,
reach or exceed the common goals set for their learning. Trajectories involve hypotheses
both about the order and nature of the steps in the growth of students’ mathematical
understanding, and about the nature of the instructional experiences that might support
them in moving step by step toward the goals of school mathematics” (Daro et al.
2011, 12). Researchers acknowledge the probabilistic natur e of learning progressions
and that existing ones require additional empirical ex amination (Szta jin et al. 2012).
19. An example from the ELA standards of the limited availability of existing re-
search relates to text complexity . An ACT r eport (2006) and other research highlight
the signiﬁcance of students being able to master texts of increasing complexity as a
predictor of their academic success in college and the workplace. Consequently , text
complexity became one of the pillars of the ELA standards. While acknowledging its
importance and appropriateness as a standard, literacy researchers note that “the
underlying theory and research on text complexity that would support creation of state
and district curricula and programs is in short supply” (Pearson and Hiebert 2012).
One critical area where more robust research is needed to inform classroom practice
is the measurement of text complexity . Although there are numerous formulas for
measuring the readability of various types of texts, text complexity refers to more than
the difﬁculty of words and includes structure, genre, and demands on prior knowledge.
Because current formulas do not measure all these dimensions, and they are not
calibrated to the ELA CCSS text complexity grade bands, the standards document
calls for the development of new tools as quickly as possible. It also notes, “the use of
qualitative and quantitative measures to assess text complexity is balanced in the Stan-
dards’ model by the expectation that educators will employ professional judgment to
match texts to particular students and tasks” (NGA and CCSSO 2010a, 7).
20. Three people were responsible for drafting the mathematics standards: Phil
Daro, a former director of the New Standar ds project; William M cCallum, a professor
of mathematics at the University of Arizona; and Jason Zimba, a professor of math-
ematics and physics at Bennington College. Those responsible for drafting the ELA
standards were David Coleman, the founder of Student Achievement Partners, and
Sue Pimentel, the cofounder of Standards Work. Each set of standards writers was
assisted by a large work team (51 in mathematics and 50 in ELA) that included
educators, researchers, and others with expertise in curriculum and assessment design,
cognitive development, and English-language acquisition, who were called upon to
provide input and review drafts on an as-needed basis. In addition, there was a feedback
group for each set of standards consisting of members with expertise similar to that of
the work group; they also reviewed drafts (21 for mathematics and 12 for ELA).
21. According to a participant in the standards-writing process, “the AFT teachers
spent two days reviewing the standards. When we went to meet with the review team
at the AFT , the math teachers had actually cut-up the standards and had deliberated
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 23 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 23
about whether the learning progressions made sense. So we started with th e research,
and they looked at the research and then reviewed the standards based on their
experience. Some revisions we made were actually based on classroom teachers’ ex-
perience” (personal interview).
22. In March 2010, NGA and CCSSO r eleased a draft of the CCSS for public
comment. Approximately 10,000 individuals, about half of whom were teachers, re-
sponded to an online survey . The overwhelming majority of respondents supported
the concept of common standards, and their comments focused on areas that required
clearer language, more examples, and greater detail. However , according to the sum-
mary report issued by CCSSO and NGA, a signiﬁcant number of respondents perceived
the CCSS to be federal standards and expressed opposition to them on principle.
Another group, representing hundreds of respondents, pressed for health standards to
be issued with the CCSS. One group questioned the CCSS on research grounds,
arguing that they were developmentally inappropriate and at odds with the research
on how children learn. They expressed concern that the standards, in starting with
kindergarten students, placed too heavy an emphasis on academic knowledge and skills
in the early grades and did not match the early learning standards for preK–3 that
many states had adopted (CCSSO and NGA 2010).
23. The other standards development principles that served as criteria for the com-
mittee’s validation of the CCSS were “evidence of the knowledge and skills that students
need to be college and career ready; a proper level of clarity and speciﬁcity; [and]
evidence that the standards are comparable with other leading countries’ expectations”
(NGA and CCSSO 2010b, 1).
24. One reason these groups were able to provide assistance is that 18 national
organizations received over $50 million between 2009 and 2010 from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation to provide information and help in implementing the CCSS.
In addition, 10 third-party providers and 20 state and local education agencies received
approximately $39 million for the same purpose (information compiled from the Gates
Foundation and funded o rganizations’ websites).
References
ACT . 2006.Reading between the Lines: What the ACT Reveals about College Readiness in Reading .
Iowa City: ACT .
Baumgartner , Frank R., and Bryan D. Jones. 1993. Agendas and Instability in American
Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Beland, Daniel. 2005. “Ideas and Social Policy: An Institutionalist Perspective.” Social
Policy and Administration 39 (1): 1–18.
Bennett, Andrew , and Colin Elman. 2006. “Qualitative Research: Recent Develop-
ments in Case Study Methods.” Annual Review of Political Science 9:455–76.
CCSSO and NGA (Council of Chief State School Ofﬁcers and the National Governors
Association). 2010. “Reactions to the March 2010 Draft Common Core State Stan-
dards: Highlights and Themes from the Public Feedback,” http://www .corestandards
.org/assets/k-12-feedback-summary .pdf.
Clements, Douglas. 2011. “What Do We Know about Content and Curriculum?” In
Research in Mathematics Education: Where Do We Go from Here? Conference Proceedings.
Washington, DC: Institute for Research on Mathematics and Science Education,
Michigan State University .
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 24 ===
Evidence Use and the Common Core State Standards Movement
24 American Journal of Education
Cohen, David K., and Susan L. Mofﬁtt. 2009. The Ordeal of Equality: Did Federal Regulation
Fix the Schools? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Collier , David, Henry E. Brady , and Jason Seawright. 2005. “Sources of Leverage in
Causal Inference: T oward an Alternative View of Methodology .” In Rethinking Social
Inquiry: Diverse T ools, Shared Standards, ed. Henry E. Brady and David Collier . Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Common Core State Standards Initiative. 2010. “Messaging T ool Kit,” http://
programs.ccsso.org/link/CCSSI%20T oolkit%20Sept%202010.pdf.
Daro, Phil, Frederic A. Mosher , and T om Corcoran. 2011. Learning Trajectories in Math-
ematics: A Foundation for Standards, Curriculum, Assessment, and Instruction . Research report
R-68. New Y ork: Consortium for Policy Research in Education.
George, Alexander L. 1979. “The Causal Nexus between Cognitive Beliefs and De-
cision-Making Behavior: The ‘Operational Code’ Belief System.” In Psychological
Models in International Politics , ed. Lawrence S. Fulkowski. Boulder , CO: Westview .
George, Alexander L., and Andrew Bennett. 2005. Case Studies and Theory Development
in the Social Sciences . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goertz, Margaret E. 2007. “Standards-Based Reform: Lessons from the Past, Directions
for the Future.” Paper presented at “Clio at the Table: A Conference on the Uses
of History to Inform and Improve Education Policy ,” Brown University , Providence,
RI, June.
Hunt Institute. 2008a. “Blueprint for Education Leadership 1.” Policy brief, June.
James B. Hunt Jr . Institute for Ed ucational Leadership, Durham, NC.
Hunt Institute. 2008b. “Blueprint for Education Leadership 2.” Policy brief, October .
James B. Hunt Jr . Institute for Ed ucational Leadership, Durham, NC.
Hunt, James B., Jr . 2009. “Strengthening America’s Competitiveness through Common
Academic Standards.” Prepared testimony before the Committee on Education and
Labor of the United States House of Representatives, April 29.
Kelman, Steven. 1987. Making Public Policy . New Y ork: Basic.
Kingdon, John W . 1995. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies . 2nd ed. New Y ork:
HarperCollins.
Kollman, Ken. 1998. Outside Lobbying: Public Opinion and Interest Group Strategies. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Light, Paul. 1999. The President’s Agenda: Domestic Policy Choice from Kennedy to Clinton .
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Loveless, T om. 2012. How Well Are American Students Learning ? Brown Center on
American Education. Washing ton, DC: Brooking s Institution.
Mahoney , James. 2000. “Strategies of Causal Inference in Small-N Analysis.”Sociological
Methods and Research 28:387–424.
Majone, Giandomenico. 1989. Evidence, Argument, and Persuasion in the Policy Process . New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Mintrom, Michael. 2000. Policy Entrepreneurs and School Choice . Washington, DC: George-
town University Press.
Mucciaroni Gary , and Paul J. Quirk. 2006. Deliberative Choices: Debating Public Policy in
Congress. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
National Center for Education Statistics. 2007. Mapping 2005 State Proﬁcie ncy Standards
onto the NAEP Scales . Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
NGA and CCSSO (National Governors Association and Council of Chief State School
Ofﬁcers). 2010a. “Appendix A: Research Supporting Key Elements of the Stan-
dards.” In Common Core State Standards for English Language Arts and Literacy in History/
Social Studies, Science, and T echnical Subjects . Washington, DC: National Governors As-
sociation and Council of Ch ief State School Ofﬁcers.
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
=== PAGE 25 ===
McDonnell and Weatherford
NOVEMBER 2013 25
NGA and CCSSO (National Governors Association and Council of Chief State School
Ofﬁcers). 2010b. Reaching Higher: The Common Core State Standards Validation Committee .
Washington, DC: National Governors Association and Council of Chief State School
Ofﬁcers.
NGA, CCSSO, and Achieve (National Governors Association, Council of Chief State
School Ofﬁcers, and Achieve). 2008. Benchmarking for Success: Ensuring U.S. Students
Receive a World-Class Education . Washington, DC: National Governors Association,
Council of Chief State School Ofﬁcers, and Achieve.
National Research Council. 2008. “Common Standards for K–12 Education? Con-
sidering the Evidence; Summary of a Workshop Series.” Alexandra Beatty , rappor-
teur . Committee on State Standards in Education, Division of Behavioral and Social
Sciences and Education, Washington, DC.
Pearson, P . David, and Elfrieda H. Hiebert. 2012. “Understanding the Common Core
State Standards.” In T eaching with the Common Core State Standards for English Language
Arts, PreK–2, ed. Lesley Mandel Morrow , Timothy Shanahan, and Karen K. Wixson.
New Y ork: Guilford.
Quirk, Paul J., and Bruce Nesmith. 2011. “Reality-Based Policymaking: Information,
Advice, and Presidential Success.” In Governing at Home: The White House and Domestic
Policymaking, ed. Michael Nelson and Russell L. Riley . Lawrence: University Press
of Kansas.
Ravitch, Diane. 2010. The Death and Life of the Great American School System: How T esting
and Choice Are Undermining Education . New Y ork: Basic.
Rothman, Robert. 2011. Something in Common . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education
Press.
Schmidt, William H., and Richard T . Houang. 2012. “Curricular Coherence and the
Common Core State Standards for Mathematics.” Educational Researcher 41 (8): 294–
308.
Sheingate, Adam. 2003. “Political Entrepreneurship, Institutional Change, and Amer-
ican Development.” Studies in American Political Development 17:185–203.
Stone, Deborah. 2012. Policy Paradox . 3rd ed. New Y ork: Norton.
Sztajin, Paola, Jere Confrey , P . Holt Wilson, and Cynthia Edgington. 2012. “Learning
Trajectory Based Instruction: T oward a Theory of T eaching.” Educational Researcher
41 (5): 147–56.
Tansey , Oisin. 2007. “Process Tracing and Elite Interviewing: A Case for Non-prob-
ability Sampling.” PS: Political Science and Politics 40 (4): 765–72.
Weiss, Carol H. 1977. “Research for Policy’s Sake: The Enlightenment Function of
Social Research.” Policy Analysis 3:531–45.
Weiss, Carol H. 1982. “Policy Research in the Context of Diffuse Decision-Making.”
Journal of Higher Education 53 (6): 619–39.
Whitehurst, Grover . 2009. “Don’t Forget the Curriculum.” Brown Center Letters on
Education no. 3. Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, http://www .brookings.edu
/papers/2009/1014_curriculum_whitehurst.aspx.
Wilhoit, Gene. 2009. “Improving Our Competitiveness: Common Core Education
Standards.” Prepared testimony before the Committee on Education and Labor , US
House of Representatives, December 4.
This content downloaded from 159.178.022.027 on July 25, 2016 15:32:36 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).