--- PDF PAGE 35 (Thesis Page ~25) ---
 
 26 
                                                     
Chapter 3 
John Dewey’s Philosophy of Education 
 
 Dewey discusses traditional and progressive education as  opposites in his 
educational theory. For traditional education, Dewey recognizes, learning is the 
“acquisition of what already is incorporated in books and in the heads of the elders” 
(Dewey 1963, p.19).27 He asserts that “old” education focuses too heavily on the subject 
matter rather than learning. In such an education model he claims, “the child is simply the 
immature being who is to be matured; he is the superficial being who is to be deepened; 
his is narrow experience which is to be widened. It is his to receive, to accept. His part is 
fulfilled when he is ductile and docile” (Dewey 1902, p. 8). Traditional education, Dewey 
maintains, is “fixed and rigid” (Dewey 1961, p. 110) which brings about the “attitude of 
listening” (Dewey 1902, p. 32). Since listening is the act of receiving, Dewey believes 
that this translates into passive learning.    
Dewey argues that in traditional schools everything is decided by the educators. 
This, therefore, Dewey asserts, limits “the intellectual and moral development of the 
young” (Dewey 1963, p.22). He blames the traditional education for placing emphasis on 
studying “facts and ideas […] bound up with the past” (Dewey 1963, p.23). He stresses 
that this does not help the student “in dealing with issues of present and future” (Dewey 
1963, p.23). Dewey acknowledges that although the “knowledge of the past and its 
heritage is of greater significance” (Dewey 1961, p. 75), the past should, he emphasizes, 
 
27 He uses the term “old” education to refer to the traditional education model. 

--- PDF PAGE 36 (Thesis Page ~26) ---
 
 27 
ater in this chapter.  
                                                     
“be seen as the past of the present, and not as another and disconnected world” (Dewey 
1961, p. 76).28 
 Dewey claims that we should “never educ ate directly, but indirectly by means of 
the environment” (Dewey 1961, p. 19). Then, for Dewey “the environment consists of 
those conditions that promote or hinder, stimulate or inhibit, the characteristic activities 
of a living being” (Dewey 1961, p. 11). Since Dewey also recognizes that education is a 
social function (Dewey 1961, p. 81)29, for him “a being connected with other beings 
cannot perform his own activities without taking the activities of others into account 
(Dewey 1961, p. 12).30 The “old” education fails, Dewey alleges, because “it neglects 
this fundamental principle of the school as a form of community life” (Dewey 1966, p 
.49). Traditional education, then, focuses mostly on the ideals of competition, not 
cooperation, which does not align with democracy. Dewey argues that since education “is 
a process of living and not a preparation for future living” (Dewey 1966, p. 48), 
education needs to promote cooperation—a  key component of his education for 
democracy. I discuss Dewey’s concept of democracy l
Dewey, through his discussion of the traditional and progressive educational 
systems, highlights “the organic connection between education and personal experience” 
(Dewey 1963, p.25). Dewey claims that traditional education does not contribute in 
student’s growth, for it imposes its standards of teacher knows all and that students know 
 
28 So, the problem is teaching the past as an end in itself, rather than an end in view—to problems of the 
present. 
29 “To say that education is a social function, securing direction and development in the immature through 
their participation in the life of the group to which they belong, is to say in effect that education will vary 
with the quality of life which prevails in a group” (Dewey 1961, p. 81). 
30 Dewey believes that “It is truly educative in its effect in the degree in which an individual shares or 
participates in some conjoint activity” (Dewey 1961, p. 22). 

--- PDF PAGE 37 (Thesis Page ~27) ---
 
 28 
                                                     
less than the teacher. This entails that traditional schools operate based on the philosophy 
of “rejection and sheer opposition” (Dewey 1963, p.21) which denies the link between 
experience and education. Dewey states, “to the growth of the child all studies are 
subservient” (Dewey, 1902, 9). In fact, he insists that “the child [is] the sun about which 
the appliances of education revolve” (Dewey 1943, p. 34). Then, it can be argued that 
Dewey asks for a curriculum which considers the needs and interests of the child ahead 
of everyone else’s. In addition, Dewey avows that “the aim of education is to enable 
individuals to continue their education” (Dewey 1961, p. 100).
31 For Dewey, then, 
education does not end when students graduate from schools or universities. Education 
and learning is a life long commitment. Only through such an education can we help the 
students grow, for Dewey believes that only “new” education “is in harmony with 
principles of growth” (Dewey 1963, p.30).  
It is apparent that, for Dewey, growth is not the acquisition of more information; 
rather, it is the improvement in capacities, such as reflective thinking, so that one is able 
to process the information one holds through interaction with the environment.32 
Therefore, more information does not translate into more growth, except when “it raises 
and responds to intellectual problems in the minds of the pupil” (Skilbeck 1970, p. 26). 
Dewey sees growth as the “reconstruction or reorganization of experience which adds to 
the meaning of experience, and which increases ability to direct the course of subsequent 
experience” (Dewey 1961, p. 76). Eric Boyer observes that, for Dewey, growth “does not 
 
31 Dewey says, “the object and reward of learning is continued capacity for growth” (Dewey 1961, p. 100). 
32 “Growth requires much more than fulfillment of hereditary capacities in a given social and physical 
environment. It requires that the individual actively judge and choose those alternatives which promise to 
expand the opportunity for the greatest long-range value” (Axtell and Burnett 1970, p. 262-3). 

--- PDF PAGE 38 (Thesis Page ~28) ---
 
 29 
                                                     
mark a fixed state of fulfillment to be attained, but rather denotes a process of continual 
improvement and progress. Because it does not rise above experience, rather denotes the 
enlargement of experience, Dewey claims that growth is the only end that can be referred 
to as an end-in-itself” (2007, p. 19). It can, therefore, be concluded that education for 
growth promotes active learning (Dewey 1902, p. 9). 
In short, learning happens only when educations aim toward growth. Growth 
happens when experiences are constantly reconstructed and reorganized as a conjoint 
activity. The reconstruction and reorganization of experiences happen only by means of 
communication and reflective thinking. Communication happens only in a democratic 
society.
33 For Dewey, this is what guarantees “the freedom of the learner” (Dewey 1963, 
p.22).  
In order to understand why Dewey considers active learning necessary in his 
educational theory, I discuss the importance of experience, the role of communication 
and reflective thinking, and the necessity of democratic modes of living for growth. 
Finally, I discuss the significance of growth and experience in relation to the 
development of the child and the society.  
Dewey believes that progressive education offers students the opportunity to grow 
by offering them the “expression and cultivation of individuality,” “free activity” and 
“learning through experience” (Dewey 1963, p.19). Progressive education also builds on 
their experiences and as a result forms “later experience of a deeper and more expansive 
quality” (Dewey 1963, p.47). In doing so the school guides the pupils toward a better 
 
33 Dewey does not discuss democracy as a form of government, but as a mode of associated living—this 
guarantees communication (Dewey 1961, p. 87). 

--- PDF PAGE 39 (Thesis Page ~29) ---
 
 30 
future. Dewey reckons that it is important to connect the curriculum to pupils’ “everyday 
life experience [for] all genuine education comes about through experience” (Dewey 
1963, p. 25).   
Dewey categorizes experiences as either active or passive. An active experience 
involves trying while undergoing is the characteristic of a passive experience, he 
explains. He says, “experience as trying involves change but change is meaningless 
transition unless it is consciously connected with the return wave of consequences which 
flow from it” (Dewey 1961, p. 139). He explains that “it is not experience when a child 
merely sticks his finger into a flame; it is experience when the movement is connected 
with the pain which he undergoes in consequences. Henceforth the sticking of the finger 
into flame means a burn” (Dewey 1961, p. 139-40). Therefore, “to ‘learn from 
experience’ is to make a backward and forward connection between what we do to things 
and what we enjoy or suffer from things in consequence. Under such conditions, doing 
becomes a trying; and experiment with the world to find out what it is like; the 
undergoing becomes instruction—discovery of  the connection of things” (Dewey 1961, 
p. 140). Using this line of reasoning he concludes two things: (a) that experience “is not 
primarily cognitive” and (b) that “the value of an experience lies in the perception of 
relationships or continuities to which it leads up” (Dewey 1961, p. 140). Dewey explains 
these propositions in terms of educative and mis-educative experiences.  
Dewey states that although all knowledge “comes about through experience, [it] 
does not necessarily mean that all experiences are genuinely or equally educative” 
(Dewey 1963, p.25). He suggests that some experiences are mis-educative. The 

--- PDF PAGE 40 (Thesis Page ~30) ---
 
 31 
experiences that have “the effect of arresting or distorting the growth of further 
experiences” are what he calls mis-educative experiences (Dewey 1963, p.25). These 
experiences, he further claims, restrict “having richer experiences in the future” (Dewey 
1963, p.26). He points out that students “in traditional schools do [in fact] have 
experience” (Dewey 1963, p.27). However, the problem “is not the absence of 
experiences [in the traditional classrooms], but their defective and wrong character—
wrong and defective from the standpoint of connection with further experience” (Dewey 
1963, p.27). Dewey asserts that “it is not enough to insist upon the necessity of 
experience … Everything depends upon the qualit y of experience which is had” (Dewey 
1963, p.27). Therefore, the main dilemma “of an education based upon experience is to 
select the kind of present experiences that live fruitfully and creatively in subsequent 
experiences” (Dewey 1963, p.27-28).  
Dewey presents his principles of continuity and interaction to deal with this 
dilemma of mis-educative experiences. He says, “the principle of continuity of 
experience means that every experience both takes up something from those which have 
gone before and modifies in some way the quality of those which come after” (Dewey 
1963, p.35). Therefore, “the principle of continuity in its education application means, 
nevertheless, that the future has to be taken into account at every stage of [the] education 
process” (Dewey 1963, p.47). Dewey points out that “experience does not occur in a 
vacuum” (Dewey 1963, p.40); therefore, through the principle of interaction, he suggests 
that “education is essentially a social process” (Dewey 1963, p.58). He states, “an 
experience is always what it is because of a transaction taking place between an 

--- PDF PAGE 41 (Thesis Page ~31) ---
 
 32 
individual and what, at the time, constitutes his environment” (Dewey 1963, p.43). Thus, 
for Dewey, the principle of interaction refers to objective and internal conditions that 
influence one’s experience. It is through these two principles that we can distinguish 
experiences that are educative from those that are mis-educative. 
It is continuity and interaction together that provide “the measure of the educative 
significance and value of an experience” (Dewey 1963, p.44-45). Ultimately, as Dewey 
states, “in a certain sense every expression should do something to prepare a person for 
later experiences of a deeper and more expansive quality. That is the very meaning of 
growth, continuity, [and] reconstruction of experience” (Dewey 1963, p.47). Hence, 
experience is judged based on its impact on a pupil’s present, future and how it influences 
a pupil’s contribution to her society. 
Since “every experience is a moving force” (Dewey 1963, p.38), Dewey believes 
that “its value can be judged only on the ground of what it moves toward and into” 
(Dewey 1963, p.38). It means that “every experience affects for better or for worse” 
(Dewey 1963, p.37). It is, then, as Dewey suggests, “the business of the educators to see 
in what direction an experience is heading” (Dewey 1963, p.38). Dewey deems teachers 
responsible in seeing what experiences “are actually conducive to continued growth and 
what are detrimental” (Dewey 1963, p.39). Dewey considers teachers as “the more 
mature … elders” (Dewey 1963, p.41); therefore, he argues that it is their responsibility 
to guide the less mature in understanding their experiences and into leading them towards 
the acquisition of experiences that instill growth. Unlike traditional education, 
progressive education demands teachers become “intimately acquainted with the 

--- PDF PAGE 42 (Thesis Page ~32) ---
 
 33 
                                                     
condition of local community, physical, historical, economic, occupation, etc., in order to 
utilize them as educational resource” (Dewey 1963, p.40). 
Dewey’s intentions and (experiential) educational philosophy lead him in 
presenting an argument for experience which if followed could lead to creating a better 
school atmosphere and ensuring a better future for the child and the society. Teachers 
play an essential role in designing the subject-matter; in doing so, they should take into 
account pupil’s experiences from the past to influences their growth and in effect their 
contributions to their societies. Dewey believes that we gain experience when we interact 
with our environment. Therefore, for experience to develop it is necessary that there is 
communication between the individuals and the environment. I outline Dewey’s 
argument for communication in light of reflective inquiry and dialogue in the following.  
 Dewey states that “animals learn (when they learn at all) by a ‘cut and try’ 
method; by doing at random first one thing and another thing and then preserving the 
things that happen to succeed” (Dewey 1910, p. 109-110). However, for human beings 
learning does not happen randomly. He claims that human beings “live in a community in 
virtue of the things which they have in common; and communication is the way in which 
they come to [know they] possess things in common” (Dewey 1961, p. 4). For Dewey, 
normal communication is “that in which there is a joint interest, a common interest, so 
that one is eager to give and the other to take” (Dewey 1961, p. 217).
34 Dewey believes 
that communication is “a wonder by the side of which transubstantiation pales” (Dewey 
 
34 For Dewey, Axtell and Burnett say, “Communication is thus one foundation of social life, one single 
achievement which allows man to remake himself and his environment” (Axtell and Burnett 1970, p. 261). 

--- PDF PAGE 43 (Thesis Page ~33) ---
 
 34 
                                                     
1960, p. 166). We learn by thinking and exchanging the results of our thoughts with other 
members of the community.    
For Dewey communication happens through reflective thinking and interchange 
of ideas through dialogue within a community.35 However, Dewey also realizes that not 
all communication leads to the betterment of life and the society. This leads to two 
conclusions: 1) that reflection leads to inquiry or finding “the relation between what we 
do and what happens in the consequences” (Dewey 1961, p. 144-145); and, 2) that 
thinking leads to intercommunication or dialogue through which “one learns much from 
others” (Dewey 1961, p. 186).36 In brief, Dewey believes that we learn by thinking in the 
process interaction with the environment and other members of the community.37 It is, 
indeed, our ability to think that distinguishes us from other animals (Dewey 1961, p. 
212). 
Dewey claims that often students, under the current system, study to meet school 
or teacher expectations, which does not actually help in learning. As a result, students 
face challenges in their lives when they come across the same problem (Dewey 1961, p. 
156). He says, “in manipulating symbols so as to recite well, to get and give correct 
answers, to follow prescribed formulae of analysis, the pupil’s attitude becomes 
mechanical, rather than thoughtful” (Dewey 1929, p. 178). Dewey argues that “so far as 
schools still teach from textbooks and rely upon the principle of authority and acquisition 
 
35 “Active, persistent and careful consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of 
the grounds that support it, and the further conclusions to which it tends, constitutes reflective thought” 
(Dewey 1910, p. 9). 
36 Since our needs in a community are common, they “demand a growing interchange of thought” (Dewey 
1943, p. 14), which leads to necessity of dialogue. 
37 “To consider the bearing of the occurrence upon what may be, but is not yet, is to think” (Dewey 1961, 
p. 147). 

--- PDF PAGE 44 (Thesis Page ~34) ---
 
 35 
                                                     
rather than upon that of discovery and inquiry [it fails to see the wider scope of learning]” 
(Dewey 1961, p. 280). This suggests that ideas should not be transmitted merely from a 
teacher to students, for these ideas are meaningful only if they are incorporated into the 
personal experiences of the child (Skilbeck 1970, p. 16). Thus, for Dewey, Skilbeck 
points out, subject-matter can be “effectively taught as a contribution to growth” only if it 
“it raises and responds to intellectual problems in the mind of the pupils” (Skilbeck 1970, 
p. 26).  
Dewey suggests that “the chief source of the ‘problem of discipline’ in schools is 
that the teacher has often to spend the large part of the time in suppressing the bodily 
activities which take the mind away from its material” (Dewey 1961, p. 141). He 
emphasizes that because “the child has not much instinct for abstract inquiry” (Dewey 
1943, p. 44), she should be provided with opportunities where she is asked to do things 
which will in turn demand thinking.38 It is only then, he maintains, that students can 
actually learn (Dewey 1961, p. 154). For instance, it is more educative if the teacher 
assigns a group of students to build a functional catapult instead of telling them how to 
make one; upon receiving such an assignment, students will decide what to research and 
who is responsible for what. Also, they discuss their findings and work together to come 
up with a model or design. Hence, it is this process of doing that motivates students to 
critically think and come up with solutions to the problems faced. Consequently, the 
process becomes an experience which is essential in learning. Dewey affirms that “we 
 
38 “Having to do with things in an intelligent way issues in acquaintance or familiarity” (Dewey 1961, p. 
185). And “The knowledge which comes first to person, and that remains most deeply ingrained, is 
knowledge of how to do (Dewey 1961, p. 184). 

--- PDF PAGE 45 (Thesis Page ~35) ---
 
 36 
learn from experience, and from books or the sayings of others only as they are related to 
experience” (Dewey 1943, p. 17). Dewey stresses that “no number of object-lessons, got 
up as object-lessons for the sake of giving information, can afford even the shadow of a 
substitute for acquaintance with the plants and animals of the farm and garden acquired 
through actual living among them and caring for them” (Dewey 1943, p. 11). In effect, 
students can only become good critical thinkers and hence can only learn if they have 
first-hand experience in dealing with the problems. He suggests that instead of teaching 
them about the dead specimen, we should take them outdoors to widen and organize their 
experience “with reference to the world in which [they] live” (Dewey 1903, p. 202). He, 
then, concludes that learning-by-doing “keeps [pupils] alert and active, instead of passive 
and receptive” (Dewey 1943, p. 13). It is, therefore, necessary that student experiences 
are deemed essential in the study of the subject matter. Learning-by-doing provides 
students with the opportunity to develop or modify their experiences through their 
interaction with the environment and the people around them. 
In order to build a society where people deliberate and make decisions I agree 
with Dewey that it is important for educators to engage pupils in the process of textual 
analysis and its relevance to their lives and experience rather than memorization. 
Although Dewey realizes that concrete knowledge is important, he recognizes that 
schooling is meaningless if students are unable to draw connections and extensions to 
their experiences. Acquisition of knowledge is possible, according to Dewey, only 
through scientific method or reflective thinking so long as they relate to the experiences 

--- PDF PAGE 46 (Thesis Page ~36) ---
 
 37 
                                                     
of the pupil.39 It helps in furnishing “the environment which stimulates responses and 
directs the learner’s course” (Dewey 1961, p. 180).40  
In one context, Dewey suggests that the reflective thinking involves five steps. 
These steps include “(i) a felt difficulty; (ii) its location and definition, (iii) suggestion of 
possible solution; (iv) development by reasoning of the bearings of the suggestion; (v) 
further observation and experiment leading to its acceptance or rejection; that is, the 
conclusion of belief or disbelief” (Dewey 1910, p. 72).41 Dewey, however, recognizes 
that these steps do not necessarily guarantee a final solution to the problem, for “the 
essence of critical thinking is suspended judgment; and the essence of this suspense is 
inquiry to determine the nature of the problem before proceeding to attempts at its 
solution” (Dewey 1910, p. 74). This line of reasoning leads Dewey to suggest that growth 
is the reconstruction and the reorganization of our experiences. In fact, Dewey believes 
that the reconstruction and the reorganization of our experiences become continuous as a 
result of scientific method—this is growth.  
Dewey believes that “action directed consciously by ideas — by suggested 
meanings accepted for the sake of experimenting with them— is the so le alternative both 
to bull-headed stupidity and to learning bought from that dear teacher” (Dewey 1910, p. 
 
39 By science Dewey means “knowledge which is the outcome of methods of observation, reflection, and 
testing which are deliberately adopted to secure a settled, assured subject matter.” In short, “science is the 
perfecting of knowing” (Dewey 1961, p. 219). 
40 “When one is told that Brutus assassinated Caesar, or that the length of the year is three hundred sixty-
five and one fourth days, or that the ratio of the diameter of the circle to its circumference is 3.1415 . . . one 
receives what is indeed knowledge for others, but for him it is stimulus to knowing. His acquisition of 
knowledge depends upon his response to what is communicated” (Dewey 1961, p. 188). 
41 “No cast-iron rules can be laid down” (Dewey 1910, p. 78). 

--- PDF PAGE 47 (Thesis Page ~37) ---
 
 38 
                                                     
110). For instance, when an individual thinks, she becomes aware of a certain problem.42 
Once the individual becomes conscious of the problem, she will be able to relate “the 
problem to wider situation” (Skilbeck 1970, p. 29). The next step involves suggesting 
ideas that could help solve the problem. This leads to stating hypotheses and predictions. 
Then, “the mind is carried forward to the likely consequences of taking one form of 
action or another” (Skilbeck 1970, p. 29). At this stage the learner may choose to 
reconstruct the original hypotheses. Skilbeck says, “[if] the consequences, as reviewed in 
imagination, are acceptable, then appropriate action is undertaken, and the hypothesis is 
critically tested. The problem, in this phase, may be resolved; or it may persist and the 
whole reflective cycle be re-enacted” (Skilbeck 1970, p. 29). This methodical thinking 
process, Dewey declares, leads to realization. For Dewey “consciousness of ignorance is 
the beginning of effective love of wisdom” (Dewey 1961, p. 189). 
Dewey believes that teachers should help their students become critical thinkers 
because only through this skill will students learn to reason and make decisions on 
regular basis. Modeling through teaching, and generating opportunities to exercise 
judgment and making decisions is a basic means to instilling critical thinking skills. He 
asserts that a good teacher connects the subject matter to the needs and desires of the 
students, so that they can see the connection between the material taught and their lives. 
Dewey also suggests that teachers must be direct, open-minded, flexible and responsible 
if they are to attain the goal of producing critical thinkers (Dewey 1961, p. 179). 
 
42 Awareness for Dewey takes many manifestations, such as knowledge through intuition or gut-feeling.  

--- PDF PAGE 48 (Thesis Page ~38) ---
 
 39 
mplications 
). 
                                                     
It is the responsibility of the educators to “cultivate deep-seated and effective 
habits of discriminating tested beliefs from mere assertions, guesses, and opinion” 
(Dewey 1910, p. 27-28). He explains that in order to “develop a lively, sincere, and open-
minded preference for conclusions that are properly grounded and to ingrain in to the 
individual’s working habits methods of inquiry and reasoning appropriate to the various 
problem that present themselves” (Dewey 1910, p. 28).43 Dewey emphasizes that 
students should be provided with ample opportunities to doubt what they are taught and 
to reflect upon it by logical observation and/or testing so that it empowers their 
experience. He says, “It is the nature of an experience to have implications which go far 
beyond what is at first consciously noted in it. Bringing these connections or i
to consciousness enhances the meaning of the experience” (Dewey 1961, p. 217
Dewey believes that doing does not happen in isolation. It includes “dealings with 
persons as well as things” (Dewey 1961, p. 185). Hence, for Dewey, “Impulses of 
communication and habits of intercourse have to be adapted to maintaining successful 
connections with others” (Dewey 1961, p. 185-86). This is how we learn from one 
another, Dewey claims. In fact, he says, “in the deepest and richest sense a community 
must always remain a matter of face-to-face intercourse […] There is not substitute for 
the vitality and depth of close and direct intercourse and attachment” (Dewey in Benson 
et al 2007, p. 45). For Dewey, reflective thinking alone does not guarantee meaningful 
communication; “face-to-face associations of the local community” is also a must (Axtell 
and Burnett 1970, p. 270). He says, “dialogue rather than monologue is natural form of 
 
43 Dewey calls this the Training of Mind. 

--- PDF PAGE 49 (Thesis Page ~39) ---
 
 40 
                                                     
thought” (Cam, 2003). Thinking alone does not get us far; it only becomes meaningful 
when we willingly participate within our community—and this participation happens 
through willingness to enter a dialogue with others or the environment. When we enter a 
dialogue, we share our experiences and through this sharing we learn from one another: 
we listen to the members of the community, we learn from their experiences, and then we 
modify our experiences if necessary. Also, when we enter a dialogue, we share common 
beliefs of the community: mutual respect, love for knowing or consciousness, our 
willingness to interact with one another, and wanting prosperity for everyone within the 
community.  
In sum, for Dewey the aim of education is to empower the youth with the 
necessary tools so they can play a positive and productive role in their communities. 
Effective communication cannot take place without the ability to think. He says, 
“Thinking enables us to direct our activities with foresight and to plan according to ends-
in-view, or to come into command of what is now distant and lacking” (Dewey 1961, p. 
212). We reorganize our experiences, if necessary, when we share them with other 
members of the community after entering a dialogue. Dewey’s theory on inquiry is a 
means to attaining a community of “free learners”. However, he believes that growth 
through reflection and inter-communication does not happen in an autocratic society but 
in societies that firmly believe in democratic ideals.44   
 
44 For Dewey, these democratic ideals are liberal. It is importance, for Dewey, that people have the choice 
to make decisions, for instance.  

--- PDF PAGE 50 (Thesis Page ~40) ---
 
 41 
Dewey believes that democracy is “primarily a mode of associate living, of 
conjoint communicated experience” (Dewey 1961, p. 87).45 In a society where the 
consequences of a conjoint activity is “appreciated as good by all singular persons who 
partake in it, and where the realization of the good is such as to effect the energetic desire 
and effort to sustain it in being just because it is a good shared by all, there is in so far a 
community. The clear consciousness of a communal life, in all its implications, 
constitutes the idea of democracy” (Dewey 1927, p. 149). In the Public and its Problems, 
he argues, “democracy is not an alternative to other principles of associated life. It is the 
idea of community life itself” (Dewey 1927, p. 148). 46 He further states, “the strongest 
point to be made in behalf of even such rudimentary political forms as democracy has 
already attained, popular voting, majority rule and so on, is that to some extent they 
involve a consultation and discussion which uncover social needs and troubles” (Dewey 
1927, p. 206). Simply, what Dewey is trying to say is that I am advocating for democracy 
because it promotes discussion or dialogue within a community and this ensures 
growth.47 
 Dewey proclaims that democracy ensures a community in which people willingly 
enter a dialogue and learn from one another. He says, “a society which makes provisions 
for participation in its good for all its members on equal terms and which secures flexible 
                                                      
45 “In order to have a large number of values in common, all members of the group must have an equable 
opportunity to receive and take from others” (Dewey 1961, p. 84). This democratic society that Dewey 
discusses, presupposes the existence of justice. This might not necessarily be true to societies where there is 
systematic injustice at its core. 
46 For Dewey social life can be evaluated based on two criteria: “the recognition of mutual interests as a 
factor in social control . . . [and] not only free interaction between social groups but change in social habit” 
(Dewey 1961, p. 86-7). 
47 “Social life [is] identical with communication [and] all communication is education” (Dewey 1961, p.5). 

--- PDF PAGE 51 (Thesis Page ~41) ---
 
 42 
                                                     
readjustment of its institutions through interaction of the different forms of associate life 
is in so far democratic” (Dewey 1961, p. 99).48 It is through dialogue that we reorganize 
our experiences. In fact, democracy helps in the re-structuring of our experiences in order 
to prepare us for a better life—a soci ety where democratic ideals, such as interaction, 
cooperation, tolerance, open-mindedness and responsibility are upheld.  
Dewey argues that in order to have a democratic community, schools need to 
provide an environment in which “the process of moral-intellectual development is in 
practice as well as in theory a cooperative transaction of inquiry engaged in by free, 
independent human beings who treat ideas and the heritage of the past as means and 
methods for the further enrichment of life” (Dewey in Dworkin, pp.133-134). Agreeing 
with Dewey would mean rejection of the traditional educational methods or practices. 
Democracy helps in the development of individuals as active members of the community 
who will be conscious of the realities in their lives—a key principle in the progressive 
model of education.49& 50 This will enable the pupils to change their situation. However, 
in order for change to take place one needs to be willing to take part in the process of 
change. For instance, in our society there are many obese people who are aware of the 
problem they have. Nonetheless, not many of them take necessary action in order to deal 
with the problem. The willingness of the individual to enter the process of change is hers. 
 
48 As opposed to a society “which internally and externally sets up boundaries to free intercourse and 
communication of experience” (Dewey 1961, p. 99). 
49 Key attributes of progressive education include “learning by doing,” “learning as a conjoint activity”, and 
“learning through real-life experiences”--where learning is scientific in nature.  
50 Dewey believes that it is important to connect the curriculum to pupils’ everyday life experience. 
Deweyan progressive education helps attain this goal by promoting democratic ideals and positive 
interaction—in effect, it so ws the seeds of ideal life which can only take place within a democratic society. 
 

--- PDF PAGE 52 (Thesis Page ~42) ---
 
 43 
                                                     
Dewey does not make a commitment to this notion of committed action—which Freire 
calls praxis. 
 Dewey states, “I believe th at individual who is to be educated is a social 
individual and that society is an organic union of individuals” (Dewey 1966, p. 47). Since 
for Dewey democracy is “primarily a mode of associated living, [and] a conjoint 
communicated experience,” then schools have a responsibility in providing pupils with 
the opportunity to experience it before they leave school (Dewey 1961, p. 87). The vital 
factor in Dewey’s vision of ideal America then is the preparation of youth in such a way 
that they are able to become responsible citizens. Hence, education is an essential 
requirement for attaining a ‘good life’. This education, however, can only be attained in 
progressive schools, for the seeds of democracy can only be sown in an environment 
which promotes democratic ideals as opposed to authoritarian beliefs. Dewey suggests 
that democracy cannot be attained in the absence of the democratic ideals discussed 
above. He argues that “communication is the process of sharing experience till it becomes 
a social possession” (Dewey 1961, p. 9). Indeed, education for democracy cannot be 
achieved unless communication or deliberation is at the core of its philosophy. Dewey 
believes that active participation is essential in communication, for communication 
cannot take place unless every pupil and the teacher actively communicate—unlike 
passive communication where students are passive recipients of information.
51 
Essentially, Dewey believes that traditional education is imposed on students in a 
way that it makes learning difficult and concepts hard to understand. He argues that the 
 
51 This aligns with the traditional philosophy of education. 

--- PDF PAGE 53 (Thesis Page ~43) ---
 
 44 
main business of traditional schools is to transmit information to the students. Therefore, 
students are, from an early age, trained to become docile, receptive and obedient. 
Learning, then, is memorization of material “incorporated in the books and in the heads 
of the elders” (Dewey 1963, p.19). He explains that because the new information is not 
incorporated into pre-existing experiences of the learner, it is meaningless to the student. 
Dewey asserts that only in progressive schools are student experiences used to motivate 
them to think and to act and in due course ensure their intellectual freedom. He also 
maintains that it is much easier for students to work with their experiences and make 
connections rather than working with the experiences of the adults. Therefore, growth is 
possible only when we communicate. ‘Learning-by-doing’ is what ensures 
communication, for when students communicate it involves their experiences and entails 
the process of reflective thinking and face-to-face discussion or dialogue. In the process 
of doing students become conscious of their experiences and hence restructure them if 
necessary.  This is what Dewey considers growth.  
To sum up, growth is possible only within a democratic community where we are 
constantly involved in the making and re-making of our experiences. This process 
involves reflective thinking and dialogue. For Dewey, this is active learning.  
 
 
 
 
 

--- PDF PAGE 54 (Thesis Page ~44) ---
 
 45 
Chapter 4 
 
Freire’s Emancipatory Education 
 
He spoke of social education, of the need for learners to 
discover themselves, as well as to know the social problems 
that afflicted them. He did not see education simply as a 
means toward mastering academic standards of schooling 
or toward professionalization. He spoke about the need to 
encourage the people to participate in their process of 
immersion into public life by becoming engaged in society 
as a whole. 
 (Freire and Macedo 1998c, p. 18) 
 
In Pedagogy of the Oppressed, Paulo Freire states that traditionally education is 
framed as “an act of depositing, in which the students are the depositories and the teacher 
is the depositor” (Freire 2000, p. 72). The task of the teacher, in traditional education, 
Freire says, is to “fill the students with the content of his narration—content which is 
detached from reality, disconnected from the totality that engendered them and could 
give them significance” (Freire 2000, p. 71). This type of education, he believes, is 
“suffering from narration sickness” (Freire 2000, p. 71). He suggests that in such schools 
the task of the student is to “receive, memorize, and repeat” (Freire 2000, p. 72). This, he 
believes, turns them into “receptacles to be filled by the teacher” (Freire 2000, p. 72). In 
such an environment, teachers are active while students are passive members of the 
classroom community. Freire argues that the interests of the two are different in such 
relationship; teachers promote the goal of the oppressors by depositing information into 