--- PAGE 1 ---
 http://rer.aera.net
Research
Review of Educational
 http://rer.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/09/25/0034654314551063
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
DOI: 10.3102/0034654314551063
 published online 25 September 2014REVIEW OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
Anne Wade and Tonje Persson
Philip C. Abrami, Robert M. Bernard, Eugene Borokhovski, David I. Waddington, C.
Strategies for Teaching Students to Think Critically: A Meta-Analysis
 
 
 
Published on behalf of
 
 American Educational Research Association
and
 http://www.sagepublications.com
 can be found at:Review of Educational ResearchAdditional services and information for 
 
 
 
 
 http://rer.aera.net/alertsEmail Alerts: 
 
 http://rer.aera.net/subscriptionsSubscriptions:  
 http://www.aera.net/reprintsReprints: 
 
 http://www.aera.net/permissionsPermissions: 
 
 What is This?
 
- Sep 25, 2014OnlineFirst Version of Record >> 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from  at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Review of Educational Research
Month 201X, Vol. XX, No. X, pp. 1
 –40
DOI: 10.3102/0034654314551063
© 2014 AERA. http://rer.aera.net
1
Strategies for Teaching Students to Think 
Critically: A Meta-Analysis
Philip C. Abrami
Robert M. Bernard
Eugene Borokhovski
David I. Waddington
C. Anne Wade
Tonje Persson
Concordia University, Canada 
Critical thinking (CT) is purposeful, self-regulatory judgment that results in 
interpretation, analysis, evaluation, and inference, as well as explanations of 
the considerations on which that judgment is based. This article summarizes 
the available empirical evidence on the impact of instruction on the develop-
ment and enhancement of critical thinking skills and dispositions and student 
achievement. The review includes 341 effects sizes drawn from quasi- or 
true-experimental studies that used standardized measures of CT as outcome 
variables. The weighted random effects mean effect size (g +) was 0.30  
(p < .001). The collection was heterogeneous (p < .001). Results demonstrate 
that there are effective strategies for teaching CT skills, both generic and 
content specific, and CT dispositions, at all educational levels and across all 
disciplinary areas. Notably, the opportunity for dialogue, the exposure of 
students to authentic or situated problems and examples, and mentoring had 
positive effects on CT skills.
Keywords : critical thinking, instructional practices, learning processes/
strategies
Toward the mid- to late 1920s, John Dewey became significantly more pessi-
mistic in his outlook. Discouraged by the intellectual vacuity and corruption of 
the Harding and Coolidge administrations and by a faith-based free market 
approach to social and economic problems, Dewey (1925) underlined, again and 
again, the importance of critique. The final chapter of Experience and Nature, 
which is recognized as one of Dewey’s most important philosophical works, is 
dedicated to an expansive and passionate defense of the power of critique in all 
aspects of our lives. Intelligence, said Dewey, was “critical method applied to 
goods of belief, appreciation and conduct, so as to construct free and more secure 
goods” and was “the stay and support of all reasonable hopes” (p. 437). Critical 
551063 RERXXX10.3102/0034654314551063Abrami et al.Teaching Critical Thinking
r
esearch-article2014
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Abrami et al.
2
thinking (henceforth, in this article, abbreviated CT), for Dewey, was something 
all citizens needed to engage in on a regular basis, and the role of the philosopher 
was not to postulate and reify eternal truths but rather to provide systematic cri-
tique of the beliefs generated through everyday critical (and not-so-critical) 
thinking.
Most philosophers within the Western tradition have emphasized critique, but 
by philosophical standards, at least, the emphasis on the development of the criti-
cal faculties of individual citizens is relatively recent and linked to the rise of 
liberal democracy. The importance of CT is now recognized in many North 
American schools, given the centrality of CT to conceptions of liberal democracy, 
especially in its more Jeffersonian iterations. It is not surprising, then, that it is 
highly valued by numerous educators, parents, and policymakers (e.g., Bloom & 
Watt, 2003; Jefferson, 1829; Tsui, 2002).
Contemporary research interest in CT dates to the work of Edward Glaser 
(1941a) whose dissertation was titled An Experiment in the Development of 
Critical Thinking. At the outset of the introduction of the monograph based on his 
dissertation, Glaser (1941b) wrote,
One hundred and fifty years of public education in the United States have resulted 
in a largely literate electorate . . . Our public education has not resulted, however, in 
the development of a sufficient proportion of citizens who can evaluate critically 
what they read. (pp. 4–5)
Glaser (1941b) continued by saying that competent citizenship in a democracy 
calls for a good deal more than the ability to read and write. Among other things, 
it requires the ability to think critically, and only those who possess the degree of 
social understanding and critical-mindedness can make intelligent judgments 
about public issues.
Yet, some 70 years after Glaser’s pioneering efforts, we still need to better 
understand how CT can be supported by instruction and curriculum reforms. This 
is an important task: In spite of the popularity of CT, there is widespread concern 
that educational institutions have failed to successfully instill CT skills and dispo-
sitions in students (Case & Wright, 1999; Hyslop-Margison, 2003). In a 1997 
study of faculty at 38 public and 28 private colleges and universities in California, 
89% of the teachers and instructors viewed the teaching of CT as important, yet 
only 9% felt that they were teaching CT on a regular basis (Paul, Elder, & Bartell, 
1997).
This gap between teachers’ values and their practices with respect to CT indi-
cates that a synthesis of effective strategies for teaching CT could be useful. This 
is the task of the comprehensive review of the empirical evidence on CT that is 
undertaken in this article. However, before the empirical evidence is addressed, it 
is necessary to briefly touch on a number of important conceptual questions: What 
is CT? Is CT a generic skill set or does it vary depending on the subject matter 
context? What are some promising approaches to teaching CT? What have other 
reviews of CT instruction found? It is the first of these questions that will now be 
addressed.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 4 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
3
Contested Terrain: Defining Critical Thinking
Researchers have offered many definitions of CT (Ennis, 1962, 1987; Facione, 
1990a, 1990b; Kurfiss, 1988; Lipman, 1991; Paul & Binker, 1990; Scriven & 
Paul, 1996; Siegel, 1988).
One leading definition of CT, developed by a Delphi consensus panel of 46 
experts, including leading scholars such as Ennis, Facione, and Paul, and orga-
nized by the American Philosophical Association (APA), recognizes this com-
plexity by offering a broad definition:
We understand critical thinking to be purposeful, self-regulatory judgment which 
results in interpretation, analysis, evaluation, and inference, as well as explanation 
of the evidential, conceptual, methodological, criteriological, or contextual 
considerations upon which that judgment is based. . . . The ideal critical thinker is 
habitually inquisitive, well-informed, trustful of reason, open-minded, flexible, fair-
minded in evaluation, honest in facing personal biases, prudent in making judgments, 
willing to reconsider, clear about issues, orderly in complex matters, diligent in 
seeking relevant information, reasonable in the selection of criteria, focused in 
inquiry, and persistent in seeking results which are as precise as the subject and the 
circumstances of inquiry permit. (Facione, 1990b, p. 2)
For the purposes of this review, we decided that the APA’s report (issued by 
Facione, 1990b) is clear and inclusive enough to serve as a framework for decid-
ing which empirical studies have adequately captured elements of CT. The authors 
describe six CT skills (including 16 “subskills”) and 19 CT dispositions as listed 
in Appendix A.
Within Appendix A, the skills/dispositions divide is worth a small additional 
discussion. The Delphi panel maintained that it was possible to possess the cogni-
tive skills necessary to carry out CT but lack the affective dispositions—the gen-
eral habits and attitudes—to exercise these skills. Consider the example of a 
person who possessed the cognitive skills associated with CT but who lacked the 
disposition to learn about or discuss social issues—it would be difficult to call this 
individual an effective critical thinker. Hence, the panel held that the development 
of both skills and dispositions was critical in the education of well-rounded criti-
cal thinkers (Facione, 1990b).
There are a number of potential objections to the APA’s consensus definition, 
one of which is that it is insufficiently broad (Alston, 2001). For example, Barbara 
Thayer-Bacon (2000) argues that good CT (she uses the term constructive think-
ing) broadens the definition to include more than just traditional rational skills and 
dispositions. Pushing beyond the traditional tools of reason, Thayer-Bacon argues 
convincingly that intuition, emotion, and imagination also play important roles in 
effective constructive conversations. She further argues that constructive thinking 
is more of a social practice than a skill or disposition inculcated in individuals. For 
Thayer-Bacon, good constructive thinking is analogous to a quilting bee in which 
one has many different tools at one’s disposal along with multiple participants 
who are diverse in their backgrounds and orientations. An even more profound 
objection to the APA definition is that it is not only insufficiently broad but also 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 5 ---
Abrami et al.
4
fundamentally inadequate. Two versions of this argument are available in a spe-
cial issue of Studies in Philosophy of Education—one by Gert Biesta and Geert 
Stams (2001) and another by James Marshall (2001).
Biesta and Stams (2001) note that a specific conception of “criticality” always 
underlies any CT that is undertaken. Two of the approaches to criticality that they 
discuss are “critical dogmatism” and Derridean deconstruction. Critical dogma-
tism conceives of the activity of critique as “the application of a criterion to 
evaluate a particular state of affairs” (Biesta & Stams, 2001, p. 60). Given that 
the APA definition suggests critical thinkers should apply a variety of criteria in 
order to assess propositions, one can locate the definition of CT used in this 
article firmly within this camp. Biesta and Stams point out that a significant 
problem for the position of critical dogmatism is that it rests on an unjustifiable 
belief in the validity of its own method; when one tries to look back behind the 
criteria that are postulated, there is no further justification of them available that 
is not circular or that does not imply an infinite regress. Therefore, thinkers who 
hold this position reflectively actually stop at this point and make a deliberate 
choice to hold to their criteria “dogmatically” since no further justification is 
possible.
Biesta and Stams’s (2001) central objection to critical dogmatism is its “total-
izing” tendency—its pretence to be a foundational point from which all critique 
can proceed and with which all critique must align. By contrast, their preferred 
framework of Derridean deconstruction abandons all pretentions of trying to 
establish a foundation of this type and, in fact, attacks critical dogmatism on this 
basis, thus serving as a critique of the standard approach to critique. Instead of the 
traditional approach, deconstruction places a heavy emphasis on what is made 
invisible and excluded:
Deconstruction thus tries to open up the system in the name of that which cannot be 
thought of in terms of the system. . . . Deconstruction is an affirmation of what is 
wholly other, of what is unforeseeable from the present . . . It is from this concern 
for what is totally other, a concern to which Derrida sometimes refers as justice, that 
deconstruction derives its right to be critical, its right to deconstruct. (Biesta & 
Stams, 2001, p. 68)
It is difficult to say exactly how an approach like this would translate into CT 
teaching practice, but at any rate, a deconstructionist approach would imply a 
style of CT that would depart dramatically from most of the studies synthesized in 
this meta-analysis.
Marshall’s (2001) account ventures less far afield in its critique of standard 
approaches to CT but is nonetheless more caustic. Like Biesta and Stams (2001), 
Marshall (2001) is dubious of the APA definition of CT cited above but for a dif-
ferent set of reasons. Marshall thinks that traditional conceptions of CT view it as 
a neutral set of conceptual tools that “lack the force of ‘critical’ to be found in, 
e.g., the Frankfurt school” (p. 75). Like the critical theorists of this group, Marshall 
is interested in a more robust style of critique that will enable students to question 
foundational aspects of the social systems they inhabit.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 6 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
5
In the course of providing an articulation of this style of critique, Marshall 
(2001) traces the history of the concept of the self in Western philosophy from 
Descartes to Foucault. It is the Foucaultian conception that Marshall finds to be 
particularly promising. For Foucault, Marshall (2001) maintains, the fundamental 
question for the self is “how one practices one’s freedom” (p. 83). In this regard, 
Foucault (1984/1998) emphasizes the importance of a kind of self-care, which 
involves “an exercise of the self on the self by which one attempts to develop and 
transform oneself” (p. 282). This kind of reflective, critical practice, which also 
includes care-for-others by extension, allows for the development of positive 
“practices of freedom” that go beyond simply the negative but important acts of 
liberating people from oppressive social systems (e.g., oppressive sexuality; 
Foucault, 1984/1998, p. 283).
These counternarratives to the APA definition of CT are important, and there is no 
intellectually honest way to wholly reconcile our analysis with them. It is, for exam-
ple, virtually impossible that the kinds of studies captured by this meta-analysis (or, 
indeed, any other meta-analysis of CT) are going to correspond to the kind of critical-
ity that Biesta and Stams (2001) and Marshall (2001) would hope to see. They would 
likely object to the studies’ generally short duration, the standardized assessments of 
CT, and the conventional and narrow definition of CT that is endorsed in most of 
them. Furthermore, all of the authors, Thayer-Bacon (2000) included, would like to 
see an approach that puts a greater emphasis on working with the student as opposed 
to intervening on him or her, and all of them have at least some sympathy for a posi-
tion that would teach students to question social systems.
Some of the questions raised by these counternarratives will be further addressed 
in the “Outstanding Questions” section toward the end of the article, but for now, 
let us give three responses to these challenges to the APA definition of CT that we 
have endorsed. First, we are, in fact, sympathetic to some of these objections. We 
appreciate the inclusiveness of Thayer-Bacon’s (2000) conception of constructive 
thinking, and some of us feel Marshall (2001) may well be right in saying that a 
deeper and less interventionist approach to the promotion of criticality is desirable. 
However, as meta-analysts, this question is outside the competence of our method; 
our task is not to forge new pathways in conceptualizing CT but rather to describe 
and pool existing findings. The specificity of the APA definition, with its enumera-
tion of specific skills and dispositions, serves well to synthesize the kinds of inter-
ventions that are typically used in CT research.
Second, although this is a question that would ultimately need to be resolved 
empirically, we believe that even if we adopted a broader definition of CT that 
attempted to account for some of these counternarratives, it would have made 
little to no difference in terms of the results of the meta-analysis. This is due to the 
fact that the kinds of new approaches to CT in which Thayer-Bacon (2000), Biesta 
and Stams (2001), and Marshall (2001) are interested are unlikely to be investi-
gated using the types of quantitative approach that can be synthesized by a meta-
analysis. We recognize that this raises legitimate questions about the limitations 
of the method we have chosen, which we address briefly in the final section.
Third, although there is a sense in which these authors, particularly Biesta and 
Stams (2001) and Marshall (2001), are working in an alternate paradigm of criticality 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 7 ---
Abrami et al.
6
vis-à-vis the APA definition, the paradigms are not totally incommensurable. There 
is some potential common ground between even the narrowest effort to promote the 
development of CT skills and the kinds of efforts that a scholar who is sympathetic 
to critical theory (e.g., Marshall) might hope to promote. Let us take Foucault’s 
(1978/1997) article—“What Is Critique?”—as an illustration in this case. Foucault 
(1978/1997) locates the beginnings of the “critical attitude,” which he defines as “the 
art of not being governed quite so much,” in the early efforts to establish the consis-
tency and truth of scripture (p. 45). He also identifies the efforts to question and move 
beyond justifications rooted merely in authority as an important precursor to the 
modern critical movement.
Arguably, a similar commonality can be found between the kinds of relatively 
modest efforts to teach CT skills and dispositions that are synthesized in this 
meta-analysis and the more ambitious research programs detailed by scholars like 
Thayer-Bacon, Biesta, and Marshall. A short intervention that endeavours to 
enhance students’ CT skills is not what these philosophers would prefer to see, but 
it may nonetheless enhance students’ openness to “not be governed quite so 
much,” which could be useful in getting students ready to think about the more 
expansive conceptions of criticality that these scholars wish to investigate further. 
In other words, the mere fact that we have opted for the APA definition of CT 
skills and dispositions does not mean that the analysis we offer has nothing to 
offer for those who would endorse another definition. The kinds of very general 
techniques—dialogue, posing authentic problems, mentorship—that our meta-
analysis indicates are valuable in the development of CT skills and dispositions 
will likely also have some value for those who have alternate conceptions of CT.
Are CT Skills Generic or Context-Specific?
Settling on a working definition of CT is a good first step, but there are other 
important questions that remain outstanding even if one is able to convene on the 
APA definition. For example, in his pioneering research on the development of 
CT, Glaser (1941a, 1941b) highlighted a difficulty that has remained outstanding 
ever since: If CT has aspects that are appropriately regarded as skills-based, do 
these skills represent generic traits and skills or are they context-bound? Glaser 
(1941b) also found the changes in CT to be somewhat general in character:
The aspect of critical thinking which appears most susceptible to general 
improvement is the attitude of being disposed to consider in a thoughtful way the 
problems and subjects that come within the range of one’s experience. An attitude of 
wanting evidence for beliefs is most subject to general transfer. Development of 
skills in applying the methods of logical inquiry and reasoning, however, appear to 
be specifically related to, and in fact limited by, the acquisition of pertinent 
knowledge and facts concerning the problem of subject matter towards which the 
thinking is to be directed. (p. 175).
Some 70 years after Glaser, there is little consensus about whether CT is a set 
of generic skills that apply across subject domains (engineering, arts, science) or 
depends on the subject domain and context in which it is taught (Ennis, 1989). 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 8 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
7
Prevailing psychological views tend to favor the generic traits approach; learning 
to think critically is understood as gaining mastery over a significant series of 
discrete skills or mental operations and dispositions that can be generalized across 
a variety of contexts. These skills include concepts such as interpreting, predict-
ing, analyzing, and evaluating. The primary appeal of the meta-cognitive skills 
discourse on CT involves its presumptive transfer between contexts. According to 
Woolfolk (1998), higher order thinking such as CT requires consciously applying 
abstract knowledge, heuristics, or procedures learned in one context to some 
novel circumstance or situation.
Many philosophers like Ennis (1989), Siegel (1988), Govier (1985), and Paul 
(1985) also view CT skills as rather general (applicable across subject domains) 
and conjecture (a) that general CT skills might apply to more than one subject 
area, despite the fact that CT always involves thinking about some specific con-
text; and (b) that the existence of general skills does not imply the nonexistence of 
context-specific knowledge. The generalist view supported by Siegel (1988) con-
tends that the ability to identify informal errors of reasoning (e.g., post hoc and 
hasty generalization fallacies) is easily transferable between different contexts.
Alternatively, the specifist view (perhaps best represented in the position of 
McPeck, 1981) argues against general CT skills or capacities due to the fact that 
thinking is always tied to a subject domain. McPeck also argues against the existence 
of general skill on the grounds that (a) all thinking is thinking about something; (b) 
general CT ability is not possible because knowledge of a subject is necessary for 
CT; and (c) CT varies greatly from field to field. McPeck (1981) remarks,
[I]t makes no sense to talk about critical thinking as a distinct subject and therefore 
cannot profitably be taught as such. To the extent that critical thinking is not about a 
specific subject X, it is both conceptually and practically empty.” (p. 5)
Strategies for Teaching CT Skills and Dispositions: What Has  
Previous Research Found?
The generic versus content-specific debate has significant practical implica-
tions for education—if CT is generic, then it could be fruitfully taught in special-
ized courses that focus on CT skills (Royalty, 1995; Sá, Stanovich, & West, 1999), 
and if it is dependent on subject matter, then it might best be learned by tackling 
concrete problems in specific disciplines (Halliday, 2000; Smith, 2002). But the 
generic versus content-specific debate is not the only outstanding debate about 
how CT skills can be taught. Generally speaking, there are a number of ways in 
which CT skills are usually taught in university and K-12 contexts. In previous 
analyses of current approaches (e.g., Abrami et al., 2008), Ennis’s (1989) CT 
typology of four courses, generic, infusion, immersion, and mixed, was used for 
classifying and describing various instructional interventions. The typology 
breaks down as follows: in generic courses, CT skills and dispositions are the 
course objective, with no specific subject matter content. In contrast, content is 
important in both the infusion and immersion approaches. CT is an explicit objec-
tive in the infusion course but not in the immersion course. In the mixed approach, 
CT is taught as an independent track within a specific subject content course.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 9 ---
Abrami et al.
8
According to Ennis (1989), the general approach attempts to teach CT skills 
and dispositions separately from the presentation of the content of existing subject 
matter offerings, with the purpose of teaching CT. Examples of the general 
approach usually do involve some content but do not require that there be content. 
The infusion of CT requires deep, thoughtful, and well-understood subject matter 
instruction in which students are encouraged to think critically in the subject. 
Importantly, in addition, general principles of CT skills and dispositions are made 
explicit. In the immersion approach, subject matter instruction is thought-provok-
ing, and students do get immersed in the subject. However, in contrast to the infu-
sion approach, general CT principles are not made explicit. The mixed approach 
consists of a combination of the general approach with either the infusion or 
immersion approach. Under it, students are involved in subject-specific CT 
instruction, but there is also a separate thread or course aimed at teaching general 
principles of CT.
This mix of approaches to developing CT skills and dispositions is mirrored in 
the empirical literature on CT; Norris (1985) testified to this when he remarked,
[T]here is little, if any, evidence on the long-term impact of instruction in critical 
thinking, despite the fact that the vision of such impact is central to the justification 
of critical thinking instruction . . . If diagnosis and remediation of specific flaws in 
reasoning are goals of critical thinking instruction, then more fine-grained 
information on the effects of particular teaching strategies will have to be sought. 
(pp. 44–45)
Norris’s (1985) concerns remain valid today, and they can be coupled with the 
fact that most reviews have either been inconclusive in determining whether par-
ticular teaching strategies seem to enhance CT skills and dispositions or restricted 
their focus of attention to very specific issues. Some examples: Adams (1999) 
summarized studies of the impact of nursing education programs on the CT skills 
of professional nursing students; Allen, Berkowitz, Hunt, and Louden (1997, 1999) 
studied the impact of various methods of improving public communication skills 
on CT; Assessment and Learning Research Synthesis Group (2003) at University 
of London reviewed in great detail the impact on students and teachers of the use 
of ICT (information and communication technologies) for assessment of creative 
and CT skills; Bangert-Drowns and Bankert (1990) reported some effects of 
explicit instruction for CT on measures of CT; Follert and Colbert (1983) analyzed 
research on debate training and CT improvements; Follman (1987, 2003) docu-
mented the difficulty of teaching CT, especially to adults; McMillan (1987) consid-
ered the effects of instructional methods, courses, programs, and general college 
experiences on changes in college students’ CT; and Pithers and Soden (2000) 
reviewed the research literature on teaching CT skills (methods and conceptions of 
teaching likely to inhibit or enhance CT). Otherwise, although not a comprehen-
sive review, Abrami et al. (2008) found 117 studies based on 20,698 participants, 
which yielded 161 effect sizes with an average effect size of g+ = +0.34 and a 
standard deviation of 0.61, suggesting a modest but robust effect favoring the 
instructional viability hypothesis that is at the heart of the current review. Finally, 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 10 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
9
no review has examined comprehensively the impact that CT instructional inter -
ventions might have on subject matter achievement.
In sum, despite a number of significant efforts to collate and review the results 
of previous empirical research on CT, the question of effective teaching strategies 
for CT remains outstanding. Thus, in undertaking the current review of research 
on instructional interventions affecting CT, several basic questions will be 
addressed: (a) Can CT skills and dispositions be taught? (b) What are some prom-
ising strategies for teaching students to think critically? (c) Which students bene-
fit from CT instruction? (d) Are there curricular areas for which CT instruction 
works best?
Method
Meta-Analysis
Meta-analysis is a quantitative research synthesis methodology that is applied 
in this study to investigate instructional interventions and their effect on CT out-
comes. The overall purpose is to estimate the average effects in the population of 
learners who are exposed or not exposed to various instructional interventions, and 
to explore the variability that exceeds sampling error through moderator analysis 
of categories of study features. The generally accepted steps in conducting a meta-
analysis are as follows: (a) define the problem; (b) establish inclusion/exclusion 
criteria; (c) search for, retrieve, and select studies for inclusion; (d) extract effect 
sizes; (e) code study features; (f) synthesize effect sizes; (g) explore variability in 
effect sizes through moderator analysis; and (h) interpret outcomes.
Problem Definition
This article is a meta-analysis that summarizes the empirical evidence on CT 
skills and dispositions in educational contexts. First, the evidence on the impact 
of various instructional strategies on CT skills and dispositions will be summa-
rized. Second, this review will examine whether certain methodological aspects 
of individual studies (e.g., research design, type of CT measure) moderate the 
magnitude of this impact. Third, the role of several substantive study features will 
be analyzed. In particular, this review will examine how different types of instruc-
tional interventions affect CT skills and dispositions, what impact pedagogical 
background (e.g., instructor training) has, and how calculated effect sizes vary 
with age (educational level), subject matter, and treatment duration. Finally, the 
impact of CT instruction on achievement outcomes will be summarized.
Review Procedures
Abstracts and full-text research reports were each coded for inclusion or exclu-
sion by two raters. An individual coder’s ratings, at each stage, were specified to 
range from 1 (the study is definitely unsuitable for the purposes of the project) to 
5 (the study is definitely suitable for the purposes of the project); the midpoint of 
3 (doubtful but possibly suitable) was designated as a vote in favor of including 
the study. In other words, ratings from 3 to 5 suggested either the retrieval of the 
full-text document (at the abstract review stage) or inclusion of the study in fur -
ther analyses (at the full-text review stage), whereas ratings of 1 or 2 meant the 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 11 ---
Abrami et al.
10
elimination of the study from further consideration. Interrater agreement rate at 
these two stages of the review was calculated and reported in two different ways: 
(a) as a correlation coefficient between ratings given by independent coders across 
all reviewed papers and (b) as a percentage of studies, with respect to which both 
coders agreed whether to reject the study or to continue analyzing it (expressed as 
Cohen’s kappa).
The extent of uniformity between coders was also documented with regard to 
effect size extraction and to the coding of study features. Each effect size was 
coded by two raters, and two agreement rates were produced: (a) a number 
between 50 and 100 was assigned to each study to reflect the degree of agreement 
between the raters with regard to how many effect sizes should be extracted from 
each study, and this number was averaged across studies; and (b) a similar proce-
dure was applied with regard to agreement as to which calculation procedures 
should be used to determine each effect size. As for study features coding, each 
study was assigned a rating according to the percentage of the features on which 
the raters initially agreed; all disagreements were discussed until a final accord 
was negotiated. All agreement rates were averaged across studies, and the average 
rates are presented in the Results section. 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Decisions regarding whether to retrieve an article were based on a review of 
study abstracts. Decisions about whether to include studies in the review were 
based on reading the full text of the article. Both of these decisions were made by 
two reviewers, working independently, who then met to discuss their judgments 
and to document their agreement rate. The following inclusion criteria were used: 
(a) accessibility—the study must be publicly available or archived; (b) rele-
vance—the study addresses the issue of CT development, improvement, and/or 
active use; (c) presence of intervention—the study employs some kind of defined 
instructional intervention; (d) comparison—the study compares outcomes that 
resulted from different types or levels of treatment (e.g., control group and experi-
mental group, pretest and posttest, etc.); (e) quantitative data sufficiency—mea-
sures of relevant dependent variables are reported in a way that enables effect size 
extraction or estimation; (f) duration—the treatment in total lasted at least 3 hours; 
and (g) age—participants were no younger than 6 years old. If any of these criteria 
were not met, the study was rejected.
Along with studies employing experimental and quasi-experimental designs, 
preexperimental designs (e.g., one-group pretest–posttest designs) were included 
at the outset. The intent was not to eliminate methodologically less sound studies 
a priori but instead to code for research methodology, explore the differences 
empirically, and decide at the analysis stage whether and how to include preex-
periments. In fact, the bulk of research on CT does not consist of true experi-
ments. This is largely because CT research has been conducted in classrooms, 
where randomization is difficult to achieve.
One of the greatest challenges was to determine what constituted a control 
condition. The best candidate for such a condition would be a course with iden-
tical subject matter and basic materials but without any instructional activities 
that are explicitly intended to promote CT development. But sometimes the 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 12 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
11
description of the control condition in the studies either was unclear or con-
tained some degree of CT-oriented instruction.
In the majority of reviewed studies, the difference between treatment condi-
tions was self-evident and reflected the research hypothesis—the experimental 
condition offered some treatment that was expected to influence CT development 
more than the corresponding control condition, which was usually described as 
traditional instruction without the activities, methods, approaches, technologies, 
and so on featured in the experimental condition.
Studies with a one-group pretest–posttest design were retained for the initial 
analyses. For these studies, the pretest scores were treated as the control group 
scores, and these data were compared with the posttest results, presumably reflect-
ing the effect of a CT-oriented treatment although it is also obvious that threats to 
internal validity may have occurred.
There were a few cases in which several treatment conditions offered different 
CT instructional interventions. When faced with such cases, reviewers decided 
which treatment was more relevant for the purposes of promoting CT develop-
ment. Several criteria were used in making this decision: (a) the degree to which 
CT skills and/or dispositions were addressed explicitly (i.e., reflecting Ennis’s 
classification; Ennis, 1989), (b) the relative strength of the treatment (more activi-
ties, exercises, etc.) that seemed more likely to influence CT, and (c) the presence 
of activities and exercises that included more of the basic CT skills of interpreta-
tion, analysis, evaluation, inference, explanation, and/or self-regulation. In every 
study with several interventions, the condition that satisfied one (or any combina-
tion) of these criteria was designated as experimental and the other condition was 
designated as control. When a judgment could not be made or reviewers strongly 
disagreed but pretest data were available, each condition was coded as a one-
group pretest–posttest design and labeled as a preexperiment. Eventually all these 
studies were removed from the final data set.
Whenever none of the above solutions was possible, the study was rejected and 
excluded from the review, as well as studies with incompatible units of analysis 
(where interventions, group compositions or outcome measures could not be 
matched). Last, studies were rejected when the description of the treatment was 
very unclear, lacking any specifics that could link the treatment(s) to an expected 
change in CT skills or dispositions. The reasons for exclusion were documented.
Outcome and Test Types
The issue of measuring CT is a complex one. First, the APA Delphi panel clearly 
distinguished between CT-linked cognitive skills and affective dispositions rele-
vant to CT, and as a result, each must be measured differently. In addition to the 
skills/dispositions divide, researchers sometimes focus on “content-specific” 
thinking skills that are linked to particular fields of study (e.g., Test of Critical 
Thinking in Biology; McMurray, Beisenherz, & Thompson, 1991). As a result, this 
analysis considers three particular outcome types: (a) generic CT cognitive skills, 
(b) content-specific CT skills, and (c) affective dispositions relevant to CT.
In determining whether and how to synthesize evidence on specific aspects of 
CT, we built on the Bernard et al. (2008) study that factor-analyzed CT subscale 
weighted means from 60 data sets for the Watson–Glaser Critical Thinking 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 13 ---
Abrami et al.
12
Appraisal (WGCTA) (G. Watson & Glaser, 1980). In this study, a strong general 
factor emerged for two versions of the WGCTA and so this review focuses on 
global indices of CT only, instead of individual subscale means that are often 
reported in the literature where the WGCTA is used. Although a similar analysis 
on other popular standardized CT measures was not performed, the findings and 
decision as to how to proceed with the WGCTA suggested that this strategy should 
be followed uniformly.
To further differentiate among CT assessment tools, five categories were used:
Standardized tests: These are well-established measures of CT or particular 
thinking skills and dispositions: WGCTA (G. Watson & Glaser, 1980), 
Cornell Critical Thinking Test (Ennis & Millman, 1985), California Critical 
Thinking Skills Test (CCTST; Facione, 1990a), and California Critical 
Thinking Disposition Inventory (Facione, Facione, & Giancarlo, 1996).
Tests/evaluations developed by a teacher: This category includes, for example, 
the content analysis of students’ responses to interview questions, and open-
ended and essay-type tasks teachers used to address CT skills development 
in their students.
Tests developed by researchers (i.e., one or more of a study’ s authors): These 
are nonstandardized measures developed by a researcher for use in a par -
ticular study. For example, Bonk, Angeli, Malikowski, and Supplee (2001) 
and VanTassel-Baska, Zuo, Avery, and Little (2002) developed a measure of 
CT that they used in their research.
Tests developed by researchers who also taught the courses in question: These 
are developed by a researcher who was also the teacher or instructor. For 
example, Zohar and Tamir (1993) developed the Critical Thinking 
Application Test to evaluate performance in reasoning skills. One of the 
researchers served as the instructor in the CT condition.
Secondary-source measures: These instruments are usually adopted from other 
sources with or without modifications. Researchers may use previously 
developed (standardized or unstandardized) instruments or modify them to 
meet the requirements of their research setting. For example, Feuerstein 
(1999) adapted the Language and Media Test developed by an Australian 
research group (Quin & McMahon, 1993) to suit her Israeli study according 
to the local media content.
In addition to the three categories of CT outcomes, measures of student 
achievement (e.g., final exam scores, course grades), when reported in the 
reviewed studies, were extracted and analyzed.
Literature Searches
To identify and retrieve primary empirical studies relevant to the major research 
questions, extensive literature searches without date restrictions were performed. 
Search strategies were customized according to the field being searched (affects 
terminology) and the supplier of the database being searched (affects nature of the 
search strategy). Generally speaking, keywords used in the search strategies were 
divided into two primary concepts: domain and treatment type. In some database 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 14 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
13
searches, a third concept, context, was added to increase the precision of the 
search. Searches were not limited to a particular age group or special population 
of learners. A combination of controlled vocabulary and keywords was used as 
appropriate, as summarized in Appendix B.1.
The teaching of CT skills is addressed in many different disciplines, and so a 
multidisciplinary approach was taken with regard to database selection. The sub-
ject and multidisciplinary databases used are listed in Appendix B.2.
A strategy was also developed to locate “gray literature” (e.g., unpublished 
dissertations, private and governmental reports, unpublished manuscripts, and 
prepublications from institutional repositories). The primary tools used for 
retrieval of gray literature were Web search engines Yahoo and Google, both of 
which do not have any controlled vocabulary; it was therefore decided to run a 
series of searches using different combinations of keywords and to browse and 
select from the first 200 records found by each. As a further step, the “open-access 
library OAIster was searched, as was the Ed/ITLib digital library produced by the 
Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education. These were useful 
in locating conference papers and dissertations/theses not available in ProQuest 
Dissertations & Theses Full Text.
Attempts were made to specifically target material from across the English-
speaking world, with searches of American, Canadian, British, and Australian 
databases.
Furthermore, approximately 60 review articles and previous meta-analyses 
were used for “branching” (i.e., their bibliographies were scanned for other rele-
vant studies). A citation search was also conducted on many of these same review 
articles using the Web of Science (ISI) database to locate publications that had 
cited them; citations searches were also conducted on the main CT tests (Cornell, 
California, Watson–Glaser).
Searches were originally conducted in 2003, and updated in 2005, 2008, and 
2009, before being finalized in 2010 (the cutoff date for records is 2009). The 
original search strategies and a bibliography of the studies included in the review 
are available on request.
Of the 7,524 records identified through searches of the literature, 2,332 were 
retrieved for full text review. Of this number, 684 met the inclusion criteria out-
lined above.
Data and Effect Size Extraction
The final collections (i.e., generic CT skills, content-specific CT skills and CT 
dispositions) contained a combination of standardized and nonstandardized mea-
sures. The majority of the studies in each collection reported only one outcome 
measure. However, in some cases two measures of the same type were found. 
When several measures representing the same outcome type were reported in a 
given study, reviewers always chose a standardized measure over a locally pro-
duced measure (e.g., teacher-made). When two standardized (e.g., WGCTA and 
CCTST) or two locally produced measures were encountered, effect sizes were 
first calculated for each test separately and then the effect sizes were averaged 
(Scammacca, Roberts, & Stuebing, 2013). For example, in the collection of 
generic outcomes, 20 composites out of 341 effect sizes were created in this way. 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 15 ---
Abrami et al.
14
Also, whenever the same group of participants was used repeatedly (i.e., the same 
control group compared to two different treatment groups), the group sample size 
was reduced proportionally in order to avoid its overrepresentation in the final 
data set.
Effect size is a standardized metric expressing the difference in two group 
means (usually a control and a treatment). Cohen’s (1988) d (Equation 1) is the 
biased estimator of effect size.
                                               
d XX
SD
ec= −
Pooled
.  (1)
There are also two modifications of this basic equation: one for studies report-
ing pretest data for both experimental and control groups and another for a single-
group pre–posttest design. In other cases (e.g., t tests, F tests, p levels), effect size 
is estimated using conversion formulas provided by Glass, McGaw, and Smith 
(1981) and Hedges, Shymansky, and Woodworth (1989).
To correct for bias in small samples, d was converted to the unbiased estimator 
g (Hedges & Olkin, 1985), as follows:
                                          
g N d≅− −



1 3
49 .  (2)
The standard error of g was calculated using Equation (3).
                                SE nn
g
NN
g
ec
=+ +− −




11
2 1 3
49
2
.  (3)
Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (Version 2.2.064; Borenstein, Hedges, Higgins, 
& Rothstein, 2005), a dedicated statistical software package, was used for all 
primary, moderator, publication bias, and sensitivity analyses.
Study Features
To explain variability in effect sizes, coded study features were assessed indi-
vidually and, when appropriate, in combinations. The following methodological 
features were tested: (a) type of research design (preexperimental, quasi-experi-
mental, or true experimental), (b) type of CT measure (standardized, teacher-
made, researcher-made, teacher-/researcher–made, or secondary source measures), 
and (c) ES extraction method (calculated from descriptive statistics, estimated 
with no assumptions made, or estimated with assumptions).
The following substantive features were coded: (a) educational level and age 
of participants (elementary or 6–10 years, early secondary or 11–15 years, high 
school or 16–18 years, undergraduate education, graduate education, or adult 
learners outside of formal school settings), (b) intervention type according to 
Ennis’s (1989) classifications (General, Infusion, Immersion, or Mixed), (c) sub-
ject matter (science, technology, engineering, and math or STEM classification; 
health education or other, non-STEM disciplines), and (d) treatment duration 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 16 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
15
(short-duration interventions lasting from several hours to 2 days, medium-dura-
tion interventions lasting several days or longer, long-duration interventions of 
about a semester or term, and extended-duration treatments lasting more than a 
semester). In addition, this review included further coding of the nature of CT 
instruction.
Turning now to more complex questions of taxonomy, the Abrami et al. (2008) 
analysis of CT instructional approaches used Ennis’s (1989) CT typology of four 
courses (General, Infusion, Immersion, and Mixed) for classifying and describing 
various instructional interventions. In the general course, CT skills and disposi-
tions are learning objectives, without specific subject matter content. In contrast, 
content is important in both the infusion and immersion approaches. CT is an 
explicit objective in the infusion course but not in the immersion course. In the 
mixed approach, CT is taught as an independent track within a specific subject 
matter. These four approaches, general, infusion, and immersion and mixed, will 
be assessed in this review for their instructional efficacy.
Although Ennis’s (1989) taxonomy has proven its usefulness, the aim in this 
study was to expand the analysis beyond a single instructional classification 
scheme. A more fine-grained approach, which might explain more of the variabil-
ity in CT outcomes and highlight especially effective instructional approaches, 
was sought. A new set of four major categories was developed: individual study, 
dialogue, authentic or anchored instruction, and coaching. Subcategories were 
also developed for the major categories and a substantial number of the effect 
sizes (k = 95) were coded for their presence.
A rating scale (0–3) describes the extent to which each category was repre-
sented in a given study:
0 = not present
1 = slightly present
2 = moderately present
3 = strongly present
Category 1: Individual Study
The initial coding included a category for individual study. Individual study 
includes instructional techniques and learning activities that are based on stu-
dents’ individual work. It takes place whenever students study alone by engaging 
in reading, watching, listening to a teacher’s explanations, reflecting on new 
information, and solving abstract problems on their own. This category was not 
used in the main set of moderator variable analyses because in the vast majority 
of cases it did not distinguish between experimental and control conditions: In 
either group, student individual work was represented to a similar extent.
Category 2: Dialogue
This category is characterized by learning through discussion. The idea that 
dialogue facilitates CT has a long history, dating back to the Socratic method, in 
which concepts were clarified through one-on-one interactions.
When engaged in critical dialogue, individuals are discussing a particular 
problem together. The dialogue may be adversarial or it may be quite 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 17 ---
Abrami et al.
16
cooperative, but in either case, some sort of question is under consideration. 
Critical dialogue can take multiple forms, including whole-class debates, 
within-group debates, within-group discussions, whole-class discussions, and 
online discussion forums.
Dialogue does not have to be oral; it can be written as well. If written, the activ-
ity must be characterized by multiple back-and-forth interactions to count as dia-
logue (e.g., online discussion forums).
The dialogue category also has numerous subcategories, which fall into three 
broad groups: question asking (2.1 and 2.2), discussion (2.3–2.8 and 2.10), and 
debate/Socratic dialogue (2.9 and 2.11). The full list of subcategories is as 
follows:
2.1.
 T
eacher poses questions to students
2.2.
 Students question their teacher
2.3.
 Student dyads (no/minimal teacher participation)
2.4.
 Whole-class discussion (no/minimal teacher participation)
2.5.
 Group discussions (no/minimal teacher participation)
2.6.
 Student dyads (teacher
-led)
2.7.
 Whole-class discussion (teacher
-led)
2.8.
 Group discussions (teacher
-led)
2.9.
 Formal debate
2.10.
 Student presentation with a follow-up discussion
2.1
1.
 Socratic dialogue
See 
Appendix C.1 for illustrative examples of the category codes.
Category 3: Authentic or Anchored Instruction
This category is characterized by an effort to present students with genuine 
problems or problems that make sense to them, engage them, and stimulate them 
to inquire. This approach to CT is somewhat newer than dialogue but still has a 
lengthy genealogy. At the very least, it can be traced back to Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau (1762) who, in Emile, criticized teaching methods that relied on fact 
memorization. Instead, Rousseau argued that children should learn to solve prob-
lems that appealed to them—in one of the lengthy examples he sketched in Emile, 
he suggested that if a child wished to learn to use a compass, it would be best for 
him or her to go outside and actually use the compass in order to navigate unknown 
terrain.
John Dewey (1902) later echoed this sentiment in The Child and the Curriculum, 
an essay within which he distinguished between what he called the “logical” and 
“psychological” aspects of knowledge. The logical aspect of knowledge was the 
finished product, the type of knowledge that is written down in a textbook. Dewey 
suggested that this type of knowledge is comparable to a completed map of a 
country. The psychological aspect of knowledge, however, is analogous to the 
process through which the finished map was constructed—it is analogous to the 
experience of the explorer walking through the undiscovered country. The chal-
lenge of teaching, Dewey argued, was to “psychologize” knowledge for students, 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 18 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
17
to make students into explorers who would work through genuine questions in 
order to rediscover, for themselves, the finished structure of knowledge.
Given this view, it is not surprising that Dewey, like Rousseau, criticized rote 
learning in which children are able to recite concepts and facts, but do not really 
understand the meaning of these facts or their conceptual significance. Dewey 
(1907) felt that in order to be able to use an idea as a tool for thinking (and, by 
extension, for CT), it was essential that one learned the significance of the idea in 
the context of a problem that appeared genuine to the student. As he noted, acerbi-
cally, “There is all the difference in the world between having something to say 
and having to say something” (p. 67).
A wide variety of approaches can be categorized under the banner of authentic/
anchored instruction. Simulations are, perhaps, some of the most powerful exam-
ples, since they bring the problem to life in the strongest possible way. Role-
playing is also a very strong fit for this category, as are various kinds of dilemmas 
(e.g., ethical, medical) that are presented to students. In sum, whenever there is a 
well-defined real-world problem that the students are analyzing, one has an exam-
ple of authentic/anchored instruction.
The authentic/applied category has numerous subcategories:
3.1.
  Applied problem solving (including some hypothetical problems with 
high applied value for students, e.g., ethical dilemmas)
3.2.
 Case studies
3.3.
  Simulations 
(may overlap with case studies; include manipulations of the 
content that is more formalized and, often, computer-based)
3.4.
  Playing games (similar to simulations, but the content is more abstract or 
problems are more hypothetical)
3.5.
 Role-play (e.g., nurse/patient in nursing education)
See 
Appendix C.2 for illustrative examples of the category codes.
Category 4: Mentoring
One-on-one mentoring, tutoring, coaching, apprenticeship or modeling are, 
arguably, the oldest forms of teaching. The key component of mentoring is one-on-
one interaction between an expert, or more generally someone with more expertise, 
and a novice, or more generally someone with less expertise. Mentoring emphasizes 
one-on-one modeling and error correction based on critical analysis. An advisor 
talking to a student, a physician modeling a procedure for a medical student, an 
employee correcting an intern are all paradigmatic examples of mentoring.
Three subcategories of mentoring were developed:
4.1.
 One-on-one teacher
-student interaction
4.2.
 Peer
-led dyads
4.3.
  Internship (an experienced professional coaching a younger colleague, 
e.g., medical internship).
See 
Appendix C.3 for illustrative examples of the category codes.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 19 ---
Abrami et al.
18
Results
The results are divided into four sections of unequal size. The first and largest 
section is devoted to an examination of generic CT outcomes. A second section 
briefly presents the evidence on the effects of CT instruction on achievement out-
comes. The third section presents the results for content-specific outcome measures. 
The final section is devoted to the effects of CT instruction on CT dispositions.
Agreement rates at various stages of the review were as follows:
• •Screening abstracts: 92.449% (Cohen’s κ = 0.85) or r = 0.78, p < .001
• •Full-text manuscript inclusion/exclusion: 89.45% (κ = 0.79) or r = 0.87,  
p < .001
• •Decisions on the data source for and the number of effects: 91.93%  
(κ = 0.84)
• •Effect size extraction: 97.82% (κ = 0.96)
• •Study features coding: 89.55% (κ = 0.79)
• •Instructional dimensions coding: 79.84% (κ = 0.60)
Generic CT Outcomes
Publication Bias
Several measures were taken to examine potential bias due to publication 
source. First, a funnel plot of the effect sizes by standard error (i.e., sample size) 
was examined to determine if the collection was relatively balanced on either side 
of the average random effect size. This examination yielded a reasonably sym-
metrical funnel with no obvious biases. Second, a classic fail-safe analysis and 
Orwin’s adaptation yielded the following results: (a) 434,819 studies are needed 
to bring the observed p value to an alpha above .05 and (b) 1,833 null-effect stud-
ies would be required to reduce the average effect in this meta-analysis to a “triv-
ial” average effect size value of 0.10. Both of these analyses were conducted 
within the analysis module of Comprehensive Meta-Analysis, and they indicate 
the robustness of the collection.
Date of Publication
The formal development of standardized instruments to measure CT skills 
began in the 1940s along with the first experimental studies of CT instruction. The 
examination of the instructional viability and nature of CT teaching methods con-
tinues to this day. The frequency of empirical included studies increases in the 
decades from the late 1930s to 2009, with the greatest frequency in the past two 
decades (i.e., 1990–1999, 26.6%; 2000–2009, 44.6%) for a combination of more 
than 70%. Research on the topic has increased steadily over time, which is likely 
indicative of the importance that educators and researchers have come to attach to 
the teaching of generic CT skills.
Characteristics of the Complete Collection
Table 1A shows the summary statistics for the collection of 867 effect sizes 
included in the original collection. This average effect size is on the lower 
boundary of a moderate average effect size according to Cohen’s (1988) 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 20 ---
19
TABl E 1
Analysis of generic CT skills: (A) overall mean effect size for the fixed and random 
models; (B) mixed-effects moderator analysis of categories of research design
Effect size 95% Interval
Overall outcome k g+ SE Lower Upper Test of null, z
A
Fixed effects 867 0.33 0.01 0.31 0.34 47.42*
Heterogeneity Q-Total = 5,275.62, df(Q) = 866, p < .001, I2 = 83.58
Random effects 867 0.39 0.02 0.35 0.42 21.39*
B
Preexperiments 363 0.39 0.03 0.34 0.45 13.00*
Quasi experiments 361 0.33 0.03 0.28 0.38 11.00*
True experiments 128 0.30 0.04 0.21 0.38 7.50*
Q-Between = 5.25, df = 2, p = .07
Note. CT = critical thinking; df = degrees of freedom.
*p < .001.
categories of effect size magnitude. This positive average effect size is sugges-
tive of the potential to teach generic CT skills.
Analysis of Outliers, Research Design, and Quality of Outcome Type
Because of the magnitude of this collection, it was prudent to examine it first 
in terms of the potentially biasing effects of extreme outliers, research design, and 
the quality and nature of the outcome measures. Fifteen outliers, whose magni-
tude was g = +2.5 or higher were identified and removed. The average random 
effect size (k = 852) dropped to g+ = 0.35, p < .001.
Table 1B shows the breakdown of studies categorized by research design. 
Although the average mixed effect for research design approached significance  
(p = .07), Bonferroni-adjusted post hoc analysis revealed that preexperiments were 
significantly higher than both true experiments and quasi experiments, and that 
these categories were not significantly different from each other (z = 0.82, p = .21). 
The decision was made to use only true and quasi experiments in further analyses. 
Also, studies were removed that were long, over a semester, in treatment duration 
or when the treatment particularities could not be confidently identified.
This left 425 effect sizes with a random effects average of g+ = 0.35, z = 14.17, 
p < .00. Under the fixed-effects model, heterogeneity was significant (Q
T = 
2,059.43, degrees of freedom [df] = 424, p < .001) and I 2, a descriptive measure 
of between-study heterogeneity exceeding sampling error was 79.41%.
To further determine if these initial results stood up to scrutiny when the larger 
collection of evidence was reduced to the set of better evidence, nonstandardized 
outcome measures (i.e., those that are of indeterminate reliability and validity) 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 21 ---
20
TABl E 2
Analysis of generic CT skills with standardized measures only: (A) overall mean effect 
size for the fixed and random models; (B) mixed-effects moderator analysis of categories 
of research design
Effect size 95% Interval
Overall outcome k g+ SE Lower Upper Test of null, z
A
Fixed effects 341 0.25 0.01 0.23 0.28 21.09*
Heterogeneity Q-Total = 1,225.89, df(Q) = 340, p = .001, I2 = 72.27
Random effects 341 0.30 0.02 0.25 0.34 12.06*
B
Quasi experiments 243 0.29 0.03 0.23 0.34 9.67*
True experiments  
98 0.32 0.05 0.23 0.41 6.40*
Q-Between = 0.31, df = 1, p = .58
Note. CT = critical thinking; df = degrees of freedom.
*p < .001.
were removed. After removing 84 effect sizes derived from nonstandardized mea-
sures, the collection was further reduced to 341 effect sizes. Removing nonstan-
dardized measures also reduced the random-effects average effect size, but only 
minimally (Table 2A). The collection, however, remained heterogeneous (Q
T = 
1,225.89, df = 340, p = .001) and I2 remained high at 72.27%.
After removing nonstandardized outcomes, high-quality quasi-experimental 
designs and true experiments were compared and were found to be not signifi-
cantly different (Table 2B), suggesting that these two categories of effect sizes 
could be combined. The final reduced sample, on which all other comparisons are 
based, was k = 341. This number represents 39.33% of the effect sizes originally 
included in the study.
A frequency histogram of this reduced collection is shown in Figure 1. This 
distribution is slightly leptokurtic, but essentially normal, with an un-weighted 
mean of 0.33 and a standard deviation of 0.55. Of the 341 effect sizes, 261 (76.5%) 
were zero or above, and 80 (23.5 %) were below zero.
Even with the dramatic reduction in the number of effect sizes retained for 
analysis, the average effect size and heterogeneity statistics did not change dra-
matically. In the remaining analyses only the subset of effect sizes considered to 
represent the best and most methodologically sound evidence on instructional 
interventions was included.
Course-Level Moderator Variables
This section begins the exploration of demographic factors, instructional vari-
ables, and other characteristics that may relate to the effect sizes. As we 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 22 ---
21
FIGURE 1. Distribution of unweighted effect sizes for generic critical thinking skills  
(k = 341, X = 0.33, SD = 0.55).
will outline below, variations in educational level, subject matter, and treatment 
duration did not generate significant differences in outcome. As a result, there are 
likely no confounds with these variables that could compromise subsequent sub-
stantive analyses.
Educational level.
 T
able 3A shows the 341 effects broken down by educational 
level. There are no significant differences among the levels, suggesting that a skills-
based approach to CT improvement can achieve some level of success at all grade 
levels. Furthermore, with the exception of the last category (i.e., graduate and adult 
students) the average effect size of CT instruction is significantly greater than zero.
Subject matter.
 No 
significant differences among different broad types of subject 
matter were observed as shown in Table 3B. In fact, the confidence intervals for 
STEM and non-STEM overlap almost perfectly, with a g+ of 0.31 for the former 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 23 ---
22
TABl E 3
Mixed moderator variable analysis of course demographic variables: (A) educational 
level; (B) subject matter; (C) duration of treatment/control
Effect size 95% Interval
Educational levels (age, years) k g+ SE Lower Upper Test of null, z
A
Elementary school (6–10) 49 0.37 0.08 0.22 0.52 4.63*
Middle school (11–15) 78 0.37 0.06 0.26 0.48 6.17*
High school (16–18) 71 0.25 0.05 0.15 0.35 6.25*
Undergraduate 126 0.26 0.04 0.19 0.33 6.50*
Graduate and adult students 17 0.21 0.13 –0.05 0.46 1.62
Q-Between = 4.83, df = 4, p = .30
B (k = 269; “Missing” and “Other” categories removed)
Health/medical education 29 0.20 0.09 0.02 0.37 2.22*
STEM subjects
a 73 0.31 0.05 0.21 0.41 6.20*
Non-STEM subjectsb 167 0.29 0.04 0.22 0.36 7.25*
Q-Between =1.25, df = 2, p = .53
C (k = 338)
a
Short (1 hour to 2 days) 13 0.66 0.26 0.15 1.17 2.54*
Medium (2 days to < one 
semester)
99 0.33 0.05 0.24 0.43 6.60*
One semester 130 0.27 0.03 0.21 0.34 9.00*
>One semester 96 0.23 0.04 0.15 0.32 5.75*
Q-Between = 4.54, df = 3, p = .21
Note. df = degrees of freedom.
aSTEM subjects are science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
bNon-STEM subjects are all other subject areas, except for health/medical education.
*p < .05
and 0.29 for the latter. Furthermore, the average effect size of CT instruction was 
significantly greater than zero for all subject matters.
Duration of instruction in treatment/control.
 Duration of the intervention did not 
significantly af
fect CT effect sizes, suggesting that the effects of CT instruction do 
not vary whether instruction is brief or not. More importantly, the average effect 
size for CT instruction was significantly greater than zero for each category of 
treatment duration (Table 3C).
The analyses of educational level, subject matter, and treatment duration point 
toward the generalizability of CT instructional effects, notwithstanding the fact 
that there remains significant variability among the effect sizes.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 24 ---
23
TABl E 4
Mixed-effects moderator analysis of Ennis’s (1989) classification of instruction (
k = 341)
Effect size 95% Interval
Overall outcome k g+ SE Lower Upper Test of null, z
Direct instruction 44 0.26 0.06 0.14 0.38 4.33*
Infusion 152 0.29 0.04 0.22 0.36 5.80*
Immersion 61 0.23 0.05 0.13 0.32 4.60*
Mixed 84 0.38 0.06 0.26 0.51 6.33*
Q-Between = 4.10, degrees of freedom = 3, p = .25
Instructional Moderator Variables
Having dealt with these basic study features, we now turn to an analysis of 
instructional variables related to generic CT outcomes based on the above-
described two taxonomies (Ennis, our three-category scheme) and resultant cod-
ing schemes.
Instructional variables based on Ennis’ s (1989) classification.
 All 
four of the 
methods in Table 4, coded according to Ennis’s (1989) classification, produced 
significantly positive average effect sizes, but the categories did not differ from 
one another.
Instructional variables based on three-category scheme.
 The Three-Category 
Scheme includes coding for Dialogue, 
Authentic Instruction, and Mentoring. 
The analyses of each instructional category are based on a subset of the data 
because not all types of instruction were present in each study. To further refine 
the analyses, findings where there is no difference in type of instruction between 
the experimental and control groups (no difference in instruction) are contrasted 
with findings where the experimental group had higher amounts of the type of 
instruction compared to the control condition (instruction favoring the experi-
mental group).
Two of the three categories, Dialogue and Authentic or Anchored Instruction, 
produced significantly larger positive effect sizes for instruction favoring the 
experimental group. This did not hold true for the Mentoring category, perhaps 
due to the smaller number of effect sizes for the latter. However, as Table 5 details, 
all three categories of instruction were significantly different from zero in terms 
of instruction favoring the experimental group.
Single and combined effects of instructional interventions.
 The following anal
-
ysis (Table 6) describes certain combinations of instructional strategies (e.g., 
authentic instruction plus dialogue) when these strategies exceeded those in the 
control condition. Other combinations were excluded because of low cell fre-
quency. Therefore, this result constitutes a refinement of the result reported in 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 25 ---
24
Table 5. This analysis represents the unique contributions of authentic instruction 
and dialogue as well as both the outcome of the dual combination of authentic 
instruction and dialogue and the triple combination of authentic instruction, dia-
logue, and mentoring (A + D + M). As an example, the 19 effect sizes represented 
in the A + D + M row of Table 6 are the only studies in which all three dimensions 
TABl E 6
Mixed-effects moderator analysis of category combinations based on the three-category 
classification
Effect size 95% Interval
Categories k g+ SE Lower Upper Test of null, z
Authentic Instruction (A) 22 0.25 0.10 0.05 0.46 2.50*
Dialogue (D) 43 0.23 0.08 0.07 0.39 2.87*
A + D 45 0.32 0.08 0.17 0.47 4.00*
A + D + Mentoring 19 0.57 0.10 0.38 0.77 5.70*
Q-Between = 8.19, degrees of freedom = 3, p = .04
*p < .05.
TABl E 5
Mixed-effects moderator analysis of categories of the three-category classification: (a) 
dialogue; (b) authentic or anchored instruction; (c) mentoring, coaching, or tutoring
Effect size 95% Interval
Categories k g+ SE Lower Upper Test of null, z
A (k = 201)
No difference 87 0.19 0.04 0.11 0.27 4.75*
experimental > control 114 0.32 0.05 0.23 0.42 6.40*
Q-Between = 4.53, df = 1, p = .03
B (k = 214)
No difference 118 0.22 0.04 0.14 0.29 5.50*
Experimental > Cont. 96 0.34 0.05 0.24 0.44 6.80*
Q-Between = 4.07, df = 1, p = .04
C (k = 266)
No difference 238 0.26 0.03 0.20 0.31 8.67*
Experimental > control 28 0.39 0.08 0.23 0.55 4.88*
Q-Between = 2.58, df = 1, p = .11
Note. df = degrees of freedom.
*p < .05.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 26 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
25
were higher in the experimental groups than in the control groups. A comparison 
between “authentic instruction + dialogue + mentoring” and “authentic instruc-
tion + dialogue” revealed a significant difference (z = 1.98, p = .024). A combina-
tion of all three strategies produced the highest effect size.
Instructional subcategories.
 For 
each subcategory, studies were identified where 
the experimental group exceeded the control group on the quality or quantity of 
each specific feature. When the experimental group equaled or exceeded the con-
trol group for at least five comparisons (i.e., k ≥ 5), an analysis was conducted to 
determine whether a subcategory explained effect sizes significantly (p  < .05). 
The following Dialogue subcategories were significant and favored the experi-
mental group: teacher poses questions (g + = 0.38, k = 19, p < .001), whole-class 
discussions led by the teacher (g + = 0.42, k  = 16, p  < .001), and small group 
discussions led by the teacher (g + = 0.41, k  = 14, p  < .001). Two subcategories 
of Authentic and Anchored Instruction significantly favored the experimental 
group: applied problem solving (g + = 0.35, k  = 31, p  < .001) and role-playing 
(g+ = 0.61, k = 5, p < .001). For mentoring, no subcategory significantly favored 
the experimental group.
Achievement Outcomes
Many of the studies that were reviewed contained achievement measures of 
course content (e.g., chemistry) in addition to measures of generic CT skills. By 
and large, these measures were teacher-made and so their psychometric properties 
remain unknown.
The results of this analysis yielded a significantly positive average effect size 
of g+ = 0.33, k = 140, p < .05. The collection was significantly heterogeneous  
(Q = 826.10, df = 139, p < .001) and I
2 was 83.17.
This result is very similar to the findings reported for 341 generic CT outcomes 
(i.e., g+ = 0.30). In addition, there were no important differences (p > .05) found 
among categories of either instructional or demographic study features.
Content-Specific CT Outcomes
The same analysis approach that was used in the previous section on generic CT 
outcomes was also applied to studies that attempted to promote content-specific CT. 
Content-specific CT outcomes are those skills that are assessed using measures spe-
cifically designed to relate thinking skills to the content that is being taught in a 
course. The analysis began with 198 effect sizes. Table 7A shows the results after 
the removal of preexperiments. It is immediately evident that content-specific out-
comes produced a higher average effect size compared to generic CT outcomes. The 
finding of g+ = 0.57 ranks at the low end of Cohen’s category of effects that are 
deemed to be of a moderate magnitude. However, as with generic effects, the distri-
bution of 97 effect sizes was significantly heterogeneous (Table 7A), suggesting a 
large degree of between-study variation based on an I
2 value of 82.36%.
Source of Measure With Preexperiments Removed
The results shown in Table 7B examine the difference in average effect sizes 
between standardized and non-standardized outcome measures. The average 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 27 ---
26
TABl E 7
Overall mean effect size (
g+) and statistics for content-specific CT outcomes: (A) 
content-specific ct outcomes with pre-experiments removed; (B) mixed moderator 
variable analysis for measure source (k = 97)
Effect size 95% Interval
Overall outcome k g+ SE Lower Upper Test of null, z
A
Fixed effects 97 0.53 0.02 0.49 0.57 25.24*
Heterogeneity Q-Total = 544.32, df(Q) = 96, p < .001, I2 = 82.36
Random effects 97 0.57 0.05 0.47 0.68 10.75*
B
Standardized 31 0.40 0.07 0.26 0.53 5.71*
Nonstandardized 66 0.65 0.07 0.52 0.78 9.29*
Q-Between = 6.67, df = 1, p = .01
Note. CT = critical thinking; df = degrees of freedom.
*p < .05.
effect fell to g+ = 0.40 for the 31 effect sizes derived from standardized measures. 
Regardless of the measure source, the average effect sizes for CT instruction were 
significantly greater than zero for this category of outcome.
The analysis of substantive study features for content-specific CT outcomes 
revealed a similar pattern to the results for generic outcomes. In particular, the 
effects of CT instruction were significant (p < .05) for all of the substantive study 
features including educational level, subject area, duration of instruction, and type 
of instruction.
CT Dispositions
The original collection of included studies produced 82 effect sizes. After 
removing preexperiments, this number fell to 25 effect sizes with an average 
effect size of g+ = 0.23 that was significantly greater than zero (Table 8) but with 
moderately high heterogeneity. Due to the small number of effect sizes, method-
ological, assessment, and substantive features were not explored in detail.
Summary of Findings
The global findings are summarized in Table 9. The column heading 
“Magnitude of Average Effect” applies Cohen’s (1988) qualitative criteria to the 
average effects of generic CT skills, content-specific CT skills, and CT disposi-
tions. The column heading “Improvement Index” refers to the percentage of gain 
under the normal distribution between the experimental condition compared to 
the control condition. One way of interpreting this index is to consider the fact 
that an average student in the experimental condition (50th percentile) would 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 28 ---
27
TABl E 8
Overall mean effect size for CT dispositions with preexperimental studies removed
Effect size 95% Interval
Overall outcome k g+ SE Lower Upper Test of null, z
Fixed effects 25 0.19 0.04 0.11 0.28 4.40*
Heterogeneity Q-Total = 82.32, df(Q) = 24, p < .001, I2 = 70.84
Random effects 25 0.23 0.09 0.06 0.40 2.64*
Note. CT = critical thinking; df = degrees of freedom.
*p < .05.
TABl E 9
General findings from three CT measures and content outcomes derived from the reduced 
collections
Outcome measure k g+ a
Magnitude of 
average effect
Improvement 
indexc
Significantly 
heterogeneousd
Generic CT Skills 341 0.30 Low b (0.20 to <0.50) 11.79% Yes
Achievement 140 0.33 Low (0.20 to <0.50) 12.93% Yes
Content-specific CT 
skills
 
97 0.57 Moderate (0.50 to 
<0.80
21.57% Yes
CT dispositions  
25 0.23 Low (0.20 to <0.50)  
9.10% Yes
Note. CT = critical thinking.
aRandom-effects model.
bBased on Cohen’s (1988) qualitative descriptions.
cImprovement index = (Φ(g+) − 0.50) × 100), where Φ is the cumulative frequency of g+ under the 
normal curve.
dDerived from the fixed-effects model.
place X% higher among students in the control condition (i.e., 50th percentile + 
Xth percentile). Finally, the column titled “Significantly Heterogeneous” is a 
result of a fixed-effects analysis and indicates whether between-study variability 
exceeds what is expected by chance. It also indicates whether there is sufficient 
unexplained variation to warrant moderator variable analysis.
Discussion
This review addressed several basic questions: (a) Can CT skills and disposi-
tions be taught? (b) What are some promising strategies for teaching students to 
think critically? (c) Which students benefit from CT instruction? (d) Are there 
curricular areas for which CT instruction works best?
At the most general level, this analysis clearly reveals that a variety of CT skills 
(both generic and content specific) and dispositions can develop in students through 
instruction at all educational levels and across all disciplinary areas using a number 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 29 ---
Abrami et al.
28
of effective strategies. There are some caveats attached to this finding, but we will 
postpone discussion of these until our “Outstanding Questions” section.
Looking more specifically at the question of possible instructional strategies, it 
is clear that two general types of instructional interventions are especially helpful 
in the development of generic CT skills. Notably, the opportunity for dialogue 
(e.g., discussion) appears to improve the outcomes of CT skills acquisition, espe-
cially where the teacher poses questions, when there are both whole-class teacher-
led discussions and teacher-led group discussions. Similarly, the exposure of 
students to authentic or situated problems and examples seems to play an impor -
tant role in promoting CT, particularly when applied problem solving and role-
playing methods are used.
In addition, as Table 6 indicates, it also appears as though dialogue and authen-
tic instruction are effective in combination, particularly when mentorship is added 
to the mix. As our findings demonstrate, studies that featured all three types of 
intervention (A + D + M) generated significantly larger effect sizes than either (A 
+ D) or A or D alone. This is particularly interesting in light of the fact that men-
toring did not generate especially strong results when analyzed on its own. In light 
of these results, it appears as though mentoring may serve in a catalytic capacity 
for CT; it can augment other strategies in a powerful way but is not especially 
successful if pursued in isolation.
It may be illustrative to examine more closely three interventions in which all 
of the instructional elements of the three-category scheme are strongly present. 
First, Yang, Newby, and Bill (2008) studied the effectiveness of structured Web-
based bulletin board discussions on CT skills of distance veterinary students. 
Learners were required to contribute their thoughts and ideas to a series of course 
exercises and were encouraged to think critically about the course content and 
especially about questions and feedback comments from both their peers and the 
instructor. In this study, all three major instructional dimensions were coded 
equally (+1) in favor of the experimental condition. The effect on CT skills (as 
measured by the CCTST) in comparison with the control students, whose Web-
based discussions were unstructured and unguided, was g = +0.53.
Second, in a study conducted by Arrufat (1997), the high prevalence in the 
experimental condition of all three major instructional strategies (i.e., Discourse—
coded +3, Authentic Instruction—coded +3, and Mentoring—coded +2) resulted 
in the effect size of g = +0.638. In this study, undergraduate Psychology students 
received an intervention intended to promote identity development. The instruc-
tion focused on fostering an increase in the use of exploration and critical problem 
solving with respect to making personal life choices (Authenticity) with guidance 
offered by the teacher, both individually (Mentoring) and in whole-class discus-
sions (Discourse).
Third, and finally, Pellegrino (2007) conducted a study in which high school 
students in the experimental condition were taught American History through sys-
tematically engaging in “historical thinking” activities. Typically, students were 
asked to present their views on a historical period in question and offer their 
explanations of what developments had shaped it. Students’ responses were then 
aligned with various sources of historical information and were asked to judge, 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 30 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
29
for instance, the relative reliability of similar events used to illustrate conflicting 
viewpoints. The teacher tried to relate course themes to learners’ previous experi-
ence and knowledge in class discussions. Activities were designed to allow both 
the teacher and the students to recognize and appreciate various perceptions of 
historical content in its complexity, conduct an independent inquiry, find and 
examine documents, and build their understanding of the dynamics of historical 
events. There were several role-play games and series of discussions involved. 
The major difference between the experimental and control conditions was on the 
dimension of Authentic Instruction (+3) with a supplement of Discourse, and this 
intervention resulted in the effect size of g = +1.13.
In all three studies, we see large effect sizes resulting from a combination of all 
elements of our three-category scheme. Furthermore, it is clear from the descrip-
tions that all three examples are compelling, longer duration studies in which a 
robust multifaceted intervention achieved impressive results, and the results of 
this meta-analysis clearly point toward a need for further pursuit, exploration and 
refinement of these especially successful strategies.
Outstanding Questions
Before concluding, we feel that it is worthwhile to consider three significant 
objections that could be levied against the analysis so far: first, that this review 
tacitly endorses a quasi-causal view of teaching CT in which successful instruc-
tion is simply a matter of adopting the correct instructional processes; second, that 
our contention that CT can be taught is subject to some significant caveats. As we 
will explain, the first objection is mitigated by the nature of our analysis, whereas 
the second objection deserves serious consideration.
The first objection holds that within some strands of educational thought, there 
is a prevailing misrepresentation of the teaching process that makes it seem as 
though good teaching is nothing more than applying the “magic recipe” of teacher 
behaviors that will produce the desired product. One could further argue that this 
mentality is present in our own approach, which has attempted to determine which 
types of instructional interventions yield the most promising results in terms of 
generating favorable results on standardized tests that purport to measure CT.
The first part of the objection has some substance and captures a line of flawed 
thinking that has been influential. One can see a particularly clear and virulent 
version of it in Skinner’s (1950, 1959) educational reform efforts, and a more 
moderate version is present within the process–product research tradition (Gage 
& Needels, 1989). Furthermore, it is probable that many of the studies analyzed 
in this meta-analysis reflect this view to some extent. The very fact that these 
studies took the approach they did (in most cases, a relatively short-duration inter-
vention followed by a standardized test) arguably indicates that they tacitly favor 
a process–product view of teaching.
However, as we indicated in our section on the contested definition of CT, the 
mere fact that this analysis synthesizes articles that occasionally take a simplistic 
approach to CT does not imply that we endorse such a view. We regard teaching 
(and, more specifically, teaching CT) as a complex and multifaceted process, in 
which there is no magic recipe for the “production of learner success.” There are, 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 31 ---
Abrami et al.
30
however, ingredients that appear to be particularly promising, and it is our task 
as meta-analysts to highlight these. The techniques that we have identified as 
being promising (i.e., discussion, authentic situations, mentorship) are not an 
exhaustive list of promising ingredients, but they are a useful starting point for 
thinking about the challenges teachers face, as well as for further research efforts 
in the area of CT. Even if one endorses a highly contextual “quilting bee” 
approach to CT, as Barbara Thayer-Bacon (2000) does, there is still some useful-
ness in taking stock of the fact that certain kinds of CT tools seem to be particu-
larly helpful.
A second major objection, to the findings presented above, holds that the 
results presented do not show that CT can be taught, nor do they show that cer -
tain types of interventions tend to facilitate the development of CT. What the 
results do show, the critics maintain, is that certain pedagogical interventions are 
associated with better performance on a CT test that measures a narrow band of 
skills that have only a tenuous link to genuine CT. These critics may hold a more 
dispositional view of CT or they may hold a view that CT is a complex, multifac-
eted practice, in line with the position of Thayer-Bacon (2000) that was sketched 
earlier.
These critics have a point: Although a wide variety of measures are captured 
by our analysis (including teacher-developed and dispositional measures), there is 
a potential bias among the measures toward a skills-focused conception of CT, 
which is, arguably, to borrow from Paul’s (1990) terminology, a relatively weak 
sense of CT. Yet, even after conceding this point, one could still argue, as we did 
in the section on the contested definition of CT, that these skills are important 
potential precursors to a more ambitious and robust form of criticality. To reject 
these results completely would be tantamount to discarding the good for the sake 
of a nonexistent and unobtainable better, at least as far as meta-analysis is 
concerned.
Still, one can easily imagine arguments that reject this line of reasoning as 
well and hold that a skills approach to CT, “effective” though it may be, is com-
pletely counterproductive. Again, regardless of the merits of this critique, we 
come up against the limitations of what a meta-analysis of education research 
can show. A meta-analysis is only capable of answering questions that have 
already been asked in certain very specific kinds of ways, and its claims must 
always be somewhat modulated. Like a crude early map, a meta-analysis of 
education research charts terrain that has already been visited many times and 
provides some modest degree of guidance for future visitors to the area. One 
will still see plenty of blank spots and indications to the effect that “Here there 
be dragons.”
Beyond these two serious objections, a number of other smaller questions 
remain outstanding. Perhaps most significantly, although the three-category 
scheme revealed some important differences between types of instructional 
interventions, the analyses of methodological and substantive study features 
failed to identify factors that explained completely the heterogeneity in effect 
sizes. Although the findings appear generally robust across educational level, 
subject area, treatment duration, and type of instruction, we are stymied in our 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 32 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
31
attempts to understand why a minority of the CT instructional interventions 
were unsuccessful, resulting in lower levels of CT performance than in the con-
trol conditions. The frustration of the reviewer is that she/he can only explore 
factors that are evident in a sufficient number of studies, and code and aggregate 
those factors. There may, therefore, be factors other reviewers will see that were 
not seen by us or that the next round of new research will elucidate. In that 
sense, this review may act as a heuristic for future thought and research efforts.
The links between CT instruction and both content-specific CT outcomes 
and achievement outcomes make clear that student learning can be positively 
affected by the integration of CT-linked content. However, there is no guarantee 
of this being the case, especially if what is to be learned focuses on factual 
knowledge, even when such knowledge is a prerequisite for deeper, critical 
understanding. To the extent that there is a perceived conflict among curricular 
objectives, such a conflict may relate, in part, to why, despite the evidence that 
it may have a halo effect on other kinds of learning, CT instruction is not more 
widespread.
An additional outstanding question relates to age. Viewed from the perspective 
of developmental psychology, the fact that there is no significant difference 
among age levels in CT is quite surprising. According to at least some theories, 
young children should lack the developmental capabilities to perform well on 
certain types of CT tasks. One possibility here is that standardized measures (not 
to mention the aggregation involved in meta-analysis) simply do not capture these 
subtle differences particularly well, but another possibility is that young children 
may be more capable of CT than some have surmised. Regardless, this is a ques-
tion that merits careful analysis.
Finally, the findings also seem to call for further investigation into the broad 
instructional strategies that were especially successful. An initial attempt was 
made to divide these categories into subcategories (see pp. 15–17) and to analyze 
the results according to them, but the results of this investigation, although 
intriguing, have been somewhat limited thus far. Some subcategories (e.g., 
teacher-led whole class discussions, applied problem solving, role-playing) 
favored the experimental group, but in the cases of many of the subcategories, 
the number of studies in the subcategory was insufficient to draw conclusive 
results. This is, in part, an inevitable difficulty in meta-analysis, but further 
research into more precise classification and alternative taxonomies is nonethe-
less advisable given the promising findings for the three general instructional 
strategy categories.
Despite these caveats, we are confident that the empirical evidence we were 
able to synthesize supports the notion that there are a number of promising teach-
ing strategies for helping students develop CT skills and dispositions. Specifically, 
there are strong indications that dialogue, authentic instruction, and mentorship 
are effective techniques for the promotion of this goal. These techniques appear to 
be particularly effective when combined. Nevertheless, we must also concede 
there is a great deal more investigation to do in this area, and our tentative pre-
scriptions would benefit from being embedded in robust normative frameworks 
for the teaching of CT.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 33 ---
32
APPEn DIx A
American Philosophical Association report of CT skills and dispositions
Cognitive skills and subskills
• •Interpretation: Categorization, Decoding Significance, Clarifying Meaning
• •Analysis: Examining Ideas, Identifying Arguments, Analyzing Arguments
• •Evaluation: Assessing Claims, Assessing Arguments
• •Inference: Querying Evidence, Conjecturing Alternatives, Drawing Conclusions
• •Explanation: Stating Results, Justifying Procedures, Presenting Arguments
• •Self-Regulation: Self-examination, Self-Correction (p. 6.)
Approaches to specific issues, questions, or problems
• •Clarity in stating the question or concern
• •Orderliness in working with complexity
• •Diligence in seeking relevant information
• •Reasonableness in selecting and applying criteria
• •Care in focusing attention on the concern at hand
• •Persistence though difficulties are encountered
• •Precision to the degree permitted by the subject and the circumstance (p. 13)
Approaches to life and living in general
• •Inquisitiveness with regard to a wide range of issues
• •Concern to become and remain generally well-informed
• •Alertness to opportunities to use CT
• •Trust in the processes of reasoned inquiry
• •Self-confidence in one’s own ability to reason
• •Open-mindedness regarding alternatives and opinions
• •Understanding of the opinions of other people
• •Fair-mindedness in appraising reasoning
• •Honesty in facing one’s own divergent world views
• •Flexibility in considering biases, prejudices, stereotypes, egocentric or sociocentric 
tendencies
• •Prudence in suspending, making or altering judgments
• •Willingness to reconsider and revise views where honest reflection suggests that 
change is warranted (p. 13)
Note. CT = critical thinking.
APPEn DIx B
Vocabulary, keywords, and databases searched
B.1: Search vocabulary and keywords
Domain: Critical Thinking, Thinking Skills
Treatment: Experiment*, Study, Studies, Intervention*, Treatment*, Control Group, 
Posttest, Posttest
Context: Education, Student*, Learn*, Teach*
(continued)
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 34 ---
33
B.1: Search vocabulary and keywords
Terms were combined within sets using the Boolean operator OR, and the sets themselves 
were combined using the AND operator. For example: (“critical thinking” OR “thinking 
skills”) AND (Experiment* OR Study OR Studies OR Intervention* OR Treatment* 
OR “Control Group” OR Posttest OR “posttest”) AND (education OR student* OR 
learn* OR teach*)
B.2: Subject and multidisciplinary databases searched
Education
ERIC (WebSpirs, CSA)
CBCA Education (ProQuest)
Education Abstracts (WilsonWeb)
British Education Index (DataStar)
Australian Education Index (DataStar)
Social Science
PsycINFO (EBSCO)
Sociological Abstracts (CSA)
EconLit (EBSCO)
Social Sciences Index (Wilson)
Social Studies Abstracts (CSA)
Multidisciplinary
Academic Search Complete (EBSCO)
Francis (CSA)
Dissertations & Theses Full Text (ProQuest)
PAIS International (OCLC)
Web of Science (Thomson Reuters)
Business
ABI/InformGlobal (ProQuest)
Medicine
Medline (PubMed)
A
PPE
n
DI
x B
 (continued)
APPEn DIx C
Codes and illustrative examples of instructional coding categories
C.1: Illustrative examples of codes for Category 2 (Dialogue)
Code “0”: dialogue not present (Rose, 1997)
 The study examined the ef
fectiveness of two explicit methods of instruction in CT 
skills for postsecondary students with and without learning skills. Students in the 
experimental group received explicit and embedded CT instruction as a part of the 
curriculum of a literature course. They were taught to use special icons designed to 
represent analogous modes of thoughts to aid cognitive processing. However, there 
was no evidence of any discussion or group work of any kind.
(continued)
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 35 ---
34
C.1: Illustrative examples of codes for Category 2 (Dialogue)
Code “1”: dialogue slightly present (Crawford, 1976)
 The primary concern of the research was the evaluation of transferability of CT
 
skills acquired in language art classes to analyses of social studies problems. The 
experimental group instruction focused on reasoning, analyses, and students’ ability 
to defend choices. Although the latter seemed to involve some dialogue, it was not 
made clear by the description of the procedure how much discussion argumentation 
and group work was involved.
Code “2”: dialogue moderately present (D. L. Watson, Hagihara, & Tenney, 1999)
 In the experimental condition, students met in small groups to discuss good and poor
 
answers to their assignments. Discussion was the major instructional strategy, but 
discussion did not take place in all student activities, and so the code “2” was assigned.
Code “3”: dialogue strongly present (Parkinson & Ekachai, 2002)
 The intervention consisted of using the “Socratic Dialogue” method in an introductory 
public relations course. 
The Socratic approach was modeled on an introductory law 
course where students were asked to brief the cases described in the readings and 
then individual students were called on in class to describe the case and answer 
questions about it. These questions included identification of objectives, audiences, 
research, legal restrictions, and public relations tactics. The questions and comments 
from the instructor were intended to help the students see principles that underlay the 
public relations problems or solutions described in the cases read.
C.2: Illustrative examples of codes for Category 3 (Authentic or Anchored Instruction)
Code “0”: authentic instruction not present (Schulhauser, 1990)
 Fourth-grade students in the treatment group were divided into literary discussion 
groups consisting of six students each. Groups read a text book every 3 weeks over 
a period of 4 months and met twice weekly with their teacher to discuss the book 
content. 
There was no evidence of anchored or authentic instruction. The focus of the 
intervention was on individual study, discussions, and teacher explanations.
Code “1”: authentic instruction slightly present (Zohar, Weinberger, & Tamir, 1994)
 CT
-oriented activities in the study included meta-cognitive discussions of the particular 
reasoning skills and how to use them. The main premise was that the same CT skills 
should be transferable and may be applied in many occasions and contexts, including 
various applied problems in biology.
Code “2”: authentic instruction moderately present (Faryniarz, 1989)
 In this study
, the experimental group of community college students studied the topic 
of ecosystems using three simulator modules. These simulations addressed real-life 
problems of lake pollution analysis, wastewater quality management, and population 
dynamics.
Code “3”: authentic instruction strongly present (Hill, 2000)
 There was a high degree of solving applied problems. Educational psychology students 
tackled dif
ficult and contentious issues in educational psychology based on real-life 
scenarios and begin to understand that the aim of inquiry is to further understand and 
create meaning in a world of conflicting perspectives and interpretations.
A
PPE
n
DI
x C
 (continued)
(continued)
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 36 ---
35
C.3: Illustrative examples of codes for Category 4 (Mentoring)
Code “0”: mentoring not present (Sungur & Tekkaya, 2006)
 10th-grade biology students in the experimental group were taught with the problem-
based approach, in which they worked with ill-structured real-world problems. 
Thus, the main focus of the intervention was on individual study
, high in elements of 
authentic instruction, but with no evidence of modeling or coaching on the teacher’s 
part.
Code “1”: mentoring slightly present (Solon, 2007)
 In this study
, community college students in introductory psychology classes received 
a moderate infusion of generic CT material—approximately 10 hours of class time 
activity that included elements of individual consultations with the instructor.
Code “2”: mentoring moderately present (Kemp & Sadoski, 1991)
 The focus of the intervention was on individual study
, discussion but also on teacher 
modeling. The instruction in world history included guidelines for the formation of 
generalizations demonstrated through teacher modeling, guided practice in groups 
with ongoing individualized teacher feedback, and the use of self-monitoring 
checklists.
Code “3”: mentoring strongly present (Housen, 2001)
 This study tested the 
Visual Thinking Strategies curriculum for primary school 
students. A strong emphasis was placed on one-on-one teacher-student interactions.
A
PPE
n
DI
x C
 (continued)
n ote
This research was supported by grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research 
Council of Canada and Fonds de recherche sur la Société et culture, Québec. The authors 
express gratitude to and acknowledge the contribution of the following (names listed alpha-
betically): Edward C. Bethel, Katherine Hanz, Emery J. Hyslop-Margison, David Pickup, 
Anna Sokolovskaya, Rana Tamim, Vivek Venkatesh, Jonathan Woods, and Dai Zhang.
References
Abrami, P. C., Bernard, R. M., Borokhovski, E., Wade, A., Surkes, M., Tamim, R., & 
Zhang, D. A. (2008). Instructional interventions affecting critical thinking skills and 
dispositions: A stage one meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 78, 1102–
1134. doi:10.3102/0034654308326084
Adams, B. L. (1999). Nursing education for critical thinking: An integrative review. 
Journal of Nursing Education, 38, 111–119.
Allen, M., Berkowitz, S., Hunt, S., & Louden, A. (1997, November). Measuring the 
impact of forensics and communication education on critical thinking: A meta-ana-
lytic summary. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Communication 
Association, Chicago, IL. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED413625)
Allen, M., Berkowitz, S., Hunt, S., & Louden, A. (1999). A meta-analysis of the impact 
of forensics and communication education on critical thinking. Communication 
Education, 48, 18–30. doi:10.1080/03634529909379149
Alston, K. (2001). Re/thinking critical thinking: The seductions of everyday life. 
Studies in Philosophy and Education, 20, 27–40.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 37 ---
Abrami et al.
36
Arrufat, O. (1997). The role of exploration and critical decision making and problem 
solving in making life choices (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest 
Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 9813418)
Assessment and Learning Research Synthesis Group. (2003). A systematic review of 
the impact on students and teachers of the use of ICT for assessment of creative and 
critical thinking skills. Retrieved from http://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Default.
aspx?tabid=109
Bangert-Drowns, R. L., & Bankert, E. (1990, April). Meta-analysis of effects of explicit 
instruction for critical thinking. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association, Boston, MA.
Bernard, R. M., Zhang, D., Abrami, P. C., Sicoly, F., Borokhovski, E., & Surkes, M. 
(2008). Exploring the structure of the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal: 
One scale or many subscales? Thinking Skills and Creativity, 3, 15–22. doi:10.1016/j.
tsc.2007.11.001
Biesta, G. J., & Stams, G. J. (2001). Critical thinking and the question of critique: 
Some lessons from deconstruction. Studies in Philosophy and Education, 20, 
57–74.
Bloom, M., & Watt, D. (2003). Solving Canada’ s innovation conundrum: How public 
education can help. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: Conference Board of Canada.
Bonk, C. J., Angeli, C. M., Malikowski, S. R., & Supplee, L. (2001, August). Holy 
cow: Scaffolding case based conferencing on the web with preservice teachers. Ed 
at a Distance, 15. Retrieved from http://209.151.89.205/usdla.org/public_html/cms/
html/journal/AUG01_Issue/article01.html
Borenstein, M., Hedges, L., Higgins, J., & Rothstein, H. (2005). Comprehensive meta-
analysis (Version 2). Englewood NJ: Biostat.
Case, R., & Wright, I. (1999). Taking seriously the teaching of critical thinking. In R. 
Case & P. Clark (Eds.), The Canadian anthology of social studies: Issues and strat-
egies for teachers (pp. 179–189). Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: Pacific 
Educational Press.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Crawford, J. A. (1976). An investigation of the transfer of critical thinking skills from 
language arts to social studies (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest 
Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 7703254)
Dewey, J. (1902). The child and the curriculum. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press.
Dewey, J. (1907). The school and the curriculum. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press.
Dewey, J. (1925). Experience and nature. Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Ennis, R. H. (1962). A concept of critical thinking: A proposed basis for research in the 
teaching and evaluation of critical thinking ability. Harvard Educational Review, 32, 
81–111.
Ennis, R. H. (1987). A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and skills. In J. Baron 
& R. Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching thinking skills: Theory and practice (pp. 9–26). 
New York, NY: W. H. Freeman.
Ennis, R. H. (1989). Critical thinking and subject specificity: Clarification and needed 
research. Educational Researcher, 18, 4–10. doi:10.3102/0013189X018003004
Ennis, R. H., & Millman, J. (1985). Cornell critical thinking test. Pacific Grove, CA: 
Critical Thinking Books & Software.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 38 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
37
Facione, P. A. (1990a). The California Critical Thinking Skills Test: College level: 
Interpreting the CCTST, group norms and sub-scores (Technical Report No. #4). 
Millbrae: California Academic Press.
Facione, P. A. (1990b). Critical thinking: A statement of expert consensus for purposes 
of educational assessment and instruction. Research findings and recommendations. 
Newark, DE: American Philosophical Association. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED315423)
Facione, P. A., Facione, N. C., & Giancarlo, C. A. F. (1996). The California Critical 
Thinking Disposition Inventory. Millbrae: California Academic Press.
Faryniarz, J. V . (1989). The effectiveness of microcomputer simulators to stimulate 
environmental problem-solving with community college students (Doctoral disserta-
tion). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 
9002473)
Feuerstein, M. (1999). Media literacy in support of critical thinking. Journal of 
Educational Media, 24, 43–54. doi:10.1080/1358165990240104
Follert, V . F., & Colbert, K. R. (1983, November). An analysis of the research concern-
ing debate training and critical thinking improvements. Paper presented at the 69th 
annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association, Washington, DC.
Follman, J. (1987). Critical thinking instruments: Instruments of plenty or plenty of 
instruments? Research Bulletin, 20, 71–75.
Follman, J. (2003). Reliability estimates of contemporary critical thinking instruments. 
Korean Journal of Thinking and Problem Solving, 13, 73–81.
Foucault, M. (1997). What is critique? In S. Lotringer (Ed.), The politics of truth (pp. 
41–81). Los Angeles, CA: Semiotexte. (Original work published 1978)
Foucault, M. (1998). The ethics of the concern of the self as a practice of freedom. In 
P. Rabinow (Ed.), Ethics, subjectivity and truth (pp. 281–301). New York, NY: Free 
Press. (Original work published 1984)
Gage, N. L., & Needels, M. C. (1989). Process-product research on teaching: A review 
of criticisms. The Elementary School Journal, 89, 253–300. Retrieved from http://
www.jstor.org/stable/1001805
Glaser, E. M. (1941a). An experiment in the development of critical thinking (Doctoral 
dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 
0156200)
Glaser, E. M. (1941b). An experiment in the development of critical thinking. New 
York, NY: Teachers College, Columbia University.
Glass, G. V ., McGaw, B., & Smith, M. L. (1981). Meta-analysis in social research. 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Govier, T. (1985). A practical study of argument. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Halliday, J. (2000). Critical thinking and the academic vocational divide. Curriculum 
Journal, 11, 159–175. doi:10.1080/09585170050045182
Hedges, L. V ., & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis. Orlando, FL: 
Academic Press.
Hedges, L. V ., Shymansky, J. A., & Woodworth, G. (1989). A practical guide to mod-
ern methods of meta-analysis. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED309952)
Hill, L. (2000). What does it take to change minds? Intellectual development of preservice 
teachers. Journal of Teacher Education, 51, 50–62. doi:10.1177/002248710005100106
Housen, A. (2001, April). Methods for assessing transfer from an art-viewing program. 
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, Seattle, WA. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED457186)
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 39 ---
Abrami et al.
38
Hyslop-Margison, E. J. (2003). The failure of critical thinking: Considering a virtue 
epistemology pedagogy. Philosophy of Education Society Yearbook, 2003, 319–326.
Jefferson, T. (1829). Letter to Marquis de la Fayette. In T. J. Randolph (Ed.), Memoirs, 
correspondence, and private papers of Thomas Jefferson (pp. 311–313). London, 
England: Shacknell & Baylis.
Kemp, S. G., & Sadoski, M. (1991). The effects of instruction in forming generaliza-
tions on high school students’ critical thinking in world history. Literacy Research 
and Instruction, 31, 33–42. doi:10.1080/19388079109558069
Kurfiss, J. G. (1988). Critical thinking: Theory, research, practice, and possibilities  
(ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report No. 2). Washington, DC: Association for the 
Study of Higher Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED304041)
Lipman, M. (1991). Thinking in education. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University 
Press.
Marshall, J. D. (2001). A critical theory of the self: Wittgenstein, Nietzsche, Foucault. 
Studies in Philosophy and Education, 20, 75–91.
McMillan, J. H. (1987). Enhancing college students’ critical thinking: A review of 
studies. Research in Higher Education, 26, 3–29. doi:10.1007/BF00991931
McMurray, M. A., Beisenherz, P., & Thompson, B. (1991). Reliability and concurrent 
validity of a measure of critical thinking skills in biology. Journal of Research in 
Science Teaching, 28, 183–191. doi:10.1002/tea.3660280208
McPeck, J. (1981). Critical thinking and education. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Oxford 
University Press.
Norris, S. P. (1985). Synthesis of research on critical thinking. Educational Leadership, 
42, 40–45.
Parkinson, M. G., & Ekachai, D. (2002). The Socratic method in the introductory PR 
course: An alternative pedagogy. Public Relations Review, 28, 167–174. doi:10.1016/
S0363-8111(02)00123-6
Paul, R. W. (1985). The critical thinking movement: A historical perspective. National 
Forum: Phi Kappa Phi Journal, 42, 2–3.
Paul, R. W. (1990). Critical thinking: What every person needs to survive in a rapidly 
changing world. Santa Rosa, CA: Foundation for Critical Thinking.
Paul, R. W., & Binker, A. J. A. (1990). Strategies: Thirty-five dimensions of critical 
thinking. In A. J. A. Binker (Ed.), Critical thinking: What every person needs to 
survive in a rapidly changing world (pp. 305–349). Rohnert Park, CA: Centre for 
Critical Thinking and Moral Critique, Sonoma State University.
Paul, R. W., Elder, L., & Bartell, T. (1997). Study of 38 public universities and 28 pri-
vate universities to determine faculty emphasis on critical thinking on instruction. 
Retrieved from http://www.criticalthinking.org/pages/center-for-critical-think-
ing/401
Pellegrino, A. M. (2007). The manifestation of critical thinking and metacognition in 
secondary American history students through the implementation of lesson plans 
and activities consistent with historical thinking skills (Doctoral dissertation). 
Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3282653)
Pithers, R. T., & Soden, R. (2000). Critical thinking in education: A review. Educational 
Research, 42, 237–249. doi:10.1080/001318800440579
Quin, R., & McMahon, B. (1993). Monitoring standards in media studies: problems 
and strategies. Australian Journal of Education, 37, 182–197. doi:10.1177/  
000494419303700206
Rose, M. M. (1997). Critical thinking skills instruction for postsecondary students with 
and without learning disabilities: The effectiveness of icons as part of a literature 
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 40 ---
Teaching Critical Thinking
39
curriculum (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and 
Theses database. (UMI No. 9806188)
Rousseau, J. J. (1762). Émile. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Jean Néaulme.
Royalty, J. (1995). The generalizability of critical thinking: Paranormal beliefs versus 
statistical reasoning. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 156, 477–488. doi:10.1080/00
221325.1995.9914838
Sá, W. C., Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1999). The domain specificity and general-
ity of belief bias: Searching for generalizable critical thinking skill. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 91, 497–510. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.91.3.497
Scammacca, N., Roberts, G., & Stuebing, K. K. (2014). Meta-analysis with complex 
research designs: Dealing with dependence from multiple measures and multiple 
group comparisons. Review of Educational Research, 84, 328–364. 
doi:10.3102/0034654313500826
Schulhauser, C. E. (1990). The effects of literary discussion groups on students’ critical 
thinking ability and attitude toward reading (Doctoral dissertation). Available from 
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 9131095)
Scriven, M., & Paul, R. (1996). Defining critical thinking: Critical thinking as defined 
by the National Council for Excellence in Critical Thinking, 1987. Retrieved from 
http://www.criticalthinking.org/pages/defining-critical-thinking/766
Siegel, H. (1988). Educating reason: Rationality, critical thinking, and education. New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Skinner, B. F. (1950). Are theories of learning necessary? Psychological Review, 57, 
193–216. doi:10.1037/h0054367
Skinner, B. F. (1959). The cumulative record. New York, NY: Appleton-Century-
Crofts.
Smith, G. (2002). Are there domain-specific thinking skills? Journal of Philosophy of 
Education, 36, 207–227. doi:10.1111/1467-9752.00270
Solon, T. (2007). Generic critical thinking infusion and course content learning in 
introductory psychology. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 34, 95–109.
Sungur, S., & Tekkaya, C. (2006). Effects of problem-based learning and traditional 
instruction on self-regulated learning. Journal of Educational Research, 99, 307–
317. doi:10.3200/JOER.99.5.307-320
Thayer-Bacon, B. (2000). Transforming critical thinking: Thinking constructively. 
New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Tsui, L. (2002). Fostering critical thinking through effective pedagogy: Evidence from 
four institutional case studies. Journal of Higher Education, 73, 740–763. Retrieved 
from http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_higher_education/v073/73.6tsui.pdf
VanTassel-Baska, J., Zuo, L., Avery, L. D., & Little, C. A. (2002). A curriculum study 
of gifted-student learning in the language arts. Gifted Child Quarterly, 46, 30–44. 
doi:10.1177/001698620204600104
Watson, D. L., Hagihara, D. K., & Tenney, A. L. (1999). Skill-building exercises and 
generalizing psychological concepts to daily life. Teaching of Psychology, 26,  
193–195. doi:10.1207/S15328023TOP260306
Watson, G., & Glaser, E. M. (1980). Watson-Glaser critical thinking appraisal. San 
Antonio, TX: PsychCorp.
Woolfolk, A. E. (1998). Educational psychology. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Yang, Y .-T. C., Newby, T., & Bill, R. (2008). Facilitating interactions through struc-
tured web-based bulletin boards: A quasi-experimental study on promoting learners’ 
critical thinking skills. Computers & Education, 50, 1572–1585. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2007.04.006
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 
--- PAGE 41 ---
Abrami et al.
40
Zohar, A., & Tamir, P. (1993). Incorporating critical thinking into a regular high school 
biology curriculum. School Science and Mathematics, 93, 136-140. 
doi:10.1111/j.1949-8594.1993.tb12211.x
Zohar, A., Weinberger, Y ., & Tamir, P. (1994). The effect of the biology critical thinking 
project on the development of critical thinking. Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching, 31, 183–196. doi:10.1002/tea.3660310208
Authors
PHILIP C. ABRAMI, PhD, is a Concordia University Research Chair and the Director of 
the Centre for the Study of Learning and Performance, Concordia University, LB 589-
2, 1455 de Maisonneuve Boulevard West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8; email: 
abrami@education.concordia.ca. His current work focuses on research integrations 
and primary investigations in support of applications of educational technology in dis-
tance and higher education, in early literacy and numeracy, and in the development of 
higher order thinking skills and learning strategies.
ROBERT M. BERNARD, PhD, is a professor of Education and Systematic Review 
Team Leader at the Centre for the Study of Learning and Performance, Concordia 
University, LB-578-1, 1455 de Maisonneuve Boulevard West, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada H3G 1M8; e-mail: bernard@education.concordia.ca. His research interests 
include distance and online learning, instructional technology, research design, and 
statistics and meta-analysis.
EUGENE BOROKHOVSKI, PhD, works as Systematic Reviews Project Manager at the 
Centre for the Study of Learning and Performance of Concordia University, LB-581, 
1455 de Maisonneuve Boulevard West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8; e-mail: 
eborokhovski@education.concordia.ca. His professional expertise and research inter-
ests include cognitive and educational psychology, language acquisition and methodol-
ogy of systematic reviews, and meta-analyses.
DAVID I. WADDINGTON is an associate professor in the Department of Education at 
Concordia University, LB-545-5, 1455 de Maisonneuve Boulevard West, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8; e-mail: waddington@education.concordia.ca. His princi-
pal interests include Deweyan conceptions of citizenship as well as new and critical 
approaches toward technology in education.
C. ANNE WADE, MLIS, has been a manager and information specialist at the Centre for 
the Study of Learning and Performance for over 20 years, Concordia University, 
LB-581, 1455 de Maisonneuve Boulevard West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1M8; 
e-mail: anne.wade@education.concordia.ca. She has also served as a sessional lecturer 
in the Department of Education/Information Studies at Concordia for the past two 
decades. Her expertise is in information storage and retrieval, educational technology 
and research methods. She is the former president of the Quebec Library Association 
and the Eastern Canada Chapter of the Special Libraries Association; the Information 
Specialist of the Education Coordinating group, international Campbell Collaboration; 
and an associate of the Evidence Network, United Kingdom.
TONJE PERSSON, PhD candidate, is in the Psychology Department at Concordia 
University, 7141 Sherbrooke West, Montreal, QC H4B 1R6, e-mail: tj_perss@hotmail.
com. Her research interests lie in the field of clinical psychology, psychology of creativ-
ity and social self–identity, and the methodology of systematic reviews.
 at TULANE UNIV on October 1, 2014http://rer.aera.netDownloaded from 