=== PAGE 1 ===
A VISION AND STRATEGY 
FOR THE NATIONAL 
SEMICONDUCTOR 
TECHNOLOGY CENTER
CHIPS Research and Development Office
April 25, 2023 
=== PAGE 2 ===
for AMERICA
CHIPS.gov
CHIPS for America includes the CHIPS Program Office, responsible for 
semiconductor incentives, and the CHIPS Research and Development Office, 
responsible for R&D programs, that both sit within the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) at the Department of Commerce. 
NIST promotes U.S. innovation and industrial competitiveness by advancing 
measurement science, standards, and technology in ways that enhance 
economic security and improve our quality of life. NIST is uniquely positioned 
to successfully administer the CHIPS for America program because of the 
bureau’s strong relationships with U.S. industries, its deep understanding of the 
semiconductor ecosystem, and its reputation as fair and trusted. 
Visit https:/ /www.chips.gov to learn more.
=== PAGE 3 ===
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................2
Mission ....................................................................................................................................................3
Goals ........................................................................................................................................................5
Landscape .............................................................................................................................................6
Relationship to Other Programs ...................................................................................................8
PROGRAMS ...............................................................................................................................................12
Technology Leadership ..................................................................................................................12
Managing Assets that Benefit the Community .....................................................................14
Workforce Programs .......................................................................................................................17
Membership Programs and Services .........................................................................................19 
GOVERNANCE ........................................................................................................................................20
Operating Model ...............................................................................................................................21
Financial Model .................................................................................................................................22
Measures of Success and Metrics ..............................................................................................22
GOING FORWARD ................................................................................................................................23
CONCLUSION ..........................................................................................................................................23
APPENDIX: DEFINITIONS OF ACRONYMS .................................................................................24
CITATIONS ................................................................................................................................................25
A Vision And 
Strategy For 
The National 
Semiconductor 
Technology Center
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
=== PAGE 4 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
2 
INTRODUCTION
It is hard to imagine a sector more important to the 
national and economic security of our nation than 
the semiconductor industry. Nearly every innovation 
of the future, whether for smarter transportation or 
better medical devices, for agricultural efficiencies 
or to address climate risks, or for the technology 
that powers our national defense capabilities, 
will depend on semiconductor technology. The 
Biden administration called out three classes of 
technology as being particularly critical over the 
coming decade¹: computing-related technologies 
including microelectronics, quantum, and artificial 
intelligence; biotechnologies and biomanufacturing; 
and clean energy technologies. Each of these fields 
is dependent on semiconductors, and semiconductor 
advancements, in turn, are driven by the demands of 
new applications. 
The pace of innovation in the semiconductor 
technology sector over the past seven decades has 
been extraordinary. The industry has progressed 
from building a few transistors in silicon to, today, 
building billions of transistors on a single wafer. 
Much of this success is due to advances in the 
manufacture of ever smaller semiconductors 
following a consistent progression in scaling known 
as Moore’s Law. Today, the smallest dimensions of 
leading-edge semiconductor devices have reached 
the atomic scale and the complexity of the circuit 
architecture is increasing exponentially with the use 
of three-dimensional structures, the incorporation of 
new materials, and improvements in the thousands 
of process steps needed to make advanced chips. 
Into the future, as new applications demand higher-
performance semiconductors, their design and 
production will become even more complex. This 
complexity makes it increasingly difficult and costly to 
implement innovations because of the dependencies 
between design and manufacturing, between 
manufacturing steps, and between front-end and 
back-end processes.
To accelerate innovation in semiconductor technology, 
there is a need for a systems-level research and 
development approach that connects sophisticated 
tools, resources, and facilities. This provides innovators 
with the flexibility to explore improvements to 
complex heterogeneous systems and the confidence 
that new designs and manufacturing technologies 
will be successful. More than ever, research and 
development activities need to be closely aligned with 
design and manufacturing processes. For example, a 
research ecosystem built upon a network of physical 
and virtual manufacturing tools could reduce the 
time needed to design new products and processes 
and shorten the experimentation cycle needed to 
implement innovations. 
Recognizing these needs, Congress appropriated 
funds for a national semiconductor technology center 
(NSTC)² to support and extend U.S. leadership in 
semiconductor research, design, engineering, and 
advanced manufacturing. By integrating efforts across 
a complex ecosystem, a successful NSTC will advance 
critical semiconductor research and development; 
expand access to design and manufacturing resources 
and allow industry, academia, and government to build 
on each other’s work; and reduce the time and cost of 
bringing technologies to market. As an independent 
public-private consortium, the NSTC will provide a 
platform where government, national laboratories, 
industry, customers, suppliers, educational institutions, 
entrepreneurs, workforce representatives, and 
investors collaborate. 
The NSTC will provide domestic access to advanced 
prototyping capabilities for the research and 
development community to advance new concepts 
and facilitate both the development and production 
of American technology on shore, energizing 
domestic manufacturing. Targeted research 
programs will deliver potentially disruptive and 
performance-enhancing capabilities. Faculty, students, 
and researchers will have access to experiential 
technical learning including state-of-the-art design 
environments and infrastructure, process design kits, 
and circuit design libraries to build the workforce 
needed to power manufacturing growth in the 
United States.
The U.S. has a once-in-a-generation opportunity 
to create a transformative center that can endure 
for decades, accelerate the pace of innovation, and 
ensure those innovations form the foundations for 
future industries. This paper outlines the strategy, 
capabilities, and resources envisioned for the NSTC by 
the Department of Commerce (hereafter referred to as 
“the Department”). First, it outlines the NSTC’s mission 
and goals, then identifies how the NSTC relates to 
other CHIPS-focused programs within the Department 
=== PAGE 5 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 3
and across the federal government. Second, it 
describes the core programs that the Department 
believes that the NSTC should build. Third, it provides 
an overview of the governance structure and financial 
and operating model, which the Department will 
continue to develop. 
For information on the interrelated CHIPS Research 
and Development National Advanced Packaging 
Manufacturing Program, the NIST Manufacturing USA 
institute(s) dedicated to semiconductors, and the 
CHIPS Metrology Research Program, as well as the 
CHIPS Incentives Program, please visit the CHIPS for 
America website.³ 
Mission 
The Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce 
Semiconductors for America (CHIPS) Act⁴ (hereafter 
referred to as “the Act”) specifies that:
[T]he Secretary of Commerce, in collaboration 
with the Secretary of Defense, shall establish 
a national semiconductor technology center 
to conduct research and prototyping of 
advanced semiconductor technology and grow 
the domestic semiconductor workforce to 
strengthen the economic competitiveness and 
security of the domestic supply chain. Such 
center shall be operated as a public private-
sector consortium with participation from the 
private sector, the Department of Energy, and 
the National Science Foundation. The Secretary 
may make financial assistance awards, 
including construction awards, in support of 
the national semiconductor technology center.
Engagement with the Community
To inform the development of the NSTC, the 
Department has conducted and continues to 
conduct significant engagement with stakeholders. 
The Department received more than 250 responses 
to “Incentives, Infrastructure, and Research and 
Development Needs to Support a Strong Domestic 
Semiconductor Industry,” a Request for Information 
(RFI) issued on January 2, 2022, which included 
questions on the scope of the NSTC.⁵ Responses 
represented input from different sectors of the 
semiconductor supply chain. To date, the Department 
has hosted over 30 workshops, listening sessions, and 
webinars with different parts of the semiconductor 
value chain. The Department also has considered 
the recommendations from other federal agencies, 
the President’s Council of Advisors on Science 
and Technology (PCAST), public reports like those 
published by the Semiconductor Industry Association 
(SIA), the insight and recommendations of the 
Industrial Advisory Committee (IAC) established by 
the Act,⁶ and input received from other stakeholders.
=== PAGE 6 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
4 
Mission Statement
Figure 1. The Department has created this mission statement to define its approach to meeting the 
objectives of the Act.⁷
The National 
Semiconductor T echnology 
Center (NSTC) will serve as the 
focal point for research and 
engineering throughout the 
semiconductor ecosystem, 
advancing and enabling disruptive 
innovation to provide 
U.S. leadership in the 
industries of the future.
Focal Point
Will have a core of centrally operated, 
in-house research, engineering, and 
program capabilities combined with a 
network of directly funded and 
aﬃliated entities that takes advantage 
of regional expertise and assets 
throughout the country. The NSTC 
also will serve as a key convening 
body for the ecosystem.
Industries of the Future
Will welcome the participation of 
semiconductor users, device makers, 
designers, application and software 
product developers, and other 
market shapers to develop promising 
use cases to bring to 
commercialization.
Disruptive Innovation
Will focus research and 
engineering on challenging 
projects with a time horizon 
beyond 5 years. NSTC will focus 
on delivering broad beneﬁts to 
the U.S. semiconductor 
ecosystem, even when working 
with individual entities. 
U.S. Leadership
Will work with allies to 
complement and 
reinforce existing 
research assets and 
capabilities, while 
strengthening and 
growing U.S. capacity.
Advancing and Enabling
Will engage in and support 
research through collaboration, 
technical exchanges, convenings, 
and grant programs.
Semiconductor Ecosystem
Will work across the semi-
conductor technical stack and 
its supply chain, including 
design, materials, capital 
equipment, and facilities. The 
NSTC charter also extends to 
the broader community that 
supports and enables the 
industry, such as workforce 
and training institutions, 
capital providers, and 
semiconductor end users.
Research and Engineering
Will work across a range of 
activities including applied 
research, start-up company 
support, prototyping of 
devices and processes in a 
real-world environment, 
challenges related to scaling, 
or development of advanced 
manufacturing tools and 
processes. 
National Semiconductor T echnology Center Mission
=== PAGE 7 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 5
Goals
To fulfill its statutory mission, the Department has 
identified three high-level goals for the NSTC and 
expects that the programs needed to implement these 
goals will be executed through a combination of new 
capabilities along with affiliated and collaborative 
relationships with existing entities. The Department 
expects to build the NSTC in stages, beginning 
with standing-up the organization, followed by 
prioritization of early-stage projects, and leading to 
the development and implementation of 
focused programs.
1. Extend U.S. leadership in foundational 
technologies for future applications 
and industries and strengthen the U.S. 
semiconductor manufacturing ecosystem.
• Conduct world-class research at the 
precompetitive stage, yielding both design 
and process technology and intellectual 
property (IP) that can be made available to 
all participants.
• Support world-class research across the 
ecosystem including at academic institutions, 
government agencies, and government-
funded research institutions.
• Create grand challenges, support targeted 
industry road maps, and foster standards to 
facilitate broad ecosystem collaboration on 
technology development.
2. Reduce significantly the time and cost to 
prototype innovative ideas for 
member organizations. 
• Establish and provide access to physical 
assets such as end-to-end prototyping and 
other facilities and equipment with capital 
costs that otherwise make access difficult, or 
which are not available in the U.S. today. 
• Provide access to digital assets and IP, 
including design tools, reference flows, 
process design kits, and data sets.
• Provide access to in-house technical staff to 
assist with overcoming technical and 
process challenges. 
• Create an investment fund that is structured 
to attract significant private capital into 
semiconductor-focused emerging companies.
• Aggregate and manage demand for access to 
multi-project wafer services at 
commercial fabs.
• Enable participation from communities 
traditionally not a part of the semiconductor 
industry through targeted access programs.
3. Build and sustain a semiconductor workforce 
development ecosystem. 
• Serve as a coordination point and 
resource across industry, academic 
institutions, government agencies, and 
government-funded research institutions 
for semiconductor-related workforce data, 
training, and development programs. 
• Encourage and promote the adoption of 
diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility 
(DEIA) best practices and the Department’s 
Good Jobs Principles⁸ as foundational for all 
workforce investments. 
• Develop and fund workforce programs to 
provide support to NSTC members in building 
and sustaining career pathways in the 
semiconductor sector. 
By the decade’s end, the NSTC should be viewed 
throughout the world as an essential resource within 
the broad semiconductor ecosystem with a network 
of respected scientists and engineers, state-of-the-
art facilities, effective programs, and demonstrated 
technical achievements. 
=== PAGE 8 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
6 
Landscape
For both small and large organizations, innovation 
often starts with new concepts for materials, devices, 
or architectures. However, there are few accessible 
manufacturing resources to go from concepts to 
physical devices to demonstrating manufacturing 
viability. In addition, the ability to transition 
technologies from new device demonstration to 
manufacturing that device at higher volumes is limited 
by high risk and high costs. 
The focus of the NSTC is to lower the cost and 
time to develop semiconductor technologies by 
providing the R&D community—including the full 
range of industry, government, academic, and non-
profit researchers and technology developers—with 
access to state-of-the-art capabilities, design and 
manufacturing expertise, fabrication flows, digital 
products, and research opportunities to validate 
concepts from materials to components to system-
level prototypes. This access will build manufacturing 
process knowledge and expertise, and allow the R&D 
community to develop devices, tools, processes, and 
designs that are attractive for further investment 
and support clearly identified economic and national 
security priorities. Supporting the community of 
researchers at this step in the development process 
within a pre-competitive, collaborative environment 
will enable validation of material, tool, device, and 
design technologies to a stage that can attract the 
private investment needed to reach the marketplace.
Initially, the NSTC will work with the community to 
identify a set of strategic challenges that are relevant 
to the industry, government, or the wider commercial 
ecosystem. The NSTC will target technologies 
in the proof-of-concept stage that will benefit 
from prototyping and scale up, and that have the 
potential to provide significant competitive benefit 
to customers of microelectronics technology or 
strategic benefit to the U.S. semiconductor ecosystem. 
In further sections of this paper, the Department has 
identified as investment priorities several important 
technology areas, including advanced packaging 
and chiplets. In the longer term, the NSTC will create 
a process to regularly identify strategic challenges, 
assess capabilities to develop solutions, and invest to 
close the gaps.
The NSTC will serve the entire semiconductor R&D 
ecosystem. Members will benefit from access to NSTC 
research, facilities, multi-project wafer schemes, 
workforce programs, convenings, shared road maps, 
standards development, and data sets. 
=== PAGE 9 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 7
Figure 2. Conceptual diagram illustrating how the NSTC and Microelectronics Commons will expand the number 
of concepts and ideas that can transition from proof-of-concept to the market. 
NSF – National Science Foundation 
DMREF – NSF Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future 
RINGS – NSF Resilient & Intelligent NextG Systems 
DOE – Department of Energy 
SC – DOE Office of Science 
NNSA - National Nuclear Security Administration 
EERE - DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
ARPA-E – DOE Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy 
DOD – Department of Defense 
ERI 2.0 – DOD Electronics Resurgence Initiative 
NGMM – DOD Next-Generation Microelectronics Manufacturing 
SBIR – Small Business Innovation Research 
NIH – National Institutes of Health 
USG – U.S. government 
FuSe – NSF Future of Semiconductors initiative 
SHIP - State-of-the-art Heterogeneous Integration Prototype 
RAMP-C - DOD Rapid Assured Microelectronics Prototypes - Commercial

=== PAGE 10 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
8 
Relationship to Other Programs
The NSTC will be part of a whole-of-government 
strategy to advance and enable innovations in 
microelectronics R&D.⁹
Whole-of-Government Approach: The Department 
works with all federal agencies through the White 
House CHIPS Implementation Steering Council and the 
White House National Science and Technology Council 
Subcommittee for Microelectronics Leadership 
(SML) and is informed by the National Strategy 
on Microelectronics Research. The Department is 
working with the Department of Defense (DOD), 
National Science Foundation (NSF), Department of 
Energy (DOE), and others to coordinate programs 
and future investments to create a well-connected 
“network of networks” supporting the national 
strategy developed by the SML. The Department also 
will pursue interagency agreements and policies that 
reduce barriers for future NSTC collaboration with 
agencies and U.S. government-funded institutions 
such as DOE National Laboratories and other federally 
funded research and development centers, nano-
fabrication facilities, and high-performance computing 
centers. This framework will facilitate and formalize 
the NSTC’s role in advancing technologies emerging 
from NSF, DOE, DOD, and other U.S. government-
funded programs and institutions, such as those 
Basic science
& process
research
Proof of 
concept
Prototype in 
laboratory
Prototype in 
fabrication
Pilot and 
scaling
Commercial 
production
Stages of Innovation
NSTC and
NAPMP programsNSTC
research
DOD Commons-Hubs
Manufacturing 
USAFederal science programs
Private
sector
Figure 3. A conceptual diagram of the stages of innovation for a new chip design across various government 
programs. (Note that the Commons Cores are not displayed. Shading is not to scale of investment.)
=== PAGE 11 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 9
from the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA) Next-Generation Microelectronics 
Manufacturing (NGMM) and other Electronics 
Resurgence Initiative (ERI) 2.0 efforts.
The Department supports a whole-of-government 
approach to ensure effective coordination with 
microelectronic programs beyond the CHIPS 
legislation. The remaining section briefly describes the 
other CHIPS-specific programs and offices with which 
the NSTC will coordinate. 
CHIPS R&D Office: To establish and manage the 
R&D programs authorized by the Act, the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has 
created the CHIPS R&D Office led by an R&D director 
reporting to the Under Secretary of Commerce for 
Standards and Technology. The CHIPS R&D Office 
will manage the development of the NSTC, the 
National Advanced Packaging Manufacturing Program 
(NAPMP), the semiconductor-focused Manufacturing 
USA Institute(s) and the CHIPS Metrology Research 
Program. The separate, but coordinated, CHIPS 
Program Office is focused on incentives.
National Advanced Packaging Manufacturing Program 
(NAPMP):¹⁰ For many years, the ability to increase 
the number and density of transistors on a chip, 
often referred to as Moore’s Law,¹¹ has driven the 
exponential performance growth of the industry. The 
RFI input and in-depth conversations with industry 
experts emphasized the importance of advances 
in packaging to continue this trajectory. Traditional 
packaging is labor intensive and relatively low 
margin and has largely moved offshore. Advanced 
packaging draws upon progress in materials, substrate 
fabrication, tooling, modeling, design, and processes 
that allow multiple semiconductors and different 
types of semiconductors to be combined in a multi-
dimensional arrangement on a substrate, all in one 
package. Advanced packaging is one example of the 
concept often called “More than Moore,”¹² indicating 
that performance advances can continue beyond the 
original feature-size scaling concept embodied by 
Moore’s Law. 
The U.S. has a unique opportunity to expand existing 
and develop new advanced packaging capacity. 
To support this effort, the Act authorized NIST to 
establish the NAPMP in coordination with the NSTC. 
The Department plans to establish NAPMP as a 
separate program¹³ within NIST, with a director 
reporting to the CHIPS R&D director. As a program 
office, the NAPMP will determine funding priorities 
both for facilities and for research programs focused 
on technology areas such as materials, substrates, 
tools, design, and test. When decisions are made 
on one or more facilities to be funded, the NAPMP 
Program Office will evaluate whether these facilities 
could be best managed by the NSTC as technical 
centers (as defined below), which could facilitate 
access for NSTC members. 
For example, the NAPMP Program Office is likely to 
fund the following priorities in coordination with 
the NSTC:
• Advanced Packaging Pilot Facility – A modern, 
low-volume pilot packaging facility focused on 
innovations in advanced packaging; a place to test 
and pilot new equipment and processes.
• Heterogeneous Integration Technical Center – A 
technical center to include research capabilities 
needed to integrate and package a wide variety 
of devices and materials systems such as 
photonics, wide-bandgap and ultra-wide bandgap 
semiconductors, advanced node logic, and mixed 
signal and novel memory devices.
Manufacturing USA:¹⁴ The Manufacturing USA network 
currently consists of 16 public-private partnerships 
where members from industry, educational 
institutions, and government work together to 
solve industry-relevant advanced manufacturing 
challenges to enhance industrial competitiveness, 
enable economic growth, and strengthen national 
security. The Act authorizes the establishment of up 
to three new Manufacturing USA institutes focused on 
advancing semiconductor manufacturing. The CHIPS 
R&D Office, in coordination with the NIST Office of 
Advanced Manufacturing, will determine potential 
topics for these semiconductor institute(s). In an RFI 
published in the Federal Register on October 13, 2022, 
NIST requested information to inform the design 
of, and requirements for, potential Manufacturing 
USA institutes to strengthen the semiconductor and 
microelectronics innovation system, which could 
include design, fabrication, and advanced test, 
assembly, and packaging capabilities.¹⁵ The topic 
selection will be designed to be complementary to 
the NSTC, NAPMP, and CHIPS Metrology Research 
=== PAGE 12 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
10 
programs. The Department anticipates that new 
semiconductor-related institute(s) will participate 
with the NSTC as an affiliated technical center(s). The 
Department also anticipates providing mechanisms for 
other Manufacturing USA institutes to participate with 
the NSTC.
Metrology Research: The extraordinary progress of 
the semiconductor industry has been enabled, in large 
part, by the ability to measure, and therefore control, 
all aspects of the integrated circuit manufacturing 
process. Metrology that is accurate, precise, and 
fit-for-purpose is fundamental to the production 
of microelectronic materials, devices, circuits, and 
systems. Built on decades of world-class metrology 
work at NIST, the CHIPS Metrology Research 
Program enabled by the Act is focused on creating 
advances and breakthroughs in measurement science, 
standards, materials characterization, instrumentation, 
testing, and manufacturing capabilities that will 
accelerate the development of metrology for next-
generation microelectronics technology. The program 
will focus on a set of metrology grand challenges¹⁶ 
identified through two semiconductor workshops with 
significant participation from industry stakeholders. 
The CHIPS Metrology Research Program will address 
these challenges by leveraging current programs 
and capabilities, establishing collaborations with 
institutions such as the DOE national laboratories and 
academic centers, and working closely with industry. 
Through the CHIPS R&D Office, the CHIPS Metrology 
Research Program will be integrated with the NSTC 
and NAPMP to ensure that metrology solutions 
developed in the program are available to members 
of the community, and that key metrology problems 
identified are addressed by the program. Finally, 
the CHIPS Metrology Research Program will build 
partnerships to accelerate transition of metrology 
advances from the laboratory to the commercial 
marketplace.
CHIPS Incentives Program within the CHIPS Program 
Office (CPO): CPO administers the CHIPS Incentives 
Program, which provides federal funding to incentivize 
investment in facilities and equipment in the United 
States for the fabrication, assembly, testing, advanced 
packaging, production, or research and development 
of semiconductors, materials used to manufacture 
semiconductors, or semiconductor manufacturing 
equipment. Applicants under the Notice of Funding 
Opportunity released on February 28, 2023,¹⁷ should 
commit to participating in the NSTC and, if applicable, 
engage, support, and collaborate with NAPMP-funded 
projects in an appropriate manner, taking into account 
the nature of the applicant and the activities of these 
organizations. Applicants for CHIPS incentives also 
should propose commitments to support CHIPS 
R&D efforts.
In addition, the CPO plans to release two additional 
funding opportunities over the course of 2023: one 
The CPO funding notice includes the following suggestions for incentives applicants’ R&D plans:
• Applicants for semiconductor production facilities should reserve capacity to support shuttle runs 
(multi-project wafers) at market rates or below in support of semiconductor startups, academia, 
government agencies, and potential R&D projects coordinated by the NSTC.
• Applicants for packaging facilities could reserve capacity for use by the NSTC or NAPMP.
• Applicants could rotate technical staff to the NSTC or NAPMP, or train NSTC and NAPMP techni-
cal staff through exchanges.
• Applicants could provide process data to the NSTC to support aggregated large-scale datasets 
for training and manufacturing process optimization.
• Applicants could provide access to existing R&D facilities either as technical centers affiliated with 
the NSTC, the Microelectronic Commons, or independently.
• Applicants could provide donations or low-cost access to equipment and/or design tools to the 
NSTC, NAPMP, or Microelectronic Commons.
• Applicants could increase public and industry access to mature-node process design kits, such as 
through open-source licenses, to foster IP development and improve foundry interoperability.
=== PAGE 13 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 11
for semiconductor materials and manufacturing 
equipment facilities, and one for R&D facilities.
DOD Microelectronics Commons: The Microelectronics 
Commons of the Department of Defense (the 
Commons) is a complementary program provided 
for by the Act that enables the development of 
microelectronics materials, processes, devices, and 
architectural designs that are focused on national 
defense needs. The Commons will address the need 
for processes, materials, devices, and architectures to 
be developed and quickly ported and re-characterized 
as they transition from research to small-volume 
prototyping in labs and finally to fabrication 
prototypes that can demonstrate the volume and 
characteristics required to ensure reduced risk for 
manufacturing. However, at-scale prototyping is high-
risk and expensive. Small and mid-size companies 
and universities have great difficulty bridging that 
laboratory to fabrication or ‘lab-to-fab’ transition 
between research ideas and realization of those 
ideas into manufacturing. The Commons will leverage 
non-traditional defense innovators (e.g., startups 
and universities) and lower some of the existing 
barriers that hinder their ability to evolve laboratory 
prototypes to fabrication prototypes. The Commons 
is a planned network of regional “hubs” with early to 
mid-stage development capabilities and associated 
“cores” with later stage capabilities. The cores will 
work closely with hubs to align them with commercial 
processes to facilitate transition of technologies. While 
the Commons will have some efforts in the same range 
of technologies and device development with those 
supported by NSTC, the Commons has a different set 
of targets in its application focus and scope of desired 
productization to address a set of defense-specific 
priorities. The Microelectronics Commons is focused 
in six technical areas important to national defense 
and emerging commercial markets: electromagnetic 
warfare, secure-edge computing, artificial intelligence 
(AI) hardware, quantum technology, 5G/6G 
technology, and commercial leap-ahead technologies. 
Additional maturation will occur utilizing subsequent 
programs and resources that could include the NSTC 
and DOD demonstration programs.
The NSTC is distinct from the Commons. The NSTC 
is focused on providing access to manufacturing 
technologies that support end-to-end wafer-level 
and die-level prototyping, including full-process and 
back-end line capabilities, in leading-edge and other 
technologies. The NSTC will utilize these capabilities 
to support a wide range of device technologies 
and R&D in design, tools, process technology, 
software, and digital products. With a broader scope 
of commercial device technologies, ecosystem 
development, and manufacturing solutions, the NSTC 
will be able to support technologies emerging from 
the Commons and will collaborate closely with DOD to 
ensure program coordination and sharing of resources 
as part of the broader whole-of-government approach 
in alignment with the national strategy. For many 
projects within the Microelectronics Commons, the 
NSTC will offer capabilities to validate concepts at 
an increased level of developmental maturity prior to 
moving into a commercialization track.
Department of Energy (DOE): The Department 
of Energy’s Office of Science (SC) and National 
Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) national 
laboratories host user facilities and other, unique 
resources, including X-ray light sources, neutron 
sources, nanoscale-science centers, and exascale 
computing providing world-leading imaging, 
diagnostic, characterization, simulation, and analysis 
capabilities. The NSTC and its members may leverage 
these resources to accelerate the development of 
next-generation semiconductor technologies. In 
addition, DOE’s R&D investments, including the 
programs comprising SC’s Microelectronics Initiative 
and efforts supported by the Advanced Materials and 
Manufacturing Technologies Office, will feed NSTC’s 
innovation pipeline. DOE and the NSTC will work to 
avoid duplication and ensure program coordination.
National Science Foundation (NSF): The NSTC 
will work closely with NSF to build coordinated 
programs that support the future workforce needed 
to realize U.S. leadership in microelectronics 
and to support fundamental research as well as 
technology translation. As examples, there are a 
range of foundational research programs that feed 
technology into the NSTC, such as the Future of 
Semiconductors, which the NSF recently launched 
in collaboration with private industry. There are also 
use-inspired and translational research programs 
such as the NSF Regional Innovation Engines, NSF 
I-Corps, Partnerships for Innovation, Small Business 
Innovation Research/Small Business Technology 
Transfer, NSF Entrepreneurial Fellowships, and NSF 
Convergence Accelerator. All these NSF programs 
will complement programs of the NSTC: The unique 
facilities and expertise of the NSTC are expected to be 
a key resource available to the full breadth of NSF’s 
programs. As with all federal agency programs, close 
collaboration with NSF will avoid duplication and 
ensure program coordination leading to leveraging 
and sharing of resources.
=== PAGE 14 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
12 
Partners and allies: The U.S. has a shared interest 
and many existing joint research programs with the 
governments of allies and partner nations to drive 
the future of microelectronics. There are existing or 
planned organizations similar to the NSTC located 
around the world. The NSTC will work to establish 
positive and synergistic relationships with partner 
nations and allies that share common values and 
objectives, including building and sustaining the future 
semiconductor workforce. The NSTC will help facilitate 
U.S.-based companies’ participation in research 
centers hosted by allies and partner nations, and 
also facilitate the participation of those centers and 
international companies in NSTC facilities in the U.S.
as appropriate. 
The Department, in conjunction with other agency 
partners, will establish guidelines, safeguards, 
and securities to enable trusted cooperation and 
collaboration between the NSTC and allies and partner 
nations in microelectronics development for national 
security applications, as needed. 
PROGRAMS
The NSTC will have in-house research, engineering, 
and program capabilities in addition to providing 
research grants to other entities. The NSTC also will 
support an integrated network of facilities, including 
leveraging existing capabilities across the country that 
are referred to as technical centers. While a high-
level summary is provided here, the specific technical 
objectives, goals, and outcomes will also be informed 
by the National Strategy on Microelectronics Research 
and recommendations from technical advisory bodies 
including the Industrial Advisory Committee. 
The Department intends for the NSTC headquarters to 
have a distinct identity and be a prominent gathering 
place. Functions that are expected to be housed in 
the headquarters include the executive leadership 
of the entity that will operate the NSTC (described 
in more detail in the Governance section), financial 
and legal operations, human resources, program 
management, government relations, member services, 
and convening spaces. In addition, NSTC research 
scientists and engineers, their labs, a prototyping 
facility, packaging facility, or a technical center may be 
co-located with the headquarters location.
The Department anticipates that the NSTC will focus 
on three key program areas:
1. Technology leadership
2. Managing assets that benefit the community
3. Workforce programs
Technology Leadership
The first key program area will focus on technology 
leadership in semiconductors and
advanced electronics.
Technology leadership is pivotal to the NSTC’s goal 
of delivering superior science, leading engineering, 
and breakthrough innovations that can be accessed 
throughout the community. Working at the NSTC or 
in collaboration with the NSTC should be considered 
a highly valued assignment with opportunities for 
significant impact and substantial career development.
Grand challenges: Grand challenges provide a 
mechanism to align the semiconductor community’s 
research and development efforts to address larger 
problems, serving to build new communities of 
practice and helping to guide further program 
investment. Grand challenges, such as the DARPA 
Subterranean Challenge,¹⁸ have a rich history of 
driving innovation. They can be used to engage 
participants outside the usual communities to bring 
fresh insights and expertise. The NSTC will work with 
federal agencies and with the community to identify 
and select difficult problems that, when solved, could: 
• Lead to dramatic advances for the U.S. 
microelectronics ecosystem
• Strengthen domestic manufacturing
• Achieve strategic objectives
• Improve national and economic security for the 
United States and its allies
As an example, the IAC proposed grand challenges 
to consider such as lowering costs for semiconductor 
manufacturing and improving environmental 
sustainability in the industry.
Technical advisors: To determine specific areas of 
technology focus and grand challenges, the NSTC 
will rely on technical advice from world-class experts 
across industry, academia, DOE national laboratories 
and other federally funded research and development 
centers, and government agencies. Such advice 
will be critical to ensuring that prioritization of 
technical work meets the long-term needs of the U.S. 
microelectronics R&D ecosystem and NSTC members, 
and the strategic and national and economic security 
imperatives of the United States and its allies. The 
NSTC will determine the appropriate composition and 
structure of advisory groups. To the extent that the 
NSTC is able to support national security objectives, 
the NSTC will engage technical advisors with 
appropriate clearances. 
=== PAGE 15 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 13
In-house and funded research: The NSTC will conduct 
and fund research and collaborations with others, 
focusing primarily on those developments that will 
benefit industry approximately 5 to 15 years in the 
future, with the technical focus guided by advisors 
and in alignment with grand challenges. Research 
programs approaching a proof-of-concept stage 
with the potential to move to the prototyping 
stage if enabled by the NSTC should be a priority, 
including programs at universities, community 
colleges, and minority serving institutions (MSIs). 
Research will be conducted on design innovation 
as well as manufacturing process improvements, 
and all segments of the semiconductor industry 
will be considered for programs. The Department 
anticipates that the NSTC will fund research areas 
that deliver maximum impact across the ecosystem. 
The R&D portfolio and technical focus of the NSTC 
will evolve over time to track with industry needs. 
Strategic investment areas that cut across many 
types of devices such as energy efficiency, AI, high-
performance computing, and secure systems should 
be considered during program development.
Investment fund: The Act calls for the creation of an 
investment fund with the private sector to support 
startups as well as collaborations between new 
ventures, academia, and established companies, 
with the goal of commercializing innovations that 
contribute to the domestic semiconductor ecosystem. 
More information on the investment fund is included in 
the Membership Programs and Services section.
Technical exchanges: Staff researchers may be 
joined by visiting researchers through fellowships, 
residencies, and technical exchange programs 
to build a connected, collaborative community. 
Universities are encouraged to consider establishing 
or using existing government service leave programs 
and other mechanisms to enable students, post-
doctoral scholars, faculty, researchers, scientists, 
and engineers to participate in the NSTC. The NSTC 
aims to attract early-career scientists and engineers 
for one- to two-year rotations, offering experiential 
learning and prototyping, enabling them to become 
part of the community, training them for leadership 
positions, expanding their networks, and connecting 
them with each other and with established scientists 
and technologists. Close interactions with senior 
researchers from major companies, universities, 
NIST laboratories, other federal agencies, allies and 
partners, and national laboratories will help accelerate 
the development of top-notch technical talent. In-
house staff also can serve as a readily available set of 
experts to provide technical advice to members and to 
evaluate potential investment fund opportunities.
Road maps: Road maps can be effective tools to 
communicate needs and timelines across industries 
and establish clear goals and deliverables for both 
research and commercial activities.¹⁹ Establishing road 
maps in microelectronics is challenging because the 
industry has gone through a phase of disaggregation 
with the diversity of materials, devices, and functions 
increasing dramatically. Although the complexity 
of the industry precludes the notion of a single 
comprehensive road map, certain areas of technical 
exploration, such as fab virtualization or multi-chip 
architectures,²⁰ could benefit tremendously from an 
NSTC-led road map process that is regularly updated 
with input from industry, government, and
academic leaders.²¹
 
Standards and protocols: The NSTC, working with U.S. 
and international standards bodies²² and leveraging 
the standards development expertise within NIST, can 
unify and focus the efforts of suppliers and developers 
in emerging areas including chiplets, advanced 
packaging, and heterogeneous integration. Standards 
vary widely in purpose and scope but can include 
documentary test methods, specifications, practices, 
terminology, classifications, and guides, as well as 
physical artifacts. Industry standards, when developed 
carefully and implemented at the right time, provide 
frameworks for manufacturers and developers that 
ensure consistency, compatibility, validation, and/
or interoperability. Such standards can increase the 
potential for new entrants to compete in a field, 
simplify product development, and reduce time
to market.
 
To further advance the electronic design automation 
(EDA) and circuit-design industries, the NSTC 
also should work to facilitate the development of 
standards for process and assembly design kits so 
that heterogenous systems can be better integrated in 
EDA tooling flows. The NSTC should especially ensure 
these standards are applicable to multi-facility process 
design kits for wafers integrated across facilities or 
circuits composed of multiple technologies.
Security: The NSTC will lead efforts to ensure 
the security and validation of the domestic 
microelectronics ecosystem, such as developing 
methods to combat cloning, counterfeiting, and 
relabeling of semiconductors. Security is especially 
critical in national defense, energy security, and other 
national security applications. Furthermore, there is 
widespread connectivity in the automotive, health 
care, mobile communications, and other sectors 
that requires security to be built in at all levels of the 
hardware and software stacks, including at the lowest 
levels of hardware. In coordination with NIST, the NSTC 
=== PAGE 16 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
14 
can facilitate the implementation of standards for 
security features that contribute to the development 
of, and access to, silicon-proven secure IP. Maximizing 
the level of protection provided while minimally 
compromising system performance is a challenge for 
the whole industry, and one that the NSTC will be well-
positioned to address in the precompetitive space.
Managing Assets that Benefit 
the Community
The Department anticipates that the NSTC will 
manage a variety of physical and digital assets 
that will benefit the broad community through 
better availability, lower cost, strong support for 
experimentation, and improved technical support.
Technical Centers
As described earlier, the NSTC will consist of a 
headquarters facility and an integrated network 
of NSTC-affiliated technical centers with locations 
geographically distributed to leverage existing 
capabilities. The Department envisions that the 
network of NSTC technical centers will be capable of 
end-to-end fabrication to enable small prototyping 
and pilot runs, experimentation with and testing of 
new materials and equipment, and other research-
related activities. The scope and quality will exceed 
what is feasible for universities, semiconductor start-
ups, federal R&D facilities, and even some corporate 
R&D laboratories. Although these technical centers 
will be similar to industrial R&D fabs in capability, 
they aim for flexibility and availability over unit cost 
optimization, with the expectation that proven designs 
move into larger scale commercial production at 
private-sector foundry service suppliers. An important 
role of the technical centers is to enable students to 
get hands-on experience designing and prototyping 
semiconductors at a variety of technology nodes.
 
In addition, the Department imagines a broad range 
of technical centers where members can offer limited 
access to specialty equipment or facilities that the 
NSTC could make available in a programmatic fashion 
to members. For example, a specific facility might seek 
funding for upgraded equipment, and in exchange 
offer a percentage of the capacity of the facility to 
be managed by the NSTC and made available to the 
community.
 
The exact makeup and number of the NSTC’s technical 
centers has not yet been determined and may change 
over time. The Department expects that government 
entities or programs such as the semiconductor-
focused Manufacturing USA institute(s) could also 
serve as technical centers affiliated with the NSTC. 
As part of the process of evaluating, selecting, or 
creating technical centers, the NSTC should be driven 
by the strategic needs identified through efforts such 
as grand challenges, and include criteria such as local 
and state support, financial impact, environmental 
sustainability, and workforce availability. Because 
there are significant infrastructure costs associated 
with the construction of new fabrication facilities, 
the Department is exploring several options to 
establish technical centers. These include building new 
facilities, acquiring existing facilities, or collaborating 
between the NSTC and existing facilities with potential 
expansion and upgrade funding to meet the desired 
specifications. Relationships with technical centers 
may be structured in a variety of ways depending on 
the needs of the NSTC, with the NSTC determining the 
ideal structure for each project.
The NSTC should strive to create an open and 
collaborative research environment while balancing 
the need to protect proprietary information that will 
be present in the technical centers. The NSTC should 
implement processes and practices that are aligned 
with laws, executive orders, and national research 
security policies articulated by the Office of Science 
and Technology Policy.²³ 
The NSTC technical centers will produce significant 
quantities of process and test vehicle performance 
data. Additional details are described in the Digital 
Assets section. 
=== PAGE 17 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 15
Chiplets: Developments on chiplets cut across many 
core NSTC and NAPMP activities: standards, road 
maps, technical centers, and the multi-project wafer 
program. The Department expects the NSTC to work 
with the NAPMP to create a chiplet program that 
plays a leading role in driving standards in 2D and 
2.5D heterogenous integration, as well as establishing 
a long-term vision in 3D integration of memory and 
logic beyond existing standards in stacked memory. 
NSTC-sponsored multi-project wafer programs could 
be used to grow an expansive library of interoperable 
chiplets that can be integrated with custom chiplets 
to demonstrate innovations with reduced investment 
and time. The technical center for heterogenous 
integration described earlier, combined with an 
open chiplet platform, could play a central role in 
prototyping new and emerging complex systems 
for transition into commercial production. Private-
sector companies could be created or expanded to 
participate in a chiplet ecosystem. In brief, the NSTC, 
in coordination with the NAPMP, should establish a 
robust chiplet program to enable an open chiplet 
TECHNICAL CENTERS: COMMUNITY INPUT
The semiconductor community has provided extensive input to the requirements for potential 
technical centers. The NSTC will embark on a prioritization process to ensure that the highest priority 
needs are met with the funds available. Identified needs for the NSTC to consider include:
• Baseline CMOS (complementary metal-oxide semiconductor): Fully functional and supported 
CMOS process flow at 22 nm or below with a capacity of 10,000 wafer starts per month on 
300 mm wafers 
• CMOS R&D process: Front-end short loops supporting < 3 nm technology R&D at a capacity 
of 2,000 wafers per month using extreme ultraviolet technology enabling the development of 
leading-edge materials, devices, and process and metrology tools 
• Manufacturing test vehicles that provide low-cost patterned and functional substrates that can be 
used to provide data through electrical test, to enable materials, equipment, process, and device 
development and optimization, especially for CMOS+X enabled technologies
• Extended metrology capacity to enable R&D in a production environment including rapid 
failure analysis to shorten prototype development cycles, extensive in-line process monitoring 
capabilities, and off-line characterization facilities 
• Space and flexibility to accommodate next-generation or prototype processing and metrology 
tools so that they can be demonstrated in a production environment
• Back-end short loop processing from specialized capabilities enabling “fab-to-lab”²⁴ finishing of 
R&D devices and high-quality processing of novel materials and devices while maintaining process 
and material segregation
• Power electronics: Power management devices often require non-silicon substrates (e.g., silicon 
carbide, gallium nitride) and specialized designs, tools, and processes
• Radio frequency, mixed signal, and analog: Communication and sensing applications require 
diverse capabilities distinct from leading-edge CMOS
• Photonics: Advancements in quantum, sensing, and interconnect are all possible at the 
intersection of light and electronics
• Microelectromechanical systems: Sensors for mobile, automotive, health care, and internet-of-
things are all growth areas that require resources distinct from traditional CMOS flow
• Bioelectronics: The convergence of microfabrication and biotechnology brings new opportunities, 
but also increased complexity and significant integration challenges
• Mature node: The NSTC may seek to have capacity at a mature node (e.g., 130 nm), with such a 
facility well suited to certain research programs and workforce education
• Design tools: New design tools and methodologies to accelerate the generation of circuit IP; 
virtualize devices, circuits, and processes; and enable co-design, simulation, and heterogeneous 
integration
=== PAGE 18 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
16 
marketplace and maintain U.S. leadership in a broad 
spectrum of silicon and non-silicon technologies. 
Digital Assets: The NSTC Design Enablement 
Gateway
Today’s IP requirements make it difficult for industry 
participants to share up-to-date circuit designs and 
software and to cooperate in the development of 
new technologies. As the cost of integrated circuit 
design skyrockets and the industry moves toward 
more complex heterogenous systems, improved 
flexibility in the design ecosystem will be an important 
component of improving the pathway from design to 
commercialization. 
The NSTC could pursue new methods and approaches, 
some technical and others focused on simplifying 
legal compliance, to ensure that IP can be safely 
shared by establishing a cloud-based, design 
enablement gateway to serve as the focal point for 
semiconductor fabless R&D. A priority of NSTC-based 
research and funding into EDA and circuit design 
could be aimed at increasing the portability of designs 
between foundries and technology nodes. Research 
into this area could reduce the time it takes to spin 
up new processes at foundries as well as improve the 
ability to rapidly qualify ported designs.
Such a gateway is complex and many details are yet to 
be determined, but the overriding goal is to facilitate 
collaboration, reduce cost and time to market, and 
broaden access to important tools and information, all 
while respecting private companies’ IP.
DESIGN ENABLEMENT GATEWAY: COMMUNITY INPUT
The semiconductor community has provided extensive input to the requirements for a new hosted 
design environment. Specifications that have been identified include:
• A complete set of resources needed for the design, simulation, and tape-out of integrated sys-
tems to be made in the U.S., without proprietary information leaving the cloud environment
• A well-structured, version-controlled interchange system between all participants within a multi-
party “nondisclosure agreement ecosystem” to facilitate sharing IP as needed by the members, 
especially circuit design-IP surrounding foundry process design kits
• An “app-store”-like environment where users can exchange integrated circuit design-IP under 
standardized licensing and support terms for basic R&D as well as for commercial use, as deter-
mined by the owner of the circuit design-IP 
• A catalog of IP generated from NSTC-sponsored projects, along with a pre-defined set of contrac-
tual obligations to determine the ownership of that IP; IP may be owned or co-owned by mem-
bers or the NSTC itself
• A catalog of circuit design-IP from NSTC-sponsored projects and, to the extent possible, of other 
federal agencies, that is made available for license at a reasonable cost
• A resource to help trace the provenance of circuit design-IP, both to ensure it is secure and to 
prevent piracy of proprietary information
• Collaboration between commercial EDA vendors and universities or startups to consider interop-
erability via industry standard tool formats or application programming interfaces (API’s) that 
would allow EDA innovations (open source or proprietary) to more tightly integrate and leverage 
commercial tool investment, adoption, and support.
The community has suggested options in licensing that the NSTC could consider in partnership with 
providers of EDA tooling and integrated IP: 
• Enabling the contribution of circuit design-IP under standard contributor license agreements
• Allowing NSTC members to access NSTC EDA resources using their own existing licenses (“bring 
your own license”)
• Subsidizing EDA and circuit design-IP license access for U.S. government agencies, universities, 
and early-stage startups
• Developing, promoting, and supporting existing or new licensing models that improve community 
access, such as a non-commercial, research-only licenses at low or no cost
=== PAGE 19 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 17
Data sets: The Department envisions a role for the 
NSTC in collecting, aggregating, and sharing data 
sets that enable benchmarking and operational 
improvements, tools development, the creation of 
digital twins, and training AI models. The NSTC could 
develop a methodology for the voluntary sharing of 
data that protects the proprietary component and 
national security while enabling access to appropriate 
performance data. To start, the NSTC could publish 
non-proprietary process, materials, and performance 
data from NSTC-operated and affiliated technical 
centers. In addition, the NSTC could use the multi-
project wafer programs to collect certain process and 
circuit measurement data to add to the data sets. 
These data sets should be available to NSTC members 
under clear guidelines that could dramatically shorten 
the time and lower the cost to go from circuit design 
concept to silicon-proven IP.
In addition, the NSTC could create a secure data 
repository where member operating data is reported 
and aggregated for return to all data contributors. 
While being meticulous about protecting data privacy, 
the NSTC could provide significant value in enabling 
individual companies to compare their data with 
aggregate industry data, making benchmarking easier 
and providing a road map for improved operations. 
Patents: Patents are an important tool that enable 
companies to publicly disclose technical information, 
yet profit from their commercialization. The NSTC 
will develop rules and procedures that protect the 
ownership of any underlying IP of its members, 
including clear procedures and expectations on IP 
disclosure, licensing, and use. As an incentive to 
encourage participation, the NSTC should strive to 
make available IP that is generated as a result of NSTC 
funding to members at a reasonable cost, and to 
facilitate appropriate IP sharing amongst members. 
The NSTC may own or co-own IP generated from 
NSTC-funded projects that it may later attempt to 
monetize to generate revenue. 
Workforce Programs
An innovative and resilient semiconductor industry will 
require a robust pool of skilled workers in research, 
development, and construction that is enabled 
through effective training and career development 
programs. Workforce development is a priority 
across both the CHIPS Incentives and Research and 
Development programs. The February 28, 2023, 
Notice of Funding Opportunity for Commercial 
Fabrication Facilities requires companies seeking 
funding from the CHIPS Incentives program to 
submit workforce development plans for the workers 
who will construct and operate their facilities. The 
CHIPS Program Office has provided an informational 
workforce development planning guide with examples 
of strategies applicants can use to meet the goals 
outlined in the Notice of Funding Opportunity.²⁶ 
The NSTC is envisioned to serve as a coordinating 
body and center of excellence to help scale the 
technical workforce—including scientists, engineers, 
and technicians—while leveraging the many 
semiconductor-related workforce activities funded 
by the U.S. government. The CHIPS R&D Office is 
working closely with federal agencies to coordinate 
semiconductor workforce programs such as through 
the SML, with NSF and its extensive portfolio of 
education and training programs, and with efforts at 
the DOD and other agencies. The CHIPS R&D Office’s 
workforce strategy document is planned for release at 
a future date.
The NSTC can facilitate workforce expansion by 
providing support to scale-up existing quality training 
programs and to develop and test novel training 
approaches. Expanding the pool of engineers and 
technicians necessitates reaching out to individuals 
from underserved communities who are historically 
underrepresented in the semiconductor industry. The 
NSTC workforce programs will include a focus on 
recruiting, training, and retaining these workers.
To achieve these goals, the NSTC should: 
1. Collaborate with industry, educational 
institutions, government agencies, and 
government-funded research institutions to 
identify and scale gold-standard education 
models, experiential learning, and training 
programs that consistently meet industry 
needs 
2. Create a clearinghouse to collect and 
disseminate a wide range of information on 
research, best practices, and opportunities in 
education, experiential learning, and workforce 
training programs 
3. Advance opportunities for career exploration 
in semiconductors and related microelectronics 
=== PAGE 20 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
18 
design fields, including individuals from 
underserved communities
4. Serve as a collaborative space to solve industry 
workforce challenges by convening, aligning 
resources, or otherwise providing support as 
industry needs arise 
The NSTC should strongly encourage adoption and 
use of the DEIA principles as detailed in the Good 
Jobs Principles⁸ and the Department’s workforce 
investment best practices.²⁷ 
Identify and Scale Proven 
Education Models
The NSTC should convene industry and educational 
institutions to identify hiring needs, challenges in 
the existing workforce pipeline, and evidence-based 
strategies to overcome those challenges. The NSTC 
should consider convening a group of experts focused 
on workforce to guide its efforts and investments. 
Frameworks. In coordination with stakeholders, the 
NSTC should facilitate the ongoing development, 
maintenance, and adoption of common semiconductor 
industry occupational frameworks to identify 
significant skills gaps and identify emerging skills 
needs. A common framework would enable the 
development of curricula, skills, and credentials for a 
variety of programs. By adopting a common language, 
skills, and credentials, a framework would support 
transferable and consistent education and training 
that allows employers to easily recruit workers and 
enable mobility within the industry. An example of this 
approach is the National Initiative for Cybersecurity 
Education (NICE) Framework.²⁸ 
In collaboration with external stakeholders, the 
NSTC framework will build a common lexicon of 
tasks, knowledge, and skills for the semiconductor 
technical workforce. The NSTC should inventory 
and integrate duplicative efforts already underway 
by stakeholders and similar models in related 
fields, such as the Semiconductor-Nanotechnology 
Manufacturing Competency Model developed by the 
Competency Model Clearinghouse.²⁹ Such a workforce 
framework is a key step in developing industry-wide 
apprenticeships and certificates that can benefit both 
employers and employees. The NSTC’s support of a 
Learning and Employment Record³⁰ program would 
similarly help jobseekers communicate their relevant 
skills to employers. As semiconductor technology 
evolves, this model should be updated with skills 
needs identified by all stakeholders.
Technical training. The NSTC should identify 
opportunities to scale existing evidence-based training 
programs, particularly those that have demonstrated 
an ability to attract potential employees, 
representative of the United States population. 
Effective training opportunities are needed to train 
prospective workers in non-degree and advanced 
degree programs, and in programs in between. Many 
career technical education centers and community 
colleges have partnered with organizations to help 
reach students from underserved communities. 
Some engineering schools across the country have 
expanded access to computing and engineering 
programs by, for example, changing the structure 
of introductory mathematics courses or increasing 
experiential learning. The NSTC should catalogue 
methods that work and support their adoption. The 
NSTC should consider a funding process to enable 
more programs to adopt techniques that have 
proven successful.
Create a Clearinghouse of Information
The NSTC should create and host a publicly 
accessible clearinghouse of education and workforce 
development information to increase standardization 
and transparency in the field. 
Workforce Metrics. The NSTC should collect, review, 
and disseminate metrics about industry employment 
and training efforts as provided by members and 
other appropriate organizations to allow evidence-
based decision making for workforce education or 
training programs. Examples of workforce metrics 
include, but are not limited to:
• Data about industry employment including 
geographic and demographic information
• Metrics about the availability, quality, and usage 
and success rates of training programs, degree 
programs, internships, apprenticeships, and 
job openings
General Resources. The NSTC should collect, review, 
and disseminate shared resources for semiconductor 
workforce development and outreach. These resources 
could include:
• Evaluations of relevant workforce training and 
development programs to give guidance to 
=== PAGE 21 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 19
industry participants in developing or selecting 
a workforce advancement program
• Grade-appropriate educational materials 
for K-12 students to create excitement and 
curiosity about the semiconductor industry 
and related microelectronics design career 
pathways
• Virtual programming like specialized 
on-demand courses, virtual tours of 
semiconductor fabs, and interactive tools for 
post-secondary learners
• Leading practices for diversifying the 
semiconductor workforce like wraparound 
services, mentorships, and sponsorship 
programs
• Information on career pathways for workers 
wanting to advance their career in the industry, 
course listings, and options for acquiring 
industry-recognized credentials
• Listings of internship and apprenticeship 
programs
• Job postings
Advance Opportunities for Semiconductor 
Career Exploration 
and Participation
Many students and prospective workforce 
participants, particularly those from underserved 
communities, are not aware of potential career 
opportunities in the semiconductor industry. The 
NSTC should provide both financial and non-financial 
support to increase interest and participation in 
the industry. 
For example, the NSTC could:
• Create campaigns to increase visibility 
for careers in the semiconductor industry, 
highlighting representative role models in a 
wide range of occupations. The campaigns 
should be regionally based and include 
member companies to highlight the unique 
opportunities available in specific locations
• To expand access to jobs in the semiconductor 
industry, develop programs that provide 
financial and non-financial support through 
grants, fellowships, and scholarships³¹ that 
enhance student success
• Provide programmatic support (e.g., career 
planning, mentorship, sponsorship, and 
cohort programs) and additional funding to 
scholarship and fellowship recipients 
• Develop a program for professionals from 
member companies to guest teach and mentor 
students at schools, community colleges, 
or universities in the region or at regional 
Manufacturing USA institutes
• Create a fund to upgrade educational 
laboratory facilities at universities, including 
MSIs and tribal colleges around the country, 
enabling more experiential learning for both 
teachers and students
It is expected that the NSTC workforce development 
portfolio will evolve over time as industry needs 
change and as the community provides feedback on 
direct workforce efforts.
Membership Programs 
and Services
The NSTC will be a membership organization that 
thrives best with active participation and provides 
significant value to all its members. The Department 
expects a flexible membership structure with different 
fees by scale of institution and by industry sector with 
the objective of making membership attractive and 
accessible to all parts of the community including: 
• Fabless semiconductor companies
• Semiconductor customers who design their 
own chips 
• Research institutions and community colleges
• State and local governments
• Federal agencies, national labs, and federally-
funded labs
• Foundries and integrated device manufacturers
• Equipment vendors and materials suppliers
• Labor unions
• Investors 
It is anticipated that specific programs may require 
additional fee structures.
The Department anticipates that international 
companies and research organizations will be able to 
participate in the NSTC subject to restrictions imposed 
by law. Foreign entities of concern and entities 
owned, controlled by, or subject to the jurisdiction of 
a foreign country of concern will not be eligible for 
membership.³² Additional guidance for international 
companies will be developed. The Department 
expects that most NSTC-funded work will take place 
at facilities and institutions located in the U.S.
=== PAGE 22 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
20 
Investment Fund and Startup Support
As the costs and time required to progress from idea 
to commercialization have escalated, it has become 
harder for universities and emerging companies to 
bring new ideas to the market. The significant amount 
of capital required at the early stages requires highly 
dilutive investment capital, discouraging innovation. 
Supporting the advancement of many new ideas is an 
important objective that cuts across many program 
areas in the NSTC including providing low-cost and 
reliable access to the physical and digital assets 
described here, and managing a multi-project wafer 
program, incubation services, and IP licensing support.
One of the important programs detailed in the Act 
is the NSTC Investment Fund. The Department 
foresees the following important characteristics as the 
Investment Fund strategy is developed:
• A structure designed to help startups reduce 
risk and accelerate milestones in order to 
attract significant private capital
• A collaboration with other U.S. government 
entities that have similar objectives 
• A collaboration with private sector venture, 
corporate, and strategic investors that 
bring substantial expertise to assessing and 
structuring financings
• A portfolio approach, with balanced risk across 
investments
• Entrepreneurial support
The Department expects that the NSTC will hire a 
manager of the investment fund with substantial 
private sector investment and technology 
development experience to guide this effort.
GOVERNANCE
The Department desires to create an NSTC that can be 
agile, fast-moving, flexible, responsive to industry and 
researcher needs, and accountable to taxpayers. The 
integrity of the NSTC is paramount, and it is essential 
that it is viewed throughout the ecosystem as neutral, 
trusted, and science-driven. In order to best effectuate 
the Department’s vision to establish the NSTC as a 
once-in-a-generation, transformative center that can 
endure for decades, the NSTC must have world-class 
leadership that is visionary, dedicated to the aims of 
the NSTC, and committed to the public interest. 
The Secretary of Commerce, in collaboration with the 
Secretary of Defense, will establish the NSTC through 
the creation of a public-private consortium as required 
by the Act. The Department has also considered the 
appropriate governance structure for the operations 
of the NSTC. It has reviewed governance structures of 
analogous organizations such as SEMATECH, and 
MEMBERSHIP STRUCTURE: COMMUNITY INPUT
The following benefits have been requested as part of the membership structure, and could be 
included either in the base fee or as an ad hoc cost:
• Use of technical centers 
• Access to research and development programs, technical expertise, emerging materials and 
process technologies, and manufacturing test vehicles 
• Access to digital assets, such as EDA and design enablement tools, IP, and aggregated data sets 
• Facilitated access to multi-project wafers at leading-edge and mature foundries
• Access for startups to a nurturing ecosystem, including resources such as incubation support, 
IP-licensing guidance, convening opportunities that introduce startups to interested investors, and 
coordination with the efforts of other federal agencies
• Participation in the groups that advise the NSTC leadership on different program objectives
• Participation in industry convenings including groups focused on road maps, standards, and  
grand challenges
• Participation in training, workforce development, technical exchange programs, and access to the 
workforce data clearinghouse
=== PAGE 23 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 21
has considered the structures of various consortia, 
independent research organizations, federally funded 
research and development centers, universities, 
and allies’ research organizations, among others. 
In addition, the Department reviewed the input of 
PCAST, the IAC, industry coalitions and associations, 
and feedback we received from stakeholders across 
the country. 
Based on this research and stakeholder input, the 
Department anticipates the creation of a new, 
purpose-built, independent, nonprofit entity with the 
requisite neutrality, expertise, leadership, and capacity 
to serve as the operator of the NSTC. The Department 
anticipates entering into an agreement with the NSTC 
operator that, among other things, will detail the 
processes for receiving government funds to support 
the NSTC’s statutory responsibilities, reporting on 
NSTC activities, and ensuring taxpayer accountability.
Operating Model
The NSTC seeks to encourage broad participation 
across the entire semiconductor ecosystem. Specific 
benefits for different categories of members will vary, 
but all members should benefit from being part of 
the community. The NSTC will stay relevant only if it 
is serving the needs of its members. The NSTC should 
be structured with a careful balance between the 
proprietary interests of individual companies and the 
interests of the community. 
The NSTC will determine the appropriate mix of 
programs and whether they are executed through 
in-house resources or in collaboration with other 
entities. The Department envisions the NSTC utilizing 
several approaches to achieve its goals including 
providing funding for collaborative projects, providing 
fee-for-service capabilities to members and the 
community, and convening and facilitating joint 
program development and road mapping activities. 
Figure 4. A conceptual model of the operational structure of the NSTC.
=== PAGE 24 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
22 
The NSTC will develop a network of technical centers 
with input from stakeholders. The network should 
ensure effective integration and workflow between 
centers and accessibility to all members. 
The NSTC should determine how best to engage 
advisors from industry and educational institutions 
to provide input on technical programs, workforce 
development, or other activities as needed.
Financial Model
The Department is developing a financial model to 
inform the broad strategic direction for the NSTC. The 
Act appropriated funding for five years. Using these 
funds as a catalyst, the Department’s ambition is to 
create a consortium that can fund multi-year research 
programs to tackle long-term strategic challenges, 
enable major facilities and virtual assets, and create a 
program that can last for decades. The Department’s 
financial model will explore potential revenue sources 
and enumerate likely costs over a period of ten years. 
Possible revenue sources for the NSTC, beyond 
funding from the Department as detailed in the Act, 
include membership fees, program service fees, 
returns from the investment fund, IP licensing fees, 
royalties, state and local government support, other 
federal agency participation, and philanthropy. The 
Department will work closely with the NSTC to ensure 
a financial model that serves the needs of the nation.
Measures of Success 
and Metrics
The NSTC represents a substantial investment for 
U.S. taxpayers. As such, it will be critical for the 
NSTC operator and the CHIPs R&D Office to work 
together to establish appropriate metrics and a 
common understanding of what constitutes success. 
In addition, a good set of metrics will enable the NSTC 
to better communicate its value to stakeholders and 
to provide guidance for future program activities. The 
Department proposes some principles to determine 
those metrics.
Measure Against Mission
Once established, the NSTC will continue to refine 
its mission and goals and prioritize programs and 
projects. The CHIPS R&D director will work directly 
with the NSTC operator to define specific measures 
of success that are consistent with the Act’s goals 
and the interests of the taxpayers, and to ensure 
accountability toward delivering them. The NSTC will 
need to define key milestones and metrics that show 
progress relative to its defined measures of success. 
The NSTC should regularly assess its defined measures 
of success and derive metrics to ensure that program 
efforts align with NSTC objectives and current 
program efforts. The NSTC should establish a policy to 
conduct these assessments as part of establishing new 
programs or revising existing programs.
Establish Measurement Infrastructure
The NSTC should establish the organizational 
infrastructure (e.g., systems and processes) 
necessary to assess progress toward meeting the 
defined measures of success. The NSTC should 
leverage existing resources and established best 
practices to enhance and guide the development 
of this infrastructure. The NSTC should coordinate 
and collaborate on these efforts with relevant 
organizations while ensuring the protection of 
proprietary information. The NSTC should use the 
capabilities provided by this infrastructure to support 
program efforts, when appropriate. 
Metrics Should Include Both Quantitative and 
Qualitative Measurements 
In addition to reporting on a wide range of specific 
activities, the NSTC should include qualitative 
measures in addition to counts of activities and 
outputs when defining metrics to show success. For 
example, data elements should include measures of 
program activities (e.g., number of individuals who 
receive certification in NSTC-sponsored training 
programs), leading indicators (e.g., data on post-
training job placements), evidence of downstream 
impacts (e.g., research output of trainees), and 
qualitative factors such as the support and respect 
of industry members. In addition, metrics should be 
established for both short- and long-term timeframes.
Regularly Report and Follow Evaluation Leading 
Practices
The NSTC will produce annual reports of its progress 
toward accomplishing its goals using the measures 
of success and related metrics, relying primarily 
on performance measures. These annual evidence-
building activities will provide regular, systematic 
updates on the extent to which the NSTC is achieving 
its intended outcomes and, if not, provides critical 
=== PAGE 25 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 23
markers that enable the NSTC to adjust its activities as 
needed. 
In addition, the NSTC should engage in the practice 
of conducting rigorous, systematic evaluations via 
experienced, independent external experts. Rigorous 
program evaluation activities complement the annual 
reporting by seeking to answer overall questions of 
effectiveness. These evaluation activities may include 
formative, process, outcome, and impact evaluations, 
as defined by the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB), as appropriate for the stage of the component 
of the NSTC under review and the evaluation questions 
being asked.³³ Consistent with OMB guidance and the 
Department of Commerce Program Evaluation policy, 
these reports should be made available to the public. 
Evaluation activities should be conducted on a regular 
cycle with a longer time horizon (e.g., every three to 
five years) than the schedule on which NSTC publishes 
its own performance reports. 
GOING FORWARD
The Department’s vision is to create an NSTC that 
can endure for generations. While that will take 
time, this vision and strategy document provides 
a critical guide to the path forward. This calendar 
year, the Department will work to establish the NSTC 
consortium with public and private representation, 
and will encourage the establishment of a new, 
purpose-built, non-profit entity with world-class 
leadership to operate the consortium. 
The Department encourages members of the 
semiconductor community to plan on becoming part 
of the NSTC, and to consider which program areas 
are of particular interest and how they will be able 
to participate in building this important consortium. 
As the Department proceeds with refining and 
finalizing these plans, it will continue to engage with 
participants in the broad ecosystem to ensure that the 
needs of the community are being addressed.
CONCLUSION
The NSTC will provide systems-level research and 
development with the sophisticated tools, resources, 
and capabilities needed to build the foundational 
semiconductor technologies of the future. The 
NSTC is a challenging and multifaceted endeavor 
that seeks to balance the needs of a wide range of 
constituents including government, the private sector, 
workforce entities, and educational institutions. The 
Department’s leadership believes that the best way to 
use the Act’s substantial appropriations, in accordance 
with the authority granted by the statute, is to create a 
long-lived center that can manage this complexity and 
become an engine of innovation for the nation. Such 
an effort will generate substantial new technology and 
broad benefits in fulfillment of this exciting mission.
The Department anticipates that the NSTC will create an open and transparent process to engage the 
community in building the NSTC, including the following possible areas of collaboration:
• Participating in research programs, grand challenges, and standard-setting activities
• Providing a headquarters location and administrative services
• Proposing a variety of structures for affiliated technical centers
• Creating the framework for new digital assets, such as the Design Enablement Gateway
• Proposing assets to be included in the Design Enablement Gateway
• Executing programs desired by the NSTC, such as providing incubation support to start-ups
• Participating in programs desired by the NSTC, such as participating in the investment fund
=== PAGE 26 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
24 
APPENDIX: DEFINITIONS 
OF ACRONYMS
AEC – Automotive Electronics Council 
AI – artificial intelligence
API - application programming interface
ARPA-E - DOE Advanced Research Projects 
Agency-Energy
CEO - chief executive officer 
CHIPS – Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce 
Semiconductors 
CMOS – complimentary metal-oxide 
semiconductor 
CPO – CHIPS Program Office
DARPA – Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency 
DEIA – diversity, equity, inclusion, and 
accessibility 
DMREF - Designing Materials to Revolutionize 
and Engineer our Future, and NSF program
DOD – Department of Defense 
DOE – Department of Energy
EDA – electronic design automation 
EERE – DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy
ERI - Electronics Resurgence Initiative
ESDA – Electrostatic Discharge Association (also 
known as EOS/ESD Association) 
EUV – extreme ultraviolet 
FuSe - NSF Future of Semiconductors initiative
IAC - Industrial Advisory Committee
IEC – International Electrotechnical Commission 
IEEE – Institute for Electrical and Electronic 
Engineers 
IP – intellectual property 
JEDEC – JEDEC Solid State Technology 
Association (formally Joint Electron Device 
Engineering Council) 
MSI – minority serving institution
NAPMP – National Advanced Packaging 
Manufacturing Program
NDAA – National Defense Authorization Act 
NGMM - Next-Generation Microelectronics 
Manufacturing
NICE – National Initiative for Cybersecurity 
Education 
NIH – National Institutes of Health
NNSA - National Nuclear Security Administration
NSF – National Science Foundation 
NSTC – National Semiconductor Technology 
Center 
OMB – Office of Management and Budget
PCAST – President’s Council of Advisors on 
Science and Technology
R&D – research and development 
RAMP-C - DOD Rapid Assured Microelectronics 
Prototypes - Commercial
RFI - Request for Information
RINGS – Resilient & Intelligent NextG Systems, 
and NSF program
SBIR - Small Business Innovation Research
SC - DOE Office of Science
SEMI – formally Semiconductor Equipment and 
Materials International 
SHIP - State-of-the-art Heterogeneous 
Integration Prototype
SIA - Semiconductor Industry Association
SML – Subcommittee on Microelectronic 
Leadership
USG – United States government
=== PAGE 27 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 25
CITATIONS
¹ Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake 
Sullivan at the Special Competitive Studies 
Project Global Emerging Technologies Summit, 
Speeches and Remarks, The White House, available 
at https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
speeches-remarks/2022/09/16/remarks-by-
national-security-advisor-jake-sullivan-at-the-
special-competitive-studies-project-global-emerging-
technologies-summit/
² The William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 authorized 
funding, while the CHIPS Act of 2022 appropriated 
funding. Pub. L. 116-283, §§ 9901-9908, 134 Stat. 3388, 
4843-4860 (2021) (codified at 15 U.S.C. §§ 4651-4657), 
as amended by the CHIPS Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-167, 
§§ 101-107, 136 Stat. 1366, 1372-1390 (2022) (codified 
as amended at 15 U.S.C. §§ 4651-4843)
³ CHIPS for America, available at https:/ /www.chips.
gov
⁴ “The CHIPS Act” or “the Act” refers to the William M. 
(Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2021, Pub. L. 116-283, §§ 9901-9908, 134 
Stat. 3388, 4843-4860 (2021) (codified at 15 U.S.C. §§ 
4651-4657), as amended by the CHIPS and Science 
Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-167, §§ 101-107, 136 Stat. 1366, 
1372-1390 (2022) (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. §§ 
4651-4843).
⁵ See National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(2022) Incentives, Infrastructure, and Research and 
Development Needs to Support a Strong Domestic 
Semiconductor Industry: Summary of Responses to 
Request for Information. (Department of Commerce, 
Washington, D.C.), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST 
SP 1282, available at https:/ /doi.org/10.6028/NIST.
SP.1282
⁶ Under 15 U.S.C. 4656(b), the IAC shall be established 
as an advisory committee to be composed of not 
fewer than 12 members, including representatives 
of industry, federal laboratories, and academic 
institutions, who are qualified to provide advice 
to the United States Government on matters 
relating to microelectronics research, development, 
manufacturing, and policy.
⁷ The graphic describing the NSTC mission appears 
as a reproduction from the NSTC Update to the 
Community released on November 16, 2022 at https:/ /
www.nist.gov/document/chips-america-national-
semiconductor-technology-center-update-community
⁸ See Department of Commerce and Department of 
Labor Good Jobs Principles, available at https:/ /www.
dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/goodjobs/Good-Jobs-
Summit-Principles-Factsheet.pdf
⁹ See also Draft National Strategy on Microelectronics 
Research (for Public Comment (September 14, 2022), 
available at https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2022/09/SML-DRAFT-Microlectronics-
Strategy-For-Public-Comment.pdf 
¹⁰ Under 15 U.S.C. 4565(d), “ National Advanced 
Packaging Manufacturing Program
Subject to the availability of appropriations for such 
purpose, the Secretary of Commerce shall establish 
a National Advanced Packaging Manufacturing 
Program led by the Director of the National Institute 
of Standards and Technology, in coordination with the 
national semiconductor technology center established 
under subsection (c), to strengthen semiconductor 
advanced test, assembly, and packaging capability in 
the domestic ecosystem, and which shall coordinate 
with a Manufacturing USA institute established under 
subsection (f), if applicable.” (emphasis added)
The Director may make financial assistance awards, 
including construction awards, in support of the 
National Advanced Packaging Manufacturing Program.
¹¹ G. E. Moore, Cramming More Components Onto 
Integrated Circuits, Electronics, volume 38, number 8, 
April 19, 1965, pp. 114 ff.
¹² W. Arden, M. Brillouët, P. Cogez, M. Graef, B. Huizing, 
R. Mahnkopf, “More-than-Moore” White Paper, 
SIA/ITRS (2010).
See also Bennett, H. and Hutcheson, G. (2011), More 
than Moore or More Moore: a SWOT analysis, AIP 
Conference Proceedings, [online], https:/ /tsapps.
nist.gov/publication/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=909225 
(Accessed March 23, 2023)
¹³ 15 U.S.C. 4565(d) National Advanced Packaging 
Manufacturing Program 
Subject to the availability of appropriations for such 
purpose, the Secretary of Commerce shall establish 
a National Advanced Packaging Manufacturing 
Program led by the Director of the National Institute 
=== PAGE 28 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
26 
of Standards and Technology, in coordination with the 
national semiconductor technology center established 
under subsection (c), to strengthen semiconductor 
advanced test, assembly, and packaging capability in 
the domestic ecosystem, and which shall coordinate 
with a Manufacturing USA institute established under 
subsection (f), if applicable. The Director may make 
financial assistance awards, including construction 
awards, in support of the National Advanced 
Packaging Manufacturing Program.
¹⁴ Under 15 U.S.C. 4656(f), the Manufacturing USA 
Institutes “may emphasize the following: (1) Research 
to support the virtualization and automation of 
maintenance of semiconductor machinery. (2) 
Development of new advanced test, assembly 
and packaging capabilities. (3) Developing and 
deploying educational and skills training curricula 
needed to support the industry sector and ensure the 
United States can build and maintain a trusted and 
predictable talent pipeline.” (emphasis added)
¹⁵ See Manufacturing USA Semiconductor Institutes, 
87 FR 62080 (October 13, 2022), available at https:/ /
www.federalregister.gov/d/2022-22221
¹⁶ See National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(2022) Strategic Opportunities for U.S. Semiconductor 
Manufacturing: Facilitating U.S. Leadership and 
Competitiveness through Advancements in 
Measurements and Standards. (Department of 
Commerce, Washington, D.C.), available at https:/ /doi.
org/10.6028/NIST.CHIPS.1000
¹⁷ https:/ /www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2023/02/
biden-harris-administration-launches-first-chips-
america-funding
¹⁸ https:/ /www.darpa.mil/program/
darpa-subterranean-challenge
¹⁹ P. Gargini, “Roadmap evolution: From NTRS to 
ITRS, from ITRS 2.0 to IRDS.” 2017 Fifth Berkeley 
Symposium on Energy Efficient Electronic Systems & 
Steep Transistors Workshop (E3S). IEEE, 2017.
²⁰ DOI: 10.1109/
VLSITechnologyandCir46769.2022.9830253
²¹ See Report to the President, Revitalizing the U.S. 
Semiconductor Ecosystem, President’s Council 
of Advisors on Science and Technology, avail-
able at https:/ /www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2022/09/PCAST_Semiconductors-Report_
Sep2022.pdf, see page 22. 
²² Primary standards developing organizations with 
international technical activity in semiconductors/
microelectronics include the following: Automotive 
Electronics Council (AEC), ASTM International (ASTM), 
Electrostatic Discharge Association (ESDA), Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), IPC 
International, Inc. (IPC), JEDEC Solid State Technology 
Association (JEDEC), International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC), and SEMI.
²³ See the Report by the Subcommittee on 
Research Security Joint Committee on the Research 
Environment, available at https:/ /www.whitehouse.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/010422-NSPM-33-
Implementation-Guidance.pdf
²⁴ The fab-to-lab concept captures the idea of using 
advanced fabrication technology on full wafers to 
produce high-quality device substrates that can then 
be cored or diced to enable processing in research 
systems. These test coupons are then returned to a 
special back-end-of-line facility to complete device 
fabrication. 
²⁵ The DARPA Toolbox Initiative has established a 
precedent for the use of R&D licenses for targeted 
projects.
²⁶ See https:/ /www.nist.gov/document/
workforce-development-planning-guide
²⁷ See the Department of Commerce three-pronged 
approach to workforce development and highly 
effective workforce investments at https:/ /www.
commerce.gov/issues/workforce-development
²⁸ See NIST Special Publication 800-181, Revision 
1: National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education 
Workforce Framework for Cybersecurity (NICE 
Framework), available at https:/ /doi.org/10.6028/NIST.
SP.800-181r1
²⁹ See the Semiconductor-Nanotechnology 
Manufacturing Competency Model at https:/ /www.
careeronestop.org/CompetencyModel/Competency-
Models/semiconductor-nanotechnology.aspx
³⁰ Learning and Employment Records are a secure 
and detailed record of verified achievements, whether 
education or training processes, formal or informal, 
classroom-based or workplace-based, that can easily 
=== PAGE 29 ===
CHIPSfor AMERICA CHIPSfor AMERICA
 27
transfer from one job or learning experience to 
another. See https:/ /www.commerce.gov/sites/default/
files/2020-09/LERwhitepaper09222020.pdf
³¹ https:/ /doi.org/10.1177/0002764219869417; https:/ /
files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1234479.pdf; Ceyhan, Gaye 
D., Alia N. Thompson, Jeremy D. Sloane, 
Jason R. Wiles, and John W. Tillotson. “The 
Socialization and Retention of Low-Income College 
Students: The Impact of a Wrap-Around Intervention.” 
International Journal of Higher Education 8, no. 6 
(2019): 249-261.
³² See definition for the term “foreign entity of 
concern” under 15 USC § 4651(8).
³³ See the Memorandum for Heads of Executive 
Departments and Agencies describing “Phase 4 
Implementation of the Foundations for Evidence-
Based Policymaking Act of 2018: Program Evaluation 
Standards and Practices” at https:/ /www.whitehouse.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/M-20-12.pdf
Disclaimer Statement
Any mention of companies, organizations, 
products or services within this document is 
for informational purposes only and does not 
imply recommendation or endorsement of any 
company, organization, product or service.
Copyright
This document is a work of the U.S. Government 
and is not subject to copyright in the United 
States (see 17 U.S.C. § 105). Foreign rights 
reserved. All tables and figures in this report, 
unless otherwise noted, were produced by NIST 
and DOC employees. Certain content contained 
within this report, which was not created by 
U.S. Government employees, may be subject to 
copyright.
=== PAGE 30 ===
CHIPS.gov
askchips@chips.gov
HTTPS:/ /WWW. CHIPS.GOV