=== PAGE 1 (Article page 5) ===
Cambridge Journal of Economics 1995, 19, 5-24
The 'National System of Innovation' in
historical perspective
Chris Freeman*
Contrary to some recent work on so-called 'globalisation', this paper argues that
national and regional systems of innovation remain an essential domain of economic
analysis. Their importance derives from the networks of relationships which are
necessary for any firm to innovate. Whilst external international connections are
certainly of growing importance, the influence of the national education system,
industrial relations, technical and scientific institutions, government policies, cul-
tural traditions and many other national institutions is fundamental. The historical
examples of Germany, Japan and the former USSR illustrate this point, as well as
the more recent contrast between East Asian and Latin American countries.
Introduction: The National System of Friedrich List
According to this author's recollections, the first person to use the expression 'National
System of Innovation' was Bengt-Ake Lundvall and he is also the editor of a highly
original and thought-provoking book (1992) on this subject. However, as he and his
colleagues would be the first to agree (and as Lundvall himself points out) the idea
actually goes back at least to Friedrich List's conception of "The National System of
Political Economy' (1841), which might just as well have been called 'The National
System of Innovation'.
The main concern of List was with the problem of Germany overtaking England and,
for underdeveloped countries (as Germany then was in relation to England), he
advocated not only protection of infant industries but a broad range of policies designed
to accelerate, or to make possible, industrialisation and economic growth. Most of these
policies were concerned with learning about new technology and applying it. The
racialist and colonialist overtones of the book were in strong contrast to the inter-
nationalist cosmopolitan approach of the classical free trade economists and List's belief
that Holland and Denmark should join the German 'Bund' and acquire German
nationality because of their 'descent and whole character' reads somewhat strangely in
the European Community of today. Nevertheless, despite these unattractive features of
his outlook, he clearly anticipated many contemporary theories.
After reviewing the changing ideas of economists about development in the years since
the Second World War, the World Bank (1991) concludes that it is intangible investment
in knowledge accumulation which is decisive rather than physical capital investment, as
was at one time believed (pages 33-35). The Report cites the 'New Growth Theory'
Manuscript received 8 March 1993; finaJ version received 23 July 1993.
•University of Sussex. I am grateful to two anonymous referees for useful comments on an earlier draft.
03O9-166X/95/010005 + 2O J08.00/0 © '995 Academic Press Limited

=== PAGE 2 (Article page 6) ===
6 C. Freeman
(Romer, 1986; Grossman and Helpman, 1991) in support of this view but the so-called
'New* Growth Theory has in fact only belatedly incorporated into neoclassical models
the realistic assumptions which had become commonplace among economic historians
and neo-Schumpcterian economists. Indeed, it could just as well have cited Friedrich
List (1841), who, in criticising a passage from Adam Smith, said:
in opposition to this reasoning, Adam Smith has merely taken the word capital in that sense in
which it is necessarily taken by rentiers or merchants in their book-keeping and their balance sheets
. . . He has forgotten that he himself includes (in his definition of capital) the intellectual and bodily
abilities of the producers under this term. He wrongly maintains that the revenues of the nation are
dependent only on the sum of its material capital, (p. 183)
and further:
The present state of the nations is the result of the accumulation of all discoveries, inventions,
improvements, perfections and exertions of all generations which have lived before us: they form
the intellectual1 capital of the present human race, and every separate nation is productive only in
the proportion in which it has known how to appropriate those attainments of former generations
and to increase them by it* own acquirements, (p. 113)
List's clear recognition of the interdependence of tangible and intangible investment has
a decidedly modem ring. He saw too that industry should be linked to the formal
institutions of science and of education:
There scarcely exists a manufacturing business which has no relation to physics, mechanics,
chemistry, mathematics or to the art of design, etc. No progress, no new discoveries and inventions
can be made in these sciences by which a hundred industries and processes could not be improved
or altered. In the manufacturing State, therefore, sciences and arts must necessarily become
popular, (p. 162)
It was thanks to the advocacy of List and like-minded economists, as well as to the
long-established Prussian system, that Germany developed one of the best technical
education and training systems in the world. This system was not only, according to
many historians, (e.g. Landes, 1970; Barnett, 1988; Hobsbawm, 1968) one of the main
factors in Germany overtaking Britain in the latter half of the nineteenth century, but to
this day is the foundation for the superior skills and higher productivity of the German
labour force (Prais, 1981) in many industries. Many British policies for education and
training for over a century can be realistically viewed as spasmodic, belated and never
wholly successful attempts to catch up with German technological education and
training systems.
Not only did List anticipate these essential features of current work on national
systems of innovation, he also recognised the interdependence of the import of foreign
technology and domestic technical development. Nations should not only acquire the
achievements of other more advanced nations, they should increase them by their own
efforts. Again, there was already a good model for this approach to technological learning
in Prussia: the acquisition of machine tool technology. It was British engineers (especially
Maudslay) and mechanics who were responsible for the key innovations in machine tool
technology in the first quarter of the nineteenth century. This technology was described
by Paulinyi (1982) as the 'Alpha and Omega of modem machine-building1 because it
1 I have ustd the expression 'intellectual capital' rather than 'mental capital' used in the early English
edinon, [C.F.]

=== PAGE 3 (Article page 7) ===
The 'National System of Innovation' 7
enabled the design and construction of metal-working precision machinery for all other
industries. Those involved attempted to maintain a considerable degree of secrecy, but
its importance was recognised by the Prussian government, who took decisive steps
to acquire the technology, despite the fact that the British government was attempt-
ing to ban the export of machine tools (with the imposition of heavy fines for
contravention).
The Prussian government, which had set up Technical Training Institutes (Gewerbe-
Institut), made sure that they received imported British machine tools for reverse
engineering and for training German craftsmen, who then disseminated the technology
in German industry (Paulinyi, 1982). British craftsmen were also attracted to Prussia, as
much of the technology depended on tacit knowledge. (Three out of four of the leading
machine tool entrepreneurs in Britain at that time had themselves spent years with
Mawdslay in his workshop.) The transfer of technology promoted and coordinated by
the Prussian state was highly successful: the German machine tool industry and
machine-building proved capable of designing and manufacturing the machinery necess-
ary to make steam locomotives in the 1840s and 1850s. This set Prussia (later Imperial
Germany) well on the road to overtaking Britain. Thus, although he did not cite this
particular example, List was not talking in a purely abstract way about industrialisation
and technology transfer but about a process which was unfolding before his eyes. It was
summed up by Landes (1970):
Only the government could afford to send officials on costly tours of inspection as far away as the
United States; provide the necessary buildings and equipment; feed, clothe, house, and in some
cases pay students for a period of years. Moreover, these pedagogical institutions were only
part—though the most important part—of a larger educational system designed to introduce the
new techniques and diffuse them through the economy; there were also non-teaching academies,
museums, and, most important perhaps, expositions.
Finally, the government provided technical advice and assistance, awarded subventions to
inventors and immigrant entrepreneurs, bestowed gifts of machinery, allowed rebates and
exemptions of duties on imports of industrial equipment. Some of this was simply a continuation
of the past—a heritage of the strong tradition of direct state interest in economic development.
Much of it, in Germany particularly, was symptomatic of a passionate desire to organize and hasten
the process of catching up.
In so far as this promotional effort stressed the establishment of rational standards of research
and industrial performance, it was of the greatest significance for the future, (p. 151)
Not only did List analyse many features of the national system of innovation which are
at the heart of contemporary studies (education and training institutions, science,
technical institutes, user-producer interactive learning, knowledge accumulation, adapt-
ing imported technology, promotion of strategic industries, etc.) he also put great
emphasis on the role of the state in coordinating and carrying through long-term policies
for industry and the economy. Here, as often, he took issue with Jean-Baptiste Say, the
favourite target in his polemics with the classical school, who had argued that
governments did not make much difference, except in a negative way.
The United States was of course even more successful than Germany in overtaking
Britain in the second half of the nineteenth century and list had leamt a great deal from
his residence in the United States and especially from Hamilton's (1791) Report on
Manufactures. The widespread promotion of education (though not of industrial
training) was even more remarkable in the United States than in Germany. However, the
abundance of cheap, accessible materials, energy and land together with successive waves

=== PAGE 4 (Article page 8) ===
8 C. Freeman
of immigration imparted to the United States' national system some specific character-
istics without parallel in Europe. The pro-active role of the state was greater in Germany
whilst foreign investment played a greater role in the United States.
Although List anticipated many features of the contemporary debate about national
systems of innovation (even though his terminology was different), it would of course be
absurd to imagine that he could have foreseen all the changes in the world economy and
national economies over the next century and a half. In particular, he did not foresee the
rise of in-house professionalised Research and Development (R&D) in industry, still less
the rise of multi-national (or transnational) corporations (TNCs), operating production
establishments in many different countries and increasingly also setting up R&D outside
their original base. These are major new developments which deeply affect the whole
concept of national systems. This paper will discuss the rise of R&D in Section 2, and
types of comparison of national systems which this has led to in Section 3. It will discuss
the role of TNCs and the ways in which they may affect the performance of national
economies in different continents in Section 4.
2. The rise of specialised research and development
Bjorn Johnson (1992) in an excellent chapter in the Lundvall book on 'National Systems
of Innovation' emphasises the important point that institutions are often thought of
simply as a source of'institutional drag' (i.e. of inertia in the system), whereas of course
institutional innovations may also give new impetus to technical and economic change.
Appropriately enough it was in Germany that the major institutional innovation of the
in-house industrial R&D department was introduced in 1870. Product and process
innovation by firms took place of course for more than a century before that, but it was
the German dyestuffs industry (Beer, 1959) which first realised that it could be profitable
to put the business of research for new products and development of new chemical
processes on a regular, systematic and professional basis. Hoechst, Bayer and BASF have
continued and strengthened this tradition down to the present day, when their R&D labs
now employ many thousands of scientists and engineers. Undoubtedly such discoveries
and innovations as synthetic indigo, many other synthetic dyestuffs and Pharmaceuticals
and the Haber-Bosch process for fertilisers were the main factors in establishing the
German chemical industry's leading position before and after the First World War.
When the three companies merged in 1926 to form the giant IG Farben Trust they
further reinforced their R&D (Freeman, 1974) and made many of the key innovations in
synthetic materials, fibres and rubbers (PVC, polystyrene, urea-formaldehyde, Buna,
etc.).
The enormous success of the German chemical industry led to imitation of the social
innovation of the R&D Department in the chemical firms of other countries (e.g. CIBA
in Switzerland). The in-house R&D lab also emerged in other industries which had the
same need to access the results of basic research from universities and other research
institutions and to develop their own new products. In the United States and German
electrical industries, in-house R&D labs appeared in the 1880s, but contract labs, such
as Edison's Institute, played a bigger part in the US system (Hughes, 1989).
From their origins in the chemical and electrical industries gradually during the latter
part of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth, specialised R&D labs
became characteristic features of most large firms in manufacturing industry (although
not of the vast majority of small firms or of service industries) (Mowery, 1980, 1983;

=== PAGE 5 (Article page 9) ===
The 'National System of Innovation'
Table 1. Estimated gross expenditure on research and development as a
fraction of GNP, (GERDIGNP ratio) 1934-1983
USA
EC*
Japan
USSR
1934
0-6
0-2
01
0-3
1967
31
1-2
10
3-2
1983
2-7
21
2-7
36
1983
civil R&D
only
20
1-8
2-7
10
'Estimated weighted average of 12 EC countries.
Source: Author's estimates based on Bernal (1939) adapted to 'Frascari'
definitions (1963), OECD statistics, and adjustments to Soviet statistics
based on Freeman and Young, (1965).
Hounshell, 1982; Hughes, 1989). This change in industrial behaviour and the growth of
government laboratories, of independent contract research institutes and university
research impressed many observers and led to the comment by a leading physicist that
the greatest invention of the nineteenth century was the method of invention itself. A
great many inventions had of course been made for centuries or indeed for millennia
before 1870, but the new professional R&D labs seemed like a giant step forward. This
perception was powerfully reinforced in the Second World War. Science was already
important in the First World War—more important than most people realised at the
time—but it was the Manhattan Project and its outcome at Hiroshima which impressed
on people throughout the world the power of science and especially, as it seemed, Big
Science. Many other developments on both sides, such as radar, computers, rockets and
explosives, resulted from large R&D projects, mobilising both government, industrial
and academic engineers and scientists.
It was, therefore, hardly surprising that in the climate which existed after the Second
World War, the prestige of organised, professional R&D was very high. The proposals
made by a visionary physicist (Bernal, 1939), to increase British R&D by an order of
magnitude seemed absurdly Utopian at the time but this was in fact achieved in the new
political climate after the Second World War. A similar rapid expansion occurred in all
industrial countries in the 1950s and 1960s (Table 1) and even in Third World countries
there was a trend to establish research councils, national R&D labs and other scientific
institutions, to do nuclear physics and in some cases to try and make nuclear weapons
(e.g. Argentina, India, Brazil, Israel, Yugoslavia). It was hardly surprising either that a
simplistic linear model of science and technology 'push' was often dominant in the new
science councils that advised governments. It seemed so obvious that the Atom Bomb
(and it was hoped nuclear power for electricity) was the outcome of a chain reaction:
basic physics -> large-scale development in big labs -> applications and innovations
(whether military or civil). The 'linear Model' was specifically endorsed in the influential
Report of Vannevar Bush, 'Science, the Endless Frontier' (see Stokes, 1993).
This meant that the R&D system was seen as the source of innovations—an impression
that was reinforced by the system of measurement which was adopted, first by the
National Science Foundation in the United States and later during the 1950s and 1960s
by all the other OECD countries. This was standardised by the so-called 'Frascati
Manual' (OECD, 1963A) and, despite the fact that the authors pointed out that

=== PAGE 6 (Article page 10) ===
10 C. Freeman
technical change did not depend just on R&D but on many other related activities, such
as education, training, production engineering, design, quality control, etc. etc., never-
theless R&D measures were very frequently used as a surrogate for all these activities
which helped to promote new and improved products and processes. Furthermore, the
importance of all the feedback loops from the market and from production into the R&D
system was often overlooked or forgotten. The simple fact that the R&D measures were
the only ones that were available reinforced these tendencies.
Their effect could be seen in many national Reports as well as in the 'Science Policy
Reviews' conducted by the OECD in its member countries in the 1960s and 1970s. The
admirable aim of these reviews, like the reviews of member countries' economic policies,
which still continue and on which they were modelled, was to produce a friendly but
independent and critical assessment of each country's performance by an international
comparative yardstick. In practice diey concentrated mainly on the formal R&D system
and technical education. This was of course still quite a useful thing to do but it meant
that the 'national system' was usually denned in rather narrow terms. Academic research
on invention and innovation had amply demonstrated that many factors were important
for innovative success other than R&D. However, the practical difficulties of incor-
porating these factors in international comparisons were very great. 'League table'
comparisons of R&D were much easier and more influential.
Gradually, during the 1950s and 1960s, the evidence accumulated that the rate of
technical change and of economic growth depended more on efficient diffusion than on
being first in the world with radical innovations and as much on social innovations as on
technical innovations. This was reflected in the change of emphasis in various OECD
Reports (OECD, 1963B, 1971, 1980, 1988, 1991, 1992) and in the introduction of
Country Reports on 'Innovation'. Basic science was of course still recognised as being
very important but much more was said about technology and diffusion than hitherto.
Although various OECD Reports are a convenient record of changing ideas and
policies for science and technology, they rarely originated these changes. The OECD
documents summed up and reflected recent experience and changes in the member
countries and disseminated what were thought to be the lessons of this experience. The
OECD was also, however, more ready than most international organisations to involve
independent researchers so that their reports also embody some input from academic
research on technical change as well as from industrial R&D management sources. The
next section will very briefly summarise the relevant results of some of this work (more
fully surveyed in Freeman, 1994) and especially the results of international comparisons.
Comparisons with Japan were especially influential after Japan joined the OECD in the
1970s.
3. Some contrasting features of national systems of innovation in the 1970s
and 1980s
As empirical evidence and analysis began to accumulate about industrial R&D and about
innovation, both in Japan and in the United States and Europe, it became increasingly
evident that the success of innovations, their rate of diffusion and the associated
productivity gains depended on a wide variety of other influences as well as formal R&D.
In particular, incremental innovations came from production engineers, from technicians
and from the shop floor. They were strongly related to different forms of work
organisation (see especially Hollander, 1965). Furthermore, many improvements to

=== PAGE 7 (Article page 11) ===
The 'National System of Innovation' 11
products and to services came from interaction with the market and with related firms,
such as sub-contractors, suppliers of materials and services (see especially von Hippel,
1976, 1988, Lundvall, 1985, 1988, 1992; Sako, 1992). Formal R&D was usually
decisive in its contribution to radical innovations but it was no longer possible to ignore
the many other contributions to, and influences upon the process of technical change at
the level of firms and industries (Carter and Williams, 1957; Jewkes et al., 1958;
Mansfield, 1968, 1971; Nelson, 1962).
Not only were inter-firm relationships shown to be of critical importance, but the
external linkages within the narrower professional science-technology system were also
shown to be decisive for innovative success with radical innovations (NSF, 1973;
Gibbons and Johnston, 1974). Finally, research on diffusion revealed more and more
that the systemic aspects of innovation were increasingly influential in determining both
the rate of diffusion and the productivity gains associated with any particular diffusion
process (see especially Carlsson and Jacobsson, 1993). The success of any specific
technical innovation, such as robots or CNC, depended on other related changes in
systems of production. As three major new 'generic' technologies (information technol-
ogy, bio-technology and new materials technology) diffused through the world economy
in the 1970s and 1980s, systemic aspects of innovation assumed greater and greater
importance.
At the international level two contrasting experiences made a very powerful impression
in the 1980s both on policy-makers and on researchers: on the one hand the extraordi-
nary success of first Japan and then South Korea in technological and economic
catch-up; and on the other hand the collapse of the Socialist economies of Eastern
Europe.
At first, in the 1950s and 1960s, the Japanese success was often simply attributed to
copying, imitating and importing foreign technology and the statistics of the so-called
'technological balance of payments' were often cited to support this view. They showed
a huge deficit in Japanese transactions for licensing and know-how imports and exports
and a correspondingly large surplus for the United States. It soon became evident,
however, as Japanese products and processes began to out-perform American and
European products and processes in more and more industries, that this explanation was
no longer adequate even though the import of technology continued to be important.
Japanese industrial R&D expenditures as a proportion of civil industrial net output
surpassed those of the United States in the 1970s and total civil R&D as a fraction of
GNP surpassed USA in the 1980s (Table 1). The Japanese performance could now be
explained more in terms of R&D intensity, especially as Japanese R&D was highly
concentrated in the fastest growing civil industries, such as electronics. Patent statistics
showed that the leading Japanese electronic firms outstripped American and European
firms in these industries, not just in domestic patenting but in patents taken out in the
United States (Patel and Pavitt, 1991, 1992; Freeman, 1987).
However, although these rough measures of research and inventive activity certainly
did indicate the huge increase in Japanese scientific and technical activities, they did not
in themselves explain how these activities led to higher quality of new products and
processes (Grupp and Hofmeyer, 1986; Womack, Jones and Roos, 1990), to shorter lead
times (Graves, 1991; Mansfield, 1988) and to more rapid diffusion of such technologies
as robotics (Fleck and White, 1987; Mansfield, 1989). Moreover, the contrasting
example of the (then) Soviet Union and other East European countries showed that
simply to commit greater resources to R&D did not in itself guarantee successful

=== PAGE 8 (Article page 12) ===
12 C. Freeman
Table 2. Contrasting national systems of innovation: 1970s
Japan USSR
High GERD/GNP Ratio (25%)
Very low proportion of military/space R&D
(<2% of R&D)
High proportion of total R&D at enterprise
level and company-financed (approx. 67%)
Strong integration of R&D, production and
import of technology at enterprise level
Strong user-producer and subcontractor
network linkages
Strong incentives to innovate at enterprise
level involving both management and
workforce
Intensive experience of competition in
international markets
Very high GERD/GNP Ratio (c. 4%)
Extremely high proportion of military/space
R&D (>70%ofR&D)
Low proportion of total R&D at enterprise
level and company-financed (<10%)
Separation of R&D, production and import of
technology and weak institutional linkages
Weak or non-existent linkages between
marketing, production and procurement
Some incentives to innovate made
increasingly strong in 1960s and 1970s but
offset by other negative disincentives
affecting both management and workforce
Relatively weak exposure to international
competition except in arms race
innovation, diffusion and productivity gains. It was obvious that qualitative factors
affecting the national systems had to be taken into account as well as the purely
quantitative indicators.
Some major differences between the two national systems of Japan and the Soviet
Union as they were functioning in the 1970s are summarised in Table 2. The most
striking contrast of course was the huge commitment of Soviet R&D to military and
space applications with little direct or indirect spin-off to the civil economy. It has now
been shown that the desire to keep pace with the USA in the super-power arms race led
to about three-quarters of the massive Soviet R&D resources going into defence and
space research. This amounted to nearly 3% of GNP, so that only about 1 % remained
for civil R&D. This civil R&D/GNP ratio was less than half of most West European
countries and much smaller than the Japanese ratio (Table 1).
Nevertheless, it could have been far more productive if the social, technical and
economic linkages in the system and the incentives to efficient performance had been
stronger. The Soviet system grew up on the basis of separate Research Institutes within
the Academy system (for fundamental research), for each industry sector (for applied
research and development) and for the design of plant and import of technology (the
Project Design organisations) (Barker and Davies, 1965; Amann et al., 1979). The links
between all these different institutions and enterprise-level R&D remained rather weak
despite successive attempts to reform and improve the system in the 1960s and 1970s.
Moreover, there were quite strong negative incentives in the Soviet system retarding
innovation at enterprise level (Gomulka, 1990), such as the need to meet quantitative
planned production targets. Thus, whereas the integration of R&D, production, and
technology imports at firm level was the strongest feature of the Japanese system (Baba,
1985; Takeuchi and Nonaka, 1986; Freeman, 1987), it was very weak in the Soviet
Union except in the aircraft industry and other defence sectors. Finally, the user-
producer linkages which were so important in most other industrial countries were very
weak or almost non-existent in some areas in the Soviet Union.

=== PAGE 9 (Article page 13) ===
The 'National System of Innovation' 13
Table 3. Divergence in national systems of innovation in the 1980s
East Asia Latin America
Expanding universal education system with
high participation in tertiary education and
with high proportion of engineering graduates
Import of technology typically combined
with local initiatives in technical change and
at later stages rapidly rising levels of R&D
Industrial R&D rises typically to >50%
of all R&D
Development of strong science-technology
infrastructure and at later stages good
linkages with industrial R&D
High levels of investment and major inflow
of Japanese investment and technology with
strong Yen in 1980s. Strong influence of
Japanese models of management and
networking organisation
Heavy investment in advanced
telecommunications infrastructure
Strong and fast-growing electronic
industries with high exports and extensive
user feedback from international markets
Deteriorating education system with
proportionately lower output of engineers
Much transfer of technology, especially from
the United States, but weak enterprise-level
R&D and little integration with technology
transfer
Industrial R&D typically remains at <25%
of total
Weakening of science-technology
infrastructure and poor linkages with industry
Decline in (mainly US) foreign investment and
generally lower levels of investment. Low
level of international networking in
technology
Slow development of modern
telecommunications
Weak electronic industries with low exports
and little learning by international marketing
There were some features of their national systems in which both countries resembled
each other, and both did of course enjoy high economic growth rates in the 1950s and
1960s. Both had (and still have) good education systems with a high proportion of young
people participating in tertiary education and a strong emphasis on science and
technology. Both also had methods of generating long-term goals and perspectives for
the science-technology system, but whereas in the Japanese case the long-term 'visions'
are generated by an interactive process involving not only MITI and other government
organisations but also industry and universities (Irvine and Martin, 1984) in the USSR
the process was more restricted and dominated to a greater extent by military/space
requirements.
A similar sharp contrast can be made between the national systems of innovation
typically present in Latin American countries in the 1980s and those in the '4 Dragons'
of East Asia (Table 3) and especially between two 'newly industrialising countries'
(NICs) in the 1980s: Brazil and South Korea (Table 4). The Asian countries started
from a lower level of industrialisation in the 1950s but, whereas in the 1960s and 1970s
the Latin American and East Asian countries were often grouped together as very fast
growing NICs, in the 1980s a sharp contrast began to emerge: the East Asian countries'
GNP grew at an average annual rate of about 8%, but in most Latin American countries,
including Brazil, this fell to less than 2%, which meant in many cases a falling per capita
income. There are of course many explanations for this stark contrast. Some of the Asian
countries introduced more radial social changes, such as land reform and universal
education, than did most Latin American countries and clearly a structural and technical

=== PAGE 10 (Article page 14) ===
14 C. Freeman
Table 4. National systems of innovation: 1980s, some quantitative indicators
Various indicators of technical capability and
national institutions Brazil
South
Korea
Percent age group in third level (higher) education
Engineering students as a percentage of population
R&D as percentage of GNP
Industry R&D as a percentage of total
Robots per million in employment
CAD per million in employment
NCMT per million in employment
Growth rate electronics
Telephone lines per 100 (1989)
Per capita sales of telecommunication equipment (1989)
Patents (US) (1989)
11
(1985)
013
(1985)
0-7
(1987)
30
(1988)
52
(1987)
422
2298
(1987)
8%
(1983-1987)
6
S10
36
32
(1985)
0-54
(1985)
21
(1989)
65
(1987)
1060
(1987)
1437
(1986)
5176
(1985)
21%
(1985-1990)
25
877
159
transformation of this magnitude in this time was facilitated by these social changes. In
the case of Brazil and South Korea it is possible to give some more detailed quantitative
indicators of some of these contrasting features. As Table 4 shows, the contrast in
educational systems was very marked as well as enterprise-level R&D, telecommuni-
cation infrastructure and the diffusion of new technologies (see R. Nelson (ed.), 1993,
for more detailed comparisons and Villaschi (1993) for a detailed study of the Brazilian
NS).
4. 'Globalisation' and national systems
It has been argued in Section 3 that a variety of national institutions have powerfully
affected the relative rates of technical change and hence of economic growth in various
countries. The variations in national systems which have been described are of course
extreme contrasting cases. Nevertheless, they have certainly been important features of
world development in the second half of the twentieth century and they point to uneven
development of the world economy and divergence in growth rates. Moreover, differences
in naoonal systems are also very important between Japan, the United States and the EC
and between European countries themselves, as the major comparative study between
more than a dozen national systems of innovation illustrates (Nelson (ed.), 1993).
The comparative study of Ireland with other small countries by Mjeset (1992) also
demonstrates this point, and the comparison of Denmark and Sweden by Edqvist and
Lundvall (1993) shows that big differences exist between neighbouring countries which
superficially appear very similar in many ways. Moreover, Archibugi and Pinta (1991)
have demonstrated the growing pattern of specialisation in technology and trade and
Fagerberg (1992) has shown the continuing importance of the home market for
comparative technological advantage.

=== PAGE 11 (Article page 15) ===
The'National System of Innovation' 15
However, the whole concept of national differences in innovative capabilities deter-
mining national performance has been recently challenged on the grounds that trans-
national corporations (TNCs) are changing the face of the world economy in the
direction of globalisation. For example, Ohmae (1990) in his book The Borderless World
argues that national frontiers are 'melting away' in what he calls the 'TT F' (inter-linked
economy)—the triad of USA, EC and Japan, now being joined by NICs. This 'ILE* is
becoming 'so powerful that it has swallowed most consumers and corporations, made
traditional national borders almost disappear, and pushed bureaucrats, politicians and
the military towards, the status of declining industries' (p. xii).
As against this, Michael Porter (1990) has argued that:
Competitive advantage is created and sustained through a highly localised process. Differences in
national economic structures, values, cultures, institutions and histories contribute profoundly to
competitive success. The role of the home nation seems to be as strong or stronger than ever. While
globalisation of competition might appear to make the nation less important, instead it seems to
make it more so. With fewer impediments to trade to shelter uncompetitive domestic firms and
industries, the home nation takes on growing significance because it is the source of the skills and
technology that underpin competitive advantage, (p. 19)
In addition to Porter's argument, Lundvall (1993) points out that if uncertainty,
localised learning and bounded rationality are introduced as basic and more realistic
assumptions about microeconomic behaviour, rather than the traditional assumptions of
perfect information and hyperrationah'ty, then it must follow that local and national
variations in circumstances may often lead to different paths of development and to
increasing diversity rather than to standardisation and convergence.
At first sight, the activities of multinational corporations might appear to offer a
powerful countervailing force to this local variety and diversity. The largest corporations
in the world, whether their original domestic base was in Europe, the United States,
Japan or elsewhere, have often been investing in many different new locations. This
investment, even though initially it may have been in distribution and service networks,
or in production facilities, has more recently also included R&D. Whilst the greater part
of the 1980s' investment has been within the OECD area itself and in oil-producing
countries and could be more accurately described therefore as 'triadisation' rather than
'globalisation', it has also flowed, even though very unevenly, to other countries of
the Third World and there is now a small trickle to the former socialist group of
countries.
As Harry Johnson (1975) long ago pointed out, in this sense the multinationals do
indeed unite the human race. Since the basic laws of physics, chemistry, biology and
other sciences apply everywhere, there is an underlying unified technology which can in
principle be applied anywhere with identical or very similar results. Insofar as large
'global' TNCs are able to sell their products and services world-wide and to produce
them in many different locations, they can and do act as a very powerful agency tending
towards the world-wide standardisation of technology and output. As the model
developed by Callon (1993) indicates, the diffusion process can tend to enhance
similarities between adopters.
Even in the case of consumer goods where it might be reasonable to suppose that there
would continue to be wide variations in consumer tastes, we are all sufficiently familiar
with such products as 'Coca Cola' and such services as those provided by McDonalds to
recognise the reality of such global production and distribution networks, offering

=== PAGE 12 (Article page 16) ===
16 C. Freeman
standardised products and services world-wide. Is it not realistic to suppose that an
ever-larger proportion of world production and trade will take this form? Supporting
such a view are not only the obvious examples of hotel chains, soft drinks, canned beer,
tourist agencies and credit cards but theoretical economic arguments based on static and
dynamic economies of scale in production, advertising, marketing, design and finance, as
well as the ability of large multinationals to take advantage of surviving differences
between nations in costs of capital, labour, energy and other inputs.
However, it would be unwise to assume that these tendencies are the only or even
necessarily the strongest tendencies within the world economy. Nor are they so
unequivocally desirable that they should be promoted by both national and international
economic policies. In fact, the arguments for preserving and even encouraging diversity
may sometimes outweigh the shorter-term advantages of the scale economies derived
from standardisation and their propagation through transnational companies, free trade
and free flows of investment. In fact both processes (global standardisation in some areas
but increasing diversity in others) co-exist.
Whilst there are certainly some products and services, such as those already men-
tioned, where there is indeed a demand which is 'global' in nature and where local
variations in taste, regulation, climate and other circumstances can be largely or wholly
ignored, there are far more products and services where such variations certainly cannot
be ignored without dire consequences. Innumerable examples leap to mind where
climatic conditions affect the performance of machines, instruments, vehicles and
materials and even more examples are obvious in relation to variations in national
standards, specifications and regulations. Whilst it is true that international standardis-
ation is a countervailing force through the activities of the International Standards
Organisation (ISO) and many other bodies attempting to achieve harmonisation of
technical standards, it is also true that the experience of the European Community over
the past 20 years demonstrates the extreme difficulties attending this process in many
areas (as well as its feasibility in others). And all this still does not take into account the
cultural aspects of the problem which deeply affect such areas as food, clothing and
personal services.
So far we have been discussing mainly the case of established products and pointing
to some factors which limit global standardisation even in the simplest cases.
Advocates of a strong globalisation hypothesis would of course accept most of these
points, although they might argue that some of them will constantly tend to diminish
as the media, travel, education and international organisations all exert their long-term
influence. Rothwell (1992) has pointed to the 'electronificatian' of design as an
important factor facilitating the internationalisation of design and R&D. It can be
argued further that local variations can easily be dealt with inside the framework of the
global strategies of the multinational corporations. Indeed, globalisation of R&D has
already led to local adaptation and modification of products to meet national
variations, as a normal and almost routine activity of TNCs. Companies such as
Honda go one step further and claim to have a strategy of diversity in world-wide
design which goes beyond the simple modification of a standard product to the idea of
local variation at the design stage in several different parts of the world. However, the
vast majority of Japanese-based TNCs remain essentially Japanese companies with
international operations rather than truly international companies and the same is true
of US and most other MNCs in relation to their home environment (Hu, 1992). Most
R&D activities of MNCs are still overwhelmingly conducted in the domestic base of

=== PAGE 13 (Article page 17) ===
The 'National System of Innovation' 17
the company and are heavily influenced by the local national system of innovation.
Moreover, ownership and control still remain overwhelmingly based on the domestic
platform.
The statistics are rather poor but analysis of all the available data and cross-checking
with the patent statistics (Patel and Pavitt, 1991; Patel, 1993) suggests that the R&D
activities of US companies outside the USA amount to less than 10% of the total, whilst
those of Japanese companies are much lower—less than 2%—though rising. The picture
in Europe is more complex both because of the development of the European
Community and the Single European Market, and because of the existence of several
technically advanced small countries where the domestic base is too small for the strong
MNCs which are based there (Netherlands, Sweden, Belgium, Switzerland). A larger
part of national R&D activities in these countries and most other parts of Europe is
undertaken by foreign multi-nationals and their 'own' TNCs perform much more R&D
abroad than is the case with the USA or Japan. Only a small part of total world R&D is
conducted outside the leading industrial countries and only a very small part of this is
financed by TNCs.
Qualitative analysis of the transnational activities of corporations shows that most of
it is either local design modification to meet national specifications and regulations or
research to facilitate monitoring of local science and technology. The more original
research, development and design work is still overwhelmingly concentrated in the
domestic base, although there are important exceptions in the drug industry and
electronics industry where specialised pools of scientific ability play an important
role.
As long as we are dealing with a static array of products and discussing only minor
variations to adjust to local consumer tastes and environments, then the standardisation
arguments, the globalisation arguments and even some of the simplifying neoclassical
assumptions abut perfect information are at the border-lines of credibility and usefulness.
But once we leave this world and enter the dynamic world of radical innovations, both
technical and organisational, and of extremely uneven and unequal access to new
developments in science and technology, then the whole picture is transformed. More
realistic assumptions and a more realistic vision are essential if economic theory is to be
of any help in policy-making..
Lundvall (1993) points out that, even in the case of continuous incremental innovation
in open economies, the drive towards standardisation is limited. Geographical and
cultural proximity to advanced users and a network of institutionalised (even if often
informal) user-producer relationships are an important source of diversity and of
comparative advantage, as is the local supply of managerial and technical skills and
accumulated tacit knowledge. He gives several examples of such localised learning
generating strong positions in the world market. Whilst he accepts that TNCs might
locate in such 'national strongholds' in order to gain access to the fruits of this interactive
learning process, he points out that it is not always simple to enter such markets because
of the strength of the non-economic relationships involved. Competing standards for the
global market may be important weapons in such situations as well as other forms of
product differentiation and quality improvement.
When it comes to radical innovations the importance of institutional variety and
localised learning is even greater. Posner's (1961) theory of technology gaps and
imitation lags is of fundamental importance here. It may be many years before imitators
are capable of assembling the mix of skills, the work organisation and other institutional

=== PAGE 14 (Article page 18) ===
18 C. Freeman
changes necessary to launch into the production and marketing of entirely new products.
It is of course true that in the global diffusion of radical innovations, TNCs may have
an extremely important role. They are in a position to transfer specialised equipment and
skills to new locations if they so wish and to simulate and organise the necessary learning
processes. They are also in a position to make technology exchange agreements with
rivals and to organise joint ventures in any part of the world. It is for this reason that
many governments in Europe as well as in the Third World and the ex-socialist countries
have been anxious to offer incentives to attract a flow of inward investment and
associated technology transfer from firms based in Japan and USA.
However, such efforts will meet with only limited success unless accompanied by a
variety of institutional changes designed to strengthen autonomous technological
capability within the importing countries. This is especially true of those generic
technologies which have been at the centre of the world-wide diffusion process over the
past two decades. Here it is essential to emphasise the interdependencies between
innovations and between technical innovations and organisational innovations. A theory
of technical change which ignores these interdependencies is no more helpful than a
theory of economics which ignores the interdependencies of prices and quantities in the
world economy.
Perez (1983) has pointed out that the social and institutional framework which is
hospitable to one set of technologies will not be so suitable for a radically new
technology. Whereas incremental innovations can be easily accommodated, this may
not be the case with radical innovations which by definition involve an element of
creative destruction. When we are talking about large clusters of radical innovations
combined with rapid processes of incremental innovation, then the problems of
structural and social adjustment can be very great. This is quite obvious when we
consider such aspects as the change in management techniques and skill-mix which
are called for, but it also applies to many other types of institutional change in
standards, patents, new services, new infrastructure, government policies and public
organisations.
It is in this context that the concept of 'national systems of innovation' assumes such
great importance and in the light of this approach it is not surprising that the recognition
of the scope and depth of the computer revolution, which was accelerated by the
microprocessor in the 1970s, has been followed by a growing recognition of the
importance of organisational and managerial change ('multi-skilling', 'lean production
systems', 'down-sizing', 'just-in-time' stock control, worker participation in technical
change, quality circles, continuous learning, etc., etc.).
The diffusion of a new techno-economic paradigm is a trial and error process involving
great institutional variety. There are evolutionary advantages in this variety and
considerable clangers in being locked in too early to a standardised technology. A
technological monoculture may be more dangerous than an ecological monoculture.
Even when a technology matures and shows clear-cut advantages and scale economies it
is important to retain flexibility and to nourish alternative sources of radically new
technology and work organisation.
National and international policies thus confront the need for a sophisticated dual
approach to a complex set of problems. Policies for diffusion of standard generic
technologies are certainly important and these may sometimes entail the encouragement
of inward investment and technology transfer by MNCs. But also important are policies
to encourage local originality and diversity.

=== PAGE 15 (Article page 19) ===
The 'National System of Innovation' 19
5. Conclusions
This paper has attempted to show that historically there have been major differences
between countries in the ways in which they have organised and sustained the
development, introduction, improvement and diffusion of new products and processes
within their national economies. These differences can perhaps be most easily demon-
strated in the case of Britain in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries when
she achieved leadership in world technology and world trade and could temporarily claim
to be 'the workshop of the world'.
Historians (von Tunzelmann, 1993; Mathias, 1969) are generally agreed that no single
factor can explain this British success; it can be rather attributed to a unique combination
of interacting social, economic and technical changes within the national economic
space. It was certainly not just a succession of remarkable inventions in the textile and
iron industries, important though these were. Among the more important changes were
the transition from a domestic 'putting out' system to a factory system of production;
new ways of managing and financing companies (partnership and later joint stock
companies); interactive learning between new companies and industries using new
materials and other inputs as well as new machinery; the removal of many older
restrictions on trade and industry and the growth of new markets and systems of retail
and wholesale trade; a new transport infrastructure; a hospitable cultural environment
for new scientific theories and inventions and, certainly not least important, the
dissemination and widespread acceptance of economic theories and policies which
facilitated all these changes. It was the British Prime Minister who said to Adam Smith:
'We are all your pupils now'. The benefits from foreign trade and in some cases piracy
and plunder also played their part, especially in the process of capital accumulation, but
it was the mode of investment of this capital within the national economy, rather than the
simple acquisition of treasure or luxury expenditure, which was a decisive impulse to
economic growth.
Of course, many of these changes also took place within other European countries, but
there were distinct and measurable differences in the rate and direction of institutional
and technical change, the rate of economic growth, of foreign trade and of standards of
living, which were fairly obvious at the time as well as to historians since. This can be seen
not only from the writings of economists but from novelists and travellers. It was
therefore hardly surprising that Friedrich List and other economists on the Continent of
Europe were concerned to develop theories and policies which would help them to
understand the reasons for British commercial supremacy and enable Germany (and
other countries) to catch up. Section 1 attempted to show that in this endeavour, List
anticipated many contemporary ideas about 'national systems of innovation' including
the crucial importance of technological accumulation through a combination of tech-
nology imports with local activities and pro-active interventionist policies to foster
strategic 'infant' industries.
In the second half of the nineteenth century, new developments in the natural sciences
and in electrical engineering led to progressive entrepreneurs and reformers realising that
in the new and fastest growing industries, learning by doing, using and interacting in the
old British ways had to be accompanied or replaced by more professional and systematic
processes of innovation and learning. The organisational innovation of the in-house
R&D department put the introduction of new products and processes on a firmer
foundation whilst new institutions and departments of higher education and secondary

=== PAGE 16 (Article page 20) ===
20 C. Freeman
education provided the new, more highly qualified scientists, engineers and technicians.
Section 2 of the paper argued that it was in Germany and the United States that these
institutional innovations began and made the greatest impact on national systems in the
second half of the nineteenth century and early twentieth century.
The rapidly widening gap between a small group of industrialised countries and the
rest of the 'under-developed' world (Durlauf and Johnson, 1992; Dosi et al., 1992), as
well as the 'forging ahead', 'catching up' and 'falling behind' (Abramovitz, 1986) among
the leaders, clearly called for some explanation of why growth rates differed so much.
The brave simplifying assumptions of neoclassical economics might lead people to expect
convergence rather than divergence in growth rates (perfect information and costless,
instant transfer of technology). Nor did formal growth theory and models provide much
help since most of the interesting phenomena were confined to a 'residual' which could
not be satisfactorily disaggregated and because of the interdependencies involved
(Nelson, 1973).
Many economic historians and proponents of what have now become known as
'national systems of innovation' would claim that the differences were due to varying
types of institutional and technical change which may be the subject of qualitative
description, even though difficult to quantify. Sections 2 and 3 of the paper argued that
the over-simplification of quantitative R&D comparisons was an inadequate method in
itself. Section 3 attempted to show by the examples of Japan and the former Soviet
Union, and of the East Asian and Latin American 'NTCs', that institutional differences
in the mode of importing, improving, developing and diffusing new technologies,
products and processes played a major role in their sharply contrasting growth rates in
the 1980s.
Finally, in Section 4 the paper discussed the controversial issue of 'globalisation' and
its bearing on national systems of innovation. It is ironical that just as the importance of
technology policies and industrial policies has been increasingly recognised alike in
OECD and in developing countries, the limitations of national policies are increasingly
emphasised and the relevance of national systems increasingly questioned (see, for
example, Humbert (ed.), 1993). The global reach of transnational corporations, the
drastic cost reductions and quality improvements in global telecommunications network-
ing and other rapid and related changes in the world economy must certainly be taken
into account in any satisfactory analysis of national systems (Chesnais, 1992).
It is tempting at first sight to follow Ohmae and to discard national economies and
nation states as rapidly obsolescent categories. The speed of change and the difficulties
of focussing analysis may be illustrated by the confusion in terminology. Ohmae
maintains that nation states are losing their power and their influence both 'upwards' and
'downwards', on the one hand to supra-national institutions (the EC, NAFTA, UN
organisations etc. as well as transnational companies) and, on the other hand, to
sub-national (or 'infra-national') provincial, urban or local authorities and organisations
(the disintegration of federal and centralised states, the growing importance in some
areas of local government agencies and even of various forms of Tariff-Free Zones, and
of'Silicon Valleys'). Unhappily, at least in the English language, the same word 'regions'
has to be used to describe both processes—the very large 'regional' trading blocs such as
NAFTA, or the emerging East Asian 'region' and the much smaller sub-national
'regions'. Some terminological innovation is needed here and for the purposes of this
paper, the expressions 'upper regions' and 'nether regions' will be used. It is undoubtedly
important to keep track of both and of their inter-action with national systems.

=== PAGE 17 (Article page 21) ===
The 'National System of Innovation' 21
The work of geographers as well as economists (e.g. Storper and Harrison, 1991;
Saxenian, 1991; Scott, 1991, Lundvall, 1992; Antonelli, 1993) has convincingly
demonstrated the importance of nether regions for network developments and new
technology systems. They have argued that local infrastructure, externalities, especially
in skills and local labour markets, specialised services and not least, mutual trust and
personal relationships have contributed greatly to flourishing nether regions. It should
not be forgotten, however, that 'nether-regional systems of innovation' and 'economies
of agglomeration' have always under-pinned national systems from the beginnings of the
industrial revolution (Arcangcli, 1993). Marshall (1890) already stressed the importance
of what were then known as 'industrial districts' where 'the secrets of industry were in the
air' (Foray, 1991). Piore and Sabel (1984) have especially underlined the importance of
these nether regions in many parts of Europe both in the nineteenth century and again
today.
Moreover, the vulnerability of national economies to external shocks is also by no
means a new phenomenon of the last decade or two, even though the liberalisation
of capital markets and international flows of trade and investment combined with
computerisation and new telecommunications networks may have increased this vulner-
ability. Small and distant nations were already affected by shocks from the City of
London under the Gold Standard and the Popular Front Government in France suffered
just as severely from the 'flight of capital' in the 1930s as the Socialist government of
France in the 1980s.
This paper has argued that nation states, national economies and national systems of
innovation are still essential domains of economic and political analysis, despite some
shifts to upper and nether regions. Indeed, Michael Porter (1990) may well be right in
his contention that the intensification of global competition has made the role of the
home nation more important, not less. Particularly from the standpoint of developing
countries, national policies for catching up in technology remain of fundamental
importance. Nevertheless, the interaction of national systems both with 'nether-region
systems of innovation' and with transnational corporations will be increasingly
important, as will be the role of international cooperation in sustaining a global regime
favourable to catching up and development.
Bibliography
Amann, R,, Berry, M. and Davies, R. W. 1979. Industrial Innovation in the Soviet Union, Newhaven,
Yale University Press
Antonelli, C. 1994. Technological districts, localized spillovers and productivity growth,
International Review of Applied Economics, in press
Arcangcli, F. 1993. Local and global features of the learning process, in M. Humbert (ed.), 1993
Archibugi, D. and Pinta, M. 1992. 'The Technological Specialisation of Advanced Countries',
Report to the EC on International Science and Technology Activities, Dordrecht, Kluwer
Baba, Y. 1985. 'Japanese Colour TV Finns. Decision-making from the 1950s to the 1980s', DPhil
dissertation, Brighton, University of Sussex
Barker, G. R. and Davies, R. W. 1965. The research and development effort of the Soviet Union,
in Freeman and Young, 1965
Barnett, C. 1988. The Audit of War, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
Beer, J. J. 1959. Tne Emergence of the German Dye Industry, Chicago, University of Illinois Press
Bemal, J. D. 1939. Tne Social Function of Science, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul
Callon, M. 1993. Variety and irreversibility in networks of technique conception and adoption, in
D. Foray and C. Freeman (eds), 1993

=== PAGE 18 (Article page 22) ===
22 C. Freeman
Carlsson, B. and Jacobsson, S. 1993. Technological systems and economic performance: the
diffusion of factory automation in Sweden, in D. Foray and C. Freeman (eds), 1993
Carter, C. F. and Williams, B. R. 1957. Industry and Technical Progress, Oxford, Oxford University
Press
Chesnais, F. 1992. National systems of innovation, foreign direct investment and the operations of
multinational enterprises, in B. A. Lundvall, (ed.), 1992
Dosi, G, Freeman, C, Fabiani, S. and Aversi, R 1992. The diversity of development patterns:
on the processes of catching up, forging ahead and falling behind, International Economics
Association, Varenna, Italy, October
Durlauf, S. and Johnson, P. A, 1992. 'Local versus Global Convergence across National
Economies', mimeo, Stanford University
Edqvist, C. and Lundvall, B.-A. 1993. Chapter on Denmark and Sweden, in E. R. Nelson (ed.),
1993
Fagerberg, J. 1992. The home market hypothesis re-examined: the impact of domestic-user-
producer interaction in exports, in B.-A. Lundvall (ed.) 1992
Fleck, J. and White, B. 1987. National policies and patterns of robot diffusion: UK, Japan, Sweden
and United States, Roboacs, vol. 3, no. 1
Foray, D. 1991. The secrets of industry are in the air industrial cooperation and the organisational
dynamics of the innovative firm, Research Policy, vol. 20, no. 5
Foray, D. and Freeman, C. (eds) 1993. Technology and the Wealth of Nations, London, Pinter
Freeman, C. 1974. The Economics of Industrial Innovation, 1st edn, Harmondsworth, Penguin; 2nd
edn 1982 London, Frances Pinter
Freeman, C. 1987. Technology Policy and Economic Performance: Lessons from Japan, London,
Frances Pinter
Freeman, C. 1994. The economics of technical change, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 18,
no. 5, October
Freeman, C. and Hagedoom, J. 1992. 'Convergence and Divergence in the Intemationalisation of
Technology", paper for MERIT Conference, University of Limburg, December
Freeman, C. and Young, A. 1965. 77K Research and Development Effort in Western Europe, North
America and the Soviet Union, Paris, OECD
Gibbons, M. and Johnston, R. D. 1974. The roles of science in technological innovation, Research
Policy, vol. 3, no. 3
Gomulka, S. 1990. The Theory of Technological Change and Economic Growth, London, Routledge
Graves, A. 1991. 'International Competitiveness and Technological Development in the World
Automobile Industry', DPhil thesis, Brighton, University of Sussex
Grossman, I. and Helpman, E. 1991. Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press
Grupp, H. and Hofmeyer, O. 1986. A technometric model for the assessment of technological
standards and their application to selected technology comparisons, Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, vol. 30, 123-137
Hamilton, A. 1791. 'Report on the Subject of Manufactures', reprinted by the US Government
Printing Office, Washington, 1913
Hobsbawm, E. 1968. Industry and Empire, London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson
Hollander, S. 1965. 77M Sources of Increased Efficiency: A Study ofDuPont Rayon Plants, Cambridge,
MA, MIT Press
Hounshell, D. A. 1992. Continuity and change in the management of industrial research: the
DuPont Company 1902-1980, in G. Dosi, R. Giannetti and Toninelli, P. A. (eds), Technology
and Enterprise in a Historical Perspective, Oxford, Oxford University Press
Hu, Y. S. 1992. Global or transnational corporations are national firms with international
operations, Cahfomian Management Review
Hughes, T. P. 1989. American Genesis, New York, Viking
Humbert, M. (ed.) 1993. The Impact of Globalisation on Europe's Firms and Industries, London,
Pinter
Irvine, J. and Martin, B. R. 1984. Foresight in Science: Picking the Winners, London, Pinter
Jewkes, J., Sawers, D. and Stillerman, R. 1958. 77ie Sources of Invention, Macmillan, London
Johnson, B. 1992. Institutional learning, in B.-A. Lundvall (ed.), 1992
Johnson, H. G. 1975. Technology and Economic Interdependence, London, Macmillan

=== PAGE 19 (Article page 23) ===
The 'National System of Innovation' 23
Landes, M. 1970. The Unbound Prometheus: Technological and Industrial Development in Western
Europe from 1750 to the Present, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
List, F. 1841. The National System of Political Economy, English Edition (1904) London, Longman
Lundvall, B.-A. 1985. Product innovation and user-producer interaction, Industrial Development
Research Series, vol. 31, Aalborg, Aalborg University Press
Lundvall, B.-A. 1988. Innovation as an interactive process: from user-producer interaction to the
national system of innovation, in G. Dosi, et al. (eds) Technical Change and Economic Theory,
London, Pinter
Lundvall, B.-A. (ed.) 1992. National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of Innovation and
Interactive Learning, London, Pinter
Lundvall, B.-A. 1993 User-producer relationships, national systems of innovation and inter-
nationalisation, in D. Foray and C. Freeman (eds), 1993
Mansfield, E. 1968. The Economics of Technical Change, New York, WW Norton
Mansfield, E. 1971. Research and Innovation in the Modern Corporation, New York, WW Norton
Mansfield, E. 1988. Industrial Innovation in Japan and in the United States, Science, vol. 241,
1760-1764
Mansfield, E. 1989. The diffusion of industrial robots in Japan and in the United States, Research
Policy, vol. 18, 183-192
Marshall, A. 1890. Principles of Economics, London, Macmillan
Mathias, P. 1969. 77K First Industrial Nation, London, Methuen
Miyazaki, K. 1993. 'Dynamic Competence Building in Japanese and European Firms: The Case
of Opto-electronics', D.Phil, thesis, University of Sussex
Mjoset, L. 1992. The Irish Economy in a Comparative Institutional Perspective, Dublin, National
Economic and Social Council
Mowery, D. C. 1980. 'The Emergence and Growth of Industrial Research in American
Manufacturing 1899-1946', PhD dissertation, Stanford University
Mowery, D. C. 1983. The relationship between intrafirm and contractual forms of industrial
research in American manufacturing 1900-1940, Explorations in Economic History, vol. 20, no. 4,
October
National Science Foundation 1973. Interactions of Science and Technology in the Innovative Process,
NSF-667, Washington, DC
Nelson, R. R. (ed.) 1962. The Rate and Direction of Innovative Activity, Princeton University Press,
NBER
Nelson, E. R. (ed.) 1963. National Innovation Systems: A Comparative Analysis, Oxford, Oxford
University Press
OECD 1963A. The Measurement of Scientific and Technical Activities (Frascati Manual), Paris,
OECD
OECD 1963B. Science, Economic Growth and Government Policy, Paris, OECD
OECD 1971. Science, Growth and Society, (Brooks Report), Paris, OECD
OECD 1980. Technical Change and Economic Policy, Paris, OECD
OECD 1988. New Technologies in the 1990s: A Socio-Economic Strategy (Sundqvist Report), Paris,
OECD
OECD 1991. Technology and Productivity: The Challenges for Economic Policy, Paris, OECD
OECD 1992. Technology and the Economy: The Key Relationships, Paris, OECD
Ohmae, K. 1990. The Borderless World, New York, Harper
Patel, P. 1993. 'Localised Production of Technology for Global Markets', mimeo, SPRU,
University of Sussex
Patel, P. and Pavitt, K. 1991. Large firms in the production of the world's technology: an important
case of 'non-globalisation', Journal of International Business Studies, vol. 22, no. 1
Patel, P. and Pavitt, K. 1992. The innovative performance of the world's largest firms: some new
evidence, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, vol. 2, 91-102
Paulinyi, A. 1982. Der technologietransfer fur die Metallbearbeitung und die preussische
Gewerbeforderung 1820-1850, in F. Blaich, (Hg), Die Rolle des Staates fur die wirtschaftliche
Entwicklung, Berlin, Blaich
Perez, C. 1983. Structural change and the assimilation of new technologies in the economic and
social system, Futures, vol. 15, no. 5

=== PAGE 20 (Article page 24) ===
24 C. Freeman
Piore, M. and Sabel, C. 1984. The Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities for Prosperity, New York,
Basic Books
Porter, M. 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations, New York, Free Press, Macmillan
Posner, M. 1961. International trade and technical change, Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 13,
323-341
Prais, S. J. 1981. Vocational qualifications of the labour force in Britain and Germany, National
Institute Economic Review, vol. 98, 47-59
Romer, P. 1986. Increasing returns and long-run growth Journal of Political Economy, vol. 94, no.
5
Rothwell, R. 1992. 'Successful Industrial Innovation: Critical Factors for the 1990s', SPRU 25th
Anniversary, Brighton, University of Sussex, reprinted in R&D Management, vol. 22, no. 3
Sako, M. 1992. Contracts, Prices and Trust How the Japanese and British Manage Their Sub-
contracting Relationships, Oxford, Oxford University Press
Saxcnian, A. 1991. The origins and dynamics of production networks in Silicon Valley, Research
Policy, vol. 20, no. 5
Scott, A. J. 1991. The aerospace-electronics industrial complex of Southern California. The
formative years 1940-1960, Research Policy, vol. 20, no. 5
Stokes, D. E. 1993. 'Pasteur's Quadrant: A Study in Policy Science Ideas', mimeo, Princeton
University
Storper, M. and Harrison, B. 1991. Flexibility, hierarchy and regional development: the changing
structure of industrial production systems and their forms of governance in the 1990s, Research
Policy, vol. 203 no. 5
Takeuchi, H. and Nonaka, I. 1986. The new product development game, Harvard Business Review,
January/February, 285-305
Villaschi, A. F. 1993. 'The Brazilian National System of Innovation: Opportunities and Con-
straints for Transforming Technological Dependency" DPhil Thesis, University of London
von Hippel E. 1976. The dominant role of users in the scientific instrument innovation process,
Research Policy, vol. 5, 212-239
von Hippel, E. 1988. The Sources of Innovation, Oxford, Oxford University Press
von Tunzelmann, N. 1994. Technology in the early nineteenth century, in R. C. Floud and D. N.
McCloskey (eds), The Economic History of Great Britain, 2nd edn, vol. 1, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press
Womack, J., Jones, D. and Roos, D. 1990. The Machine that Changed the World, New York, Rawson
Associates (Macmillan)
World Bank 1991. World Development Report, New York, Oxford University Press