--- PAGE 1 ---
Review of Educational Research
February 2024, Vol. 94, No. 1, pp. 3 –32
DOI:https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543231152262
Article reuse guidelines: sagepub.com/journals-permissions
© 2023 AERA. https://journals.sagepub.com/home/rer
3
How Consistent Are Meanings of “Evidence-
Based”? A Comparative Review of 12 
Clearinghouses that Rate the Effectiveness of 
Educational Programs
Mansi Wadhwa
Jingwen Zheng
George Washington University
Thomas D. Cook
Northwestern University
Clearinghouses set standards of scientific quality to vet existing research to 
determine how “evidence-based” an intervention is. This paper examines 
12 educational clearinghouses to describe their effectiveness criteria, to 
estimate how consistently they rate the same program, and to probe why 
their judgments differ. All the clearinghouses value random assignment, but 
they differ in how they treat its implementation, how they weight quasi-
experiments, and how they value ancillary causal factors like independent 
replication and persisting effects. A total of 1359 programs were analyzed 
over 10 clearinghouses; 83% of them were assessed by a single clearing-
house and, of those rated by more than one, similar ratings were achieved 
for only about 30% of the programs. This high level of inconsistency seems 
to be mostly due to clearinghouses disagreeing about whether a high pro-
gram rating requires effects that are replicated and/or temporally persist-
ing. Clearinghouses exist to identify “evidence-based” programs, but the 
inconsistency in their recommendations of the same program suggests that 
identifying “evidence-based” interventions is still more of a policy aspira-
tion than a reliable research practice.
Keywords : evaluation, policy, program evaluation, research utilization, 
validity/reliability, case studies, descriptive analysis, experimental 
research, mixed methods, policy analysis, research methodology, 
clearinghouse, evidence-based, causal identification, what works
1152262RERXXX10.3102/00346543231152262Cook et al.Short Title
research-article2023--- PAGE 2 ---
Cook et al.
4
“Evidence-based” is a concept currently in vogue under the assumption that 
high-quality scientific studies can identify interventions with valid positive results 
whose dissemination will improve educational outcomes on a broad scale. 
Clearinghouses (CHs) play an important role in this process by (1) specifying 
their preferred scientific criteria for identifying valid causal effects; (2) searching 
out studies of the required quality; (3) evaluating each of these studies; (4) synthe-
sizing all the results over studies to assess if a given program, policy, or procedure 
can be recommended; and then (5) disseminating the recommendations to inter -
ested researchers, policy-makers, teachers, school administrators, parents, and 
even the general public to inform them whether a given program is effective, 
promising, unclear in its effects, ineffective, or even directly harmful. This paper 
describes how consistent CH standards are for concluding that an educational 
intervention is evidence-based, how consistent program recommendations are 
when more than one CH evaluates the same program, and why CH judgments 
might differ. The goal is to examine the reliability of “evidence-based” judgments 
in the very CH domain that claims to generate and disseminate valid information 
about interventions that scientific evidence indicates to have positive effects.
Over the last few decades, the evidence-based policy movement has grown 
steadily. One area where it has become institutionalized is in clearinghouses. 
Clearinghouses collect all the studies evaluating a given program before vetting 
them for their relevance and technical quality, synthesizing the study-specific 
results into an overall finding about program effectiveness, and disseminating the 
finding in hopes that all interested stakeholders can access it (Gough et al., 2021; 
White, 2019). Many novel ways of synthesizing evidence for policy relevance 
also continue to emerge (see overviews/meta-syntheses in Polanin et al., 2017).
In scientific discourse, “evidence-based” refers to using a particular set of war-
ranted scientific standards to justify claims about program effectiveness. In public 
discourse, evidence-based implies that a program has been shown to have positive 
impacts, and no reference is required to the quality of the research practices 
underpinning this verdict. As a result, if a well-evaluated program had no demon-
strable effects, it could be simultaneously judged as evidence-based because of 
the design but also as not evidence-based because of the absence of evidence of 
effectiveness. This paper uses “evidence-based” in both senses, relying on context 
to make the difference clear.
Seen from a multitrait-multimethod perspective (Campbell & Fiske, 1959), the 
paper can be interpreted as exploring the construct validity of “evidence-based” 
as it is practiced in educational science. The emphasis is on convergent rather than 
discriminant validity, reliability being a necessary condition for construct validity. 
Concretely, we ask: How well do judgments about the effectiveness of a given 
program converge across CHs? If they converge well, this indicates that CHs 
agree on what constitutes evidence-based practice and that stakeholders can rely 
on the conclusions presented. If they do not agree, this indicates that the concep-
tion or implementation of evidence-based practice differs so much between CHs 
that each program effectiveness rating offered should be treated with caution as a 
guide to better educational practice.
Specifically, this paper answers three main questions. First, how variable are 
CHs in the scientific standards they use to attribute effectiveness? To this end, we --- PAGE 3 ---
5
 Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
describe 12 CHs dealing with education interventions, illustrating how heteroge-
neous they are in their institutional features, in the program and study inclusion 
criteria they use, and in the causal identification criteria they espouse. The intent is 
to describe the landscape of CHs, so we do not offer a normative analysis of what 
constitutes an ideal clearinghouse or of differences in clearinghouse quality. The 
second question is: How well do different CHs converge on the same finding about 
program effectiveness? There are many reasons why perfect replication is impos-
sible, including: (1) sampling and measurement errors that affect causal estimates 
even when the same research team evaluates two identical versions of the same 
program at the same time using the same random assignment design and outcome 
measures; (2) within- and between-study differences in the human populations, 
settings, and times examined as well as in the intervention and outcome particulars 
studied; and (3) the fact that there is not yet scientific consensus about the validity 
of some research procedures whose use varies over CHs. All this makes it impos-
sible for researchers to know in advance how much consistency in program judg-
ments to expect over CHs. The third section of this paper takes the results from the 
second section and asks why effectiveness ratings of the same program differ. Four 
explanations are explored: (1) CHs have different decision rules for including stud-
ies in a review; (2) they describe different variants of the same program; (3) they 
examine different outcomes; and (4) they differ in the standards of evidence they 
apply to single studies and/or to the research synthesis they conduct.
A Description of the 12 Education Clearinghouses
CHs are entities that review the research studies analyzing the effects of educa-
tion programs in order to publish a rating of how effective the program is. We 
identified 43 CHs in the United States and United Kingdom after (1) consulting 
three repositories of study results (CNCS Evidence Exchange, 2016; Neuhoff 
et al., 2015; Pew-McArthur Results First Initiative, 2015), (2) conducting our own 
online search, and (3) soliciting suggestions from other researchers. We compared 
the resulting lists against each other to identify the unique CHs. From this list, we 
select those that conduct program effectiveness ratings, do not borrow their rating 
schemes from other CHs, and are accessible on the web. Nineteen CHs were 
excluded for these reasons as of May 2019, and these are listed in Table 1. Of the 
remaining 24, we selected those that focus on educational interventions from 
pre-K to college and that examine educational outcomes like academic achieve-
ment, school readiness, graduation, and preventing school-based social problems. 
Twelve such CHs were identified, and Table 2 lists some characteristics of them. 
Some CHs have long names, and we will henceforth refer to them by the acro-
nyms in Table 1.
Between June 2019 and August 2020, we collected and coded data from the 12 
relevant CH websites, describing their target populations, policy foci, public/non-
profit or private funding source, the types of intervention evaluated, the study 
rating process, and the standards of evidence used for assessing both the quality 
of individual studies and overall program effectiveness. We also detailed each 
CH’s criteria for including programs in a review, and the methodological and 
background factors they emphasize when rating individual studies and the pro-
grams they evaluate.--- PAGE 4 ---
6
Topic area: Of the 12 education CHs, four focus exclusively on education and 
eight include education along with other fields of enquiry. The thematic focus of 
CHs varies, including in breadth. For example, NDPC focuses on dropout preven-
tion and CASEL on social and emotional learning, whereas CHs like the WWC 
and BEE cover a broader spectrum of outcomes and thus a broader range of inter-
ventions (Best Evidence Encyclopedia, n.d.; Collaborative for Academic, Social 
and Emotional Learning, 2012; National Dropout Prevention Center, n.d.; What 
Works Clearinghouse, 2017a).
Target population: Some CHs also specify target populations: four focus on 
students only, two on children and families, two on youth, and one each on mili-
tary families and families with pregnant women. The remaining two do not spec-
ify a target group or set of targets.
TABlE 1
Exclusion criteria and excluded clearinghouses
Exclusion criteria CHs excluded
Named clearinghouses that do not 
conduct/publish effectiveness ratings 
but are repositories for other things or 
other social science-related purposes (8)
-  California Healthy Kids Resource Center
-  Center on Knowledge Translation for 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research
- My Brother's Keeper
- National Quality Measures Clearinghouse
- National Guideline Clearinghouse
-  Washington State Institute of Public 
Policy (WSIPP)
- Out-of-School Time Program Database
-  United States Interagency Council on 
Homelessness Solutions Database
Clearinghouses that cannot be accessed 
on the web due to discontinuation, 
suspension, or other reasons (6)
-  National Registry of Evidence-based 
Programs and Practices (NREPP) 
SAMHSA
- Social Work Policy Institute
-  Evidence-based Practices for Substance 
Abuse
- FindYouthInfo.gov
- Self-Sufficiency Research Clearinghouse
-  What Works/Lifecourse Interventions to 
Nurture Kids Successfully (LINKS)
Clearinghouses that do not carry out 
their own rating but publish the ratings 
and program effectiveness reports from 
(or linked to) other, more prominent 
clearinghouses and those that use 
the standards of evidence of another 
clearinghouse (5)
-  Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) Model 
Programs Guide
- What Works in Reentry Clearinghouse
- Youth.gov
-  Best Practices Registry for Suicide 
Prevention
- Campbell Collaboration--- PAGE 5 ---
7
TABlE 2
Twelve education clearinghouses and dimensions of heterogeneity
Name Primary focus field(s) Target population
Type of funding 
organization
Which kinds of objects 
are rated?
California Evidence Based Clearinghouse for 
Child Social and Economic Welfare (CEBC)
Multifocus: education, social and 
behavioral development, health, and 
social and economic welfare
Children and family Public Programs
Promising Practices Network (PPN) Multifocus: social and behavioral 
development, heath, education, social 
and economic welfare
Children and family Nonprofit Programs
Best Evidence Encyclopedia (BEE) Education Students Public Programs
National Dropout Prevention Center (NDPC) Education Students Nonprofit Programs
Social Programs that Work (SPTW) Multifocus: education, health, social and 
economic welfare, labor, social and 
behavioral development
All Nonprofit Programs
Clearinghouse for Military Family Readiness 
-Continuum of Evidence (CMFR)
Multifocus: health, education, social and 
behavioral development, labor
Military family Public Programs
Collaborative for Academic, Social, and 
Emotional Learning Guide (CASEL)
Education Students Nonprofit Programs
Blueprints for Healthy Youth Development Multifocus: social and behavioral 
development, education, health
Youth Nonprofit Programs; study
Home Visiting Evidence of Effectiveness 
(HomVEE)
Multifocus: health, education, social and 
behavioral development, social and 
economic welfare
Families with pregnant women & 
children from birth to kindergarten 
entry (up to age 5)
Public Programs; study
CNCS Evidence Exchange (EE) Multifocus: social and economic welfare, 
education, social and behavioral 
development, health, labor
All (youth, veterans, military families, 
tribes, schools, rural/urban/suburban/
low-income communities, nonprofits)
Public Programs and 
interventions
2
Promise Neighborhoods Research Consortium 
(PNRC)
Multifocus: education, social and 
behavioral development, health, social 
and economic welfare, labor
Youth Public Programs, policies, and 
practices
What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) Education Students Public Programs + policies + 
practices; study--- PAGE 6 ---
Cook et al.
8
Funding sources: Seven CHs are funded and supported either by a U.S. gov-
ernment department and its evaluation/research arm or by partnerships between 
government and a university. The remaining five are financed by foundations or 
by universities and research institutes that largely depend on government and 
foundation grants and contracts. CHs also vary in how well they are funded. We 
do not have reliable information about funding levels for each CH, but two senior 
officials at the U.S. Department of Education confirmed to us in writing in May 
2021 that the department has spent more than $100M supporting WWC. Other 
CHs operate on much smaller budgets.
Object of rating: CHs also vary in the objects they rate. Seven CHs give effec-
tiveness ratings only to educational programs that have a name or some other 
unique identifying label. The remaining CHs rate combinations of named pro-
grams, policies, and practices, sometimes with separate standards for each.
Program and Study Inclusion Criteria
Most CHs publish explicit requirements for program inclusion, but resource 
and other limitations may determine how extensive program and study searches 
can be, how detailed each study review can be, and how often a program review 
can be updated. Consequently, CHs vary not just in the programs they examine 
but also in the sample of studies they analyze for any one program. Nine CHs 
describe their process for determining which programs to include. To illustrate the 
range, the California Evidence-Based Clearinghouse (CEBC) employs a combi-
nation of expert advice and extensive literature search; the What Works 
Clearinghouse (WWC) and associated experts identify relevant programs on the 
basis of a review protocol that outlines the process and criteria for a systematic 
review; and the Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) 
Evidence Exchange reviews only programs and interventions that CNCS has 
itself funded. Each CH also targets specific outcomes or interventions related to 
their organizational mandate so that, for example, the Home Visiting Evidence of 
Effectiveness (HomVEE) focuses only on home visiting models designed to 
improve child development and school readiness (California Evidence-Based 
Clearinghouse, n.d.a; CNCS Evidence Exchange, n.d.; Home Visiting Evidence 
of Effectiveness, 2020). 
CHs also vary in study entry requirements relating to research design, publica-
tion date, geographic setting, sample size, outcome measures, target population, 
language used, and whether a study is peer-reviewed or not. The Clearinghouse 
for Military Family Readiness (CMFR) and CEBC include only peer-reviewed 
studies, but many other CHs do not. HomVEE’s search is limited to studies con-
ducted after 1989, whereas the WWC’s cutoff is 20 years prior to the review start 
date. CHs may also specify preferred study sample sizes—HomVEE prefers stud-
ies with more than 250 individual participants. The WWC’s topic-specific review 
protocol specifies the set of outcome domains around which the review is orga-
nized; the study focus (impact only); sample characteristics (e.g., age, gender, 
grades and English learner status); a publication lag period of 20 years; study 
settings (schools predominantly); intervention characteristics (vary by topic); 
study report language (English only); and study designs limited to randomized 
control trials (RCTs), regression-discontinuity designs (RDDs), single case --- PAGE 7 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
9
designs (SCDs), and quasi-experimental designs (QEDs). Inevitably, CHs will 
vary in how many, and which, studies are approved to contribute to their review 
of an intervention.
Causal Identification and Estimation
CHs test whether an intervention affects a designated outcome, and so they 
must specify their causal design and analysis preferences and outline how they 
deal with the reality that most single causal tests are embedded within person, 
setting, time, intervention, and outcome variants that are so local that they pre-
clude easy generalization. Table 3 outlines the causal designs listed across all 12 
CHs. We rated each CH zero if its requirements do not mention a given experi-
mental design type; one if it is only briefly mentioned and no design implementa-
tion standards are given; two if the design is described, but no design-specific 
implementation standards are provided; and three if the CH details design-specific 
standards for causal inference and quality implementation. It is clear that: (1) each 
CH invokes RCTs as the preferred design; (2) each treats the implementation and 
analysis more comprehensively for RCTs than any QED; (3) all CHs include a 
generic QED design characterized by initially nonequivalent treatment and com-
parison groups; and (4) two more specific QED types are intermittently exam-
ined—RDD and interrupted time series (ITS).
RCT implementation and quality standards: Table 3 also shows that CHs vary 
in how they assess RCT study quality. Most use standard terminology to describe 
attrition patterns and baseline group equivalence tests, but they vary in the imple-
mentation details emphasized and how the integrity of the RCT is tested. Five 
CHs require random assignment be conducted and analyzed at the appropriate 
level, but only the WWC provides an in-depth description of cluster-level random 
assignment. Three CHs (Blueprints for Healthy Youth Development, Social 
Programs That Work [SPTW], and Promising Neighborhoods Research 
Consortium [PNRC]) require intent-to-treat (ITT) analysis, whereas WWC also 
allows calculating Complier Average Causal Effects (CACE) under specific con-
ditions. Treatment-related attrition is important for RCT implementation quality, 
and seven CHs have explicit guidelines for attrition, though HomVEE and 
Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning (CASEL) follow 
WWC guidelines in this. The WWC guidelines specify combinations of overall 
and differential attrition. If the expected bias created by attrition is under the toler-
able level (0.05 SD or less), then the highest study rating can be achieved. Greater 
attrition prevents this highest study rating but lesser positive ratings are still pos-
sible based on the size of the group baseline difference. If this group baseline 
difference is less than 0.05 standard deviations, then a positive study rating is 
possible and no statistical adjustment tests are required; if it is between 0.05 and 
0.25 SD, then a statistical adjustment for group nonequivalence is required; and if 
it is over 0.25 SD, the study cannot meet WWC quality standards (What Works 
Clearinghouse, 2017a). Other CHs handle attrition differently. CMFR and SPTW 
accept overall attrition under 20 percent; Blueprints requires statistical examina-
tion of baseline differences in outcomes and sociodemographic characteristics, 
comparing both those who dropped out of the study with those who stayed and --- PAGE 8 ---
10
TABlE 3
Study design and rating standards: A summary of the extent of description3
Clearinghouse RCT
Other QEDs / undifferentiated 
QED RDD ITS
What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) 3 2 3 2
Blueprints 2 1 0 0
California Evidence Based Clearinghouse for Child Welfare (CEBC) 2 1 0 0
Home Visiting Evidence of Effectiveness (HomVEE) 3 3 3 0
Promising Practices Network (PPN) 1 1 0 0
Best Evidence Encyclopedia (BEE) 1 1 0 0
National Dropout Prevention Center (NDPC) 1 1 0 0
Social Programs That Work (SPTW) 3 1 0 0
Clearinghouse for Military Family Readiness (CMFR) 3 3 0 0
Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning Guide (CASEL) 1 1 0 0
Promise Neighborhoods Research Consortium (PNRC) 2 1 1 1
CNCS Evidence Exchange 2 2 0 0--- PAGE 9 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
11
also those who dropped out from the treatment group with those who dropped out 
from the control group (Blueprints for Healthy Youth Development, n.d.; 
Clearinghouse for Military Family Readiness n.d.; Social Programs That Work, 
n.d.).
CHs also vary in how they test for group equivalence by posttest time. Some 
check the equivalence of demographic variables in addition to the pretest values 
of the outcome—for example, HomVEE requires baseline equivalence for tradi-
tional demographic variables only, Blueprints adds that the baseline value of the 
outcome must also not differ, and the WWC’s topic-specific review protocol lists 
the specific set of variables for which baseline equivalence is required. All CHs 
agree on assigning superior value to well-implemented RCTs, but they differ in 
how they test that an RCT is implemented well enough to deserve the site’s high-
est study quality ranking.
Standards for QEDs: CHs treat QEDs even more variably than RCTs. All CHs 
consider a generic class of QED with selection bias due to recruiting the treatment 
groups from different populations, engendering the need to justify how the choice 
of comparison groups and of data analysis methods might “somehow” eliminate 
selection bias. Only HomVEE and CMFR have distinct standards for appraising 
the quality of such studies. HomVEE has separate standards for matched compari-
son and single case designs, and CMFR applies different standards to matched 
and statistically controlled comparison group designs. However, all CHs except 
CMFR agree that the maximum rating for such QEDs should be lower than for 
RCTs. As for more specific QED designs, only WWC and PNRC explicitly men-
tion ITS studies. They can only meet WWC criteria if baseline equivalence is 
established for multiple time periods before treatment, whereas PNRC provides a 
more general guideline that favors ITS studies with long but not necessarily over-
lapping baselines and sizable effects (Clearinghouse for Military Family 
Readiness, n.d.; Flay et. al., 2005; Home Visiting Evidence of Effectiveness, 
2020; Promise Neighborhoods Research Consortium, n.d.; What Works 
Clearinghouse, 2017a).
As for RDD, three CHs explicitly mention it, but only WWC and HomVEE 
provide a detailed description of its implementation and analysis standards. Each 
allows RDD studies to attain its most favorable rating level if evidence is convinc-
ing about the integrity of the forcing variable, the continuity of the relationship 
between the outcome and forcing variable, and the viability of whatever func-
tional form or bandwidth assumptions are made. The main conclusion is that CHs 
see only RCTs and a generic QED as broadly relevant to causal identification; 
they assign higher value to RCTs than to any QED other than RDD; and they do 
not generally see any version of ITS, or even RDD, as especially important for 
practical causal identification. The main exception here is the WWC that consid-
ers both quasi-experimental designs as important for causal inference and also 
lays down standards for each of them.
Estimate-conditioning factors: Many factors can condition research-based con-
clusions about effectiveness. One is that effects replicate, and seven CHs invoke a 
replication standard. CEBC and HomVEE consider replication demonstrated if 
similar results are achieved in two nonoverlapping samples, whereas PNRC, 
SPTW, and CNCS Evidence Exchange emphasize multisite studies and effects that --- PAGE 10 ---
Cook et al.
12
replicate across locations and cultural contexts. To award a program its highest rat-
ing, Blueprints and CMFR require at least one independent replication conducted 
by an entity external of the program. Other CHs also assign higher ratings to inde-
pendent evaluations (National Dropout Prevention Centre [NDPC], CNCS 
Evidence Exchange), defining this in terms of researcher independence from pro-
gram administrators and implementers. However, Blueprints further requires that 
the entities conducting the replication have no financial stake in the program, 
whereas CMFR requires that the replications must entail only minor adaptations of 
program modalities and involve no major changes in the sample studied.
CHs also vary in the minimal post-intervention follow-up period within 
which effects must be demonstrated. Four CHs specify such a period, but three 
require it to attain high ratings. The most frequent follow-up period is 12 months 
or more after the intervention has ceased, but a period between 6 and 12 months 
is sometimes accepted, albeit with a lower study quality rating. CHs also differ 
in how they deal with the size, statistical significance, and direction of effects. 
Five websites report only on programs with positive effects (Blueprints, 
Promising Practices Network [PPN], BEE, CASEL and SPTW). Three CHs 
(e.g., WWC, CMFR, CEBC) distinguish between ineffective programs versus 
those with indeterminate effects. And while all invoke the statistical signifi-
cance of causal findings, many also require minimal effect sizes—PPN requires 
a difference of at least 0.25 SD for its highest rating, and BEE requires an impact 
of at least 0.20 SD (Best Evidence Encyclopedia, n.d.; Blueprints, n.d.; 
California Evidence-Based Clearinghouse, n.d.b; Coalition for Evidence-Based 
Policy, 2010; Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning; 
2012; Kilburn et. al., 2014; What Works Clearinghouse, 2017b).
The estimate-conditioning factors considered above contribute to an interven-
tion’s ultimate effectiveness rating along with the criteria for causal identification 
and estimation. The result is that two CHs can consider the very same causal stud-
ies but still differ in how evidence-based they judge a program to be. One might 
claim it is evidence-based due to a single statistically significant impact, whereas 
another might require the same effect to attain a specific size, to persist for over a 
year after treatment, and to be multiply and independently replicated. Obviously, 
hurdles of quite different height exist for claiming program success over and 
above the traditional issues of causal identification and estimation that have been 
linked to RCTs and QEDs.
Comparing evidence standards across CHs: To examine the joint influence of 
all these factors, we now describe four CHs that vary in the ways depicted in 
Table 4. WWC analyzes and reports results for educational interventions, but it 
does so separately for each outcome domain considered. So, no intervention rat-
ing is aggregated over the different outcomes considered. The three other CHs—
Blueprints, NDPC, and CEBC—explicitly assign values to programs based on 
one or more than one outcome, though they allow careful readers to learn about 
outcome-specific impacts on the websites. Although each CH makes program 
judgments that correspond to “no discernible positive effects” and to “promising 
effects,” they differ in how interventions better than promising are labelled. 
WWC uses “positive” and “potentially positive”; Blueprints uses “model pro-
grams” and “model plus programs”—a distinction that largely depends on fully --- PAGE 11 ---
13
TABlE 4
Diversity in some study and program attributes: Comparison of WWC, Blueprints, NDPC, and CEBC
WWC Blueprints NDPC CEBC
Object of rating Individual studies and outcome-
specific ratings of educational 
interventions
Individual studies and also named 
programs
Programs but not studies Programs but not studies
Overall rating scheme Intervention effects are rated:
Positive; potentially positive; 
mixed; potentially negative; 
negative; or no discernible 
effects, and the extent of 
evidence for a conclusion can be 
medium to large or small.
A study can:
Meet WWC evidence standards 
without reservations; meet WWC 
standards with reservations; or 
fail to meet WWC standards.
A program is rated as:
Model plus, model, promising, 
or non-certified because the 
evidence is insufficient or 
inconclusive, or the program is 
ineffective or harmful.
A study can be: Certified to enter 
the review or not
A program is rated as having:
Strong evidence of effectiveness; 
moderate evidence of 
effectiveness; limited evidence 
of effectiveness; insufficient 
evidence of effectiveness
A program is rated as:
Well-supported by research 
evidence; supported by research 
evidence; promising research 
evidence; evidence fails to 
demonstrate effect; NR. Not 
ratable on the CEBC Scientific 
Rating Scale
Study quality
rating scheme
Highest-positive study rating: 
Individual-level RCT with low 
attrition,
Cluster-RCTs with no risk of bias
RDDs satisfying certain conditions.
Second study rating level: RCTs 
with high attrition and QEDs that 
satisfy baseline equivalence and 
other criteria
Study quality is assessed based on: 
Treatment assignment procedure, 
attrition levels, degree of baseline 
equivalence, use of appropriate 
statistical method, estimates are 
ITT, nature of outcomes, sample 
size, reliable and valid measures.
Not specified Studies not rated separately, but 
criteria staff use include: study 
design (only RCTs or QEDs), 
nature of control/comparison 
group, reliability and validity 
of at least one outcome, all 
intervention components are 
analyzed together.
Criteria for the Highest Program Effectiveness Rating
Number and type of 
studies
Minimum two studies; at least one 
must be rated “Meets WWC 
Evidence Standards Without 
Reservations”
Minimum two high-quality RCTs 
or one high-quality RCT and one 
high-quality QED
Either an RCT or a high-quality 
QED
Minimum two high-quality RCTs 
with non-overlapping samples
Demonstration of 
effect
Positive effect on the outcomes 
specified
Positive effect on specified 
outcomes
Positive effects on specified 
outcomes
Positive effects on specified 
outcomes
(continued)--- PAGE 12 ---
14
WWC Blueprints NDPC CEBC
Statistical significance 
of effect
Statistically significant effect 
required
Statistically significant effect 
required
Not specified Not specified
Iatrogenic effects No studies can show statistically 
significant negative, or 
substantively important, negative 
effects
No evidence of iatrogenic effects 
must be found in any certified 
study in an area central to 
Blueprints mission
Not reported No iatrogenic or legally 
compromising effects are allowed
Independence of 
evaluator
Not specified At least one study must be by a 
researcher independent of the 
developer and other researchers
Studies must be conducted by 
evaluators independent of the 
developer
Not specified
Follow-up period Not specified Sustained effects shown at least 
once in 12 months post treatment
Not specified One RCT must show sustained 
effects at least 12 months post 
treatment
Other factors Documentation of the program 
must be available online or in 
material form
The program must be running for at 
least 3 years
Program must have documentation 
on program components and 
administration
How Second-Highest Effectiveness Rating Differs from Highest Rating Criteria Above
 Requires one study instead of 
two; statistically significant or 
substantively important (>0.25 
SD) positive effect shown; any 
studies showing “indeterminate 
effects” must be ≤ in number to 
those showing positive effects.
Standards are the same as for 
the highest rating except no 
requirement that one study is 
conducted by an independent 
researcher
A QED with a nonindependent 
evaluator
Requires one RCT instead of two 
and a shorter follow-up period of 
6 months post treatment
TABlE 4. (ConTinuED)--- PAGE 13 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
15
independent replication. NDPC uses “strong evidence of effectiveness,” and 
CEBC “well supported by research evidence.” The evidence for these summary 
judgments comes from individual studies and/or syntheses thereof, but only 
WWC and Blueprints provide explicit ratings of each study. WWC designates 
each single study as “meeting WWC evidence standards without reservations,” 
or meeting them “with reservations,” or “not meeting” them. These single study 
ratings then determine how much weight each study is given in the final out-
come-specific intervention appraisal. Blueprints designates each study as “certi-
fied” or not, depending on how well it meets the site’s criteria of methodological 
quality. CEBC provides a summary of each study, but no rating of each; and 
NDPC provides neither a rating nor summary of the studies it bases its recom-
mendations on.
To get the highest effectiveness rating, WWC requires two studies with sta-
tistically significant impacts on specified outcomes, and one of these studies 
must meet WWC’s standards without reservations. No requirements are made 
about the size of the average effect, or the effect still being manifest a year after 
treatment has ceased, or researchers being independent of the program develop-
ers or being independent of each other over studies. For its Model Plus designa-
tion, Blueprints also stipulates a minimum of two studies that have statistically 
significant, positive results that meet its implementation and analysis require-
ments. One must be an RCT, but the other can be a QED. Blueprints further 
requires the effect to be demonstrated over 12 months and the various researcher 
teams be independent of the developer and each other. NDPC needs only one 
study with positive results that can be either an RCT or a high-quality QED as 
judged by reviewers. However, the program in question cannot be a pilot; it 
must have been in the field at least 3 years. CEBC’s highest rating requires posi-
tive results from at least two well-implemented RCT studies, one of which must 
show persisting effects for at least 12 months after the end of treatment. It 
seems, then, that Blueprints and CEBC have the highest standards, mostly due 
to their stipulation of the necessity of long-term effects (and independent repli-
cation in Blueprint’s case). NDPC has the lowest standards in requiring a single 
study that need not be an RCT or have sustained effects over time, or be inde-
pendently replicated, though it rules out all pilot programs. At issue here are not 
the standards traditionally associated with causal identification and estimation; 
rather, the standards speak to the context in which any causal demonstration, or 
set of demonstrations, is inevitably embedded.
How Consistent Are Clearinghouse Ratings of the Same Program?
Introduction and Method
We sought to identify every educational intervention rated across the 12 CHs. 
This is needed to describe which programs are rated by more than one CH and 
then to estimate how consistent evidence-based judgements about multiply evalu-
ated programs/interventions are. Such an analysis is only possible with CHs that 
provide a summary rating of program effectiveness, so we exclude PNRC as it 
does not conduct tier-wise ratings of programs for effectiveness and PPN since it 
ceased functioning by mid-2020, though the RAND Corporation website still --- PAGE 14 ---
16
TABlE 5
Criteria we used to select the education programs from all programs that a CH 
evaluates.
CHs
Number of 
programs Scope of program population
WWC 537 All programs rated by this CH. These include programs in 
topic areas like literacy, mathematics, early childhood, 
English learners, science, behavior, charter schools, 
postsecondary, children and youth with disabilities, 
kindergarten to 12th grade, teacher excellence, path to 
graduation
Blueprints 310 42 certified education programs (with outcomes labelled as 
academic performance, cognitive development, dropout/
high school graduation, employment, postsecondary 
education, preschool communication/language 
development, school readiness, truancy-school attendance) 
and 268 noncertified programs with summaries indicating 
a focus on education
NDPC 274 All programs rated by this CH fall under the topic of dropout 
prevention
CMFR 166 Programs under the topics: academic performance, school 
culture, school readiness
BEE 124 All programs rated by this CH that were listed by name 
in alphabetical order on the BEE website at the time of 
data collection. These programs fell under topics such as 
reading, writing, early childhood, comprehensive school 
reform, mathematics, etc.
HomVEE 53 Programs dealing with the outcome: child development and 
school readiness
CASEL 25 All programs listed in the 2015 CASEL guide only; these 
programs focus on social and emotional learning
SPTW 24 Programs under the topics: prenatal/early childhood, K–12 
education, postsecondary education
CEBC 11 Programs from the topic area—educational interventions for 
children and adolescents in child welfare
CNCS 
Evidence 
Exchange
52 Programs under the focus areas “Education” and “Capacity 
Building.” From among these, only the programs that had 
“Impact” and “Outcomes” studies were selected by using 
the ‘Program Evaluation” filter in the search section. Out 
of these, programs for which no “Level of Evidence” was 
given were removed as were any duplicates. In making 
these selections, we made use of the definitions for these 
terms given in the CNCS Evidence Exchange Metadata 
Glossary.--- PAGE 15 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
17
makes some of its material available. Seventeen programs that were under review 
at Blueprints and were not rated by any other CH were also dropped from the final 
sample (Blueprints for Healthy Youth Development, n.d.; Kilburn et. al., 2014; 
Promise Neighborhoods Research Consortium, n.d.). Table 5 lists the criteria and 
process used to compile this list of programs from these CHs. The resulting CH 
sample consists of 1,359 education programs from 10 CHs. Some classification 
issues mildly complicate the analysis. As the case studies later make clear, some 
CHs use the same core name to refer to a somewhat different set of program com-
ponents due to program modifications that take place over time. Also, the same 
program might be listed under different names in different CHs. Estimating this 
last requires an in-depth examination of 1,300+ programs, but we judge such 
misidentification to be rare in light of the proprietary interest program developers 
have in attaching a unique brand name to a given intervention.
To estimate the consistency of program ratings requires rescaling the informa-
tion from each CH due to difference in the rating scales used. We collapse their 
summary judgments onto a three-point scale, scoring as 1 (= recommended) any 
rating that explicitly judges a program to be effective based on the evidence 
reviewed. For some CHs, this means collapsing different categories of effective-
ness. Thus, we assign a score of 1 to Blueprints’s Model and Model Plus ratings 
and do the same with the CBEC judgments of: Well-supported by Research 
Evidence and Supported by Research Evidence. We score as 2 (= promising) all 
ratings where some positive study results are judged to be relevant and method-
ologically justified, but where the design or results cast plausible doubt on a clear 
judgment of effectiveness. Many CHs invoke their own promising category, and 
we use that. Finally, we score as 3 (= not recommended) all ratings indicating 
inconclusive or negative effects.
For any rated program, the overall effectiveness judgment is clear when CHs 
agree on a score of 1, 2, or 3. Also clear is when a program achieves ratings of 1 
and 3, indicating diametrically opposed CH judgments about how evidence-based 
a program is. Differences between 1 and 2 are somewhat less clear. While each 
judgment is positive, CHs differ in how certain they judge the positive evidence 
base to be. Evidence base here refers to the set of studies used to make program 
effectiveness judgments. Differences between 2 and 3 are especially problematic 
because, on the one hand, some promising information about a program is avail-
able, but on the other hand, there are some null or negative findings and never a 
positive claim of 1. We estimate the consistency in evidence-based judgments 
across each CH rating pair that judges the same program. When just two CHs rate 
a program, only one rating pair is possible; but when four do, six (partially depen-
dent) rating pairs are possible. We analyze the percentage of such pairs that are (a) 
fully consistent because they have the same score—1, 2, or 3—though we analyze 
each of these separately; (b) moderately consistent, with scores of 1 and 2; (c) 
moderately inconsistent, with scores of 2 and 3; and (d) fully inconsistent with 
scores of 1 and 3.
Results
How many CHs evaluate a given program? Table 6 shows how many CHs rate 
a specific education program; 83% of programs are rated by a single CH, 12% by --- PAGE 16 ---
18
TABlE 7
Percentage of effective and not effective programs when rated by two or more 
clearinghouses
Percentage of programs
Programs rated by 2 CHs
Both CHs rate Not Effective 82.3
Both CHs rate Effective 17.7
Programs rated by 3 CHs
All 3 CHs rate Not Effective 2.2
1 CH out of 3 rates Effective 44.4
2 CHs out of 3 rate Effective 37.8
All 3 CHs rate as Effective 15.6
Programs rated by 4 CHs
1 CH out of 4 rates Effective 13.3
2 CHs out of 4 rate Effective 40.0
3 CHs out of 4 rate Effective 33.3
All 4 CHs rate as Effective 13.3
TABlE 6
Overlap in assessed programs among clearinghouses
Number of clearinghouses rating a 
program
Number of education programs rated 
(percentage)
1 1131 (83.2)
2 164 (12.1)
3 45 (3.3)
4 15 (1.1)
5 4 (0.3)
Total number of programs 1359
two, 3.3% by three, and fewer than 2% are rated by four or five CHs. No program 
is rated by more than five CHs. Thus, only 17 percent of programs have multiply 
replicated judgments about how evidence-based they are that CH consumers can 
assess. However, the names of these programs strongly suggest that they are 
among the better known in education, suggesting that CH users seeking multiply 
replicated information are most likely to achieve this for more established pro-
grams, some of which we later discuss as case studies.
How consistent are the between-CH ratings? Table 7 shows the percentage 
of programs rated effective (i.e., ratings of either recommended or promising). 
When two CHs rate the same program (n  = 164 programs), approximately 
18% of the programs in question are rated as effective because either both CH 
scores are 1 or both are 2 or the scores are 1 and 2 with no 3s. The remaining --- PAGE 17 ---
19
TABlE 8
Consistency in ratings when two or more clearinghouses rate the same program
Percentage of rating pairs in education
Programs rated by 2 CHs
Fully Consistent (1&1 or 2&2 or 3&3) 30.5
Moderately Consistent (1&2) 8.5
Moderately Inconsistent (2&3) 25.6
Fully Inconsistent (1&3) 35.4
Total number of rating pairs 164
Programs rated by 3 CHs
Fully Consistent (1&1 or 2&2 or 3&3) 31.1
Moderately Consistent (1&2) 14.1
Moderately Inconsistent (2&3) 27.4
Fully Inconsistent (1&3) 27.4
Total number of rating pairs 135
Programs rated by 4 CHs
Fully Consistent (1&1 or 2&2 or 3&3) 30.0
Moderately Consistent (1&2) 20.0
Moderately Inconsistent (2&3) 22.2
Fully Inconsistent (1&3) 27.8
Total number of rating pairs 90
Programs rated by 5 CHs
Fully Consistent (1&1 or 2&2 or 3&3) 50.0
Moderately Consistent (1&2) 20.0
Moderately Inconsistent (2&3) 5.0
Fully Inconsistent (1&3) 25.0
Total Number of Rating Pairs 40
82% of programs are not rated as effective because each gives a 3 rating, or 
the CH scores are moderately inconsistent (2 and 3), or they are fully incon-
sistent (1 and 3).
Table 8 displays additional findings. For programs rated by four CHs (n = 15 
programs), full consistency among rating pairs stands at 30%, whether for scores of 
1, 2, or 3. Only for the very few programs rated by 5 CHs (n = 4 programs) is this 
level higher, at 50%. However, Figure 1 shows that most of these agreements for 
programs rated by two CHs are about a program not being recommended (a score 
of 3), next most for promising (2), and least of all for the recommended and most-
desired rating of all 1s. A conscientious consumer of multiple CHs will find that 
they most agree on the programs not worth adopting and least agree on those with a 
consistently positive evidence base. Figure 1 also reveals that when two CHs rate 
the same program the most frequent disagreement is full inconsistency (scores of 1 
and 3), and this frequent disagreement is also seen over different numbers of CHs. 
Maximal disagreement is 35.4% for programs rated twice, 27.4% for programs with 
three CH ratings, 27.8% for programs with four CH ratings, and 25% for programs --- PAGE 18 ---
20
with five ratings. So, stakeholders browsing different CHs will encounter some 
starkly conflicting judgments of a program’s worth. For about a third of all pro-
grams evaluated more than once they will find one CH concluding that a program is 
recommended whereas another concludes that it is not even promising.
Moderate consistency is when ratings are 1 and 2. The probability of this is 
low, but it increases with the number of CHs rating a program. With two CHs, 
8.5% of rating pairs are moderately consistent; with three they are 14.1%; and 
with four or five they are 20% each. For consumers willing to tolerate the differ -
ence between recommended and promising, these percentages indicate a consis-
tently low level of positive evaluations of the same program. However, if the more 
stringent criterion is invoked of all scores being 1, then the already-low consis-
tency level drops even further.
How should these estimates of the consistency of program endorsements be 
interpreted? Figures 1 and 2 reprise the findings visually; Figure 1 for programs 
rated by two CHs. It shows that (1) the modal rating pair entails maximal disagree-
ment, and (2) consistency is least for programs that are recommended by both CHs. 
Figure 2 is for programs evaluated more often, and again we find that the most 
common disagreement, accounting for at least a quarter of all CH differences, is 
between ratings of recommended and not even promising—the pattern of results 
most likely to lead to inappropriate program adoption. The least likely disagree-
ment is between ratings of promising and recommended, the very disagreement 
that most advocates of evidence-based practice would be most willing to tolerate. 
We now turn to trying to explain this surprisingly high level of diversity.
FIGURE 1. Correspondence in rating for education programs rated by two 
clearinghouses.--- PAGE 19 ---
21
Case Studies of Clearinghouse Agreement and Disagreement
Using the results of the description of CH differences and of the consistency 
estimates just presented, we chose to examine four hypotheses for why CHs might 
differ in their evidence-based program ratings: (1) they vary in the studies 
included, (2) they examine different versions of the same-named program, (3) 
they analyze different outcomes for the same program, and (4) they use different 
methodological standards to warrant judgments about how evidence-based a 
study or program is. Because these explanations are not fully exclusive and the 
number of programs for in-depth examination is limited, we claim only to probe 
these hypotheses rather than formally test them.
Five programs were examined as individual cases. One was consistently rated 
as promising; another program involved modest agreement; two programs 
involved modest disagreement; and the remaining program showed maximal dis-
agreement—that is, at least one CH fully endorses the program but others con-
clude it is not even promising. When we had a choice among programs in any 
one of these agreement/disagreement categories, we chose the better-known pro-
gram on the grounds that CH users are most likely to seek information about 
these programs. They also tend to be more mature, with effectiveness first 
claimed decades ago and the program content having been in continuous devel-
opment since then. When we encounter different variants of the same program, 
we examine each by means of data from program assessment reports published 
on CH websites. When no justification is offered for the program rating given, 
FIGURE 2. Dispersion in evaluative ratings of education programs rated by 3, 4, and 5 
clearinghouses.--- PAGE 20 ---
Cook et al.
22
we offer our own interpretation based on website information about the standards 
used. Inevitably, all interpretations of why CHs differ in their rating of the same 
program are our own.
(1) open Court Reading. Open Court is an elementary-school reading pro-
gram aimed at building children’s English reading skills. WWC, Blueprints, 
and BEE each rate it and conclude it is “promising.” All CHs include the same 
RCT (Borman et al., 2008) and treat it as high-quality evidence. WWC and 
BEE also include a matched QED study (Skindrud & Gersten, 2006), but 
Blueprints rates it as failing to meet its standards for study certification and 
excludes it from an overall verdict on the program. Nonetheless, there is con-
siderable consistency between the three CHs in the verdict reached and studies 
considered.
Still, CHs differ in the standards used. WWC and Blueprints differ in their 
interpretation of the effect sizes in Borman et al. (2008), with Blueprints declar -
ing them to be “very small”
1 while also invoking other limitations related to 
possible baseline group differences and the quality of the differential attrition 
tests used. WWC reviewed Open Court under two separate topic areas, each with 
its own evidence review protocol. Under Adolescent Literacy, WWC finds the 
Borman et al. effect size to be statistically significant, but under the Beginning 
Reading protocol the objection is raised that statistical significance was not com-
puted for the student sample WWC preferred, though the average effect size was 
judged to be above 0.25 SD, thus meeting the website’s standard of substantive 
importance (What Works Clearinghouse, 2014). BEE reviewed the Borman et al. 
study as part of two systematic reviews. For beginning reading, it was called a 
“randomized quasi-experiment” (Slavin et al., 2009a) rather than an RCT, 
because there were only nine treatment and seven control classes in first grade. 
But for upper elementary grade reading, the same study was reviewed as an RCT 
(Slavin et al., 2009b). Both reviews judged the effect sizes between + 0.10 and 
+0.19 SD to be “modest,” and each pointed to a possible confounding because 
the classes employing Open Court were taught for 2.5 hours per day whereas the 
control classes had only 90 minutes of regular reading time. We see here one CH 
identifying possible study limitations to which no other CHs drew attention.
Skindrud and Gersten (2006) is a quasi-experimental study of Open Court, and 
both WWC and Blueprints agree on its failure to account for clustering. WWC 
applied a correction and discovered that the results, although no longer statisti-
cally significant, were nonetheless substantively important enough to be worth 
adding to the evidence of Open Court’s promise. However, Blueprints rejected the 
study from its review, citing the clustering issue, baseline treatment group differ-
ences after excluding program dropouts, and a study sample that was geographi-
cally limited (Blueprints for Healthy Youth Development, n.d.; What Works 
Clearinghouse, 2014). So, the Blueprints program rating depended on a single 
RCT. WWC and BEE added a QED to this, but none of these CH differences were 
enough to affect the bottom-line evaluation of Open Court. All three CHs rated it 
as promising, but none fully recommend it. All examine the same program vari-
ant, they substantially overlap in the reading outcomes examined, and they closely --- PAGE 21 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
23
agree on the number and identity of the studies worth reviewing. Even so, their 
interpretation of the same study slightly differs due to different evidence stan-
dards being used.
(2) Success for All. Success for All (SFA) is a school-wide reform initiative 
that introduces instructional strategies to improve student literacy. Five CHs 
have evaluated the basic program and/or variants of it (Blueprints, WWC, 
CMFR, SPTW, and BEE), with SPTW focusing only on its effectiveness for 
grades K–2 and BEE also evaluating specific program variants like Reading 
Reels; the Bilingual and English Program, or the Transition Program. All CHs 
either rate the program recommended or promising; none provides a negative 
assessment. Blueprints, CMFR, and SPTW find it to be promising; WWC 
gives ratings from recommended to mixed depending on the outcome exam-
ined; and BEE evaluates various program variants as providing either strong or 
modest evidence of effectiveness.
The number of studies used to assess the basic SFA program varies greatly. 
SPTW uses 6, CMFR 8, WWC 9, and Blueprints considers 16 studies but certi-
fies only 1. Borman et al. (2007) plays a core role as the only RCT that four CHs 
review, but they modestly differ in their appraisal of it. Blueprints certifies it as 
meeting its standards for inclusion, but its review indicates the absence of a 
long-term follow-up and questionable baseline equivalence for race/ethnicity. 
However, SPTW reviewers do not question equivalence and accept the study’s 
follow-up period. This study also met WWC’s highest study quality criteria, 
showing positive effects on the alphabetics outcome domain but indeterminate 
effects on comprehension. Overall, for alphabetics in grades K–4, WWC rates 
SFA as recommended, but for the more complex skill of reading fluency, it rates 
SFA as promising, and for comprehension and general reading achievement, 
SFA is judged as not recommended. WWC’s nuanced differences by outcome 
domains mean that stakeholders interested in SFA will have to examine that site 
very carefully. But aside from the one finding about comprehension and reading 
achievement, the SFA ratings indicate a strong consensus that it is not ineffec-
tive, even if confidence varies about how evidence-based it is. BEE uses differ -
ences in standardized effect sizes to decide which options are superior to others. 
In its review of beginning reading programs, BEE gives the highest rating to 
SFA for its weighted mean effect size of +0.29 SD based on 23 qualifying stud-
ies, whereas the lowest rating goes to the Transition Program for children in 
grades 2 to 5 who move from Spanish to English instruction where the median 
effect size based on a single qualifying study is + 0.16 SD—just below the 0.2 
criterion for BEE’s highest rating. Overall, the CHs vary in the number of stud-
ies used; they rate SFA over different outcomes and versions of the same pro-
gram, but they still arrive at relatively consistent judgments of SFA’s 
effectiveness.
(3) Peer Assisted learning Strategies (PAlS). PALS is a peer-tutoring pro-
gram aimed at improving reading and math for children. Rated by 5 CHs 
(WWC, BEE, Blueprints, CMFR, and NDPC), this program shows moderate 
disagreement in ratings. NDPC and Blueprints rate PALS as a whole and --- PAGE 22 ---
Cook et al.
24
declare it to be recommended and promising, respectively. WWC rates differ-
ent outcomes whose ratings vary from promising to not recommended; BEE 
reviews only PALS Math and finds it to be recommended, whereas CMFR 
reviews both PALS Reading and PALS Math separately and finds neither to be 
even promising. Thus, the CH ratings are quite disparate but predominantly 
recommended or promising—four CHs give recommended or promising rat-
ings to the whole program or a version of it; one CH does not recommend any 
version.
The studies of this program hardly overlap between CHs. Blueprints and BEE 
use a single study; WWC uses from one to three depending on the outcome, all of 
which examine unique outcomes; NDPC uses an unknown number of studies but 
does not cite them; and CMFR uses 10 studies for PALS Reading and two for 
PALS Math. CMFR and WWC share two studies (Fuchs et al., 2002; Saenz et al., 
2005), though no other CH includes them (except NDPC, as it does not publish 
which exact studies they use). The base of studies contributing evidence is clearly 
quite disparate, and rating differences from this source are possible. The variabil-
ity is partly due to CHs choosing to evaluate unique components or outcomes of 
PALS. Blueprints and NDPC generalize over the reading and mathematics out-
comes, but CMFR rates PALS Math and different variants of PALS Reading sepa-
rately, whereas BEE reviews PALS for elementary and middle/high school math 
separately and WWC rates PALS on five topic areas, each guided by its own 
review protocol—beginning reading, adolescent literacy, English language learn-
ers, elementary school mathematics, and students with learning disabilities. 
Mostly, WWC finds stronger evidence for reading than math gains.
The summary ratings each CH provides also correspond with their different 
evidence standards. NDPC’s requirement of an RCT or strong QED was appar -
ently fulfilled by the set of studies they reviewed, although they do not describe 
them. Only one RCT study was certified by Blueprints, though it reviewed 17 
other causal studies that could not be certified due to limitations related to differ-
ential attrition, no long-term follow-up of the effect, data analysis conducted at 
the wrong level, and lack of clarity about the intent-to-treat estimation. For 
Blueprints, a rating of promising followed, because a higher rating requires at 
least one more rigorous study. CMFR found that the evidence for both the reading 
and math versions of PALS was unclear, absent a demonstration of sustained 
effects at 6 months post program completion.
(4) (Eisenhower) Quantum opportunities Programs. The Quantum 
Opportunity Program (QOP) aims to improve the academic outcomes of high 
school youth and is rated by WWC, Blueprints, and NDPC. The Eisenhower 
Quantum Opportunities Program (EQOP) is an updated version that two CHs 
have rated. In each case, there is moderate disagreement in ratings—NDPC 
finds QOP promising, but Blueprints and WWC find it to be not even promis-
ing. Blueprints and CMFR also rate EQOP, with the former finding it promis-
ing and the latter not even promising.--- PAGE 23 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
25
The disagreements are largely due to the different studies used. NDPC’s prom-
ising rating of QOP relies on two multisite RCTs that, at one site, demonstrated 
positive effects on academic skills, high school graduation, and postsecondary 
schooling, but the studies are not cited. WWC examined two studies of QOP, but 
only Schirm et al. (2006) met the website’s quality standards. However, no statis-
tically significant or substantively important effects were shown on school prog-
ress or school completion. Although Blueprints did not find any positive evidence 
for QOP at all, the modified version, Eisenhower QOP, fared better and attained a 
promising rating on the basis of a single study with limitations such as no testing 
of group outcome differences at baseline and no adjustments for clustering. This 
single study showed that EQOP increased high school GPA, college acceptance, 
and college persistence, etc. (Curtis & Bandy, 2015, 2016). However, CMFR 
could not rate it even promising because, by early 2019, they found no relevant 
published studies.
(5) Communities in Schools (CiS). CIS provides academic and nonacademic 
support to students at risk for dropping out of school. Rated by five CHs (PPN, 
Blueprints, CMFR, NDPC, and CNCS Evidence Exchange), CIS exhibits clear 
disagreement among the CHs. It is rated as recommended by one (NDPC), as 
promising by two (PPN, EE), and is not endorsed by two more (CMFR, 
Blueprints).
The sole full endorsement by NDPC rests upon an unknown number of RCTs 
at the student level and one school-level QED, all of which are reported as show-
ing one or more positive effects on outcomes such as high school dropout, gradu-
ation, GPA, credit completion, attendance, eighth-grade math and reading. 
However, the studies cannot be identified. Of the CHs with a promising rating, 
PPN came to this conclusion in May 2009 based on a single QED (Rossman & 
Morley, 1995) that compared a multisite sample of intervention and comparison 
youths who were not matched in any way. Using two evaluation reports (Parise 
et al., 2017; Somers and Haider, 2017), CNCS Evidence Exchange rated the pro-
gram as moderately supported. This judgment was based on one 2-year RCT that 
positively affected nonacademic school outcomes, and on one ITS study that 
showed absolute improvements in graduation and dropout rates in the treatment 
group 3 years post-intervention. But this increase did not surpass what spontane-
ously occurred in the comparison group. Other CHs did not find CIS to be even 
promising. Blueprints considers the evidence “inconclusive” due to either a lack 
of enough RCT/QED studies or severe methodological limitations in those avail-
able. CMFR reached the same conclusion because, by February 2018, they could 
not find any peer-reviewed publication evaluating CIS, and peer review is neces-
sary for CMFR. Stakeholders interested in learning how evidence-based CIS is 
will find divergent conclusions across CHs, largely due to variation in the evalu-
ative standards applied and the studies available when a review was conducted.
These five case studies illustrate once again that CHs are at best only modestly 
reliable in the consistency of their evidence-based ratings. Also, although each of 
the four explanations for this unreliability probably plays some role in explaining 
the variation, the likely primary explanation is that the CHs vary in the design --- PAGE 24 ---
Cook et al.
26
features a study must include to achieve a CH’s highest rating and in how much 
replicated evidence of what kind is needed for higher rankings. To require a single 
RCT or QED with a statistically significant finding is a much lower hurdle than 
requiring two RCTs with positive findings that are of a given size, that are 
observed 12 months after the intervention has ended, and that are in studies con-
ducted by researchers who are independent of the program developers and even of 
prior researchers of the program in question. Also important is CH variation in the 
number and type of studies of the same intervention that a review includes. Some 
of this variation may be due to when the program review was last updated and to 
the availability of funds to conduct a thorough literature search. But some of it is 
also due to internal decisions about which studies meet the CH’s minimal stan-
dards of methodological adequacy for including a study in the program review 
and determining what weight it should be assigned in that review. Of lesser impor-
tance are hypotheses about CH differences in (1) the outcomes analyzed to evalu-
ate a program, and (2) the version of the same-named program that is examined. 
Of course, stakeholders can be led astray if they confuse variants of the same 
program; but with care, they can navigate between variants if they are attuned to 
the issue that often arises because a positive evaluation has enabled the program 
developers to acquire funding to modify the original program.
Discussion
This paper is concerned with the practical construct validity of the term “evi-
dence-based,” albeit in the special context of CHs that were specifically estab-
lished to determine which social programs are evidence-based because justified 
and codified procedures were used to examine effectiveness and warrant con-
clusions about whether a given program is effective rather than ineffective, 
inconclusive, or never appraised. If CHs rarely agree in their evidence-based 
conclusions about the same program, this will surely puzzle most consumers of 
research. Discrepant recommendations can be due to many factors and, of the 
four plausible explanations examined here, the most likely is that CHs vary in 
the standards used to assess how evidence-based a program is. Among the most 
important differences in standards for attaining a high effectiveness rating are 
whether initial positive program effects need to be demonstrably replicated or 
not and whether they need to be demonstrably persisting or not. Because CHs 
do not agree on such criteria for acceptable evidence, and because they are 
important enough to lead to different judgments about program effectiveness, 
“evidence-based” seems to be an idea with modest construct validity despite 
CHs being funded precisely to identify which programs are most evidence-
based. At a minimum, high construct validity requires CHs to converge on the 
same conclusion (Campbell & Fiske, 1959), but because they only do so mod-
estly, we conclude that “evidence-based” has limited practical construct validity 
in the CH context.
This conclusion might bewilder potential consumers of evidence-based knowl-
edge who expect CHs to generate certified knowledge about what does and does 
not work. Sophisticated methodologists will surely be less puzzled because they 
will probably anticipate all the many design and analysis decisions required for 
evidence-based conclusions, and they might also realize that professional --- PAGE 25 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
27
consensus does not exist about how important they all are, about how seriously 
they might bias causal estimates, and about how successful ameliorative proce-
dures can be in reducing bias. So, methodologists might anticipate only a modest 
level of between-CH agreement. But would that level be as modest as obtained 
here? And if only modest agreement should be expected, then should we not 
appraise all consumers of CH of this so that they can set their expectations of CH 
ratings accordingly, treating any CH’s recommendations with caution rather than 
as certified knowledge of high validity and relevance? Needed is some mecha-
nism for generating more discussion of how CHs might agree to handle their 
major sources of difference, including whether positive results need to be repli-
cated, or be independently replicated, or to persist over time after treatment 
withdrawal.
Of all the educational interventions considered here, only 17% were rated by 
more than one CH. So, stakeholders interested in learning about the conse-
quences of a specific education program will usually have no choice about which 
CHs to use or prefer; they must accept whatever is available and the assump-
tions/standards that go with it. But the programs rated more often are those with 
greater visibility within the educational research and policy communities. For 
this 17% of programs, disagreements in program recommendations were com-
mon, even including the most extreme level of disagreement between a program 
judged worth recommending versus not even promising. We do not know how 
much CH consistency stakeholder groups expect or are prepared to tolerate, but 
we surmise that it would be higher than obtained here. This is troubling because 
evidence-based language is now widely used in scientific, policy, and media 
circles, leading us to ask: Does it reflect a shared aspiration among all stake-
holder groups that is still not linked to a shared understanding of what constitutes 
trustworthy evidence? Is the rhetoric surrounding “evidence-based” currently 
more prevalent than scientific consensus about the very broad set of methods 
needed to underwrite conclusions about program effectiveness? We reluctantly 
suspect that “evidence-based” needs to be treated with more skepticism than is 
common at present.
How might the gap between hope and reality be narrowed? The major obsta-
cle to improvement seems to lie in the different standards of evidence CHs have 
adopted for assigning program ratings of promising or higher. To explain these 
CH differences, traditional concerns with causal identification and estimation 
seem to be of lesser importance more ancillary design features like the need for 
replication, for effects of a required size, and for persisting post-treatment effects. 
None of these are issues that can be easily resolved within the community of 
education stakeholders. For instance, is replication enough if it only occurs 
across sites in a single multisite study? Should two or more RCTs be required, or 
is a single RCT and a single QED enough? Is independent replication by differ -
ent investigators required? And how should an overall conclusion be reached if 
some studies indicate a positive result for a given outcome but others do not? 
Which methodological features should determine the weight given to individual 
studies in a program review? No professional consensus currently exists on most 
of these issues, and so disagreements about them are legitimate and worth seri-
ous discussion.--- PAGE 26 ---
Cook et al.
28
How similar are these education results presented here to those in related 
fields? Education has as many as 12 CHs assessing program effectiveness, 
whereas there are 13 that deal with the social and behavioral prevention domain. 
There, the level of agreement between CHs is higher than in education by about 
20 percent (Zheng et al., 2022). Although the present study does not seek to 
explain such a domain difference in between-CH consistency, one difference 
stands out across the two domains—the way in which the What Works 
Clearinghouse dominates over the other CHs in education. WWC also features in 
the synthesis of CHs dealing with social and behavioral programs, but because it 
predominantly addresses studies of academic achievement, its role is more central 
in education writ large than it is in the social and behavioral domain. In education, 
WWC’s combination of longevity, high funding level, clarity and justification of 
standards, number of programs rated, relative rapid updating of results, and pro-
motion by the United States Office of Education and the way its use is mandated 
for various research and practice decisions all combine to give WWC great visi-
bility in education. Indeed, some CHs (e.g., HomVEE) even base their standards 
on its criteria. Nonetheless, WWC is not the only CH in education, and its stan-
dards are not the only ones viable and in use. This paper does not examine WWC’s 
domain dominance and its possible consequences, because its scientific purpose 
depends on comparing the standards of evidence and other assumptions that dif-
ferent CHs make. This comparative research strategy does not require examining 
any one CH in special detail or trying to crown the assumptions built into any CH 
as superior for warranting acceptable knowledge of program effectiveness.
The present paper has some obvious limitations. First, we have not examined 
the extent to which policymakers use the recommendations CHs make. That ques-
tion is beyond the scope of this paper, though Nakajima (2021) shows that policy-
makers are open to incorporating research evidence into their decision-making 
and prefer research findings from large samples, multiple testing sites, and con-
textual settings similar to their own. However, policymakers were not shown to 
prefer experimental studies over observational ones, a finding that is at odds with 
the preference universally built into the educational CHs studied here. Further 
research is needed to explore how policy-makers use the program recommenda-
tions from CHs (Hedges & Waddington, 1993). Second, more descriptive work is 
also needed to compare CHs in other domains to learn whether there is something 
stably unique about education that leads to greater disagreement among CHs than 
occurs in other fields, such as social and behavioral intervention (Zheng et al., 
2022). A third challenge is that we only have access to evidence standards and 
program effectiveness profiles that CHs publish on their web portals. But some 
decision rules might be used in CH practice that are not documented online; they 
need to be documented and appraised. Likewise, some CHs publish their rationale 
for program endorsements but do not document how they assess the quality of the 
individual studies on which their final judgements depend. Fourth, our analysis is 
limited to CHs whose mandate is to certify interventions as effective or not; it is 
unclear how well the findings transfer to evidence-based practices that summarize 
survey data or qualitative studies. And finally, the landscape of CHs is a dynamic 
one. CHs continually rate new programs; they can update the ratings of existing 
programs. Some CHs update their evidence standards in line with relevant --- PAGE 27 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
29
methodological developments, whereas others are slower to do so. The content, 
design and structure of CH websites changes over time, and our paper is but a 
snapshot of a continually evolving landscape.
The findings reported here lead to questions that a body with more authority than 
a single research team might profitably address. Do we need so many CHs in educa-
tion? How can the number be reduced and other CHs be better supported? How can 
we maintain or increase the heterogeneity in evaluative criteria where no scientific 
consensus currently exists while reducing the heterogeneity where consensus 
exists? Can a modest-sized list of consensually validated causal contingencies be 
developed for increasing the level of between-CH standardization with respect to 
requirements about desired replication, effect sizes, and the length of persisting 
effects? Specifying such things would even allow CHs to test and publicize contin-
gent conclusions of the form: Program X is rated as evidence-based only if immedi-
ate effects are examined and no independent replication is required, or Program Y is 
evidence-based so long as effects larger than .20 SD are tolerated and the replicated 
evidence is from at least two RCTs. With enough time and detail in reports, sophis-
ticated methodologists might be able to work out such causal contingencies for 
themselves. But we cannot expect this from other potential CH consumers who 
have been promised simplifying recommendations from CHs and for whom the 
communication of contingencies might bespeak more complication than clarifica-
tion. Nonetheless, even partial agreement about the most important causal contin-
gencies should help. The current universe of educational CHs has grown in 
topsy-turvy fashion, and some official body—is needed to review the informal sys-
tem of CHs we now have in education and to make suggestions about how the sys-
tem might be improved.
notes
This research was funded by NSF Grant 176458.
1 The effect sizes for the reading composite, reading vocabulary, and reading compre-
hension have d values 0.16, 0.19, and 0.12, respectively. (Blueprints for Healthy Youth 
Development, n.d.)
2 Note: “Intervention” can be a program, policy, or practice. “Policy” refers to legal-
administrative mandates from governments at different levels; “program” refers to stand-
alone programs and procedures often funded within programs; and “practice” refers to 
activities designed primarily to improve policy or program implementation.
3 Key:
0 = The CH’s standards do not mention the specific causal design type.
1 = A causal design type under analysis is only briefly mentioned without specific elab-
oration on its meaning, measurement, or quality implementation in the CH’s standards.
2 = A causal design type is described in detail, but no design-separate standards are 
provided for quality implementation.
3 = The CH details design-specific standards for both causal inference and quality 
implementation.
References
Best Evidence Encyclopedia. (n.d.). https://bestevidence.org/about/
Blueprints for Healthy Youth Development. (n.d.). Blueprints standards. https://www.
blueprintsprograms.org/blueprints-standards/--- PAGE 28 ---
Cook et al.
30
Borman, G. D., Dowling, N. M., & Schneck, C. (2008). A multisite cluster randomized 
field trial of Open Court Reading. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 
30(4), 389–407. https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373708326283
Borman, G., Slavin, R., Cheung, A, Chamberlain, A., Madden, N., & Chambers, B. 
(2007). Final reading outcomes of the national randomized field trial of Success for 
All. American Education Research Journal, 44(3), 701–731.
California Evidence Based Clearinghouse. (n.d.a). CEBC rating policy and procedures 
manual. https://www.cebc4cw.org/registry/how-are-programs-on-the-cebc-
reviewed
California Evidence Based Clearinghouse. (n.d.b). Scientific rating scale. https://www.
cebc4cw.org/ratings/scientific-rating-scale/
Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the 
multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56(2), 81–105. https://doi.
org/10.1037/h0046016
Clearinghouse for Military Family Readiness. (n.d.). About the Continuum. https://
www.continuum.militaryfamilies.psu.edu/about
CNCS Evidence Exchange. (2016). Clearinghouses and evidence reviews for social 
benefit programs. March 2016. https://www.nationalservice.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/Clearinghouses%20and%20Evidence%20Reviews.pdf
CNCS Evidence Exchange. (n.d.). Metadata glossary. https://www.nationalservice.
gov/sites/default/files/documents/GLOSSARY-Metadata%20Categories%20
Definitions%20for%20Publication.pdf
Coalition for Evidence-Based Policy. (2010, February). Checklist for reviewing a ran-
domized controlled trial of a social program or project, to assess whether it produced 
valid evidence. http://coalition4evidence.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/
Checklist-For-Reviewing-a-RCT-Jan10.pdf
Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning. (2012). CASEL Guide: 
Effective Social and Emotional Learning Programs, Preschool and Elementary School 
Edition. https://casel.org/preschool-and-elementary-edition-casel-guide/
Curtis, A., & Bandy, T. (2015). The Quantum Opportunities Program: A randomized 
control evaluation. The Eisenhower Foundation.
Curtis, A., & Bandy, T. (2016). The Quantum Opportunities Program: A randomized 
control evaluation (2nd ed.). The Eisenhower Foundation.
Flay, B. R., Biglan, A., Boruch, R. F., Castro, F. G., Gottfredson, D., Kellam, S., . . . Ji, 
P. (2005). Standards of evidence: Criteria for efficacy, effectiveness and dissemina-
tion. Prevention Science, 6(3), 151–175. 
Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Yazdian, L., & Powell, S. R. (2002). Enhancing first-grade chil-
dren's mathematical development with peer-assisted learning strategies. School 
Psychology Review, 31(4), 569–583. https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.2002.12086175
Gough, D., Maidment, C., & Sharples, J. (2022). Enabling knowledge brokerage inter-
mediaries to be evidence-informed, Evidence & Policy, 18(4), 746–760. Retrieved 
Jan 25, 2023, from https://bristoluniversitypressdigital.com/view/journals/evp/18/4/
article-p746.xml
Hedges, L. V ., & Waddington, T. (1993). From evidence to knowledge to policy: 
Research synthesis for policy formation. Review of Educational Research, 63(3), 
345–352.
Home Visiting Evidence of Effectiveness (HomVEE). (2020). Home Visiting Evidence 
of Effectiveness (HomVEE) Systematic Review Handbook of Procedures and 
Evidence Standards: Version . https://homvee.acf.hhs.gov/--- PAGE 29 ---
Reliability of Clearinghouse Evidence-Based Program Ratings
31
Kilburn, M. R., Cannon, J. S., Mattox, T., & Shaw, R. (2014). Programs that work, 
from the promising practices network on children, families and communities. Rand 
Corporation. https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL145.html
Nakajima, N. (2021, September). Evidence-based decisions and education policymak-
ers. Working Paper. Accessed at: https://nozominakajima.github.io/files/nakajima_
policymaker.pdf
National Dropout Prevention Center. (n.d.). Rating system. http://dropoutprevention.
org/mpdb/web/rating-system
Neuhoff, A., Axworthy, S., Glazer, S., & Berfond, D. (2015). The what works market-
place: Helping leaders use evidence to make smarter choices. Bridgespan.
Parise, L., Corrin, W., Granito, K., Haider, Z., Somers, M. A., & Cerna, O. (2017). Two 
years of case management: Final findings from the Communities in Schools random 
assignment evaluation. MDRC. Project: Communities in Schools.
Pew-MacArthur Results First Initiative. (2015). Results First Clearinghouse Database 
User Guide, June 2015. The Pew Charitable Foundation and MacArthur Foundation. 
Accessed at: https://www.pewtrusts.org/-/media/assets/2015/06/results_first_clear-
inghouse_database_user_guide.pdf
Polanin, J. R., Maynard, B. R., & Dell, N. A. (2017). Overviews in education 
research: A systematic review and analysis. Review of Educational Research , 
87(1), 172–203.
Promise Neighborhoods Research Consortium. (n.d.). Program criteria, what works. 
http://promiseneighborhoods.org/what-works/program-criteria/index.htm
Rossman, S. B., & Morley, E. (1995). The National Evaluation of Cities in Schools. 
Executive Summary. The Urban Institute.
Sáenz, L. M., Fuchs, L. S., & Fuchs, D. (2005). Peer-assisted learning strategies for 
English language learners with learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 71(3), 
231–247.
Schirm, A., Stuart, E., & McKie, A. (2006). The Quantum Opportunity Program dem-
onstration: Final impacts. July 2006. Mathematica Policy Research Inc. Accessed 
at: https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED498110
Skindrud, K., & Gersten, R. (2006). An evaluation of two contrasting approaches for 
improving reading achievement in a large urban district. The Elementary School 
Journal, 106(5), 389–408.
Slavin, R. E., Lake, C., Chambers, B., Cheung, A., & Davis, S. (2009a). Effective 
beginning reading programs: A best-evidence synthesis. Center for Data-Driven 
Reform in Education.
Slavin, R. E., Lake, C., Cheung, A., & Davis, S. (2009b). Beyond the basics: Effective 
reading programs for the upper elementary grades. Center for Data-Driven Reform 
in Education.
Social Programs That Work. (n.d.). Ratings. https://evidencebasedprograms.org/
Somers, M. A., & Haider, Z. (2017). Using integrated student supports to keep kids in 
school: A quasi-experimental evaluation of communities in schools. MDRC.
What Works Clearinghouse (2014). WWC Intervention Report: Open Court Reading 
©, Early Childhood Education, December 2005.
What Works Clearinghouse. (2017a). Standards handbook  (version 4.0). Institute of 
Education Sciences.
What Works Clearinghouse. (2017b). Procedures handbook (version 4.0). Institute of 
Education Sciences.--- PAGE 30 ---
Cook et al.
32
White, H. (2019). The twenty-first century experimenting society: The four waves of 
the evidence revolution. Palgrave Communications, 5(1), 47.
Zheng, J., Wadhwa, M., & Cook, T. D. (2022). How consistently do 13 clearinghouses 
identify social and behavioral development programs as “evidence-based”? 
Prevention Science, 23(8), 1343–1358.
Authors
MANSI WADHWA is a PhD candidate at the Trachtenberg School of Public Policy, 
George Washington University, email: mansi_wadhwa@gwmail.gwu.edu. Her research 
focuses on gender, social policy, and evidence-based policy.
JINGWEN ZHENG is a PhD candidate at the Trachtenberg School of Public Policy, 
George Washington University, email: jzheng@gwu.edu. She specializes in program 
evaluation, urban policy, and development economics.
THOMAS D. COOK is the Joan and Serepta Harrison Emeritus Professor of Ethics and 
Justice at Northwestern University, where he is also Professor Emeritus of Sociology, 
Psychology, Education and Social Policy. He is currently a research professor at George 
Washington University in Washington, DC; email: t-cook@northwestern.edu. He is 
interested in social science research methodology, program evaluation, school reform, 
and contextual factors that influence adolescent development, particularly for urban 
minorities.