7
This short history of the Cognition family focuses on the 
intertwined stories of two entities:  Cognition Education Trust (the 
Trust) and Cognition Education Limited (the company). The Trust 
is the owner and sole shareholder in Cognition Education and its 
subsidiaries: Wavelength, Begin Bright, and Visible Learning Plus. 
The commercial dividends paid by the company to the Trust, fund 
the Trust’s programme of educational philanthropy – binding the 
two entities in a relationship of shared moral purpose. The history 
was commissioned by the Trust. Its primary audience is internal – to 
provide trustees, directors, staff and alumni with an overview, over 
almost three decades, of an extraordinary tale of establishment, 
development, change and adaptation. 
Today, the Trust and company are almost unrecognisable from 
the entities founded in 1989 on residual functions of the Auckland 
Education Board. The Trust, which initially operated as a 
philanthropic extension of the company, is now very much an 
active owner and shareholder that appoints the company’s board 
of directors, monitors commercial performance and manages 
the investment fund that underpins its granting programme. The 
PREFACE

8
company operates multi-nationally with a well-established reputation 
for education evaluation, consulting, training, publishing and media. 
In 2017, the transport division is the sole commercial function that 
survives from day one, although that too will shortly come to an end, 
following the recent decision of the Ministry of Education to take the 
function back in-house.  
As a short history the focus is on the larger themes that have shaped 
the collective journey.  The demands of those themes have caused 
the narrative to occasionally depart from strict chronological 
sequencing. Of necessity, there are things left out and things that 
only get a glancing mention. It is likely there will be readers who are 
disappointed that they (or events they were personally involved in) do 
not figure more prominently or at all in the narrative. The narrative 
traces the major pivot points that underpin the organisational 
story. Individuals feature to the extent that their words or actions 
provide illustrative colour to the story. Cognition Education is a 
business. Successful businesses energise teams and teamwork. This is 
intentionally the story of the family, the teams and the major events 
that have shaped them. 
The title, “Darwin’s Finch”, is a metaphor drawn from evolutionary 
biology. The finches of the Galapagos Islands, first described by 
Charles Darwin, form a range of sub-species primarily distinguished 
by the adaptations of their beaks to particular environmental niches 
and food sources – adaptations which field studies show can occur at 
a remarkably accelerated pace.1  Similarly, the company originally 
established as Multi Serve and subsequently Cognition Education has 
had to be highly resilient and adaptive over a relatively short life-span. 
On an almost cyclical basis (typically every six to seven years) the 
company’s form, focus and scale has been subjected to intense pressure 
from disruptive shifts in market conditions. 
The reasons for each of these disruptive episodes are inevitably 
multi-faceted, but at varying stages and to varying degrees, three large 
(disruptor) themes stand out. The first of these, ongoing, is the flux 
in education policy environments (both national and international) 
related to widespread anxieties about the performance of schools and 
education systems; a climate which invites potential opportunity but 
also feeds unpredictable political and policy shifts that translate into 
market uncertainty. The second disruptor was the instability caused 
1 Jonathan Weiner, The Beak of the Finch: A Story of Evolution in Our Time, Random House, 2000 

9
by the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the restraining impact it had 
on governments’ discretionary investment priorities – which is where 
education reform commitment tends to sit. The third, compounding 
the second, is the significant decline in international oil prices which 
has affected the ability of governments in Cognition’s key Middle East 
markets to balance budgets. In the face of such pressures, what stands 
out is Cognition’s remarkable resilience and its adaptive intelligence. 
The “beak of the finch” speaks pungently to the consistent ability 
of the company and its people to reshape and productively adapt to 
unpredictable forces of change.
It was my privilege to work for the company for more than 12 years. 
The last 40 months as chief executive was a career highlight. If there 
is a bias in this work, it arises from the deep affection in which I hold 
the people, the organisations (Trust and company) and their combined 
purpose. To be asked to be the chronicler is an even greater privilege, 
and I thank the trustees for the opportunity and their confidence. 
My thanks to Aaron Smith for organising access to records and 
assisting with necessary liaison. Heartfelt thanks also to the many 
former colleagues who gave their time to be interviewed, clarified 
facts, offered viewpoints and provided source material. Particular 
thanks are due to Ian Cordes, Phil Coogan, and Ian Hall for the 
substantial time they gave to reviewing and commenting on various 
chapters. While ultimate responsibility for the text lies with me, the 
work is undoubtedly better for their input.  
As we go to print in mid-2017, the company is navigating yet another 
cycle of significant change. I trust that the key themes of this story are 
a useful reminder to those now charged with making and remaking 
our commercial and philanthropic futures, of the spirit of the many 
who have gone before and the purposeful optimism that carried 
them. As the author and journalist, Eduardo Galeano once observed, 
‘History never really says goodbye. History says “see you later”.’ 
Terry Bates – July 2017

10
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition