11
Foundations
Multi Serve, the Trust and company that became Cognition Education, 
was born in 1989. These were the heady days of New Zealand’s “Tomorrow’s 
Schools” reforms. A new market language was at play in the affairs of the 
State, expressing the determination of the Labour government (first elected 
in 1984 and re-elected in 1987) to resolve the acute fiscal deficit it had 
inherited. Tomorrow’s Schools was one of a number of reform contexts where 
government wanted to shrink the administrative apparatus of government 
and subject more of its functions to the discipline of market forces and price 
competition.  
Multi Serve was one of thirteen “education service centres” established 
across the country, as part of the machinery of reform. The ESCs, as they 
were known, were initially funded under government suspensory loans. Their 
key role at 1 October 1989 was to take over functions previously managed 
by the outgoing Department of Education and Education Boards and now 
outsourced through commercial contracts, which would become contestable 
over time. The key contracts for the new Multi Serve ESC, serving the greater 
Auckland region, were schools’ payroll and schools’ transport. 
Government reasoning appears to have been that the ESCs were a necessary 
transitional step in encouraging the development of a competitive supply 
Chapter 1
(1989-1996)
FOUNDATIONS

12
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
market to schools. Whether they survived over time appears to have been a 
moot point. The Tomorrow’s Schools policy document was unequivocal in 
stating that education service centres would be “one source of administrative 
support to institutions.” It elaborated: “Institutions will be free to choose 
whether to use the education service centres or to buy services elsewhere.” 2 
Almost 30 years on, what was novel language applied to the business of 
government in the late 1980s has become embedded. By contrast, the 
countdown to 1 October 1989 was super-charged, given the very short 
timelines to implementation. Just 18 months separated the release of the scene-
setting “Picot Report” and the go-live date for the Tomorrow’s Schools policy. 
That interval was jam-packed with the passage of complex enabling legislation, 
Prime Minister David Lange’s nationwide stump of school and town halls, 
the first election of the new school boards of trustees and the formation of 
slimmed-down education agencies working to very different policy instructions 
than their predecessors. An off-shore commentator called it the “earthquake 
method” of education reform. Virtually all the new structures (including the 
ESCs) were created within a year. 3
Earthquakes are, by their nature, unsettling. As critical infrastructure to the new 
system, the ESCs and their performance in the transition was an early and vital 
confidence test for government implementation planning. The teacher unions 
were vociferous in their criticism about the pace of change and the perceived 
heresies in the shift away from central arrangements. Schools might be about 
to become self-managing, but every school-based employee expected to be paid 
with the same accuracy and regularity as had applied before the changeover. 
Every parent of every child eligible for school transport expected school buses 
to run on time and safely. Hence, the relatively low-risk approach that was taken 
in initially staffing the ESCs. In exchange for a government-funded suspensory 
loan, abated over five years, the Multi Serve Board took over the employment of 
staff formerly employed by the Auckland Education Board. 
The terms of the establishment had two significant effects. Multi Serve had 
secured the institutional knowledge and systems required to operate critical 
high-stakes contracts – school transport and teacher payroll. But in doing so, 
it had also paid the price of transferring a substantial bureaucratic mind-set 
and a range of service offerings (including property, finance, school stationery, 
warehousing) that had previously been free to schools but would now come at a 
cost to those schools. Multi Serve’s first board chairperson, Stewart Germann4, 
2	
Tomorrow’s Schools, New Zealand Government policy document, Wellington, 1988, Section 1.5, p.14
3	
Cathy Wylie, Vital Connections, NZCER Press, 2012, p.77 
4	
“First” chairperson belies the fact that Germann would go on to serve as Chair of both the Trust and company for 
almost 25 years. He shared this long-service distinction with two other “foundation” directors, Keith Goodall and 
Chris Morton (who also served as company chairperson from 2013 to 2016). The combined governance service of 
these three directors was more than 75 years. 

13
Foundations
recalls that the name “Multi Serve” emerged naturally from the multiple 
service lines that the company inherited.
Community enthusiasm for Tomorrow’s Schools was high. Across the country 
only two schools failed to elect a board. The promise of self-management was 
a heady pheromone. From the perspective of many boards and principals, 
Multi Serve personnel might have had institutional knowledge, but it was old 
institutional knowledge at a time when schools were being remade in a new 
image of self-management. Thus Multi Serve risked being seen as the old 
Education Board reskinned. It probably didn’t help perceptions that initially 
the company was housed in the former Education Board headquarters in 
Grafton, and the Government’s suspensory loan, that capitalised the company 
was linked to its retaining former Education Board staff. The Government was 
exporting liability for potential public service redundancies. 
Few, if any, personnel coming across from the Education Board, had 
experience of competitive markets and related commercial disciplines. Initially 
the company’s financial planning was heavily conditioned by memories of the 
Education Board. Very optimistic assumptions were made about how schools 
would behave in relation to the new ESCs and the services they would seek. 
For example, in building the first company budget, it was assumed that every 
school in Auckland would contract financial management service support. 
In reality, schools were price sensitive from the outset and immediately shopped 
around. Early on, management expressed concern that sales staff were not 
addressing, “the commitment … that clients are giving alternative suppliers.”5 In 
the event only around 80 schools took up contracts – less than a third of what had 
been anticipated. Overly optimistic projections were also evident in the property 
division where winning commissions were only half those stated in the business 
plan. By March 1990, sales figures for the stores contract, were being characterised 
as “perhaps optimistic”, and concerns were being raised at the potential for the 
Ministry of Education to demand recovery on the losses sustained.6 
The viability of the company in these initial years was thus highly dependent 
on two large scale contracts (payroll and transport) that were subject to central 
government procurement. In that sense, the initial mindset of the organisation 
would prove costly. In late 1991, just over two years from establishment, the 
company lost the Auckland payroll contract in a competitive tendering process. 
The successful bidder had gathered a group of other ESCs together and had 
significantly cut its labour costs. By contrast, Multi Serve based its bid on 
pricing that had been previously agreed with the Ministry in an earlier short-
term extension of its original contract.
5	
Multi Serve (MS) Board Minutes, December 1989, item 6 
6	
MS Board Minutes (special meeting), 29 March 1990

14
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
Alarmed by the resultant financial vulnerability of the company, the board 
endeavoured to sue the Ministry on the basis that the terms of the original 
payroll contract carried certain “legitimate expectations” of contract renewal. 
The action also applied for interim relief for lost income. In the event, the 
Court was unsympathetic. In delivering his judgement, Justice Temm accepted 
the Ministry’s argument that the only reasonable expectation that the company 
could have was to be invited into the tender round. The tender, he ruled, 
was not a “meaningless ritual”, but rather a “competition where there are 
[necessarily] winners and losers.”7 
Justice Temm went on to comment that while the company had apparently 
felt “safe” with the precedent of its pricing offer, it might also be characterised 
as, “perhaps a little complacent.” 8 The Court pointed to the fact that the 
company had successfully bid for and won the tender for the Northland 
schools’ payroll from that region’s ESC. In complaining that it had lost the 
larger Auckland contract to a competitor (in a parallel process), the company 
appeared to be rather wanting its cake and eating it. 
This was the company’s first taste of competitive tendering with government. It 
was very much a sign-post to the future. The ESCs might have been important 
to the initial transition of the reforms, but they would not have favoured status in 
government purchasing beyond the initial contracts. Cost-competiveness mattered; 
the successful bid price was close to half what Multi Serve had tendered. Moreover, 
the political environment had shifted. The reforms had not rendered the expected 
savings, and there was a concern in policy circles that the full intent of the policy 
had not been realised. Those pressures were already affecting ESCs that were 
still in formative stage. At a special board meeting in March 1990, company 
managers expressed concern at the “hardening” of attitudes towards ESCs that 
were becoming evident in the Residual Management Unit of the Department of 
Education. The government commissioned a new cross-agency task-force of senior 
officials to review the processes and outcomes of the reform. 
The consequent “Lough Report” was published in April 1990, scarcely six 
months after the implementation date of Tomorrow’s Schools. The report 
recommended two key areas of change. The first was that the size of the 
education bureaucracy be further reduced. The second was that there be further 
devolution of personnel management to schools. Central to this next phase of 
envisaged devolution was the suggestion that payment of teacher salaries be 
moved away from central Ministry control and instead be directly managed by 
schools. The signals for the future of ESC administered payroll contracts were 
ominous. They darkened further in the air of fiscal constraint that accompanied 
the election of a National government some seven months later.
7	
Germann v Attorney-General HC Auckland CP1890/91, 17 December 1991 at 11
8	
Germann v Attorney-General, op.cit., at 6

15
Foundations
The issue of where responsibility for the administration of schools’ payroll 
should lie (centrally or locally) was a major theme of the education landscape 
through the 1990s. What was colloquially known as “bulk-funding” became 
a bitter battleground between the teacher unions and the Government. 
As a result, bulk-funding was never fully mandated by government and 
never advanced beyond voluntary subscription by schools. The effect was a 
lengthy period of policy irresolution which created considerable contractual 
uncertainty for the company. 
The Ministry was squeezed between two imperatives: maintaining orderly (but 
ageing) systems for the centralised payment of schools’ payroll and keeping 
options open for full devolution to schools. The result was a series of relatively 
short-term payroll management contracts. Each contract iteration represented 
a pragmatic response on the part of the Ministry to necessary platform changes 
but kept the door open to the possibility of schools directly managing the 
function for themselves. 9 
In late 1991 the payroll contract was lost. A year later it was won back. 
However, the significant loss of income through 1992 forced a dramatic 
reshaping of the company. The board and management had been well aware 
of the risks. Affidavits in the payroll appeal case noted that, “the payroll service 
is a lucrative contract which, the Trust emphasises, has enabled it to fund 
every one of the [other] services that it supplies.”10 In other words, the payroll 
contract was an existential anchor. Without it, the company lost the means 
to subsidise the ambitious range of service lines it had originally established, 
many of which were under-performing. 
In 1992 revenue fell to less than $3 million annually – around a third of what 
it had been in 1991, the first full year of trading. The number of people 
employed by the company also fell dramatically. At establishment, staff had 
numbered 120. Now it was around 40. Restoration of the payroll contract in 
1993, was critical. Otherwise, as Ian Cordes, then company CFO, recalled, 
“Multi Serve would have closed the doors.”11 Yet even with the payroll contract 
restored in 1993 and expanded to include the Waikato region, the company’s 
financial position was difficult. To win back the contract, Multi Serve had been 
forced to reduce both its staffing and its margin. The author of what came to 
be known in popular culture as “ruthanomics”, Ruth Richardson, was in the 
ascendancy as Finance Minister. Cost savings were a significant motivation in 
government procurement processes. 
Compounding the company’s revenue woes was the limited success in selling 
direct to schools. Schools were still finding their “self-managing” feet, and 
9	
Ernst Young, “Review of the Transfer of the Education Service Payroll” October 1996, p.3
10	 Germann v Attorney-General, op.cit., at 3
11	 Ian Cordes, formerly Chief Financial Officer at interview, May 2016

16
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
part of that was managing their own fiscal pressures. From the outset there 
were significant numbers of principals who considered that school operational 
funding was insufficient. That mind-set grew steadily, reinforced by the general 
air of restraint evinced by the Bolger government, particularly prior to 1996. 
Schools boards were cautious in their spending and were inclined to take the 
no-cost/low-cost option. Colleges of Education had taken over the functions 
of the old Department of Education’s advisory service. This meant they were 
able to provide teacher development services at no cost to schools – free was a 
difficult price point for ESCs to compete with. 
Multi Serve board minutes and management reports from these early years 
convey significant anxiety that core contracts carrying “major financial and 
other marketing benefits to the Trust,”12 were relatively short-term and at 
risk of not being renewed. A board member from that time, Chris Morton, 
characterised the operating environment as one of, “constantly trying to 
invent the future.”13 The payroll contract was up for negotiation year-on-year. 
Although it was won back for the 1993 calendar year, directors noted the 
effects of both a reduced contract margin and the ongoing policy uncertainty 
that lay behind short-term contractual cycles: “uncertainty will continue … 
until the Government, schools and employee unions finally decide the future 
handling of payroll administration.”14 
The anxiety was exacerbated by uncertainty over the school transport contract, 
the company’s only other sizeable revenue source. The directors commenting 
that “devolution of funding for the school transport service is under review and 
uncertainty as to Multi Serve’s role will continue until that is finally resolved by 
the Government.”15 The depth of organisational disquiet surfaced strongly at 
the board meeting in August 1992. Directors were looking for diversification 
and concerned at over-reliance on what they considered was an unpredictable 
education services market. They agreed that, “the Trust must get equity 
participation in a profitable non-educational business venture.” All trustees 
were asked to pursue options as a matter of urgency.16 
A number of attempts were made. The names of new ventures subsequently 
appear and disappear from the board’s minute book: “Home Study Video”, 
“Blueprint”, “Kaha Media”, “Educational Travel International” and “Facilities 
Management Services.” None provided a sufficiently sustainable medium-term 
growth platform. At a special meeting of the board in February 1995, the 
minutes ruefully note the directors’ agreement that, “developing new services 
12	 MS Directors’ Report, Annual Financial Statements (March 1993), Multi Serve Education Trust
13	 Chris Morton, former Board member at interview 2016. Morton ultimately served as company board chairperson 
from 2013 to 2016. 
14	 ibid
15	 ibid
16	 MS Board Minutes, August 1992

17
Foundations
for the education sector had proven costly over the past three years.”17
Multi Serve was not alone in its pain. Other ESCs were also finding the going 
tough. Chief executive Ron Perkinson noting, with understandable frustration, 
that “no ESCs were making money.”18 Consolidation was inevitable and 
the majority would not survive the outsourcing of the previously centralised 
education services payroll engine when it finally took place in 1996. Moreover, 
the highly discounted price at which the company was subsequently able to buy 
out the balance of its suspensory loan suggested a degree of pragmatism on 
the part of the Government. ESCs had served their transitional purpose in the 
reforms; it was time to move on.
 Nevertheless, the pattern of marginal trading continued. Early in 1995, 
directors reiterated their frustration at the company’s dependence on a market 
“constantly constrained by the Ministry of Education and Government 
policy.”19 The same report noted the success in securing the payroll contract 
again but worried that the price had once again been reduced. Faced with 
the continuing downward pressure on costs, directors questioned the viability 
of the business.20 Nor was the situation improving in terms of direct trading 
with schools. Two months later board minutes recorded a lukewarm market 
response to Multi Serve’s newly launched school management offering which 
was competing with a free service from the School Trustees Association: 
“Inevitably schools … go for the free service.”21
An even bigger challenge was looming. The Government finally made the 
long-expected decision to fully out-source education payroll functions to a third 
party. The Cabinet decision was made in July 1994 with an expected go-live 
date of 1 July 1996. The successful contractor was expected to provide an end-
to-end solution to encompass the management functions previously performed 
by the Ministry and the schools’ service function that the ESCs had picked up. 
A key component of the new contract was the expected development of a new 
software platform to replace the Ministry’s ageing system.
A contract was signed between the Ministry and the successful tenderer, 
Datacom, in late August 1995. Datacom’s bid included Multi Serve and 
Schools Support Services in the South Island as delivery partners. The 
difference for Multi Serve was that instead of directly contracting to the 
Ministry, as it had since 1989, it was now a sub-contractor to Datacom. 
The company could be pleased that its emerging reputation for reliability 
and performance had been recognised and that it had retained the business 
17	 MS Board Minutes, Special Meeting, February 1995, item 6
18	 ibid
19	 MS Directors’ Report, Annual Financial Statements (March 1995)
20	 ibid
21	 MS Board Minutes, 28 June 1995, item 6

18
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
stream most critical to viability. For other ESCs their exclusion from these 
arrangements effectively spelled the end of the road. 
However, with less than twelve months to the expected implementation date, 
the company faced new pressures. Restructuring was again in the air. The 
agreement with Datacom required a significant reduction in payroll staff 
numbers – never helpful to organisational morale. More significant were the 
risks arising from a highly compressed implementation time-line and poor 
understanding from the Ministry both as to the nature of the task and the 
standard of project management required for such a complex undertaking.
Although there are around sixteen years between the two documents, the 1996 
Ernst Young review of the implementation failings of the education services 
payroll transition to Datacom reads uncannily like the report of the 2013 
Ministerial Inquiry into “Novopay” – the latter now colloquial shorthand  
(in New Zealand) for bureaucratic “screw-up”. Datacom had less than a month 
from the contract signing to provide a full software specification and less than 
eleven months from there to “go-live”. Somewhat predictably, the results 
fell short. Ernst Young subsequently commenting: “We believe that had the 
full functionality of the required … system been exhaustively explored and 
documented … at the outset … the complexities … would have been better 
understood and planned for in the implementation.”22 It appears to have been 
downhill from this point.
The implementation date was initially delayed by around six weeks, but the extra 
time did not prevent the system failing on day one. By day two of implementation, 
things were working after a fashion but the software was not fully functional, and 
the initial failure had left a huge backlog of payment errors. These issues were 
compounded by the fact that pre-implementation development pressures on the 
head contractor had translated into incomplete training of the subcontractors. 
Multi Serve staff were now in the unenviable position of trying to operate a 
new system they didn’t fully understand, while simultaneously endeavouring to 
shake the faults out of the system and responding to an unprecedented level of 
complaint from schools and teachers. All of this accompanied by the predictable 
siren songs of media and politicians looking for someone to blame.  
The crisis was a significant reputational test for the company. The board 
considered transferring the payroll division to a new standalone company, so 
concerned were directors at the potential damage to the core brand. Teachers 
and school boards were not interested that the fault lay elsewhere. Teachers 
had been paid accurately by Multi Serve before and now they were being paid 
inaccurately. The new system took months to become fully operable and the 
error back-log cleared. 
22	 Ernst Young, op. cit. p.16

19
Foundations
At the peak of the crisis the company was managing around 10,000 calls a 
day. Under the new contract, staffing in the payroll division had been reduced 
to fewer than 25 but now had to be doubled to manage demand. Short-term, 
the company was delivered a hard lesson about the risks of commercial 
partnerships and subcontracting. But the enduring story was the admirable 
resilience of staff under pressure, a quality which would become something of 
an organisational hallmark over time.
Ultimately, the operational partnership between Multi Serve and Datacom 
became very strong. When the parties separated more than sixteen years later, 
having lost the contract to what became Novopay, it was with genuine regret 
and a sense of a job-well-done over a lengthy span of time. But as staff and 
board gathered in 1996 for Christmas drinks, 2012 would have seemed an 
eon away – particularly given the policy and commercial turbulence of the 
company’s first six years, the wearying contractual uncertainty and the sense of 
being almost consumed by the recent cataclysm. 
Nevertheless, directors and staff could also look back on those first years with a 
modicum of satisfaction. The company had survived where other ESCs were 
faltering or had closed. It had shaken off the naivety of establishment and the 
overly bureaucratic mindsets it had inherited. It had paid off its suspensory 
loan to government, and it was establishing a new tradition of philanthropic 
intent (the subject of a later chapter) unmatched by its competitors. 
Albeit unsuccessful, Multi Serve had stood up to the Ministry of Education in 
court – an early test in a critical commercial relationship. A tougher and more 
focused commercialism was beginning to underpin its decision-making. It had 
lost key contracts and won them back. It had tried new ideas and had the good 
sense not to pursue unpromising initiatives for too long. It had entered into a 
commercial partnership with Datacom which would provide core sustenance 
for the next decade and a half. Somewhat bruised, it was nevertheless hungry 
and looking for new opportunity. It was now a genuine business, tougher for 
the experience and with an emerging confidence to look further afield. 

20
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition