21
Broader Horizons
The story so far has focused primarily on the company’s role as a service 
support agent for schools – in education but not of education. By contrast, the 
next several years would see the emergence of a range of educational training, 
support and consulting opportunities in international markets – precursors 
to the substantial expansion of the business that occurred in the Middle East 
between 2004 and 2010. 
Over time the company has been the beneficiary of several opportunities that 
have required extraordinary agility, audacity and resilience to pull off. Each of 
these moments has contributed substantially to the scale of the company and its 
reputation. The first was the invitation from the Government of Brunei in late 
1996 to establish a private international school under the patronage of Prince 
Jefri, brother of the Sultan. This was part of a wider strategy in the Sultanate to 
drive improved academic outcomes against international benchmarks. 
Those who work in the company know well the costs of competitive tendering 
for complex international projects. In this case the client came to the company 
having done its own search and apparently attracted to the recent school 
reforms in New Zealand. The phone call to then CEO Ron Perkinson inviting 
him into negotiations was unexpected. The Bruneians were seized with 
urgency. Sensing that fact, Perkinson caught the first available flight. The 
Chapter 2
(1997-2003)
BROADER HORIZONS

22
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
contrast with dealings over the New Zealand schools’ payroll contract could 
not have been greater. 
Eager to secure the work, the company offered a sum of $0.8M to manage 
the design of a new school and its curriculum as well as establish operating 
systems and recruit teaching staff. Later the scope would expand to include a 
boarding hostel. The initial deal was done on the spot, but the Bruneians were 
not convinced the price was sufficient and they increased it by twenty percent 
– probably the first and only time in the company’s history that a major client 
has voluntarily offered to increase a price. 
Prince Jefri took a close interest. The development was managed through his 
personal investment company Amadeo. He personally intervened with local 
education officials to sort out problems with the school accreditation process. 
He also approved the details of the boarding hostel and provided a substantial 
personal cheque ($30M) to underwrite the first year of school operations. He 
even tried to get involved in staff appointments – championing the wife of a 
resident ambassador as a potential appointee.23 
The contract ran for slightly more than two years, but ultimately became the 
victim of the sudden collapse in the Prince’s fortunes (both political and fiscal) 
in 1998. Vanity Fair magazine described him as, “The Prince who blew through 
Billions.” For the company, the pace and scale of the work, as well as the 
physical distances that needed to be managed, were new territory. Despite the 
challenges, the school was successfully built, staffed and opened within budget 
and on time. Although project manager, John Faire, reported a “much higher 
than expected level of personal contact to manage the political and cultural 
environment.” 24 That comment would prove prescient in the even more 
demanding circumstances of Qatar and Abu Dhabi a decade later. 
Board discussions on Brunei noted persistent “difficulties”. Among these 
difficulties were the air pollution problems associated with fire haze caused 
by illegal agricultural and forest burn-offs more broadly across Borneo and 
Indonesia. The possibility that the school might need to be temporarily 
relocated to the United Kingdom was discussed by the board. 25
Notwithstanding these challenges, the ultimate success of Jerudong International 
School (JIS) has often been a shared reference point between local officials and 
the company in its subsequent work in Brunei. JIS was one of the few Amadeo 
operations that avoided closure when the Sultan took over his brother’s affairs. 
The project became a psychological catalyst for the company’s international 
growth ambitions. It rendered a rare and welcome taste of a client who was 
23	 MS Board Minutes, April 1997, item 6.2
24	 MS Board Minutes, July 1997, item 6.2
25	 MS Board Minutes, [both] April 1997 & April 1998, item 6.2

23
Broader Horizons
willing to place a significant value on the quality of independent professional 
advice. More significantly, it gave the company critical experience in managing 
cultural and project complexity in an unfamiliar jurisdiction. It cemented the 
idea that the conceptual framework of Tomorrow’s Schools could be adapted 
to market demand elsewhere. Although as events in the Middle East would 
later reveal, this idea had its limits and at times was something of a barrier to 
consistent implementation. 
It was unfortunate that the abrupt termination of the Jerudong contract closed off 
further opportunities that were under development at the time. One of these was 
a proposed foundation tertiary facility to provide post-school bridging for students 
preparing for university entry; the other was a major Bruneian teacher supply 
programme in conjunction with a local partner. Both of these opportunities 
were seen by senior management as offering the potential to underwrite a more 
permanent presence in the Bruneian market. As the subsequent history of the 
company reveals, maintaining a cost-effective business and marketing presence 
within specific markets beyond New Zealand’s shores, particularly where major 
contracts have ended, is a significant commercial challenge. 
The still-born teacher recruitment programme for Brunei was a relatively 
organic segue from a New Zealand-based contract that was part of a 
government response to teacher shortages in the local market. Through 1996 
and 1997 the company’s professional services division was busy recruiting 
teachers from the UK, Australia and Canada. Almost 200 overseas teachers 
were successfully placed in New Zealand schools through this programme. The 
project reinforced the emerging internationalism in the commercial mindset. 
These ambitions were underscored in early 1997 by a meeting in Brunei of 
Multi Serve’s international recruitment agents. Given that the recruitment 
business did not grow beyond the New Zealand placement programme, the 
Brunei event was perhaps a little premature. 
Nevertheless, the taste of international work and profile remained enticing, 
particularly given the somewhat pessimistic board analysis of the domestic 
outlook in mid-1999: “Economically the longer term projection for the 
country, without a significant change in policies, is for a steady downward slide 
in relation to other OECD countries.”26 As part of the consequent strategic 
review, directors again affirmed the desirability of developing an international 
strategy. There was hope for new opportunities in Jamaica, one of which 
involved a partnership with Professor Warwick Elley from Massey University. 
In a pattern that would become familiar in later years, significant time and 
effort went into bid preparation and in-market visits only for the effort to 
founder on the resistance of local officials.
26	 MS Board Minutes, item 7.7, June 1999

24
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
Concurrently, a number of relationship development visits were made to the 
World Bank in Washington and to education authorities in Brazil. A new 
specialist business unit, “Curriculum Projects”, was formed with a focus on 
strategy and change management in international schools. A joint venture 
company was formed with Cambridge Consulting to assist in the further 
development of international consulting work. However, little eventuated from 
the relationship, despite the involvement of former Prime Minister Jenny Shipley. 
Hopes were expressed that exploratory work to build a school for underprivileged 
students for the Sampoerna Foundation in Indonesia would bear fruit. 
A series of small review and development contracts were won with 
international schools in Manila, Bali, Tokyo and Fiji. In one notable case, 
Heather McRae (later head of education operations) recalls that she got an 
inkling of key issues when she discovered the principal of the Manila school 
moonlighting as a saxophonist in a nightclub. There was also success securing 
contracts in Lesotho (school-based management) and Egypt (educational 
ICT), both through the World Bank. Officials from the Lesotho Ministry of 
Education were hosted by Multi Serve on a visit to New Zealand in late 1999.
However, sustained success through World Bank contacts remained elusive. 
Lead times for this nature of work were typically extended and relative to the 
sales effort, international revenue after JIS was limited. Through 1998 and 
1999, there was a significant push in Indonesia for work funded by the World 
Bank, but uncertainty arising from political changes in the country affected 
decision-making. A contract to develop a teacher education facility with 
Sampoerna was apparently won,27 but then not implemented. 
Relationship management and maintaining key contacts at a distance continued 
to be a challenge, particularly where local civil service capability was relatively 
undeveloped. Symptomatic was the rueful note in the board minutes in mid-
2000: “Lesotho project [is] progressing slowly. Mrs M… difficult to contact.” The 
aid-funded28 Lesotho work would continue in occasional bursts through to 2005, 
including participants spending time in New Zealand schools. Contracts with 
Brunei came again in several stints between 2004 and 2008. The primary focus 
was training school inspectors in school effectiveness evaluation, but the apparent 
largesse of Prince Jefri’s time was a distant memory. A more conventional 
approach was being taken to procurement in Brunei. Budgets no longer 
sustained curriculum documents “bound in leather and gold.”29
Conditions in the New Zealand market continued to be mixed, although by the 
late nineties there were signs of a greater stability creeping into the Ministry 
27	 MS Board Minutes, May 1999, item 6.7 & August 1999, item 6.4.1
28	 Through the World Bank – see MS Board Minutes, September 1999, item 9
29	 At interview [August 2016] Heather McRae told the story of the curriculum documents for JIS needing to be bound 
in “leather and gold”. 

25
Broader Horizons
of Education’s procurement processes. Core contracts such as payroll and 
transport were now subject to longer terms and a greater frequency of roll-over 
and extension. The transport division saw opportunity to expand the business 
by offering management services to direct resourced school network groups 
to augment the centrally controlled contract. In the event, school network 
sales results were relatively modest as were the returns. Not for the last time 
the company was served a reminder that direct trading with schools was often 
characterised by levels of price sensitivity that were not commercially sustainable. 
More significant were new pressures on the Ministry of Education arising 
from disquiet at the pace of change with curriculum and assessment reform. 
Poorly supported implementation was biting politically, as was the faltering 
performance of parts of the schools’ network. The 1994 TIMSS results for 
mathematics and science suggested systemic teaching weaknesses in primary 
schools in these curriculum areas.30 Critical Education Review Office reports 
(through 1996 and 1997) on the performance of schools in South Auckland, 
Northland and East Coast suggested the need for a system response. So too 
the 1999 Literacy Taskforce findings which noted wide variations in teacher 
expertise amongst schools, resulting in a smorgasbord of approaches that were 
neither effective nor sufficiently evaluated.31 
Taken together these pressures suggested that the Ministry needed to expand 
its role and more actively “lead the system” than had been initially assumed 
in the 1989 reforms. A change of leadership in the Ministry helped. The new 
Secretary of Education, Howard Fancy32, applied a more nuanced policy 
intelligence. He recognised the need for the Ministry to more actively steer 
from a distance. That meant underpinning devolved school management with 
greater system capability and actively engaging with the “front-line” in building 
that capability. 
The result was a greater frequency and scale in centrally funded professional 
development and support opportunities. In the classroom the focus was 
on building the effectiveness of teaching, assessment for learning, lifting 
achievement in the core curriculum and implementing senior secondary 
qualifications. For principals and school boards there was a parallel emphasis 
in development contracts that encouraged a more strategic focus on lifting 
educational performance and leading learning in their schools. The company 
successfully secured a range of major contracts, building in-school capability in 
the upper North Island. Key contracts over the period included: “Assessment 
for Better Learning” (ABEL), “Leading and Managing”, “Board Training and 
Support” (BTAS), “Assess to Learn” (ATOL) contracts.
30	 Wylie, pp. 142-143
31	 Wylie, op. cit., p.141
32	 Howard Fancy joined the company board as a director when his tenure as Education Secretary expired. 

26
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
Moreover, the Ministry was better understanding its role in growing and fostering 
a competitive supply market. Contracts began to be tendered on three-year 
terms instead of the shorter terms that had previously applied and this positively 
affected the business model. In the early years, what was then called “professional 
services” (later “education operations”) relied on external contractors organised 
by a small internal administration team. Ash Newth, a former District Senior 
Inspector of Primary Schools, coordinated much of this work, his extensive 
relationships in the sector enabling him to bring together flexible delivery 
teams under secondment from schools. Typically these contracts were relatively 
short-term (up to a year) and the way they were organised made for consistent 
profitability as well as further cultivating relationships in schools. Despite changes 
in other parts of the training and consulting business, the Newth-model endured 
for successive iterations of school trustee training and support contracts up until 
2013, when the political decision was made to fund the work-stream wholly 
through the School Trustees Association. 
However, there were also difficulties in the approach. Maintaining work-force 
stability and consistent quality in the face of uncertainty and delays associated 
with official decision-making about contract extensions, roll-overs and 
replacements as well as the time often taken in the procurement process was 
an on-going challenge. It was difficult for company managers to keep potential 
school-based secondees committed to the next contract cycle (outcome as yet 
unknown) when they were also under pressure from their employing schools 
looking for certainty over their presence or otherwise.33 
The Ministry, seeing the potential benefits of more stable contractor supply 
chains as well as the advantages of sending stronger investment commitment 
signals to schools (particularly after the election of the Labour-led government 
in 2000) responded positively. As major professional learning contract cycles 
extended, it became possible for the company to contemplate retaining a larger 
scale, permanent education training and development workforce – forming the 
core of what would ultimately become the consulting division. 
The nature and quality of personnel attracted through these more stable 
professional development contracts, was significant to later success in winning 
large scale schooling improvement and system development projects in the 
Middle East. It was this grouping that generated the intellectual capital 
in the winning tenders and provided critical leadership and management 
capability in what were always high stakes implementation contexts. A scaled 
up consultancy and the nature of the ATOL contract which continued until 
2005, was also key to the company engaging critically with the thinking of 
key education researchers and theorists – work that sign-posted subsequent 
33	 Interview with Heather McRae, August 2016

27
Broader Horizons
commercial relationships with Professor John Hattie (Visible Learning) and 
Professor Russell Bishop (Culture Counts) a decade later. 
In the shorter term, the work and the confidence that came with it encouraged the 
company to break new ground in supporting the establishment of new schools in 
the greater Auckland region. A surge in immigration in the early 2000s required 
a significant expansion of the Auckland schools network. Under pressure, the 
Ministry took an innovative approach to contracting support for these new school 
establishments, allowing a significant degree of diversity in the design approach. 
The model required governance support for establishment boards of trustees 
to be integrated with design and build consortia. Drawing on its domestic 
consulting profile and with the success of Jerudong as a key reference point, 
Multi Serve was particularly well-placed to take on this work. In each case 
the company’s role was to support the school’s “Establishment Board” to 
appoint a principal, establish an operational infrastructure prior to opening 
while concurrently developing a design brief for the architects that was well-
grounded educationally and could be translated into affordable construction. 
Multi Serve advice was critical in assisting boards to develop the preferred 
educational approaches that fed into design briefs. Typically it took several 
months to appoint a principal. Complex design, consent, and build processes 
of this scale could not afford that delay, and big decisions often had to be 
made in advance of a principal’s appointment. Thus the key responsibility 
for forming the advice that informed those decisions lay with the Multi 
Serve “governance facilitators”. The success of the work was reflected in the 
uniformly high praise for the company’s input at each opening. 
Between 2003 and 2009 five new schools – Oteha Valley Primary, Baverstock 
Oaks, Tupuranga (now Kia Aroha College), Silverdale Primary School (a 
relocation) and Albany Senior High School – were designed, built and opened 
in a partnership between Arrow International and Multi Serve. In terms 
of budget and complexity, Albany Senior High posed challenges that prior 
contracts had not. The chosen site was very small and ecologically sensitive, 
restricting the building platform. Community opposition to the proposed 
site was significant and the Ministry had not yet obtained the necessary 
site-use designation from the local authority, normally a preliminary to an 
establishment board being appointed. 
Delays were such that a temporary transportable school had to be built on a 
corner of an adjacent existing school. Ultimately the site’s restrictions, combined 
with a management and board commitment to flexible-use learning spaces, 
drove an inspired creative and architectural response. The result crowned a 
seven-year work-stream staffed by a group of agile and skilled consulting staff 
but, paradoxically, it also ended the company’s involvement in this type of work. 

28
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
The Ministry had changed the rules along the way and had based the Albany 
contract on standardised hours for governance support. Officials were unwilling 
to acknowledge the significant additional input required from the company 
to support the board over extended implementation timelines and through 
very complex and contentious planning issues. Discussions with the Ministry 
suggested the funding framework for future work would be similarly constrained. 
The company did not tender again.
Through this period, the company continued to look for opportunities to 
reduce its dependence on a single domestic client. Part of that search spawned 
two significant educational ICT initiatives. The first of these, “Edcom”, 
enjoyed conspicuous success for a time. The other, “Edgenet”, failed. In 
partnership with Telecom, Edcom was formed to provide ICT guidance to 
schools, primarily through a “help desk” service. This was a subscription 
business model that offered discounts on school phone services as a benefit 
of membership. Seven hundred schools signed up in the first year, although 
Telecom (with an eye to corporate image) rather blunted the appeal of 
membership by extending the call discount benefits to non-member schools. 
The following year Edcom won a national tender, supplying Microsoft software 
and licenses to schools on a discounted basis. Membership neared a peak of 
close to 1200 over a period of four years. The favourable Microsoft pricing deal 
was the key attraction, and Edcom was very profitable. For a short time Multi 
Serve was the largest supplier of computer software to New Zealand schools. 
Then, in late 2001, the newly elected Labour Government reached agreement 
with Microsoft to provide computer software to all state schools for a one-off $10 
million fee, effectively removing the major incentive for continuing membership 
of Edcom. Initially Edcom had a fixed-fee distributive role in the new 
arrangements, but the contract was only transitional – just 12 months. The major 
source of the division’s revenue fell victim to broader political considerations 
and the bulk purchasing power of government. In this case the politics won. The 
government’s actions were enthusiastically welcomed by cash-strapped schools.34 
By 2004 Edcom had closed. 
Although short-lived, Edcom’s success was a reminder of how complex the 
management of business partnerships in a relatively small market could be. 
Datacom had also bid for the initial Microsoft schools’ contract and had not 
appreciated losing to what it considered a junior business partner; feathers were 
ruffled. Ian Cordes recalled that displeasure being informally but pungently 
conveyed. It was Datacom that won the re-tendered Microsoft distribution and 
support contract which effectively sealed Edcom’s fate. 
The company’s parallel foray into the digital world never got traction. 
34	 See announcement by Hon Trevor Mallard, Minister of Education, 5 February 2002, www.beehive.govt.nz.

29
Broader Horizons
“Edgenet” was an ambitious attempt to develop a piece of software to track 
and report student progress aligned to the levels of learning that set out in the 
New Zealand national curriculum documents - overly ambitious as it turned 
out. A significant development grant ($0.8M) was obtained from Technology 
New Zealand, a government digital innovation funder. Over time two software 
developers were engaged, but both appear to have overstated their capability. 
Consequently, the project was subject to delays over several years. Edgenet 
never got to the demonstration stage. Key personnel departed. 
Given the uncertainty, Multi Serve directors declined requests for further 
investment calculating that the business risks were too high. The death of 
the project was a cautionary tale of the challenges and costs of developing 
bespoke software compounded by an over-reliance on the technical expertise 
of an external party and insufficient internal expertise to properly oversee the 
project. Whatever the failings of the software developers, there also appears to 
have been a high degree of naivety in the company’s management approach 
and an obvious opportunity lost. Technology NZ’s reaction to the failed 
investment is lost to the record, but contemporary observers will note the 
contrast with the strictures of current government procurement processes. 
There was, nevertheless, a small “upside” to this unfortunate episode. Edgenet 
usefully embedded itself in the company’s institutional memory. A decade 
later, memories of the Edgenet failure and the struggle of the early months 
partnering with Datacom in a software transition were uppermost when the 
company declined the offer to subcontract to Talent 2. Talent 2 were about to 
take over the schools’ payroll contract with their evidently incomplete Novopay 
software. As we will see in a later chapter, the wisdom of that decision was clear 
within days of the contract transfer. 
However there was one ICT project from the late nineties that produced sustained 
success and a business partnership that lasted a decade. In early 1999 the company, 
in association with Copeland Wilson Associates (CWA), won a Ministry of 
Education contract to develop the education portal and web community that 
became Te Kete Ipurangi (TKI). This was before the Ministry formalised a 
national ICT strategy for schools. Consequently, as David Copeland (then head of 
CWA) observed, there appeared to be opportunity to influence officials’ thinking as 
to how a national strategy might be framed and implemented.  
Accordingly, the approach to the tender was ambitious and intended to catalyse 
subsequent policy thinking. Early discussions also involved Learning Media, 
but the latter company, apparently concerned to maintain its then pre-eminent 
place as a provider of educational content to New Zealand schools, decided to 
put in its own bid. The Multi Serve-CWA had two parts: (a) the development 
of a web-enabled resource centre (CWA); and (b) an ICT help desk for schools 

30
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
(Multi Serve) – in effect Edcom on a large scale but pre-funded by the Ministry. 
So CWA was to be the TKI content builder and Multi Serve an ICT service 
desk and call centre. 
Although the proposal won the tender, it was only accepted in part. The 
Ministry argued the help desk function was not affordable, although it did 
subsequently create its own in-house service and recruit a number of former 
Multi Serve staff to run it. The change in scope of the TKI tender was an early 
test of a new partnership. On the face of it, there was no role for Multi Serve. 
It is a tribute to the spirit of the relationship that it was quickly agreed that the 
remaining work would be divided between CWA and Multi Serve. CWA would 
be responsible for content creation, but the Multi Serve team would provide 
formal quality assurance on that work. 
For a while the two teams were co-located. The combined staff exceeded 30 
at peak, with Multi Serve contributing around a third of that number. Despite 
its longer-term success, the relationship was not without its tensions. CWA’s 
creative team was in almost daily contact with the Ministry of Education, 
whereas there was much less interaction possible for Multi Serve’s quality 
assurance team. At times, Multi Serve felt confined to the shadows of the 
contract. Inevitably this brought a degree of frisson to relationships within the 
partnership. At one point directors discussed resolving “relationship difficulties” 
by either party buying out the other. 35 
Ultimately however, these occasional tensions were managed. As with 
Datacom, the relationship with CWA proved adaptable and durable – 
successfully managing shifting political circumstances and renewing the 
contract over multiple development cycles. Almost 20 years on, TKI has 
assumed a ubiquity in the New Zealand schools’ eco-system that belies the 
innovation of its conception and original creation. The significant part that 
company personnel played in that creation is a source of on-going pride. 
Multi Serve’s legacy was embedded in the DNA of TKI content. The 
development of the TKI style guide, the guidelines for content management 
and associated links that framed the core work of content editing and sourcing 
links to other educational resources was critically Multi Serve’s work. The TKI 
contract also provided a compelling reference point for some subsidiary but 
related tenders that the company subsequently won in its own right - managing 
online teacher communities through Arts On-Line and English/ESOL On-Line. 
In the seven years that followed the Jerudong contract, diversification success 
was mixed. Nevertheless, the scale of the business grew by around a third over 
the period – the TKI contract making a significant contribution to that growth. 
At March 2003 annual revenue stood at a little over $10 million. However as 
35	 MS Board Minutes, November 2003, item 6.5

31
Broader Horizons
the year progressed, domestic market uncertainty was again creating anxiety. 
There were deep concerns about the roll-over of both the payroll and transport 
contracts and the related proposal to once again reduce contractual timeframes. 
Compounding these issues, the Ministry was concurrently calling for 
expressions of interest in a new payroll system and signalling that a longer-term 
transport contract was likely to differ significantly from previous arrangements. 
Confidence in the quality of Ministry decision-making was low. A related 
meeting with the Ministry’s transport management team had left company 
representatives with an impression of “short staffing” and “disorganisation”.36 
The search for greater sustainability was being driven by a new CEO, Des 
Hammond (appointed in July 2002). Hammond was increasingly concerned at the 
apparent paucity of new Ministry of Education professional development contract 
opportunities. He worried that those tenders that were available did not appear to 
be truly contestable but were being weighted in favour of existing suppliers. 
In October 2003, the board noted that, in the past six months only one new 
tender opportunity, “Dance in the Curriculum,” had gone to market. In 
November a literacy support proposal was reported as unsuccessful. Hammond 
suggested that long-standing relationships between the Ministry and traditional 
suppliers such as Learning Media and the University-based school support 
teams were major influences in procurement decision-making that Multi Serve 
could not match. There was frustration at perceived “subsidies” enjoyed by 
University of Auckland’s Team Solutions group and the competitive advantage 
those rendered. Rubbing salt into the wound, Team Solutions had recently 
advertised a further 45 vacancies.37 
Yet again, and despite modest past results, the notion of growing the 
direct-to-schools business was revived. The education operations division 
was reorganised into three regional service hubs: Auckland, Hamilton and 
Wellington. In the case of Auckland and Hamilton, education advisory and 
financial services teams were integrated to improve the interface with schools. 
Company directors asked if a faltering Edcom could be similarly integrated. 
When the Wellington regional manager resigned, the Board suggested that an 
“influential principal” be sought as a replacement.38 
Despite these changes, “direct to schools” was not growing quickly enough. 
However, another international opportunity, requiring even more agility and 
audacity than Jerudong, was about to present itself. It would propel the company 
into an extraordinary period of growth and to a previously unimaginable scale. It 
is to those events and the first contract in Qatar that the story now turns. 
36	 MS Board Minutes, August & September 2003, items 6 & 7 respectively
37	 MS Board Minutes, October 2003, item 7
38	 MS Board Minutes, December 2003, item 7

32
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition