33
Desert Sands
The Jerudong contract encouraged the idea that there were broader 
opportunities for the company in South East Asia. As part of the company’s 
marketing strategy, its senior members began to attend the annual EARCOS 
Conference (East Asia Regional Conference of Schools) on a regular basis. 
As we have already seen, the ASEAN market had proved somewhat more 
intractable than was initially hoped, but the EARCOS connection was critical 
in securing the first contract in Qatar. 
Jo Mullins, relatively recently appointed to head education operations at 
the company, attended EARCOS in November 2003. It was there that she 
first heard of plans led by Rand Corporation, to reform schools in Qatar. 
Reorganising education operations had dominated her first months in the job. 
As a result she was well aware of the commercial challenges that the company’s 
heavy reliance on the domestic market represented. Instinctively, she sensed 
that New Zealand’s devolved schooling system and Multi Serve’s experience in 
that system might speak to Qatari education reform aspirations. 
Given three distinct policy options by Rand, the Qataris had chosen an 
adapted charter school model “which decentralised [schools’] governance and 
Chapter 3
(2004-2010)
DESERT SANDS

34
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
encouraged variety through a set of schools independent of the Ministry”.39 
The four key principles underpinning the reform – autonomy, accountability, 
variety and choice – appeared to resonate strongly with the policy logic 
and rhetoric of Tomorrow’s Schools. Mullins flew back to New Zealand 
determined to get the company’s profile and the New Zealand experience in 
front of Rand.
Initially, CEO Hammond was cool on the idea. The company had recently 
been through a protracted, costly and ultimately unsuccessful tendering 
experience in Jamaica. “Why should this be different?” he asked. Mullins and 
her deputy Andrew Short, were persuasive. A brief proposal was written. 
Within the month Mullins and Short were in Santa Monica, California, 
presenting to a joint panel of Rand personnel and Qatari officials. As Short 
recalls, the initial body language of the Rand people at the presentations 
suggested low interest in Multi Serve as a potential provider. The sales pitch 
began with a full mihi and waiata – the key message being “a bicultural 
approach; support from a small country like yours.” One of the Rand panel 
walked out, but the Qataris beamed.40 Multi Serve had proposed supporting 
four of the newly independent schools, the resultant contract offered five. The 
delivery team needed to be in Qatar within three months.
Although negotiation for later cohorts (six over the full term of the project) 
was more difficult, initially the behaviour of Qatari officials suggested the 
early spirit of Jerudong. The bid price of $6.5M received a nonchalant nod of 
approval. However, there was a potential sting in the tail. The apparently easy 
agreement on price came with a standard contract that was poorly drafted and 
somewhat one-sided. The company’s legal adviser put significant energy into 
a revision, but that was waved away. The simple message was, “this is how we 
do business.” From the outset then, the potential scale of reward was balanced 
with significant contractual risk. 
The relationship was soon tested. By early 2004 Multi Serve had a team of 
around 20 people in-country along with personnel from a number of other 
international school support organisations (SSOs). Initially, living and working 
conditions were difficult. Allocated apartments were incomplete and the lack 
of digital connectivity made communications and working conditions trying. 
Mullins reported: “… drivers did not turn up, there was no water or power for 
several days … no phones or internet connections. The flats needed extensive 
cleaning and repair work … those issues continue with water, plumbing and 
electrical issues the substance of daily living.”41 
39	 See Rand Corporation, “Education for a New Era – Design and Implementation of K-12 Education reform in 
Qatar,” 2007, p.xix
40	 Andrew Short at interview, June 2016
41	 Jo Mullins, Report to MS Board, item 6a, April 2004

35
Desert Sands
As ostensible project manager, Qatar’s Education Institute was completely 
unprepared for demands on office space and was unable to provide sufficient 
working space for the SSO teams. Early plans to house all the SSOs in one of 
the newly independent girls’ schools were undone when the principal refused 
to allow male consultants on to the premises. “As a consequence,” Mullins 
reported, “four [SSO] teams shared a small office space with patchy internet 
access. There were often up to 15 people from the four organisations working 
in this space with laptops literally on their laps.”42
In all of this there was something of a culture shock. The client interface was 
complex and Qatari civil service capability underdeveloped. In no sense was 
the project brief fully formed and it continued to change. As an early example, 
SSOs were required to assist the new school operators draft performance 
contracts and associated budgets with the Education Institute. Regular 
meetings had to be held with the tripartite structure of RAND, the Charter 
Schools Development Centre and the Education Institute – all of them settling 
into unfamiliar roles and new relationships with each other. Official clarity was 
in short supply. Team reports highlighted long hours and considerable strain 
arising from apparently arbitrary decision-making, unrealistic deadlines and 
unexpected changes of direction. 
Communication difficulties with school operators, arising both from language 
barriers and uncertainties about their operations and resourcing, compounded 
the difficulties. Operators struggled to formalise their thoughts, contractually, 
at the level Rand and the Supreme Education Council (SEC) expected. It fell 
to the Multi Serve team to fill the gap, and the gap was complex. The contracts 
(effectively draft Charters) operators had submitted with their bids had to be 
substantially reworked, then translated back into Arabic first for the reluctant 
approval of the operators (who felt that they were being bound well beyond 
what had been initially agreed) and then the SEC. Despite these challenges, 
the Multi Serve team met the first critical milestone – producing the required 
contracts and budgets on time. Competitor SSOs did not. 
Again there was a cost, with the company sandwiched somewhat 
uncomfortably between operators and officialdom. Team frustration over lack 
of access to capable translators was a strong theme in operational reports. 
Mullins observed that the whole exercise had unnecessarily fuelled resentment 
and tension between the operators and the Education Institute, compounded 
by the eccentric approach officials had taken to budgets. Framing all of this 
was a growing awareness of the costs of doing business in an unfamiliar 
environment. Securing residency and work visas for staff was proving 
considerably more bureaucratic and time-consuming than had been originally 
42	 Mullins, ibid

36
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
anticipated. This was difficult for staff whose goodwill was being tested daily. 
It was impossible to buy a car, have a mobile phone or even get a key cut 
without a residency card. Typically, obtaining a card took around six weeks – a 
process involving X-rays, blood tests, finger-printing, multiple photographs and 
seemingly endless paperwork. Obtaining exit visas was an equally opaque and 
time-consuming process. 
Advice on local tax compliance was also somewhat ambiguous. The challenges 
of a small company managing business compliance demands from a distance 
were an inevitable growing pain, but would become a recurring theme when 
operations later expanded into the United Arab Emirates and then Malaysia. 
Mullins commenting: “[with] hindsight there was probably a need to have 
expert assistance available to us in Qatar, over and above the team we had on 
the ground, to assist in the areas of finance and Qatari law. This is something 
that is worth considering for future contracts.”43
Rand, sensing the difficulties, appears to have temporarily taken a more 
dominant role. In May the Board was advised that Rand was “taking direct 
control,” and that senior officials had been removed.44 Directors expressed 
concern that unnecessary stress on staff had arisen from the Education Institute 
adding “extra requirements not specified in the contract.”45 What the company 
was in the process of learning was that a signed contract in Middle Eastern 
terms rarely meant a fixed programme specification. Time and again in Qatar 
and later in Abu Dhabi, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, it would become evident 
that in the client’s mind the “black letter” of the contract was simply a starting 
point – a broad legal framework for the relationship. In practice, contract 
terms were often highly iterative and particularly susceptible to new priorities 
emerging from executive decision-making in the political domain almost always 
without regard for the operational and fiscal consequences.
Although largely unseen on a day-to-day basis, the conventions and 
assumptions of autocratic political leadership drove a civil service culture very 
different from democratic jurisdictions and company experience. Civil servants 
were there primarily to execute instructions from above, not to give free and 
frank advice to their political masters, nor to be unduly troubled by notions 
of responsiveness to either the broader public or their contractors. In short, 
the company was adapting to an environment where contractual terms were 
frequently subject to change at very short notice, where the decision-making 
that lay behind those changes was often opaque, and where client performance 
expectations took little account of the impact of their ad hoc changes to 
previously agreed project specifications and approaches.
43	 Mullins, op.cit.
44	 MS Board Minutes, May 2004, item 6.3
45	 MS Board Minutes, April 2004, item 7.2

37
Original offices for Multi Serve, Grafton, 1991

38
A Cognition 
Classroom in 
Qatar, 2004
Group of  
students with 
Chris Sullivan, 
Qatar, 2005
Student project  
HBABJ Science Club

39
Al Wajbah primary school girls, 2005
Group of  Qatari school boys, 2004

40
CERT and CEL Board, 2006. Back row:  Janet Kelly, Nola Hambleton, Wyatt Creech,  
Terry Bates, Keith Goodall, Dr Russell Bishop. Front Row:  Margaret Bendall,  
Des Hammond (CEO), Stewart Germann, Mary Sinclair (Executive Trustee)
Ron Perkinson (CEO), 1990–1999

41
Jo Mullins, whose sales leads led Cognition 
to the step change in the Middle East
Cognition Education Ltd Board of  Directors, c2008. Left to right: Prof  John Hattie,  
Chris Morton, Stewart Germann (Chair), John Langley (CEO), Carol Moffat,  
Ian Cordes, Keith Goodall

42
NEiTA 2010 Cognition Education Ltd Award with Hon Anne Tolley, Minister of  Education
Alastair Kerr (Chair), 2016 –
Tina Lucas (CEO), 2016 –

43
Cognition Education Trust Board, 2017. Left to right: Sarah Martin, Richard Jefferies, 
Candis Craven (Chair) and Tim Livingstone
Festival of  Education (2014). Shane Ngatai, Associate Minister of  Education  
Hon Nikki Kaye, Minister of  Education Hon Hekia Parata, Jesse Lee

44
Rt Hon John Key delivers address at the  
NEiTA Awards, co-sponsored by Cognitition
Multi Serve Service Medal
Cognition Education Trust’s assessment panel reviewing grants. Left to right: Executive 
Director Anne Rodda, Trustee Sarah Martin, Advisers Soana Pamuka and Margaret 
Bendall, and Trustee Richard Jefferies by teleconference

45
Desert Sands
All of that said, there was also a great sense of adventure about the Qatar 
project. As Chris Sullivan, a member of the original project team, recently 
observed, “it was in equal measure often exhilarating, never dull, and 
undertaken with a degree of optimism that we could, and were, making a 
difference.”46 With talk of an additional seven schools for “Cohort 2” already 
well advanced, the company was motivated by the potential volume of work 
and margins not seen since Jerudong. 
However the opportunity also came at a fiscal cost. From the outset frustrations 
arose from slow and convoluted client payment processes which over time 
presented significant cash-flow challenges for the company – later compounded 
by similar administrative inertia in the Abu Dhabi contracts (which scaled up 
rapidly from 2007). This meant building new relationships with the company’s 
bankers to secure necessary lines of credit – at the height of the Middle East 
projects in excess of $16M. Critical sector comment back in New Zealand 
about the apparent scale of the company’s off-shore work not being matched 
by its charitable distributions was oblivious to very real cash-flow challenges 
– a combination of arthritic client payments and the need for capital to fund 
expansion on a scale hitherto unimaginable.
It was not only international expansion that was causing headaches. As the 
Qatar project began to scale, the company was advised by the Ministry of 
Education that it had been unsuccessful in the tender round to renew the main 
ATOL (Assess to Learn) contract for the next three years. This was a major 
blow. The three major educational services contracts the domestic consultancy 
held at that time were TKI, BTAS, and ATOL, and of these TKI and ATOL 
were the revenue streams that underpinned the bulk of staff retained in the 
domestic consultancy. By contrast, BTAS was largely managed through a 
network of external subcontractors. 
So on top of the initial culture shock of Qatar came a second culture shock as the 
company was forced to rapidly rethink its approach to educational services in the 
domestic market and downsize the local consulting team. The relatively recent 
reorganisation of domestic consulting into three regional service hubs also came 
under scrutiny. This reorganisation had occurred on the assumption that core 
Ministry contracts could be augmented by growing direct trading with schools 
through “bundled services” offers. A typical example might comprise a contract 
for senior management appraisal, combined with agreed hours of assessment 
and curriculum support for teaching staff and a financial services package. In 
the event that growth was not realised. The “direct to schools” market was 
dominated by sole operators or very small consultancy groupings who were able 
to operate at a much lower price point than was possible in the company. 
46	 Chris Sullivan at interview, Aug 2016

46
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
Such work as was won, typically principal performance appraisals and small 
scale evaluations, was thus marginally priced and sometimes further discounted 
on a buy one, get one free basis. On early acquaintance (having just joined 
the company at this time) the author heard well-meaning staff justifying such 
arrangements as part of the charitable mission of the Multi Serve Trust. 
Analysis of the Financial Services division (primarily accounting services to 
schools) suggested that commercial performance was also being compromised 
by a culture of marginal and discounted pricing, especially in Auckland. This 
confusion needed to be addressed in the process of reorganising and refocusing 
the consultancy. The need for the commercial arm to make a profit in order 
that the philanthropic arm could distribute that profit seemed to be habitually 
overlooked by too many staff. 
The challenge then was how to better differentiate the company’s consultancy 
offerings and people from small suppliers (typically sole traders) as well as to 
build capability and profile likely to enhance competitiveness in government 
procurement, both domestic and international. The nature of contracts such as 
ATOL meant that the education operations staffing profile tended to be weighted 
towards people who were more “trainers” than “consultants”. The reorganisation 
of the consultancy saw a deliberate focus on recruiting lead staff whose personal 
and professional reputations were likely to generate client interest and revenue. 
The immediate objective was to recover and supplant the revenue that had 
been lost with ATOL through a more diversified approach and a focus on 
work that generated higher margins. The second objective was to back the 
international growth strategy with greater in-house technical and development 
capability. A new programme evaluation offering was launched, and a swathe 
of PHDs joined the team to augment the additional public policy expertise that 
had been recruited at about the time ATOL was lost. 
The strategy worked. Within three years annual consulting revenue was up 
almost 30 per cent to more than $4M, despite no single contract having 
replaced ATOL in value. In April 2007, for example, the Board noted five new 
evaluation contracts recently won by the domestic consultancy, collectively 
worth $2.3M. The striking diversity of this work highlighted the shifts that 
were taking place in company capability and market perception. The nature 
of these contracts (“Developing Effective Leadership and Planning for 
ICT”, “Making Language and Learning Work”, “Survey of Special Needs 
Resourcing in Schools”, “Study of the Food and Nutrition Environment in 
Schools”) also suggested a growing interest in the company’s emerging strength 
- evaluating public policy. 
These shifts also marked the beginnings of a growing diversification in the 
domestic client base beyond the traditional relationship with the Ministry of 

47
Desert Sands
Education. Notable examples over the following decade evaluated a range 
of high profile policy programmes for a range of government agencies and 
NGOs: community education for the Tertiary Education Commission; 
education in prisons for the Department of Corrections, road safety education 
for the Ministry of Transport; “Enviroschools” for the Enviroschools’ 
Foundation; the “Sky’s the Limit” reading programme for the New Zealand 
Book Council; and the “Roots of Empathy” programme for the Ministry 
of Social Development. An initial relationship with the Ministry of Health 
evaluating a food and nutrition initiative in schools was followed by the 
Health Promoting Schools (HPS) contract, first signed in 2010 and ongoing. 
This primary healthcare initiative focuses on improved health and wellbeing 
outcomes for school students and their communities and has involved around 
70 percent of schools nationally. 
Over the period, the company also reaffirmed its place in the digital education 
space, which had diminished with changes to the TKI contract. For the 
Ministry of Education the company developed the “Digital Technologies 
Framework” and evaluated the “Laptops for Teachers” initiative. It managed 
the delivery of English Online, ESOL Online, Social Sciences Online and Arts 
Online, all very significant teacher digital communities. Arts Online represents 
one of the company’s longest contracts – more than a decade in duration. 
In this time the company also produced a series of DVDs to assist teachers 
with the English language needs of diverse learners and to assist teachers of 
languages other than English. 
Concurrently, the Qatar project continued to grow at pace. By the end of the 
2006/7 financial year, revenue was almost $10M annually with significant 
growth prospects. The company was one of 19 nationally selected finalists for 
the New Zealand Trade and Enterprise, “Exporter of the Year Award”. The 
company was now in a credible position to bid for and win a parallel schooling 
improvement project in Abu Dhabi, the dominant Emirate within the UAE. 
Over the next three years, the revenue scale of this project would be more than 
double that of Qatar. The pace of expansion required in both jurisdictions 
and the overall volume of work (particularly the demands of recruitment 
and business compliance) would initially test the company’s organisation and 
infrastructure. 
In December 2007, the executive management team met in a strategy review 
session. The mood was upbeat. Despite the emerging international liquidity 
crisis, which was shaking financial confidence in the United States and Europe, 
the outlook for further growth in the Middle East looked good. The company’s 
international profile appeared to be broadening as well. Earlier in the year, a 
small team had worked in New York with Professor John Hattie (University of 

48
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
Auckland) in an asTTle47 training trial with 12 schools in Harlem, a foretaste 
of a relationship that would ultimately result in the commercial partnership 
that became “Visible Learning Plus”. Prospects for a contract to train school 
inspectors in Brunei were encouraging. There was also excitement at potential 
opportunities from the upcoming ICSEI conference (International Congress of 
Schooling Effectiveness and Improvement) scheduled for Auckland in January 
2008. A company team had played a major role in the organisation, and the 
programme indicated that Cognition staff would be well profiled. For the first 
time in the company’s history, annual revenue was projected to break the $20M 
barrier. In the event it exceeded $26M – almost double the ($13.7M) average 
of the preceding five years. 
The day concluded on an ebullient note. Drinks were served with an ambitious 
five year revenue growth target, $55M annually by 2012, scrawled on the 
whiteboard. In a sense it was a fitting final meeting for CEO Des Hammond 
who departed early in the new year. Hammond could take considerable 
credit for initiating the growth platform that would take the company to a 
significantly different scale and focus over the next four years. He could also 
take credit for leading a process that had resulted in the company’s recent 
change of name. Multi Serve had become Cognition Education. 48 
Aspirational though that five-year target seemed, it was achieved within 18 
months of explosive growth and acknowledged with an export award in 2010.49 
Annual revenue almost doubled to $46M the following year and accelerated to 
$66M the year after, crowning the company and Trust’s twentieth anniversary 
celebrations in 2009. Annual turnover for the three financial years 2009 to 
2011 averaged $55M. More than 60 percent of that revenue was due to growth 
in Abu Dhabi sales. 
The rate at which the organisation was forced to scale was a significant 
challenge compounded by the selection of an Emirati sponsor of dubious 
efficiency. The major mistake was the company agreeing to combine the role 
of sponsor (ordinarily a largely pro- forma role) with that of immigration 
agent. The agent’s inability to process work visa and residency applications at 
the expected rate created considerable inconvenience for incoming staff. The 
need to clog the weekend with a “border-run” (a bus-ride into Oman to renew 
a temporary visa) became something of a grim and wearying joke for staff. 
Project manager, Sally Smart, described it, “as an exasperating time.”
The reputational and legal risk for the company eventually led to protracted 
47	 asTTle is a proprietary assessment tool owned by the New Zealand Ministry of Education and initially developed by 
a team led by Professor John Hattie. 
48	 Although the name “Cognition” was actually a moment of inspiration from Jo Mullins following an executive team 
brain-storming session. 
49	 [Air NZ Cargo] Export Awards – 2010, Consultants and Services Exporter of the Year.

49
Desert Sands
litigation to terminate the sponsor’s contract – no easy task in a small country 
with different legal conventions and a judicial system subject to protracted 
delay and political influence. The company was reminded again of the price 
to be paid arising from naïve judgements and hasty decisions in a complex 
compliance environment with very different cultural norms.
As in Qatar, the supply chains for the company’s schooling improvement work 
were people-intensive. A typical Cognition (in-school) change management 
team in either country comprised a lead adviser supplemented by two or 
three advisers in specified areas of curriculum and a translator. With families 
added to those personnel, the company found itself with a substantial job not 
only of recruitment and initial training but also settling in-country residency 
arrangements, arranging work visas and securing housing for employees – all 
of which had to be achieved under compressed time frames. 
By mid-2010 (the peak of these projects) Cognition had close to 300 employees 
in Middle East markets and related residency responsibility for a further 115 
partners and children. Through 2007/8 in Abu Dhabi particularly, there was 
a shortage of residential stock. The author has particularly vivid memories 
of days spent with senior colleagues in new subdivisions literally emerging 
from the desert and meeting landlords’ agents in houses that were barely past 
foundations stage. 
The confident assurances that these buildings were only a few weeks from 
completion and a lease should be signed immediately to secure them stretched 
credulity, but there was simply no alternative. One particularly absurd 
conversation of this sort ended with Cognition managers standing beside a 
pile of builder’s rubble, helpless with laughter at the comedic brashness of the 
land agent. In the event, a number of incoming employees had to be initially 
accommodated in hotels – an additional project cost, but necessary when 
balanced against the need to establish credibility with a high-value client in an 
intensely competitive market. 
Personnel in the school advisory teams were sourced from a range of countries 
with New Zealanders comprising the largest proportion. A typical Kiwi 
“can-do” attitude underpinned the resilience of Cognition teams who initially 
confronted trying circumstances. Leaving aside the vagaries of actually 
getting fully settled and housed, the dilapidated state of school buildings and 
equipment, as well as the uncertainty of local teaching staff as to the role 
and purpose of these “foreigners” in their schools, could present significant 
challenges of relationship management and planning. 
Although not a uniform reaction, it was not surprising that some teams 
encountered resistance, both overt and covert, from principals and teaching 
staff. The Abu Dhabi project had initially been presented as a public-private 

50
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
partnership (PPP). Successful tenderers were to be directly responsible for the 
appointment and performance management of staff in schools. In the event, 
local political considerations caused the Abu Dhabi Education Authority 
(ADEC) to resile from that commitment, but the original intent affected the 
initial reception that incoming Cognition personnel experienced. 
Parents and local communities were also apprehensive. ADEC had declared 
that the primary language of instruction in schools would be English, a very 
significant and culturally unsettling change in a school-age population for whom 
Arabic was the primary language. Then there was the obvious question: “Who 
are these non-Islamic people come to change our schools and to what purpose?” 
Compounding the apprehension was the fact that the local education 
authorities were themselves in the throes of significant structural change and 
had not adequately communicated the purpose or processes of the intended 
reform programme to those affected. All of this against the accelerating sense 
of culture-clash inherent in the Western response, first in Afghanistan and later 
Iraq to the event universally referred to as 9/11.
In these early years and against this broader backdrop, the reassuring “New 
Zealand-ness” of the Cognition teams was an asset. It quickly became evident 
that the instinctive ease of Kiwis in cross-cultural settings and the ability to 
forge constructive relationships was helpful in creating an accelerated climate 
of acceptance in the schools. Also helpful was that New Zealand as a country 
was seen by locals as small and unthreatening. The company’s induction 
programmes for incoming personnel stressed the need to avoid modes of 
behaviour and advice that might be interpreted as representing a “colonising 
mind-set” and to be acutely sensitive to local social and religious norms. 
Knowing that longevity in the market would require results, it was also 
important that warm relationships did not become an end in themselves. The 
challenge for the school teams was to translate hard-earned warmth and trust 
into sustained pressure for a step-change in teacher and principal practice. 
This was no easy task in a professional culture which was teacher-centred 
rather than student-centred and placed control and compliance ahead of self-
management and performance. There were also some senior advisers (usually 
ex-principals) who initially took a New Zealand self-managing schools mind-set 
into the work. There were two risks here. The first was potential offence to the 
client education authorities who had a clear expectation of maintaining central 
control and expected that message to be reinforced by their contracted SSOs. 
The second was the risk to demanding project accountabilities, particularly in 
Abu Dhabi, of a plethora of individual change management approaches. 
In contrast to the more qualitative focus on outputs that characterised the 
Qatar contracts, ADEC’s performance measures were much more demanding, 

51
Desert Sands
as they were primarily quantitative, required aspirational improvements in 
student achievement and set aggressive English-language competence targets 
for principals, teachers and students. It was thus imperative to focus school 
teams on a common, research-based intervention methodology supported 
by the development of value-added measures to assess student, teacher and 
principal progress. 
In that process the company developed the concept of “voluntary milestone 
reporting” underpinned by analysis that went beyond the black letter of the 
contract and gave the client a richer view of progress and performance. The 
methodology was heavily influenced by key theorists such as Hattie, Fullan and 
Levin. It focused Cognition teams on the process factors most likely to engage 
principals and teachers in productive change and the teaching approaches most 
likely to catalyse the quality and pace of student learning. 
These shifts were reinforced by the introduction of an internal evaluation 
programme, developed and operated by senior members of the core consultancy.  
The programme monitored the performance of school-based teams at regular 
intervals, reported the comparative consistency of programme performance 
across schools and created an evidence base which actively engaged the project 
management team in the dialogue of continuous improvement. This “coaches 
of coaches” approach proved highly effective both in creating common 
expectations of performance and building relationships between the domestic 
and international teams. 
Most significant was the adoption of a Hattie-inspired effect-size methodology 
to judge the impact of the project on the principals, teachers and students in 
Cognition-managed schools. Students were the subject of nationally generated 
assessments, known as “EMSA”, in English, mathematics, science and Arabic. 
To complement these external assessments, Cognition developed internal 
common assessment tools (CATs) to monitor student progress more regularly. 
This was a hefty additional design and data management task for which the 
local leadership team deserved considerable credit. Over the three years of the 
project that followed the introduction of this monitoring regime, the average 
annual student gain, across multiple curriculum domains, was 0.86 – highly 
accelerated student learning when compared with the 0.4 annual effect size 
that Hattie’s research indicates is “significant”. 
Average annual teacher and principal gains over the same period, also using 
standardised observation tools developed in-house, were 0.94. The effectiveness 
of the Cognition approach, as illustrated by these gains, was enthusiastically 
acknowledged by ADEC officials, yet they were reluctant to demand the same 
performance disciplines from competitor SSOs. As a direct consequence, 
officials were unable to give their political masters a consistent story about 

52
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
improvement return on project investment. By late 2011 the view emerging from 
the upper echelons of ADEC was that the PPP investment had largely failed.
This was frustrating for Cognition personnel who had a clear story of success 
to tell. The author recalls a conversation with a senior procurement manager 
in ADEC in early 2012 who bemoaned the performance and ethics of some 
providers and noted that in contrast Cognition “had always been a very ethical 
company.” When asked why ADEC did not terminate unsatisfactory operators 
and hand the work to proven performers who could supply evidence of impact, 
he responded that the greater policy interest was in fostering a competitive 
supply market. That objective required a willingness to tolerate a greater range 
of operator effectiveness than might otherwise be considered desirable, but 
ADEC were wary of allowing a single company to become market dominant. 
Aware of the risks of unpredictable policy change on a single high value 
contract, the company endeavoured to use its substantial SSO presence to 
develop a more diverse range of regional offerings. In Qatar the strategy 
enjoyed some success. Over several years the company won a range of 
contracts intended to buttress the school-based reforms in a broader policy 
sense and to grow system capability. These included contracts developing 
curriculum standards, early childhood policy, teacher licensing implementation, 
school evaluator training, school board training, professional standards for 
teachers, principal leadership training, and blended e-learning environments. 
The most enduring of these additional contracts was the QORLA project, 
which established the framework and administrative processes for the licensing 
of teachers over four years. 
Regionally, however, the appetite for the costs of large scale development 
projects was waning as the impact of the global financial crisis began to weigh 
negatively on governments’ accounts. From historically heady peaks, oil prices 
dropped dramatically in late 2008, a decline of almost seventy percent. The 
value of GCC investments in both US and European markets also suffered 
as a result of the wider financial melt-down. The relatively slow recovery 
of oil revenues over the next two years and the financial trauma of Dubai, 
which required heavy emergency support investment from other Gulf states 
(primarily Abu Dhabi), created a predictable caution in the region as to the 
scale of discretionary public investment. It also generated a greater focus on 
the value to be derived from such investments. 
In Qatar the Digital Oasis (blended e-learning) contract was hastily abandoned 
within six months of starting. Qatari investment in intensive school reform 
ended a year later in mid-2010 as cohort six came to an end. Although 
Cognition could take considerable satisfaction from being the sole remaining 
SSO in the final year of the programme, the team departed with something of 

53
Desert Sands
a sense of unfinished business. Disappointing as the Qatar wind-down was, a 
larger shock was in store. 
In December 2010, ADEC unilaterally changed the Abu Dhabi contract from 
fixed price to cost-plus terms and used this as the basis to reduce contract 
payments – the reduction being in excess of $8M. Although subsequent 
negotiations clawed back about half the deducted sum, the company’s 
resilience was tested as was its relationship with its insurers (Zurich) who 
refused to honour their contract frustration insurance. Directors resolved to 
pursue the matter. It would take protracted litigation over the next four years, 
ultimately to the level of the New Zealand Supreme Court, to achieve a 
settlement with the underwriters. 
December 2010 was also the spark in Tunisia that lit the fuse for the large-scale 
regional unrest that became known as the Arab Spring. Particular flash-points 
were Bahrain, Libya and Syria, three countries where the company had been 
prospecting hard. Heightened social and sectarian tensions in Bahrain and the 
rapid collapse of political and administrative order in Libya and Syria forced 
those expansionary intentions to be put on hold. Within the GCC, the wider 
political tumult was watched with some anxiety. In Saudi Arabia and the UAE, 
military expenditure began to rise sharply as did tensions with the traditional 
(Shia) foe, Iran – suspected by the conservative Sunni Gulf monarchies of 
using the disorder to bolster its regional influence. In this atmosphere, and as 
we will see in the next chapter, large-scale education reform would struggle to 
compete for resources. 

54
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition