55
The Braided River
The rapid shift in market conditions saw an accelerating decline in the 
company’s revenues from mid-2010. Revenue in the Middle East was under 
particular pressure, and the outlook for sizeable growth opportunities was not 
promising. By early 2012 total income had halved from a peak of $66M two 
years previously. The scale of Middle East contracts was now around $10M 
annually, a drop of seventy-five percent over the previous two years. The 
effects were compounded by the imposition of cost-plus contractual terms 
that severely restricted margins while significantly increasing the costs of 
administration and operational compliance for the company. 
Despite the greatly varying levels of commercial risk, the gross margin on a 
contract with ADEC was now about the same as a contract with the Ministry of 
Education in New Zealand, and this change significantly reduced the company’s 
profitability. At least temporarily, it appeared the domestic business needed 
to shoulder greater weight and the international business model had to be 
diversified. However, the domestic market also had some immediate challenges. 
The most significant of these was the schools’ payroll contract, a key fiscal 
anchor for more than 20 years, which seemed likely to end within the year. 
On the plus side, new opportunities were presenting in the domestic 
professional learning and development (PLD) market and in the Middle East, 
Chapter 4
(2011-2016)
THE BRAIDED RIVER

56
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
and the Abu Dhabi authorities were signalling the likelihood of Cognition 
continuing in a reform programme, albeit of more modest scale. The 
contract with a private school provider in Kuwait, that had commenced the 
previous year, also seemed likely to be renewed, and there was strong enquiry 
from Saudi Arabia for assistance to upgrade school transport systems in the 
Kingdom. Hopes were also high for larger scale schooling improvement 
prospects out of a newly established commercial beach-head in Malaysia. In 
parallel, international trading seemed likely to be augmented by the developing 
relationship with John Hattie and a vision of turning his “Visible Learning” 
research into packaged evaluation and development programmes for teachers 
and schools globally. 
Nevertheless, fiscal pressures were intense and were accompanied by a change 
of company leadership. In the second half of 2012 the author replaced Dr John 
Langley as CEO. In his four years with the company, Langley had been a colourful 
figure with a strong media profile as a political and educational commentator. 
This personal commentary could sometimes detract from the company’s broader 
commercial interests. 50 For the incoming CEO, the current circumstances 
underlined the need for commercial performance to be front and centre. 
For a time, it had been possible to liken the effect of the Qatar and Abu 
Dhabi contracts to the convergence of two great rivers. Now the company’s 
book and outlook seemed more akin to a “braided river”, and a new strategy 
was built around that metaphor. Revenue had dropped considerably and the 
large contracts in the Gulf had been supplanted with many smaller pieces of 
business. The next five years would see a number of innovations in the way the 
company worked and some significant shifts away from the traditional business 
model. In the home market one of the most significant of these shifts was 
already gathering force as the company’s leadership changed. 
From late 2010 it had appeared that a number of long-standing domestic PLD 
contracts were coming to an end. There were strong signals that these were 
unlikely to be re-tendered on similar terms. Most critically, these changes included 
ending the preference universities and colleges of education had enjoyed in 
providing core school support services on a regional basis. Ministry of Education 
briefings stressed the desire to see a new era of “collaboration” in PLD delivery.  
The consultancy division was under pressure. Revenue had halved over the 
previous two years. Thus the initial round of PLD tendering leading into 2011 
was seen as a must-win opportunity. The intention was to take advantage of a 
significant new opening in the market and speak compellingly to the Ministry’s 
50	 As in mid-2010 when the Board publicly distanced itself from a Langley opinion piece in the New Zealand Herald  
that strongly criticised Prime Minister John Key for leaving a trade mission to the GCC earlier than originally 
planned. Predictably media interest was strong as was the company’s interest in reassuring government and its 
network of trade officials.

57
The Braided River
new “collaboration” mantra. The result, in a move initiated and substantially 
brokered by Cognition, was the formation of the Te Toi Tupu consortium 
(TTT), which ultimately combined the talents, skill-mix and experience of 
Cognition, CORE, the University of Waikato, NZCER51 and the Tainui 
Endowed College52 in a formal market coalition. 
For Cognition, the seed of the idea had been formed from observing the 
behaviour and operation of various design and construction consortia that the 
company had worked with in the new schools programme discussed earlier. That 
experience highlighted the ability of the construction industry to dynamically 
and efficiently form and re-form multi-party coalitions to deliver to particular 
market opportunities. Given the potential benefits for opportunities of scale 
and complexity in the new PLD environment, the question was whether a 
comparable model could be created in the education sector. The strategy also 
mitigated the risks of diverting resources into tendering and pricing competition 
in an environment where profit margins were highly constrained. 
Having agreed in principle to a collaboration, initial time pressures on what 
was initially a loose “coalition of the willing” were acute. Compounding the 
difficulties was the fact that the narrow window for bid preparation overlapped 
with CORE’s annual “uLearn Conference” to which its senior staff were heavily 
committed. A Cognition writing team decamped to Christchurch for a week to 
maximise liaison. The consulting division’s subsequent report to the board noted 
the challenges: “We had to speed-date, negotiate the nuptials and prepare a 
complex five-strand bid inside a month.”53 In terms of future bids, it was evident 
that there was an urgent need to build a platform of shared values, to standardise 
tender development processes and to agree on delegations of control. 
Significant bidding success was immediate. This gave breathing space to develop 
the required policy platform relatively quickly. In the context of shared bidding 
and delivery, the consortium partners agreed to common pricing schedules and 
operating protocols, including rules for head contractors and subcontractors. 
Each agreed to commit resources and funding to establish a common secretariat 
(managed out of Cognition) and contract management regime. Cognition’s 
influence within the consortium was particularly marked by the focus on project 
impact – a vivid feature of the TTT website as it ultimately developed. The 
collaboration endured for six years, finally winding up in December 2016 as 
government engineered another major change in domestic PLD resourcing. 
Over time, work won through the consortium was diverse. Cognition led 
the national Mathematics (years 1-8) project. It subcontracted regionally 
for “Learning with Digital Technologies” (previously known as Blended 
51	 The “New Zealand Council of Educational Research”.
52	 Now renamed “Waikato-Tainui College for Research and Development”.
53	 Consulting Division Report to CEL Board, October 2010, output 3

58
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
e-Learning), “Gifted and Talented Education” (GATE), “National Aspiring 
Principals Programme” (NAPP), New Zealand Curriculum (years 1-8) and 
Science in Primary Schools. The effect significantly boosted the scale of 
Cognition’s domestic consulting business. Between 2013 and 2016 annual 
revenue grew to around $13M – around forty percent of total business. This 
was four times the average for the preceding decade. The mathematics contract 
also created a scale and platform to consistently measure the impact of its 
intervention on students’ learning. The 0.98 effect size was comparable to what 
was achieved in the Abu Dhabi PPP – students consistently learning at more 
than double the rate ordinarily expected. 
In contrast to elation arising from the early success of TTT, there was 
considerable sadness as the final months of 2012 marked the end of more than 
twenty years of involvement in the school payroll contract. Although subjected 
to considerable delay, the old arrangements were being replaced by a new 
web-based approach to payroll management (“Novopay”). Development and 
implementation were in the hands of a new Australian contractor, Talent 2, who 
had won the tender against a Datacom proposal (which included Cognition) 
some four years earlier. However, it was struggling with adapting its generic 
software to the complexities of the New Zealand schools’ payroll system. 
It was certainly a difficult period for Cognition’s payroll staff. Concerned with 
potential reputational risk arising from the obvious shortfalls with software 
development as well as Talent 2’s high-handed approach to negotiations, 
Cognition had already declined the offer to continue as a payroll subcontractor. 
That meant looming redundancy for a large group of personnel but 
uncertainty (and hope) arose from frequent extensions of the Datacom contract 
as the Novopay implementation timeline continued to slip. 
The Ministry compounded the uncertainty. Just months before the revised 
Novopay “go-live” date of August 2012, Datacom and Cognition were asked 
to develop contingency plans in the event the Novopay contract was cancelled. 
Hope sprang again, but by June the option had expired. Probably because of 
perceived political risks and considerable money already spent, the Ministry 
was reluctant to exercise contractual penalties. A subsequent Ministerial Inquiry 
found that as late as June 2012, the Ministry had actively “misrepresented” the 
state of the contract to responsible Ministers. This allowed a combination of 
significant risks to be carried into “go live” and overestimated the ability of the 
Ministry, Talent 2 and schools to manage those risks. 54 
Despite the uncertainty and disappointment, the commitment of the 
affected personnel stood out to the end. The operations group report to the 
board in June commented: “We have five fortnightly pay-runs to go … The 
54	 Ministerial Inquiry into the Novopay Project p.10

59
The Braided River
professionalism and calm of the affected staff is extraordinary … it feels like 
we are bringing a big venerable ship back to port for the last time. Hard to 
keep emotions in check and a real tribute to the character of the team.”55 The 
company’s farewell was an emotional affair, with the departing team, a number 
of whom had served from the very beginning in 1989, welcomed into a gala 
event on a red carpet flanked by applauding colleagues. 
The failures of Novopay’s implementation were widespread and protracted. In 
these circumstances Cognition’s decision not to subcontract to Talent 2 proved 
prudent. Yet there was considerable irony in early 2013 when the Ministry 
established part of the “Novopay Backlog Clearance Unit” in the company’s 
former payroll division space, employing significant numbers of former 
Cognition personnel to staff it. Even more perverse, given the lengthy history 
of successful outsourcing, was the subsequent establishment of a new State 
trading company, Education Payroll Limited. 
Yet as the payroll division closed, it was becoming increasingly evident that 
another innovation, the company’s investment in its new “Visible Learning 
Plus” (VL) brand was paying early dividends. The apparent pace of growth 
had the potential to almost immediately offset the long-standing revenue 
stream that had been lost and render significantly higher margins. In late 
2010, John Hattie, then an academic at the University of Auckland and also a 
member of the Cognition board, had approached the company looking for a 
new home for the nascent commercial platform that had been developed out 
of his landmark meta-analysis of impactful teacher practice, Visible Learning, 
published two years earlier. 
Somewhat surprisingly, University of Auckland’s Faculty of Education had 
decided not to support the work beyond the end of the 2010 academic year. 
Given the international acclaim which greeted Hattie’s work on publication, 
(the Times Education Supplement described it as “the holy grail of education”) 
and the close fit with the company’s desire to ground its intervention designs 
with measurable impact on student learning outcomes, it did not take long to 
reach agreement on a commercial partnership. The key focus was converting 
the critical principles of the VL research to a graduated professional learning 
curriculum (targeted at teachers and school leaders) that could be modularised 
and sold as such. In return Hattie received a royalty on all VL-related income. 
From a standing start in early 2011, revenue for the new division grew very 
quickly. In the year payroll closed, VL achieved just short of $2M in revenue. 
The following year’s result came close to matching the average annual payroll 
division’s earnings ($2.7M) for the previous decade. The small difference was 
more than compensated for by the much higher margins that VL achieved. 
55	 See CEL Board Agenda, Operations Group Report, June 2012

60
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
The relatively weightless business model helped. From the outset, the company 
had been able to take advantage of a profit-sharing arrangement originally 
developed between Macmillan (Australia) and Uniservices.
Macmillan was keen to transfer the arrangement to the new order. Initially 
Australia was the primary focus of activity with Macmillan managing sales 
and events while Cognition supplied the programme and people. At the 
same time both Hattie and a small Cognition support team were struggling 
to manage demand for VL-related appearances and services in a number of 
countries. Hattie was clear that he wasn’t much interested in ad hoc one-off 
“appearances”. He wanted to see his work directly applied to building more 
effective teaching practice and improved student learning. Accordingly he 
encouraged the company to think less about events and more about sustained 
intervention opportunity. As Hattie put it in a subsequent business review 
discussion: “I want to have a positive educational impact on the lives of 
students. I want schools and systems to privilege expertise in their adults;  
and I want systems to provide resources to schools to maximise and privilege 
this expertise.”56
The initial Macmillan experience, combined with the need to respond 
to broader market demands, spawned a larger idea to license established 
providers in their home markets to sell and deliver specified elements of the VL 
programme. Licensees were subsequently determined through a competitive 
tender process for each market. In relatively short order James Nottingham 
Associates (Scandinavia), Osiris Education (UK) and Corwin (initially the US/
Canada and later Australia) entered into licensing agreements with Cognition. 
The advantage of the model was that it enabled the VL business to expand 
quickly into multiple markets on relatively modest initial revenue expectations. The 
company avoided the operational and compliance costs which would have come 
with establishing as Cognition Education in each market. The model also avoided 
the capital commitment and risk of establishing an unfamiliar brand in new 
markets, thus freeing resources, as licensor, to develop and refine the programme. 
To date, the most significant large scale opportunity for the VL programme 
has been with the Department of Education in Australia’s Northern Territory 
(commencing in mid-2012) although it has been powerfully augmented by a 
companion offering, “Culture Counts Plus” (CC). This is built on a similar 
business model and approach, with CC content developed in parallel with VL 
from the relationships-based learning research of Professor Russell Bishop, 
then of University of Waikato. His research had found first practical expression 
in the “Te Kotahitanga” programme funded in a number of New Zealand 
secondary schools by the Ministry of Education. 
56	 Email note from John Hattie to the author, October, 2015

61
The Braided River
In the context of the Northern Territory, the Cognition team developed a 
system-wide intervention approach called “Collaborative Impact” (CIP). 
This was underpinned by a designed mix of Visible Learning and Culture 
Counts content, now called “Relationships Based Learning” (RBL). The mix 
made sense given the evident regard Bishop and Hattie have for one another’s 
work. The focus of the CIP approach also drew on the company’s larger-scale 
intervention history, tightly codifying critical intentions, behaviours, processes 
and interdependencies. 
The objective was to create a sense of collective responsibility and efficacy to 
accelerate Aboriginal student achievement, through the designed collaboration 
of clusters of schools, in turn actively aligned to the efforts of officials and 
supervisors within the Northern Territory’s Department of Education. The 
temptation to command change from a safe distance, rather than authentically 
model it, is not uncommon in education bureaucracies. With a background in 
senior public service management, it was a potential risk that project leader 
Mary Sinclair was well attuned to. The determination to affect everyone – 
students, teachers, principals, officials – was a key principle of the design and 
implementation.
The results have been dramatic and the work, known as “Schools South”,  
is ongoing. In a letter to Hattie in late 2016, the chief executive of the 
Territory’s Department of Education celebrated the gains evident in the 
preliminary NAPLAN test results: “Of the 20 measures for … testing …  
we have seen an improvement in 16 … with the largest increase in writing …  
The Northern Territory … has the highest national average when it comes to 
year level cohort gains.” 57
Although a major focus of work in the Northern Territory, RBL has not yet 
achieved the international scale of Visible Learning, nor has the product been 
licensed or franchised thus far. That said, the CIP methodology appears to 
have considerable potential to frame future system and schooling interventions. 
Nottingham Associates have been supported by Cognition to deliver a number 
of commune-specific CIP programmes in Denmark over the past two years. In 
the domestic market, the approach appears to be generating interest in newly 
established (PLD) communities of learning. Additionally, there is emerging interest 
in the approach from the New Zealand tertiary sector. RBL programmes currently 
or recently represent major PLD investment in a number of local polytechnics. 
RBL has also been fundamental to the design of “Te Kakahu”, a three year joint 
initiative with seven secondary schools, funded by the Ministry of Education and 
managed between Cognition and Te Puna Mātauranga o Whanganui.58 
57	 Letter from Ken Davies (Chief Executive – Department of Education, Northern Territory) to John Hattie,  
August 2016.
58	 The Whanganui Iwi Education Authority. 

62
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
By 2012, outside of New Zealand and Australia, the story was one of emerging 
diversification. The Nauru project, which commenced that year and lasted a 
further three, was, as Phil Coogan, then head of consulting, dryly observed, 
“logistically and professionally challenging.”59 The core work was schooling 
improvement at the junior secondary level and the education of special needs 
students. Project funding was through the New Zealand Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade (MFAT) but managed in Nauru by AUSAID, a situation 
which created its own complexities, as did the economic pressures the tiny 
Pacific nation was under. Contract payments were something of a “lottery” 
throughout the life of the project. 
Travel to the island was difficult with just weekly but often unreliable flights 
out of Brisbane. Internet access was shaky, making communications difficult. 
Project staff lived in a cash economy with no eftpos facilities. The only fresh 
food deliveries were weekly by the plane that delivered the island’s lifeblood 
cash instalments. Local civil service capability and capacity were also low. 
Relationships between officials and project staff could be mercurial, with some 
individuals falling out of official favour on apparently whimsical grounds. 
Notwithstanding the challenges, the contract was successfully delivered by an 
admirably resilient Cognition team. The work also helped open the door to 
a longer-term relationship with MFAT in delivering aid-funded work in the 
Pacific. Subsequently the company has designed a literacy and school leadership 
programme for the Solomon Islands, the Cook Islands and Tonga, followed by 
further work in the Solomons including major curriculum planning and review. 
In a parallel development, the Malaysian beach-head had been established in the 
expectation that a government-business collaboration, the Khazanah schooling 
improvement initiative, would be expanded. The company saw Khazanah as a 
potential core business strand that could be used to showcase its capability and 
build a local market presence. Cognition had narrowly lost a protracted and hotly 
contested first round tender, but had been encouraged by the tender committee 
to renew its interest in an expected programme expansion. 
This optimism was not rewarded. The Khazanah programme did not develop 
in the way originally anticipated. Nevertheless, strategically significant work 
was won in Malaysia and subsequently in Indonesia. In 2012 Cognition was 
commissioned to design and implement a corporate social responsibility 
programme for Malaysia’s second-largest Telco, Axiata. The “Axiata Young 
Talent Programme” (YT) operated at secondary, pre-university and university 
levels, with the major investment being at the secondary level.
The YT programme was intended as an incubator to develop Malaysian 
youth leaders from rural and poorer areas. Younger secondary age students 
59	 Interview comment from Dr Phil Coogan – December 2016

63
The Braided River
had scholarships to Kolej Yayasan Saad, a well-regarded secondary school 
in Malacca. In a related project, Cognition ran a one-year teacher capacity 
building programme at the school, also funded by Axiata, to foster teaching 
approaches that reinforced the higher thinking and problem solving 
competencies that were central to the YT programme. 
Axiata’s Indonesian subsidiary XL was sufficiently impressed to engage 
Cognition in its own larger corporate social responsibility programme (CSR). 
The XL Future Leaders Programme aimed at identifying and fostering youth 
talent in Indonesia’s universities. The first intake, catering for 120 students 
representing 25 universities, ran in 2013 with the Cognition team training and 
supporting local hub facilitators. 
During the company’s engagement, more than 500 students have graduated 
from what is generally regarded as Indonesia’s most rigorous youth leadership 
development initiative. The programme is highly regarded for the real-life 
experiences that derive from the social innovation projects that form the second 
year of the curriculum. The focus on assisting communities affected by natural 
disaster and economic hardship attracted the attention of UNESCO, which 
short-listed it for a global innovation award in 2015.  
As the relationship with Axiata developed in Malaysia, work in the Middle 
East was also diversifying although revenue from the region had reduced. As 
already noted, there was cautious optimism that the SSO contract with the Al 
Shaya Group in Kuwait would be extended for at least another 12 months. A 
small team had transferred from Abu Dhabi the previous year to assist in the 
redevelopment of a small private school provider in Kuwait City. The company 
had previously provided in-school support and training to a private school 
provider, Al Bassam, in Saudi Arabia on a smaller scale. It appeared that some 
offset for the decline in regional government contracts might be possible in 
supporting the development of privately owned schools. 
In the event the Al Shaya contract lasted for around 18 months and although 
substantial progress was achieved it was not to the extent originally envisaged. 
The promised contract extension ultimately foundering because family 
shareholders were concerned that the required development investment was 
reducing their incomes. Recruiting and retaining promising staff was also 
rendered difficult by the need to have staff vetted by an Islamic cleric. The 
outcomes of this process could be both baffling and frustrating for Cognition 
staff focused on building and nurturing professional capability.
The company was also encouraged by approaches from the newly established 
Tatweer Educational Transportation Company (TTC) in Saudi Arabia (KSA), 
a government entity charged with managing the daily transport of school-age 
students across the Kingdom. As with Al Shaya in Kuwait, TTC executives had 

64
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
sought out Cognition to help build their capability, following a global search. 
TTC had inherited contracts for daily transport of more than half a million 
school-girls and needed to expand the business over five years to include boys. 
Similar to work in New Zealand, KSA school transport services were sub-
contracted to commercial operators. The ultimate objective was to extend 
the service to as many of the five million school-age students as possible. The 
contract evolved several times over a period of about four years. Cognition 
provided specialists in various aspects of public transportation to support TTC 
staff in Riyadh. The work later morphed into a multi-year contract to successfully 
develop an operator oversight and enforcement regime, preceded by a successful 
international schools transport conference in Riyadh, largely led by Cognition. 
The company’s organisation of significant conferences became something of a 
trademark over this period. In late 2013 the company was directly approached 
by the New Zealand Ministry of Education to lead the organisation of a series 
of “Festivals of Education” in Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch. These 
were to coincide with the fourth “International Summit on the Teaching 
Profession”, jointly organised between the Ministry and the OECD, in March 
2014. Education Minister Hekia Parata described the summit as the “Rugby 
World Cup of Education”, so expectations on the company were high and 
timeframes very short.  
Notwithstanding the time pressure, the company successfully organised a series 
of multi-day festivals in each city that were well received and enthusiastically 
attended. The festivals celebrated and showcased local students, schools, 
communities, and tertiary institutions as well as creating opportunity for 
the educators and the public to engage with educational researchers and 
practitioners. Buoyed by this success, senior people in the Ministry, suggested 
that a second round of festivals, aimed at provincial centres, would occur in 
the following year, but these did not eventuate. However, working with Visible 
Learning Plus partners, Cognition collaborated in a series of highly successful 
international VL conferences: Brisbane (2013), San Diego (2014), London 
(2016), and Maryland (2016). 
Less successful was a collaboration with two other New Zealand companies, 
Maven and Uniservices, in Oman. The contract to provide a comprehensive 
review of Oman’s K-12 education system was brokered through Education 
New Zealand (ENZ), an entity established by the government primarily 
to market New Zealand education services globally. Albeit well-intended, 
the effect was to significantly complicate contracting and implementation 
processes. The approach from the Omani government was an early test. As 
civil servants, ENZ staff were required to be even-handed in their relationships 
with potential suppliers. With a loose concept of “NZEdInc” as a primary 

65
The Braided River
driver, the easiest way to manage potential supply competition was to 
encourage consortium approaches. 
Thus Cognition found itself in a hastily arranged and ultimately uneasy 
coalition with partners who were relatively inexperienced in Middle Eastern 
public contracting and culture. The consortium delivered on phase 1, but 
ultimately split over the best approach to phase 2 tendering. The primary 
cause was Cognition’s unease at proposed approaches to the second tender 
as representing potential probity risks. Unable to resolve these difficulties and 
frustrated at a significant opportunity missed, Cognition officially withdrew 
from the tendering process. 
In Abu Dhabi “PPP” morphed into “PLD” (professional learning and 
development). A new metaphor in the project name, “Tamkeen”, signalled 
a change in reform intent and contractual purpose to what was loosely 
termed “Emiratisation”. Tamkeen is an Arabic word that blends meaning 
from concepts such as empowerment, reinforcement, enabling. The effect 
was to move away from the close intervention of SSO in-school teams that 
had characterised the PPP. Training and support was to be delivered through 
clusters and implementation responsibility transferred directly to school leaders 
and management teams. 
Perversely, what was initially presented as taking local capacity-building to a 
next level was somewhat confounded by the authorities insisting that contract 
performance should be monitored on an outputs rather than an outcomes 
basis. Only designated ADEC officials could gather evaluation data. In practice 
this was somewhat ad hoc. Training providers were expressly prevented from 
designing and gathering even survey data from training participants. Significant 
personnel and leadership change was taking place within ADEC, and the 
evaluative lessons of the PPP were apparently not transferred. Although the 
contract ran for 40 months, the company was not able to continue the level of 
student and teacher progress monitoring that had been possible under earlier 
arrangements. 
Challenges also arose in 2013 from negative ADEC reaction to school visits by a 
small group of civil servants from the Afghanistan Ministry of Education. They 
were being trained in the UAE in a collaboration between Cognition and World 
University Services Canada (WUSC). Funded by the Canadian Government, 
this was one of several short and highly successful training courses for Afghani 
educators that Cognition and WUSC delivered. The Cognition team had the 
agreement of the school principals for these short observation visits but not the 
express permission of ADEC. Although the Afghanis had valid visas, officials 
made much of the need to manage potential security risks. UAE newspapers 
were increasingly carrying stories about the progressive withdrawal of NATO 

66
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
troops from Afghanistan and the deteriorating security situation in that country. 
Unusually, given its reputation for superior relationship management, Cognition 
found itself on the receiving end of a client reprimand. 
A rare protocol mis-step could be overcome, but over the next two years, the 
voices for “Emiratisation” grew stronger. There was on-going uncertainty about 
what would replace Tamkeen or whether it would be replaced at all. Eventually 
a new contract (“Itqan”) was promised. In August 2015, although details of the 
final contract were still to be finalised, the company was asked directly by the 
Office of the Director-General to staff up for the new school year and be ready 
to deploy as soon as schools opened.60 As a gesture of goodwill, and as it had on 
a number of previous occasions in the region, the company responded in the 
expectation that a formal contract would quickly follow. 
In mid-October, it came as something of a shock to be advised by ADEC that 
Itqan had been cancelled and that all work would cease from 1 December. 
This left the company seriously exposed to unrecoverable implementation 
costs and a compromised employment brand with a large project staff who 
had scarcely arrived back in the country. A number of supportive principals 
immediately made themselves heard in ADEC’s corridors, arguing for the 
company to be retained. But they were fighting a head-wind. As senior officials 
explained, Cognition’s performance in Tamkeen had well exceeded the quality 
and consistency of other providers. So while the principals Cognition had 
worked with were disappointed to see external support removed, that was not 
necessarily the feeling among principals who had worked with other SSOs. 
Cognition’s protests at the proposed terms of settlement resonated in the 
Director-General’s office. A meeting was hastily arranged between the author, 
as company chief executive, and the Director-General, Dr Amal Al Qubaisi. 
It appeared that there had been a change of heart. While Dr Amal confirmed 
that Itqan had been cancelled, the company was invited to put together a 
new proposal for capacity-building. Dr Amal emphasised her regard for the 
company’s past work and her desire for an ongoing strategic partnership. 
However, within weeks of that meeting, she had been appointed to a new role 
as President of the (UAE) Federal National Council and was no longer in a 
position to direct ADEC’s decision-making. 
In late January 2016 the company was formally advised that while the new 
proposal was, “very well designed … ADEC at this stage is more inclined 
to utilise in-house expertise.”61  The forces favouring full Emiratisation had 
apparently prevailed, but this was not the full story. It is likely that ADEC’s 
decision was primarily a consequence of wider government-directed budget 
60	 Executive Management Report to the CEL Board, October 2015, Attachment 1 – paragraph 3.
61	 Letter from Dr Mohammed Bainyas, Executive Director, ADEC, January 2016

67
The Braided River
cuts. The costs of a drawn out UAE military campaign in Yemen were biting, 
and oil prices were down. GCC governments have struggled to balance budgets 
when oil prices fall significantly below the US$100 a barrel where their budgets 
historically break-even.62 Under broader fiscal pressure, Tamkeen/Itqan was 
an easy target to achieve some savings.63 As with the PPP project that preceded 
it, Tamkeen had been inherently compromised by ADEC Procurement’s 
tendency to place greater value on a competitive supply chain than on quality 
and consistency of delivery, a point Cognition negotiators had made over and 
over to their ADEC counterparts. Ironically the meaning of Itqan broadly 
translates as “perfection of action”. 
The years following the GFC have been characterised by a drift away from 
large scale PLD opportunities, both internationally and domestically. As this 
chapter demonstrates, those wider pressures forced the company to look 
beyond its traditional offerings to less congested and competitive market 
niches. Internal innovation, to create new market opportunity, has been the 
common theme that links developments such as Te Toi Tupu, Visible Learning, 
Collaborative Impact, Relationships Based Learning and CSR. 
The company has also been alert to external acquisition opportunities. The 
sudden collapse of a long-standing domestic competitor, Learning Media, in late 
2013 created an unexpected opportunity to acquire and grow new educational 
publishing capability at relatively low cost. The company leveraged the 
opportunity well. Within two years, publishing revenue had more than quadrupled 
and opened a new international market publishing school readers for China. 
Publishing was complemented with the subsequent acquisition of Wavelength 
in early 2015. A small but highly profitable digital media company, Wavelength 
now operates as a separate commercial entity within the Cognition Group. It 
has since absorbed the publishing team and is now the umbrella brand for the 
group’s publishing and digital media activities, accounting for revenue around 
$5.5M annually. 
In the past year, the group has acquired an Australian company, Begin Bright, 
which franchises school readiness and tutoring programmes for pre-schoolers 
and school early years. The number of Australian franchisees grows monthly, 
and the underlying educational concept offers potential for wider international 
expansion. As wholly-owned subsidiaries of Cognition Education Limited, 
Wavelength and Begin Bright have recently been joined by Visible Learning in 
being made separate trading entities within the Group.
62	 Source – Deutsche Bank, Special Report – Adjusting to Lower Oil Prices (Budget Breakeven Thresholds), May 2015. 
63	 Even after Itqan was discontinued a Cognition presence has continued in the Emirate. A small contract team contin-
ued with implementation of the ADEC sponsored Student Competence Framework (SCF) across all private schools 
in the Emirate. SCF concluded in late 2016 but a small PLD team, primarily marketing VL,  keeps the Cognition 
shop window open in the UAE. 

68
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition