69
Giving Back
One of George Orwell’s best known essays is “Why I write”. It provides 
a useful “Why we work” analogy for those who do work or have worked within 
the Cognition Group and its predecessor Multi Serve. The owner and sole 
shareholder of Cognition Education Limited (the company) and its subsidiaries 
is Cognition Education Trust (the Trust). Both the company and the Trust 
are registered as charitable entities within New Zealand. The company funds 
the Trust by way of regular donations from its profits. The Trust’s registered 
purpose is to provide benefits to the schools of the greater Auckland region 
and New ZeaIand. Usefully, that commitment is sufficiently broad to have 
enabled significant flexibility in the granting strategy since establishment. 
More importantly, the fact and substance of this “giving back” is one of the 
Cognition family’s existential anchors. 
As with the company, the Trust and its activities have evolved significantly over 
time. The Trust has always been the owner-shareholder, but for the first 20 
years of its existence most outsiders and probably most employees would have 
understood it as simply the philanthropic arm of the company. The directors 
who formed the company board were also the trustees of the Trust. The 
records of proceedings over more than two decades shows that directors were 
punctilious about ensuring that the transactions and decisions of both entities 
Chapter 5
GIVING BACK

70
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
were appropriately separated. However, as the scale of the company grew 
exponentially from 2006, directors recognised the inherent risks of continuing 
to wear two hats. 
An obvious challenge was maintaining the required accountability of company 
to shareholder, particularly when balancing the need for growth investment 
against providing returns to the shareholder sufficient to credibly fund its 
charitable purpose. Accordingly, the decision was made in early 2011 to 
remove commercial directors from governance roles in the Trust and establish a 
separate Trust board. The Trust would now be responsible for the appointment 
of commercial directors, monitor the performance of the company, manage 
donations from the company and deliver the granting programme. Within the 
board, the key champion of this “cleaner solution”64 was Keith Goodall. Goodall 
was a foundation director and trustee. He had been instrumental in establishing 
the original Multi Serve ESC in charitable terms and over the years had been a 
consistently strong voice for improving philanthropic performance. 
The revised arrangements came into place in April 2011. Shortly thereafter, 
Multi Serve Education Trust became Cognition Education Trust (CET). 
Subsequently the relationship and performance accountabilities of company 
to Trust, including commercial growth targets and expected levels of donation, 
were negotiated into a Statement of Intent. The SOI as it is colloquially 
known, is a device borrowed from the hybrid world of state-owned enterprises. 
It is a companion document to the company’s strategy framework (more 
latterly known as “the blueprint”) and is iterated consistent with shifts in the 
commercial strategy. Conceptually and practically this was a very different 
arrangement from the Trust as a philanthropic extension of the company. The 
commercial directors and the company were now formally accountable to a 
body other than themselves, and the shareholder’s expectations of commercial 
performance were central to that relationship.
The separation in 2011 was also the opportunity to rethink the basis of the 
Trust’s funding and the sustainability of its philanthropic activity under 
the new arrangements. From inception the Trust’s granting activities were 
underwritten by the company on the basis of annual donations which tended 
to vary according to profitability. For the first 15 years, the major focus 
of philanthropic activity was the annual Multi Serve Awards. Nominees 
from schools and their communities were celebrated for their outstanding 
performance and contribution to education. These were gala-style events 
featuring prominent New Zealanders as guest speakers and providing “Oscar 
moments”, as Stewart Germann liked to observe, for outstanding principals, 
teachers, trustees, support staff, and school volunteers. 
64	 Keith Goodall at interview, August 2016

71
Giving Back
Although enthusiastically supported by the schools’ community, by 2005, there 
was a growing sense among trustees that the awards had had their day. Events 
were catering for upwards of 500 people and the costs of event management 
and air travel for attendees were spiralling upwards. Moreover, as the work in 
the Middle East grew, it appeared the company was in a position to increase 
the level of donation. Trustees were keen to find another way to more directly 
celebrate the growth of effective educational practice. 
The spirit of the original Multi Serve Awards continued in a new partnership 
with the Australian Scholarships Group (ASG) which had operated the biennial 
“National Excellence in Teaching Awards” (NEiTA) programme for some 
years. In partnership with ASG, the Trust agreed to sponsor a new category of 
education leadership awards run in association with the core NEiTA programme. 
As with the Multi Serve Awards, the NEiTA programme was based on 
nominations from school and early childhood communities. Nominees went 
through an extensive screening and judging programme that culminated in 
a presentation luncheon and ceremony at Parliament presided over by the 
Minister of Education. Over time, NEiTA’s purpose was overtaken by the 
establishment of the Prime Minister’s “Education Excellence Awards” which 
CET saw as replicating purpose. Consequently, the Trust’s involvement with 
NEiTA ended in 2014.
In parallel with the NEiTA involvement a new philanthropic entity was launched 
in 2006. Cognition Education Research Trust (CERT) became Multi Serve 
Education Trust’s primary distribution channel. Foreshadowing developments 
in the 2011 governance separation of Multi Serve Education Trust and 
Cognition Education Limited, CERT was governed by an independent group 
of trustees representing the wider education sector in New Zealand. Day-
to-day management was in the hands of an executive trustee - the first time 
that philanthropic activity was allocated dedicated staffing resource. More 
significantly, CERT shifted the focus away from the celebration of educational 
performance to researching and growing educational performance. This 
represented a significant reorientation of philanthropic intent.
CERT funded and supported domestic educational research programmes and 
interventions likely to make a significant difference to student achievement. 
The trustees were particularly keen to encourage productive discourse between 
practitioners, researchers and policymakers. A partnership was struck with 
Fulbright New Zealand through which the Trust funded an annual practising 
teacher research scholarship to the United States. Seven teacher research 
scholars were supported through the years 2008 to 2014. CERT also provided 
post-graduate scholarships to educators seeking to take time from work to 
undertake doctoral study within New Zealand. More significantly, CERT 

72
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
funded eleven domestic education research projects to a combined value of 
almost $0.7M with a further $0.25M spent on related symposia, research 
dissemination and publications. 
In 2009 the findings of these research initiatives were published in “A Journey 
of Discovery”, coinciding with the 20-year anniversary celebrations of Multi 
Serve’s establishment. CERT also produced a second publication, “Tomorrow’s 
Schools – Twenty Years On”. This collection of essays, from a range of senior 
educators and policymakers, reflected on the achievements and challenges 
wrought by the policy and regulatory changes that had so dramatically 
changed the domestic education landscape in 1989. Both books formed the 
basis of well-attended symposia that were part of the anniversary celebrations. 
The “Tomorrow’s Schools” publication was keenly sought after by practitioners 
and universities, and supplies were quickly exhausted. 
The interest generated by these publications and associated convenings spawned 
another change. The formation of the Cognition Institute (the Institute) in 2010 
was essentially an evolution of CERT. Although well-intended, with hindsight 
the initiative was probably premature. The CERT board was dissolved. Direct 
governance responsibility went back to Multi Serve Education Trust at a time 
when the Trust was increasingly preoccupied with the design of the broader 
structural reform that culminated in the 2011 separation. 
Executive management of the new-born Institute also changed at a critical 
moment. The CERT executive manager, Mary Sinclair, was required to return 
to a major policy project in Qatar. Her experience and sectoral connections 
were not easily replaced. By early 2012 the new Cognition Education Trust 
board had concluded that the ambitious independent education policy and 
research think-tank aspirations that had framed the Institute’s launch, were 
unlikely to be realised without substantial ongoing investment. The trustees 
felt they were not in a position to provide this funding. Given other granting 
priorities, the trustees felt they were not in a position to provide this funding 
and consequently discontinued the venture.
The more robust accountability arrangements between the Trust and the 
company also begged a large question about the sustainability of the Trust’s 
revenue base and its ability to fund a credible level of philanthropic activity. 
Under the pressure of new expectations, it was clear that the Trust would 
require much greater certainty than had applied historically, about the level of 
annual donation it could expect from the company. A key question was how 
best to smooth the level of donation through the inevitable peaks and troughs 
of business cycles. 
From her background with the ASB Trust (now Foundation North), Trust 
chairperson Candis Craven had substantial experience of managing 

73
Giving Back
investment funds that produced a return for philanthropic investment. That 
helped turn discussions to the concept of the Trust building and managing a 
perpetual investment fund that over time would generate a more predictable 
basis for granting activities. Given the aspiration, a key question was how to 
provide the initial capital base for such a fund.
For its part, the company, although managing a period of revenue contraction, 
had paradoxically built up a substantial level of cash reserve. This was due 
to final payments on large Middle East projects and associated performance 
bonds being released. The favourable settlement of the long-running 
compensation case with Zurich also made a substantial contribution. As a 
result, the three years 2012-2014 saw the company donate $7.85M to the 
Trust, with a further $1.0M donated in subsequent years to 2016. This 
substantial capital injection formed the basis of the Trust’s investment fund 
which today stands at close to $8.5M. 
Reflecting its inherent prudence as guardian of a perpetual investment fund, 
the Trust now has two key operating principles. The first is to draw only on 
income derived from the capital fund for its operating costs and granting 
programmes. The second is to ensure that the greater portion of such income 
is applied to grants and investment fund growth, which means keeping 
administrative overheads low. 
The past four years have been a period of historically low returns in investment 
markets. Nevertheless, the fund has provided average annual income to the 
Trust in excess of $0.45M for granting and administrative purposes. On that 
basis the Trust has been wholly self-funding, a development of considerable 
significance. The Trust retains part-time executive management support, but 
has continued to shrink administrative costs. 
Given current market constraints and its self-imposed operational disciplines, 
the funds available to the Trust for granting purposes are necessarily limited. 
Reflecting this reality, the trustees are focused on maximising the value 
of granting. To that end, investment preference is given to initiatives and 
associated research designed to increase teacher effectiveness and build the 
capabilities of children and youth from birth to school exit. The associated 
evaluation focus is the measurable impact that teachers have on learners. 
There is a strong echo of CERT in here but more importantly, a close match to 
the company’s “methodological genome”. 
In recent years, the Trust has funded a diverse mix of research projects, PLD 
initiatives and resource developments, including the “Student Voice Portal”. 
The recent extension of granting focus to initiatives in the critical pre-school 
years has supported the “Books for Babies” programme through the Storytime 
Trust. Application for Trust grants is invited through regularly advertised 

74
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
granting rounds but the market is still maturing. The Trust’s executive officer, 
Anne Rodda, observes an on-going challenge in attracting applications that 
meet robust design and investment accountability tests, an issue which was also 
familiar to CERT trustees. 
Prior to 2003, philanthropic activity was relatively modest, up to $0.15M 
annually. As the business grew in subsequent years, the Trust and its various 
progenitors provided aggregate granting in excess of $4.4M, an average, over 
fourteen years of almost $0.315M annually. As with the company, the granting 
vehicle has morphed considerably over time. CET has built on earlier CERT 
granting practice, but the investment fund has future-proofed its aspirations in 
a way that CERT could not have contemplated. It has also provided the Trust 
with a useful degree of insulation from the market pressures that cyclically 
buffet the company. Combined with the separation of governance structures 
that took place in 2011, the effect has created a more robust approach to both 
company donations and Trust granting policy. Looking forward, a slow lift in 
investment market returns seems likely. The effect will be both to increase the 
potential for granting and also the sums typically available to reinvest in the 
growth of the investment fund. 
In the final analysis, what distinguishes the Cognition family from its 
competitors is the on-going determination to give back. It is apparent that the 
scale and focus of philanthropy has been “lumpy” at times, but the aspiration 
to give back has been a constant. The current granting focus on growing the 
effectiveness of teachers and the potential of students in their care is one that 
aligns well with the company’s methodological focus. So too does the Trust’s 
recently broadened scope to take in the pre-school years.
For the first 15 years, philanthropy tended to be about acknowledging and 
celebrating educational performance, a largely perceptual exercise. By contrast, 
the past decade has seen an evidence-based shift to investing in improving and 
growing educational performance. That very significant change, began with 
CERT, misfired with the Institute, but was picked up again by CET. In that 
evolutionary process, the “family” has come to the realisation that philanthropy 
is also a business and needs to be managed and resourced as such. The Trust 
has taken on that task with verve, discipline and creativity. The resultant 
operational and fiscal platform has an inherent sustainability, which although 
still modest, has considerable promise for the future, both in terms of growth 
and productive educational influence.