75
Epilogue
The Cognition story is on-going. Perhaps a decade or so from now, 
another writer will add the next chapter or two to this work. This account 
has tracked some profound changes in the Trust and company’s focus and 
operation over almost three decades. Current indicators suggest that the 
form of commercial operations will continue to evolve significantly and at an 
accelerating pace. 
As the leadership of the company transferred from the author to its new 
CEO, Tina Lucas, at the beginning of 2016, it was increasingly evident that 
the finch, yet again, was hunting for new feeding grounds in areas of reduced 
competition. The effect, since 2015, has spawned a number of sub-species, 
being the acquisition and spin-off specialist trading entities now described as 
the “Cognition Group”.
Complementary to these developments has been a broader consideration of 
how the Group grows and operates globally. To that end Cognition has recently 
established commercial entities in Australia and the United Kingdom as well as 
reviving the Malaysia station. The company has recently achieved its first seven 
figure contract in the UK and continues to grow its international licensing and 
franchising footprints. The investment in digital media has considerable potential 
to grow beyond the current domestic base. That global pull, combined with 
EPILOGUE

76
Darwin’s Finch: A Short History of Cognition
significant shifts in the local market, means the scale and nature of the company’s 
future domestic presence is something of an open question. 
The schools’ payroll and transport contracts were core functions of the 
company from the birth of Tomorrow’s Schools. Over the past five years the 
Government has made the decision to progressively in-source these functions 
again. The transport contract finally terminated in June, 2017. Concurrently, 
the “Investing in Educational Success” policy has significantly reduced the 
role of central agencies in domestic PLD procurement and dispersed it to 
“communities of learning” still finding their feet but also paradoxically subject 
to significant bureaucratic and Ministerial controls. The domestic PLD playing 
field appears to have been tilted in favour of much smaller market players for 
the foreseeable future. 
It is always hardest to make sense of the events that are closest to us in time. 
The extent to which the Cognition Group’s current strategic intentions 
materialise remains speculative, but the potential for further reshaping appears 
high. Asked about the effects of the French Revolution, China’s former 
Premier, Zhou Enlai, famously remarked, “it is too early to say” –  
an observation that seems particularly apposite to the uncertain and volatile 
market conditions that Cognition has consistently operated within. One 
expects that the Group’s agility and adaptability will continue to be tested. 
Notwithstanding the current uncertainties, the story so far should give 
considerable confidence that the organisation has the evolutionary DNA to 
successfully adapt and thrive. Darwin’s finch continues to morph. Better, one 
might observe, to be an agile Galapagos finch than the proverbial canary in a 
coal-mine. 


Terry Bates has worked 
in New Zealand education as 
a secondary school teacher, 
principal and “educrat” – 
holding senior management 
roles in both the Education 
Review Office and the Ministry 
of Education. The last twelve 
years of his career were with 
Cognition, coinciding with 
the dramatic growth and 
international expansion of the 
company after 2004. Initially 
appointed to lead the consulting 
division, he later became 
Chief Operating Officer and 
ultimately Chief Executive.  
He retired from the company in 
late 2015 and now devotes the 
bulk of his time to serving on 
the boards of a range of social 
enterprises.
Cover illustration: 
Charles Darwin, A Naturalist’s Voyage,  
London, 1889