================================================================================
Chapter 03: The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education: The Proto-Scientific and The Reformist-meliorist Administrative Motif
Author(s): Pella Kaloyannaki and Andreas M. Kazamias
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 1: The Creation and Re-creation of a Field
Book Pages: pp. 11–36
PDF Pages: pp. 36–60 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 36 / Book Page 11] ---

3
THE MODERNIST BEGINNINGS OF COMPARATIVE
EDUCATION: THE PROTO-SCIENTIFIC AND THE
REFORMIST-MELIORIST ADMINISTRATIVE MOTIF
Pella Kaloyannaki and Andreas M. Kazamias

Introduction
The modernist beginnings of comparative education (CE) as a field of study are
conventionally traced to the post-Enlightenment period in the early and mid decades
of the nineteenth century, specifically to the pioneering work of Marc-Antoine Jullien
de Paris and to discourses of educational policy-makers, reformers and administrators in Europe and the United States, such as Horace Mann, Calvin Stowe and Henry
Barnard in the United States, Victor Cousin in France and the poet–school inspector
Matthew Arnold in England. First, this chapter analyses in some detail Jullien’s ideas
about CE—its methodology, epistemology and ideology—as reflected mainly in his
now famous Esquisse et vues préliminaires sur un ouvrage sur 1’éducation comparée
(Plan and Preliminary Views for a Work on Comparative Education), published in 1817,
on the basis of which Jullien has been acclaimed as ‘the father’ of CE. Here Jullien’s
conception of CE will be referred to as representing ‘the proto-scientific humanistic
and meliorist motif ’ in the history of the field. Second, the study examines in lesser
detail what may be called ‘the reformist-meliorist motif in comparative education’,
which refers to discourses about foreign education as reflected in the relevant texts of
nineteenth-century policy-makers, reformers and administrators like Victor Cousin of
France, and Horace Mann, Calvin Stowe and Henry Barnard of the United States.

The Proto-Scientific Humanistic and Meliorist Motif:
Marc-Antoine Jullien de Paris
The Man, His Work and His Times
Marc-Antoine Jullien de Paris was born in Paris in 1775, from highly educated parents
in the humanities (philosophy, language, literature and the classics). At a young age
and for a short period he served as a journalist for the Jacobins and the French National
Convention, and was a diplomat and legionnaire in the service of Napoleon Bonaparte.
He travelled widely in Europe, visited England and Scotland and also went to Egypt
as a war commissioner in Bonaparte’s expedition there. Throughout most of his life
11
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 11–36.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 37 / Book Page 12] ---

12

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

until his death in 1848 he devoted his time to the study of education and pedagogy on
which he wrote books, monographs, essays, reports and memoranda. During the years
1819–1830, Jullien founded and directed the journal Revue encyclopédique ou Analyse
raisonnée de productions les plus remarquables dans la littérature, les sciences et les
arts (Encyclopedic Review or Reasoned Analysis of the Most Remarkable Productions
in Literature, Sciences and the Arts) for which he wrote, among other things, on public
education in Switzerland, Belgium and Spain.
Jullien’s interest in education began quite early in his life, during the period of the
French Revolution, and continued thereafter until his death. According to his biographer R. R. Palmer, Jullien started writing books on the subject in 1805 while he was
serving in the French army. As a theorist of education he was especially attracted to the
pedagogical ideas of the famous Swiss educators J. H. Pestalozzi and P. E. Fellenberg
whose schools he had visited at Yverdun and Hofwyl, respectively, in Switzerland
(Palmer, 1993). According to Fraser, in his authoritative edition and translation of
Jullien’s Plan:
Until his death … Jullien was engaged constantly in scientific and cultural affairs.
He founded the Societé Française de l’union des nations, and invited international
scholars to his home for monthly dinners. He traveled continually, attending international congresses, devoting his time to learned societies, and corresponding
with statesmen and educators whose cosmopolitanism sought to evade the confines of nationalism as it consolidated itself in Europe (Fraser, 1964:12).
In Jullien’s life and works, one can distinguish certain elements which, in combination
with each other, had an effect on Jullien’s pioneering ideas in the promotion of the
episteme (‘science’) of comparative education. Jullien was also nurtured in the ideas
and spirit of the Enlightenment ‘paradigm of modernity’ with its emphasis on reason/
rationalism, empiricism, science (including social science), universalism, secularism,
progress and the nation state. Not unsurprisingly, he became interested in the scientific
study of education.

Comparative Education as ‘Almost Nearly a Positive Science’
Jullien envisaged ‘education’ and a fortiori comparative education, to be a ‘nearly positive
science’ (science positivie) analogous to comparative anatomy. In the Plan he explained:
Education, as all other sciences and all the arts, is composed of facts and observations. It, therefore, seems necessary to form, for this science as one has done
for other branches of knowledge, collections of facts and observations, arranged
in analytical charts, which permit them to be related and compared, to deduct
from them certain principles, determined rules, so that education might become
almost nearly a positive science. … Researches on comparative anatomy have
advanced the science of anatomy. In the same way the researches on comparative education must furnish new means of perfecting the science of education
(Fraser, 1964:40–41).

--- [PDF Page 38 / Book Page 13] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

13

To make comparative education a ‘nearly positive science’ Jullien developed the aforementioned Plan (Esquisse). The Plan consisted of two major parts: (a) an introductory
statement on Jullien’s critical assessment of the state of education in the different countries of Europe, and his own ideas as to how the ‘incomplete’ and ‘defective’ European
education could be improved; and (b) a series of questions which were intended to
collect ‘facts and observations’ and ‘destined to furnish material for Comparative
Observation Tables’ (Fraser, 1964:31).

Why a Science of Comparative Education?
Like his contemporary French scientific positivist philosopher-sociologist Auguste
Comte (1798–1857), Jullien believed that the scientific method could be applied to
human and social affairs. As a positive science, therefore, comparative education
should focus on objectively determinable and systematically collected facts and observations. A ‘nearly positive science’ of CE, according to Jullien, which in the collection
and tabulation of ‘facts and observations’ employed similar methods and techniques/
instruments as the positive sciences and the ‘mechanical arts’, would be useful in
the reform and improvement of contemporary education throughout Europe. In the
introduction to the Plan, Jullien averred that both public and private education in the
different countries of Europe were ‘incomplete, defective, without coordination …
without harmony with itself in the different physical, moral, and intellectual spheres
in which the students ought to be guided’. He attributed the social, political and moral
ills of European countries, the corruption and ‘degradation of minds and hearts, which
have produced revolutions and wars’, the disorder and the general deterioration of
European societies to incomplete and defective education. Consequently, education
needed to be reformed and improved. In his own words:
The reform and improvement of education, the true basis of the social edifice,
primary source of habits and opinions, which exercise a powerful influence on
the entire life, are a need generally felt, as if by instinct, through Europe. It is a
matter of indicating the means of satisfying the need in the surest, most efficient,
and prompt manner (Fraser, 1964:35).
According to Jullien, the methodological approach by which the defects and weaknesses of education, and generally ‘the condition of education and public instruction
in all the countries of Europe’ could be ascertained, would be the drawing up of
‘analytical summaries of information’, collected through a ‘series of questions’—a
questionnaire—tabulated in ‘comparative tables of observations’ and classified
under ‘uniform headings’ for purposes of ‘comparative analysis’. The responsibility for the collection of such educational facts and observations, for evaluative
judgements and for the search of solutions to educational problems ‘would be given
to intellectual and active men of sound judgment, (and) of known moral conduct’
(Fraser, 1964:36–37; Kaloyiannaki, 2002:42–43). Jullien articulated this reformative-melioristic value of his ‘nearly positivist’ scientific conception of comparative
education as follows:

--- [PDF Page 39 / Book Page 14] ---

14

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

These analytical summaries of information, on the condition of education and
public instruction in all the countries of Europe, would supply successively
comparative tables of the present state of European nations in regard to this
important aspect. One could judge with ease those which are advancing; those
which are falling back, those which remain stationary; what are in each country the deficient and ailing sections; what are the causes of internal defects
… or what are the obstacles to the ascendancy of religion, ethics, and social
advancement and how these obstacles can be overcome; finally, which parts offer
improvement capable of being transported from one country to another, with
modifications and changes which circumstances and localities would determine
suitable (Fraser, 1964:37).
A ‘nearly positivist’ scientific perspective in comparative education, as envisaged by
Jullien, would also be valuable in other respects. In one respect, it would ‘furnish
new means of perfecting the science of education’ (Fraser, 1964:41). In another, it
would release comparative study from political influence, the omnipotence of religion,
prejudice and despotism (Kaloyiannaki, 2002). And, in still another, it would help in
‘nation-building’, as he argues in the case of a comparative study of education in the
22 cantons of Switzerland. Indeed, according to Jullien, the comparative study of education in the cantons of Switzerland would serve a double purpose: in the first place, it
‘will give birth to the idea of borrowing from one another what they may have which
is good and useful in their institutions’; and in the second, it will establish and consolidate ‘the political unity of Switzerland’ by developing ‘a national Helvetian mind’
(Fraser, 1964:45–46).

Jullien’s Methodology: The ‘Questionnaire’ and the Indicators of Comparison
Jullien’s comparative methodology could be described as ‘empirico-deductive’ and
perhaps ‘qualitative quasi-ethnographic’. It sought to gather data, in Jullien’s words
‘facts and observations’, on education and related questions by means of a questionnaire which consisted of a ‘series of questions’ on six educational areas, namely:
(a) primary and common education; (b) secondary and classical education; (c) higher
and scientific education; (d) normal education; (e) education of girls; and (f) education,
as it related to legislation and social institutions. The collected facts and observations
would then be ‘arranged in analytical charts’ or ‘comparative tables of observations’
which would allow for comparative analysis and the deduction of ‘certain principles,
determined rules, so that education might become almost nearly a positive science’
(Fraser, 1964:40).
In the Plan Jullien identified the educational themes/topics for all six areas for
which a series of questions would be posed. However, what he was able to complete
was questions for the first two areas, namely, primary and common education and
instruction, and secondary and classical education. In each area the questions posed
were a set that covered a variety of educational issues, topics and questions. Some
of the questions were relatively short, seeking to elicit quantitative data or yes or no
answers, while others were relatively long and involved seeking to elicit qualitative

--- [PDF Page 40 / Book Page 15] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

15

judgements and interpretations. Briefly and selectively, the questions for the first two
areas were of the following kind:
1. The first area ‘primary and common education and instruction’ included questions on: (a) ‘Primary or Elementary Schools’, e.g. number, organisation,
maintenance and administration, ‘differences among the schools destined for
children of different religious faiths’, whether they are free or not; (b) students,
e.g. number, age of admission, enrollment ratios; (c) directors and primary
teachers, e.g. number, preparation, salaries, possibilities for advancement or
retirement; (d) physical education and gymnastics, e.g. ‘suckling of children,
nourishment, clothing, sleep, beds, games, exercises, walks, hygienic care and
diet, sicknesses, vaccination, and death rate’; (e) moral and religious education,
e.g. ‘first development of moral sentiments, repression of vicious tendencies,
influence of mothers of families, religious instruction whether dry and dogmatic
or interesting and appropriate to make a profound impression on the soul, regulations and discipline of primary schools, punishments … emulation—is it used
or not as a necessary motivation?’; (f) intellectual education, e.g. ‘development
of the faculties of the mind, instruction or acquisition of knowledge, first education of the senses and organs, aims and ways of teaching, memory exercises,
three principal faculties: attention, comparison, reasoning’; (g) domestic and
private education, e.g. ‘up to what point is the education begun and continued
by parents, in the bosom of the family, in harmony or in opposition with the
education and instruction given in primary and public schools?’; (h) primary
and common education—as it is related to secondary education, or to the second
stage and with the intentions of children’, e.g. ‘Is the present organization of
primary and common education resting on a basis sufficiently large, solid, and
complete to supply children of poor and working classes with all the elementary
knowledge indispensable to them to exercise and develop all their faculties?’;
and (i) general considerations, e.g. ‘Is the present manner of bringing up children, up to their seventh or ninth year, the same as in former times? Or rather, in
what does the difference consist, between the new and old ways of education?’
(Fraser, 1964:53–67).
2. The questions in the second area ‘Secondary and Classical Education’ were
similar to those in the first. They asked for information about (a) secondary
schools (colleges, gymnasia, private institutions and boarding schools), namely,
‘number, nature, origin and foundation, organization … fees’; (b) students,
namely, number, age, ‘their division into classes’, etc.; (c) physical education
and gymnastics; (d) moral and religious education, for example, ‘Knowledge of
God, daily prayers, feeling of benevolence, courage, patience’; (e) intellectual
education, for example, ‘development of the faculties, acquisition of knowledge or instruction … teaching aims/methods … classical books … exercises
to develop the memory, judgment or reason, imagination … vacations … letter writing style … study of laws’; (f) domestic and family education—in its
relationship with public education; and (g) ‘general considerations and various
questions’ (Fraser, 1964:67–82).

--- [PDF Page 41 / Book Page 16] ---

16

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

Jullien’s Conception of Comparative Education: A Positive or a Human Science?
Viewed from the vantage point of a positivist empirical-scientific methodology, it could
be said, as indeed it has been said, that Jullien’s questionnaire is too complex, too long
and ‘biased’ in the sense that ‘Jullien’s assumptions about the proper goals of education colored the questions he asked’ (Noah and Eckstein, 1969:29). Likewise, from the
same positivist methodological perspective one might also add that in several parts,
the questions in the Plan are convoluted and ‘leading questions’ seeking less to record
‘objectively determinable’ and systematically collected ‘facts and observations’, and
more to instruct and promote Jullien’s own ideas and theories about education. Such
evaluative comments would indeed be quite in order, especially on the question of
‘biased’ and convoluted ‘leading questions’ which appear quite frequently under the
thematic categories of ‘moral and religious education’ and ‘intellectual education’.
Here are some selected pertinent examples of such types of questions (Fraser 1964).

Under ‘Moral and Religious Education’
- ‘Does one restrict religious instruction to teaching and explanation of the catechism, precepts, dogmas, ceremonies, exterior forms? Or does one attempt to
penetrate children’s souls, give solid internal foundation to their religious belief,
to form conscience, to develop and fortify by the double strength of habits and
examples, the moral character, true devotion, disposition to benevolence, tolerance, Christian charity?’
- ‘Does one apply oneself (according to the wise advice of the German philosopher, Basedow) to making children well acquainted with virtue in its beautiful
side and with vice in its bad side, so that they may become truly good men and
not hypocrites, that is to say, that they not only have their own interests in view,
when they do good?’

Under ‘Intellectual Education’
- ‘What are the aims of education which the children usually receive in primary
school? (Does one limit oneself in the majority of schools to reading, writing and
arithmetic? Or does one also give a few elementary ideas of grammar, singing,
geometrical drawing, geometry, and land surveying, applied mechanics, geography and history of the country, anatomy of the human body, practical hygiene,
natural history applied to the study of land products most useful to men? All the
elements of these sciences, as essentials to each individual in all conditions and
circumstances of life, would seem to have to form a part of a complete system of
primary and common education, perfectly appropriate to the true needs of man
in our present state of civilization.)’
- ‘Does one apply the elementary teaching method of arithmetic, practiced with
success by M. Pestalozzi in his educational institute; or of any other methods of
the same kind, whether in arithmetic, or for other branches of instruction?’
- ‘How does one seek to develop and exercise in children, in a progressive and
imperceptible manner, first, the power of attention, the foremost faculty and

--- [PDF Page 42 / Book Page 17] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

17

generator of all others; then, the faculty of comparing or the simile; finally,
reasoning (which are the three essential and fundamental faculties of human
understanding, according to the distinction established by M. Laromiguiere, in
his Lessons of Philosophy)?’
If, however, one were to place Jullien’s conception of a ‘science of education’ in the
post-Enlightenment broader ‘scientific’ intellectual historical context, and, further, if
one bore in mind (a) Jullien’s humanistic cultural background, and (b) as noted above,
that Jullien was nurtured in the ideas, spirit and culture of the Enlightenment ‘paradigm
of modernity’, one could perhaps understand his conception of comparative education
as ‘an almost nearly positive science’, i.e. as not a positive science in the strict meaning
of the term, as this is shown by the nature of the questionnaire and the indicators of
comparison in the Plan. Positivism, stricto sensu, affirms that ‘all knowledge regarding matters of fact is based on the “positive” data of experience’, and its all-important
imperative is ‘strict adherence to the testimony of observation and experience’. As
a philosophical ideology, further, positivism is ‘worldly, secular, anti-theological,
and anti-metaphysical’ (http://www.brittanica.com/eb/article9 108682/Positivism).
Additionally, according to the Wikipedia encyclopedia, as it developed in the second
half of the twentieth century, positivism (a) focuses ‘on science as a product, a linguistic
or numerical set of statements’; (b) insists that at least some of the statements made are
‘testable, that is amenable to being verified, confirmed, or falsified by the empirical
observation of reality’; and (c) is based on the belief that ‘science rests on specific
results that are dissociated from the personality and social position of the investigator’
(http:1/en. wikipedia. org/wiki/Positivism).
Bearing in mind the above, Jullien’s conception of a ‘science of comparative education’ cannot be said to be consonant with the positivistic scientific conceptions of
comparative education that developed in the second half of the twentieth century, e.g.
that of Harold Noah and Max Eckstein (Noah & Eckstein, 1969). Nor can it be said
that it was consonant with other scientific conceptions of the same twentieth-century
period, e.g. those of Brian Holmes (Holmes, 1965), George Bereday (Bereday, 1964),
the University of Chicago Functionalist School (Anderson, 1961; Foster, 1960), or
indeed the Stanford World Systems School of later years (Arnove, 1982). It can, however, still be said that Jullien’s conception of a science of comparative education was
consonant with what the French and other Europeans, e.g. the Greeks and the Germans,
refer to as ‘human sciences’, which in certain respects are differentiated, in terms of
methodology and subject matter, from the positive and the other empirical-statistical
sciences. Two years after the appearance of the Plan for comparative education, Jullien
published a Sketch for an Essay on the philosophy of the sciences where, according to
Palmer, ‘science was taken to mean mental activity of all kinds, including, applied technology, political and economic treatises, imaginative literature, and the fine arts’. In a
‘Synoptic Table of Human Knowledge According to a New Method of Classification’
in the same Sketch, Jullien classified ‘human knowledge’ under ‘first order’ and ‘second order’ sciences. Under ‘first order’ sciences he included the physical sciences and
practical sciences such as ‘agriculture, mining, engineering and healing’, and under
‘second order’, he included ‘metaphysical, moral and intellectual sciences, relative to

--- [PDF Page 43 / Book Page 18] ---

18

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

the mind’, history, psychology, natural theology, liberal arts, fine arts, practical morality and education (Palmer, 1993:176–178).
Ideologically, as explained below, Jullien could be characterised as an Enlightenment
liberal and an international cosmopolitan humanist educational reformer. The purpose
of investigating, in a scientific/epistemic way, what he considered to be a defective,
morally and intellectually, and an ‘incomplete’ European education, was to ameliorate/improve it by reforming it along what he considered to be the desirable moral,
intellectual and physical educational principles. As quoted above, the Enlightenment
liberal humanist Jullien considered education to be ‘the true basis of the social edifice,
primary source of habits and opinions, which exercise a powerful influence on the
entire life’ (Fraser, 1964:35). He believed that education can exert a decisive influence on the moral and intellectual ‘renaissance’ of man, on national welfare and on
nation-building (Kaloyiannaki, 2002). His comparative method—the use of the type of
questionnaire analysed above—sought to do more than merely collect ‘facts and observations’. As Noah and Eckstein have pointed out, Jullien ‘was ultimately concerned
with problems of diffusing knowledge of education, particularly knowledge of educational innovation’. The same authors have added: ‘Influenced as he was by the ideas
of Rousseau and Pestalozzi, he wished to encourage a practical, child-centered educational methodology that emphasized, among other things, education of the senses and
preparation for life in society, all with a humanitarian emphasis’ (Noah & Eckstein,
1969:16). Actually, Jullien wished to encourage a multi-prismatic humanistic education, as indicated by his emphasis in the questionnaire on the moral, the religious, the
physical and the intellectual education of ‘man’, who, according to him, is ‘the subject
on which education acts’. Man, Jullien avers, ‘is composed of three elements: body,
heart, and mind, whose culture and development constitute for him the true means of
happiness’ (Fraser, 1964:48). It would be relevant to add here that Jullien’s Plan and
the questions asked reflected also the humanitarian influence of the German Count
Leopold Berchold, a renowned ‘traveler and humanist’, and of the Frenchman M.
Laromiguiere to whom he refers in the questionnaire in connection with an education
that cultivates the ‘faculties of the soul’ (Fraser, 1964:41, 91, 133–147; Kaloyiannaki,
2002). And, further, that some researchers (Gautherin,1993; Leclercque, 1999) consider that Jullien’s work constructs a polyphonic human world; for in the Plan Jullien
goes beyond Europe and refers to ‘mankind as a whole’ (humanité), to ‘all people’,
to the ‘amelioration of the human being’ and to the ‘love for mankind’, thus giving a
universal and humanitarian character to his comparative approach and the propositions
for reform (Kaloyiannaki, 2002).

A French Enlightenment Liberal: Liberté, Raison, Education
In the preface to his study on Jullien, titled From Jacobin to Liberal (1993), R. R.
Palmer wrote:
Born in the year when armed rebellion against Britain began in America, he
(Jullien) witnessed the fall of the Bastille as a schoolboy in Paris, joined the
Jacobin club, took part in the Reign of Terror, advocated democracy, put his

--- [PDF Page 44 / Book Page 19] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

19

hopes in Napoleon Bonaparte, turned against him, welcomed his return from
Elba, became an outspoken liberal under the restored Bourbons, rejoiced in the
revolution of 1830, had doubts about the July monarchy, welcomed the revolution of 1848, and died a few weeks before the election of Louis-Napoleon
Bonaparte as president of the Second Republic (Palmer, 1993:ix).
And in a chapter on Jullien as a ‘theorist of education’, the same author noted: ‘In
education, as in other respects, he (Jullien) turned from the Jacobin into the liberal.
Where he had once seen education as part of the revolutionary process, he came to see
it as a substitute for revolution, or as a means by which revolution could be prevented”
(Palmer, 1993:151).
The Enlightenment, R. Freeman Butts, a noted educational historian, has written,
‘was a reaction against the traditional civilisation of the old regime in Europe—against
absolute monarchy, closed economic systems, rigid social stratification, religious
authoritarianism, an unscientific world view, the doctrine of original sin in human
nature, and the domination of intellectual life by medieval conceptions of knowledge’.
And further:
Underlying this protest was a growing faith in the powers of man, in science,
and in human reason. This age of reason preached the humanitarian faith in
progress that man, by taking thought, could reform his institutions as a means
of promoting the general welfare. These currents of thought helped to shape the
pervasive liberal and democratic ideals that came to mark the heartland of the
West (Butts, 1973:307).
To the above, one should add another basic tenet of the Enlightenment, namely, the
concept of ‘freedom’. ‘Freedom’ was emphasised by J. J. Rousseau, the eminent
modern political and educational philosopher and an Enlightenment thinker who influenced Jullien, but also by an equally eminent philosopher, the German, Immanuel
Kant. According to Kant, ‘Enlightenment is man’s emergence from his self-incurred
immaturity. There is more chance of an entire public enlightening itself … if only the
public concerned is left in freedom … freedom to make public use on one’s reason in
all matters’ (http://philosophy.eserver.orgjkant/what-is-enlightenment). Lastly, and of
particular relevance here, it should be made explicit what appears to be implicit in the
above, that in the philosophy of the Enlightenment, education, pedagogy, ‘politics’ and
‘nation-building’ were closely related.
Jullien’s Plan and his other texts on education (e.g. his General Essay on Education
published in 1808) as well as his many writings on ‘culture’ and ‘civilisation’ reflect
certain of the aforementioned key ideas of the Enlightenment. First, as shown in the
Plan but also elsewhere, Jullien placed great emphasis on ‘reason’ and the related
‘scientific way of knowing’, which, as indicated above, were cardinal tenets of the
philosophy of the Enlightenment. In the first number of the newly launched Revue
Encyclopédique, which appeared in 1819, Jullien wrote: ‘Our new journal should meet
one of the needs of our time. Its object is to set forth, accurately and faithfully, the
march and continuing progress of human knowledge in relation to the social order and

--- [PDF Page 45 / Book Page 20] ---

20

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

its improvement which constitute true civilization.’ And in an issue in 1823, he wrote:
‘Our Revue is the first and only work to have executed, by periodical publication, the
great Baconian idea of the unity of the sciences, brought together in such a form as to
resemble a universal Congress, in an alliance truly holy for advancement of the human
mind toward the same moral and philosophical goal in the infinitely varied spheres
where it is destined to operate’ (Palmer, 1993:178–181; Davies, 1996:596–598).
A second element in Jullien’s theory of education, which was consonant with the
philosophy of the Enlightenment, was his emphasis on the ‘regeneration and perfection of public education/instruction’ (Fraser, 1964:36). Like the French Enlightenment
thinkers and the French and English political liberals of that time, Jullien considered
public education to be socially and politically important for the production of enlightened and patriotic ‘citizens’, for man’s ‘renaissance’, for progress and national welfare.
As Palmer pertinently has observed:
It is evident why Jullien thought of education as an aspect of political or social
science. The ideas expressed were not his alone. They may be found, more piecemeal, in the educational plans formulated before and during the Revolution,
including those of Talleyrand in 1791, Condorcet in 1792, and a plan endorsed
by the Paris Jacobins in 1793. They resemble the ideas of Jeremy Bentham and
the emerging “Philosophical Radicals” in England (Palmer, 1993:154).
Still another Enlightenment element in Jullien’s educational ideological repertoire,
which reflected the influence of Rousseau and Pestalozzi, was his emphasis on the
pedagogical principle of ‘complete liberty in the development of natural faculties or
inclinations and the individuality of each pupil’. After visiting Pestalozzi’s school at
Yverdon in Switzerland in 1810, Jullien enunciated the following pedagogical principle: ‘The fourth general principle … consists in allowing a full development of
the original faculties and inclinations of each pupil as they reveal and express his
true nature. … The child grows and in a way instructs himself; the teacher is only
the external means of development and instruction. … Education should make each
child capable of rising to all perfection that his physical, moral and intellectual nature
allows’ (Palmer, 1993:163–164).

An International Educationist/Pedagogue and a Cosmopolitis (World Citizen)
From the 1940s, when Jullien’s Plan was accidentally discovered, till today, comparative educationists have credited Jullien with being a pioneer in the development
of comparative education; indeed, as noted above, some comparativists have hailed
Jullien as the ‘father’ of this modernist episteme (science). Generally speaking, however, comparativists have paid relatively little attention to Jullien’s pioneering ideas
about international education (IE), a kindred epistemic field.
The term/concept ‘international education’ has been plagued by vagueness and a
multiplicity of definitions and interpretations concerning its subject matter (Vestal,
1994:13). In the recent literature on it, there is a distinction drawn between international education and comparative education, but also a recognition that the two

--- [PDF Page 46 / Book Page 21] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

21

epistemic domains are related to each other (Fraser & Brickman, 1968). This is also
witnessed by the fact that in the 1960s, the name of the newly founded Americanbased Comparative Education Society was changed to Comparative and International
Education Society (Jones, 1971:22). When the term is used by comparative and
international educationists it usually refers to the following activities and concerns:
(a) study of the education of other peoples in other countries; (b) educational exchanges
and study abroad; (c) technical assistance to educational development in other countries; (d) international cooperation in educational development through international
organisations; (e) ‘comparative and cross-cultural studies in a variety of subjects and
disciplines’; and (f) intercultural education (Vestal, 1994:14).
Viewed from such an international education perspective, one could, not unjustifiably, refer to Jullien as being a precursor of ‘international education’. His views
about, and criticisms of, the state of education at the time referred to the ‘different
countries of Europe’, not just to his native France. Also, as he states in the Plan, what
was needed for ‘the regeneration and perfection of public education’ in Europe was
the organisation of a Special Education Commission ‘small in number, composed of
men in charge of collecting, through their own means and by corresponding associates
chosen with care, the materials for a general work on the establishments and methods
of education and instruction in the different European states, related and compared
under this report’. With a carefully selected staff of international associates, this special international commission would see that ‘analytical summaries of information’
about ‘the condition of education and public instruction’ in all the countries of Europe
were collected through the use of a common method, namely, a ‘questionnaire’. The
purpose of collecting such ‘analytical summaries of information’ was to evaluate the
state of education in each European nation, to determine and explain the ‘deficient and
ailing sections’ in each country, and to make suggestions for improvement. Speaking
as a theorist of education, but more so as an international educational reformer and
pedagogue, Jullien elaborated:
These analytical summaries of information, collected at the same time and in the
same order … would supply successively, in less that three years, comparable
tables of the present state of European nations in regard to this important aspect.
One could judge with ease those which are advancing; those which are falling
back, those which remain stationary; what are, in each country, the deficient and
ailing sections; what are the causes of internal defects … or what are the obstacles to the ascendancy of religion, ethics, and social advancement, and how these
obstacles can be overcome; finally, which parts offer improvement capable of being
transposed from one country to another, with modifications and changes which
circumstances and localities would determine suitable (Fraser, 1964:36–37).
In the Plan, in addition to the organisation of a special international commission, he
proposed that a Normal Institute of Education and similar institutions be established
in different areas for the training of ‘good teachers’. The Normal Institute would publish a multilingual Bulletin or General Journal of Education which would disseminate
information for the ‘perfecting of instructional methods’ (Fraser, 1964:39).

--- [PDF Page 47 / Book Page 22] ---

22

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

Jullien’s internationalism in education and more broadly in ‘culture’, ‘knowledge’
and ‘civilisation’ was reflected in other activities and theoretical treatises. As Fraser,
quoted above, has noted: ‘He (Jullien) travelled extensively, attending international
congresses, devoting his time to learned societies, and corresponding with statesmen
and educators whose cosmopolitanism sought to evade the confines of nationalism
as it consolidated itself in Europe.’ Apropos of Jullien’s contacts with eminent international figures, Fraser quotes Thomas Jefferson, the American president, who in a
letter in 1810, acknowledging receipt of Jullien’s General Essay on Education, praises
Jullien for his ‘devotion to international education’ (Fraser, 1964:12–13).
The Revue Encyclopédique, of which he was founder and editor, published articles,
reports, short notices, book reviews and letters on civilisation/culture (letters, literature and the arts) and the sciences in America, Asia, Africa and Europe. In one of the
‘letters’ to the correspondents and contributors of the Revue, Jullien noted that the
journal was ‘circulated through all countries of the civilized world’, and added:
It is not enough for us to be encyclopedists; we aspire especially to be cosmopolites (world citizens). We would not think our task fulfilled unless each of our
numbers presented, in the most complete and accurate way, the state of sciences,
letters, arts, intellectual labors and moral improvement throughout the surface of
the globe. (Palmer, 1993:180–181)
Lastly, it would be appropriate to mention here that Jullien, the internationalist and
the cosmopolitis (world citizen), does not only merit Palmer’s characterisation of
‘apostle of civilisation’, he could also, quite justifiably, be called ‘apostle of peace’.
Perturbed by what he perceived to be ‘the dissolution of all religious, moral, and social
bonds, extreme corruption, degradation of minds and hearts, which have produced
revolutions and wars’, Jullien stressed the need for the improvement of education,
nationally and internationally, for international cooperation and for peaceful coexistence (Kaloyiannaki, 2002). He became a member of the London-based ‘Association of
Friends for Peace’, and in 1833 in A Letter to the English Nation, he wrote:
Our illustrious and learned CUVIER, whose recent death was a loss as keenly
felt in England as in France, had rightly judged, in his lofty meditations, that
only comparative anatomy and comparative geology could advance the sciences
of anatomy and geology which remained so long in their infancy. Similarly, only
comparative civilization can speedily advance our present civilization, which
still preserves, despite its brilliant and imposing wonders, the deep and afflicting
traces of the old barbarism. (Palmer, 1993:205)
Given his views about the value of a reformed European education and pedagogy in
the regeneration of European societies and the amelioration of the human condition
in general, in the Letter quoted above, Jullien could easily have added comparative education next to comparative civilisation as being of equal significance in the
advancement of ‘our present civilization’. This ameliorative element, which is salient
in Jullien’s own ‘lofty meditations’ as well as in his proposals and activities for the

--- [PDF Page 48 / Book Page 23] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

23

advancement of ‘civilization’ and ‘comparative and international education’, merits
additional comment.

A ‘Scientific Humanist’ Reformer and a Meliorist Comparativist/Internationalist
Historical accounts of comparative education as a modernist episteme (‘science’)
have placed Jullien’s conception of this epistemic area in the first phase of its course
of development, which has been characterised as the phase of ‘borrowing’. Other
nineteenth-century observers of European education who have been placed in this
‘borrowing’ category of ‘comparativists’ are the American and European educational
reformers mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, namely, Calvin Stowe, Victor
Cousin and Horace Mann, about whom more will be said below. The emphasis of
‘borrowing’ in the nineteenth century, according to Bereday, ‘was on cataloguing
descriptive educational data; comparison of the collected information was then undertaken in order to make available the best practices of one country for transplantation
to others’ (Bereday, 1964:7). And, according to Noah and Eckstein, Jullien’s Plan ‘is a
prime example of work in comparative education motivated by a desire to gain useful
lessons from abroad’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969:15, 21). Behind the idea of ‘borrowing’,
of ‘transplantation of best practices’ and of ‘gaining useful lessons’ was the meliorist
ideology of improvement.
In the Plan, Jullien uses the word ‘borrowing’ as a likely benefit of comparative
analysis, when he talks about applying his ‘instrument’ and ‘observation charts’ first
to the cantons of Switzerland. In his words: ‘The bringing together and comparison
of cantons in these respects will give birth to the idea of borrowing from one another
what they may have which is good and useful in their institutions’ (Fraser, 1964:46).
In the same text, Jullien also uses the word ‘transpose’ in the sense of transferring
what is found through comparison to be an improvement in one country, to another. In
such a case, however, ‘modifications and changes which circumstances and localities
would determine “suitable,” would have to be made’. So, one could say that behind his
notions of ‘borrowing’ and ‘transfer’ was one side to Jullien’s meliorist ideology which
was similar to that of the aforementioned nineteenth-century reformers.
But there was another side to Jullien’s meliorism that differentiated him from the
other ‘borrowing comparativists’. This, simply stated, was that Jullien had definite
ideas about the type of education and pedagogy that was needed for the regeneration
of European man, civilisation and society. This is patently evident by the types of
questions he included in the Plan, some of which are quoted in the relevant section
above. The regeneration of human society, Jullien averred, could only be accomplished
through a ‘moral and religious education’ as well as an ‘intellectual education’.
A believer in ‘faculty psychology’, the dominant psychological theory of the
time, Jullien called for an education that would develop ‘attention, comparison and reasoning’, the ‘three principal faculties of the mind’. More important, Jullien implies in
the questionnaire, would be moral and religious education, specifically: ‘first development
of moral sentiments … religious instruction, dry and dogmatic or interesting to make
a profound impression on the soul … knowledge of God, daily prayers, feeling of
benevolence, courage, patience’ (Fraser, 1994:60, 63, 71). And in the introductory part

--- [PDF Page 49 / Book Page 24] ---

24

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

to the questionnaire, he unequivocably declared: ‘It is through the return to religion
and morality, it is through a reform widely contrived, introduced in public education,
that one can reinvigorate men …, it is time to give to the prosperity of nations and
to the broad foundation of politics the necessary stability of religion and morality’
(Fraser, 1964:34–35).

Epilogue: Jullien as a Comparative and International Educator
We have no evidence that Jullien’s comparative methodology or his ideas and proposals about comparative and international education as presented in his Plan and
preliminary views for a work in comparative education were adopted or had any significant influence in the subsequent development of the two related epistemic domains.
As historians of comparative education, we concur with what Stewart Fraser in his
authoritative edition and evaluation of Jullien’s Plan wrote back in 1964. Agreeing
with the historical judgement of Franz Hilker, Isaac Kandel and Nicholas Hans, three
twentieth-century pioneer comparativists, that Jullien ‘was unable to influence the
development of comparative education to any great extent’, Fraser added:
While Jullien may not necessarily qualify as the principal instigator or exponent
of comparative pedagogy in the nineteenth century his Plan remains one of the
most important artifacts in the science. Technically, and in fact, Jullien never
developed a thoroughgoing comparative methodology in education, nor did he
live to see his ideas for institutes of international education become established,
but he has been widely identified as one of the first to consolidate these useful
ideas into a preliminary draft of such potential magnitude that he cannot be
ignored today (Fraser, 1964:117).

The Policy-Oriented and Administrative Meliorist
Motif in Comparative-International Education: Victor
Cousin of France, and Horace Mann, Calvin Stowe and
Henry Barnard of the United States
Jullien’s Plan and his other writings that dealt with comparative and international education were among very few such discourses that appeared at the beginning of the nineteenth
century. Indeed, Jullien’s Plan was rather unique insofar as ‘comparative education’ was
concerned. But, as William Brickman, a noted historian of ‘international education’ has
noted, by 1900, the ‘meager literature’ on ‘foreign education’, what in German has been
referred to as Auslandspadagogik, was transformed into a ‘flood of books’ and other
writings, e.g. reports, travellers’ or visitors’ observations, journalistic reportages and the
like (Fraser & Brickman, 1968:19). This was especially true of the United States, but a
heightened interest in Auslandspadagogik (education in ‘other lands’) was also manifested in European countries, particularly in England and France.
The period following the French Revolution was one of portentous political, social,
cultural and economic changes. According to the already mentioned historian Freeman

--- [PDF Page 50 / Book Page 25] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

25

Butts, by the middle of the nineteenth century there was a ‘transmutation in the heartland of Western civilisation’ from ‘traditional’ to ‘modern’ ideas, socio-economic and
political institutions, and values (Butts, 1973:295). Central to the ‘modernity project’,
to use Jurgen Habermas much discussed characterisation of this transmutation, also
referred to as ‘modernisation’, was the Enlightenment ideas of reason and the ‘reconstruction of the public sphere in which reason might prevail’, as well as the ‘rational
organisation of everyday social life’, of ‘objective science’, of universal ‘morality and
law’ (Habermas, 2007).
An important element of the Enlightenment ‘modernity project’ was the reform
of education. The rational organisation of ‘national/public education’ was seen as a
necessary condition in the reconstruction of the public sphere—the emerging political formation of the ‘nation state’—and the rational organisation of social life (Butts,
1973:301–302). As was the case with Jullien’s interest in comparative education, nineteenth-century European and American reformers, in their capacity as educational
administrators and policy-makers in their respective countries, showed an interest
in ‘foreign/international education’, mainly, however, for the purpose of what in the
aforementioned historical accounts of the development of comparative education
has been referred to as ‘educational borrowing’ (Bereday, 1964:7; Noah & Eckstein,
1969:16–21). Jullien’s interest in comparative and international education, as noted
above, was partly melioristic in the ‘educational borrowing’ connotation of the term,
but purportedly it was also ‘scientific’: the systematic collection of comparative ‘facts
and observations’ through a questionnaire, which would permit the comparativistinternationalist ‘to deduct from them certain principles, determined rules, so that
education might become almost nearly a positive science’ (Fraser, 1964:40–41). To
illustrate this ‘non-scientific’ melioristic, in the sense of ‘borrowing’ international/
foreign educational discourses and practices, we have chosen to present the ideas
of Victor Cousin of France, Horace Mann, Calvin Stowe and Henry Barnard of the
United States.

The French Discourse: Victor Cousin—‘If it is Prussia
I Study, it is Always of France that I Think’
Victor Cousin (1792–1867) was a contemporary of Jullien, and like Jullien, an
Enlightenment liberal intellectual, but there is no evidence that the two collaborated
or communicated with each other. Cousin, according to Palmer, was mentioned as
‘subject’ in Jullien’s Revue Enclopédique, but not as a contributor (Palmer, 1993:180).
In his professional career as philosopher-teacher at the Sorbonne, Cousin was attracted
to German philosophy, particularly to Hegelian idealism, which, according to Walter
Brewer’s authoritative study Victor Cousin as a Comparative Educator (1971),
Cousin introduced into French philosophy (Brewer, 1971:23–24). It was not, however,
only German philosophy that Cousin held in high esteem and sought to introduce
into France. Like other contemporary European and, as we shall see later on in this
chapter, American thinkers and reformers, Cousin held German public education to
be very successful, and worthy of study for the purpose of emulating some of its

--- [PDF Page 51 / Book Page 26] ---

26

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

characteristics and practices. So, soon after his transformation from philosophy professor to philosopher cum administrator and educational policy-maker during the July
Monarchy of Louis Philippe (1830–1848)—he served as a member of the Supreme
Council of Public Instruction in Guizot’s ministry and in 1840 for a short time as
Minister of Public Instruction—Cousin travelled to Germany to study the German
educational institutions and practices. The result of his German tour was his influential
report Rapport sur 1’état de 1’instruction publique en Prusse (Report on the state of
public instruction in Prussia) (1831) which, according to the American historian E. W.
Knight, ‘is among the most important of all the reports on educational conditions in
Europe during the second quarter of the nineteenth century’ (Knight, 1930:117–118).

Cousin’s Report on Prussian Public Instruction
The main part of Cousin’s report dealt with aspects of Prussian education that Cousin
considered appropriate to his purpose, which was expressed in these words: ‘if it is
Prussia I study, it is always of France that I think’ (Brewer, 1971:50). Most of what
Cousin considered appropriate for his purpose, he found in a legislative proposal by
Privy Councilor Johann Wilhelm Suvern, which he called the ‘Law of 1819’. Cousin
commented on the following aspects of the Prussian public system of primary education: the organisation and administration or ‘the government of public instruction’; the
training, appointment, promotion, emoluments and ‘punishment’ of primary ‘schoolmasters’; the ‘duty’ of parents to send their children to the primary schools, and of
each parish ‘to maintain a primary school at its own cost’; the ‘different gradations
(or stages) of primary instruction’, i.e. elementary schools (Elementarschulen) and
burgher schools (Burgerschulen); and the content of school curricula (Knight, 1930).
The Suvern ‘Law of 1819’ could be interpreted as being part of the politico-social
side of the already mentioned European ‘modernity project’. As Brewer has written,
‘it was among the last in the series of political and social reforms that were designed
to modernize and strengthen the State after the disasters of 1805–1806 had left Prussia
dismembered and prostate at the feet of the French Imperial Army’ (Brewer, 1971:44).
The Enlightenment liberal reformer Cousin, like his contemporary Prussian reformers,
considered the establishment of a national system of public primary schools as being
a basic desideratum necessary for the development of a modern French nation state.
In the Germanic-Prussian system of primary education and in the Law of 1819, which
he described in glowing terms in his 1831 report, Cousin, then a high-ranking policymaker, saw a framework for the restructuring of French education and the formation
of a national system.
In his report, Cousin identified and commented on several aspects of the legal and
institutional framework of the Prussian educational system in the ‘Law of 1819’,
which, according to him, could be profitably transferred to France. Among these,
three received special attention. One, to which he devoted considerable space, had
to do with the provisions and mechanisms, which Cousin called the ‘machinery’ and
‘government’ of public instruction, for the formation of a national system. Specifically,
he commented on: (a) the ‘national’ obligation of parents to send their children to the
primary schools; (b) the ‘duty of each parish to maintain a primary school at its own

--- [PDF Page 52 / Book Page 27] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

27

cost’; (c) a decentralised administrative structure, whereby, according to the ‘Law of
1819 … every primary school, in town or country, shall have its own particular management, its own special committee of superintendence’; and (d) maintenance ‘in a
just and reasonable measure’ of the ‘ancient’ and beneficial union of popular education
with Christianity and the church, but ‘always under the supreme control of the state,
and of the minister of public instruction and ecclesiastical affairs’ (Cousin, 1930:130–
155, 189–198).
Another aspect of Prussian education, embodied in the ‘Law of 1819’, that impressed
Cousin was the organisation of schooling at a national level. The law provided for ‘two
stages or gradations in primary instruction, i.e. elementary schools (Elementarschulen)’
for the ‘lower classes’ and ‘burgher schools (Burgerschulen, Stadtschulen)’ for the
middle-class tradesmen and artisans, followed by a third-stage gradation, the ‘gymnasia’, for those who wanted ‘to enter on a course of practical studies in ordinary life, or
scientific, superior and special, or professional, studies at the universities’ (pp. 155–
156). Cousin also referred to, and commented—rather positively—on, the detailed
provisions of the law that pertained to the content of the curricula of the elementary
and burgher schools. He noted that both types of schools were to provide a general curriculum consisting of religion and morals, the German language, history, geography,
mathematics, physics, gymnastics, drawing and singing. The burgher schools, in addition, were to teach Latin. The gymnasia, on the other hand, were to provide exclusively
‘a classical and liberal culture’ (pp. 155–164).
The third aspect of the Prussian system of education that received special attention
by Cousin was the training of primary ‘schoolmasters’ and their ‘mode of appointment,
promotion and punishment’. Here again, Cousin quoted in detail the provisions of the
1819 Suvern Law, emphasising what he did with the aforementioned other aspects
of the Prussian system, namely, the care and active role of the state in education (pp.
167–188).
Translated into English and published in England and the United States, Cousin’s
report on public instruction in Prussia impressed the English and American educational reformers, who in the second quarter of the nineteenth century were actively
involved in the development of a national state system of elementary schools (Brewer,
1971:54–57). In America, according to Knight, the educational historian: ‘The report
served to emphasize the importance of state control of education and the training of
teachers in normal schools supported by the state. Its influence is widely apparent,
especially in Michigan and Massachusetts.’ In England, Knight added, ‘[t]he Foreign
Quarterly Review viewed Cousin’s report as an incontestable proof, “by the solid and
substantial argument of complete practical success”, that a system of national education was not visionary, not merely a chimera, “not a phantom of the brain, imagined
by dreaming philosophers; but a mode of insuring the elementary instruction of all
children, which may be established and maintained not less than any army or navy”
(Knight, 1930:116–119).
The influence of Cousin’s report in England and the United States lay more in providing a legitimising` force for the educational reform efforts of the times, which
sought to establish a national state system of elementary/primary schooling. In his
native, France, on the other hand, Cousin’s report not only provided a legitimating

--- [PDF Page 53 / Book Page 28] ---

28

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

rationale for the reform of primary instruction, it actually influenced the enactment of
the famous Guizot Law of 1833, which in large part was written by Cousin himself;
it was based on his report, and it laid the foundation for the development of a French
national system of elementary education (Knight, 1930:116; Brewer, 1971:36; Halls,
1965:20). It should be noted here that Guizot and Cousin, both liberals, became highranking political figures and educational policy-makers under the new monarchy—the
July Monarchy of Louis Philippe (1830–1848). ‘To liberals’, according to the
European historian J. M. Roberts, ‘Louis Philippe was attractive because he reconciled
the Revolution with the stability provided by the monarchy’ (Roberts, 1996:352). To
Cousin, the post-Revolutionary liberal intellectual, who characterised himself as an
‘eclectic’ thinker, a Louis Philippe constitutional monarchy would combine the best
qualities of both monarchy and democracy. As an ‘eclectic’ liberal political ideologist and policy-maker during the July Monarchy, he was to found a philosophy of the
middle-of-the-road that meant to offend neither Catholic nor atheist, that would be
liberal, proclaiming the principles of the French Revolution, but would be opposed to
republicanism, a philosophy that was an apologia for the rule of the ‘upper bourgeoisie’ (Brewer, 1971:30). Cousin’s discourse on education—his policy talk and policy
practices— reflected his ideological ‘eclecticism’.

An ‘Eclectic’ Political Liberal and Educational Reformer
Cousin’s ‘eclectic’ liberal educational ideology is reflected both in his discursive
text on Prussian education and in the policy text of the Guizot Law, reputedly written largely by Cousin. As noted in the discussion above on Jullien, one of the basic
doctrines of the European Enlightenment and the ‘modernity project’ was the reform
of political and sociocultural institutions, notably the ‘state’, i.e. the machinery of
government, and public education as an ideological mechanism of the state. Cousin,
the ecletic liberal of the July Monarchy, advocated that for national regeneration and
nation-building, the French state should take a more active role in broadening the
popular base for education. As Brewer has written:
He [Cousin] argued that the right to educate was neither the natural right of the
individual, nor of a group of individuals sharing a special creed, nor was it a
private industry; “it is a public resource”. … Organized society—the State—by
providing a school has the right and the duty to insist that certain conditions
obtain: this is the State’s right of supervision (Brewer, 1971:16).
In his report, Cousin lauded the Prussian experience of state-building and the state’s
active involvement in the development of a national system of elementary education.
After quoting profusely from the Law of 1819, which specified the state’s ‘care’ and
involvement in the organisation and provision of public instruction, he eulogised: ‘This
law … omits no topic of interest, and is the most extensive and complete law on primary instruction of which I have any knowledge. It is impossible not to be struck with
its profound wisdom … the Prussian law of 1819 appears to me excellent’ (Cousin,

--- [PDF Page 54 / Book Page 29] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

29

1930:205–206). It was the 1819 Suvern legislative proposal that Cousin recommended
to the French Minister of the Interior that it form the basis for the reform of French
primary education (Brewer, 1971:44).
The Guizot Law of 1833, whose objective, as stated by Guizot himself, was ‘the
greatest good to be derived from educating the people’ (Brewer, 1971:17), was indeed
based on Cousin’s report and the Suvern proposal. It reflected the liberal ideology
of both Cousin and Guizot, two active liberal educational reformers during the July
Monarchy of Louis Philippe. The main provisions of the Guizot Law, which are relevant for us here, were the following: (a) every commune (and there were more than
30,000) was obliged to open an elementary school to which children from poor indigent families would be admitted free; (b) every department was required to establish
a normal school to train primary school teachers; (c) elementary education was to be
organised hierarchically into two levels, i.e. (i) lower primary level schools—similar to the Prussian Elementarschulen—to teach the 3 Rs, French and religion, and
(ii) upper/intermediate level schools, similar to the Prussian Burgerschulen, for the
middle classes, to train for commerce and industry; (d) religious and moral instruction
was to be included in both levels of schools; (e) the administrative structure of the
system was to be decentralised after the Prussian pattern; and (f) the (liberal) principle
of la liberté d’enseignement was to be recognised by sanctioning the opening of nonstate, i.e. private, institutions (Brewer, 1971:58; Halls, 1965:20; Bowen, 1981:315).
Cousin’s ‘eclectic’ liberalism was also reflected in his views about secondary education and his conception of the ideal school system. In this connection it should be noted
that Cousin also inquired into the secondary schools of Prussia and Holland and made
some comparisons with the French secondary collèges. Among other things, Cousin
called for the increase in the number of such schools and the removal of barriers to
the establishment of private secondary schools. He suggested that the principle of la
liberté d’enseignement be adopted for secondary education as it had been adopted in
1833 for primary education, and that private secondary schools, like private primary
schools ‘shall be subject to the supervision of the special authorities of public education in all matters that concern morals, discipline and studies’ (Brewer, 1971:89).
As to his ideal school system, Cousin, as quoted by Brewer (1971), envisaged a selective class system of post-elementary schools: primary elementary schools for everyone,
‘advanced elementary schools’ for the ‘middle class’, lower-level secondary schools
for ‘young people of the middle and upper classes’, and selective upper secondary
schools for the ‘upper ranks of society’ (p. 95).
Cousin was a humanist intellectual and a cultural educational reformer. He had a
classical humanistic formal education and, as noted above, he was a professor of philosophy who was attracted to German thought, particularly Hegelian idealism. In his
report on Prussian public instruction he lauded the provision in the Suvern Law that
‘primary instruction shall have for its aim to develop the faculties of the soul, the
reason, the senses, and the bodily strength’, and ‘it shall comprehend religion and morals’ (Cousin, 1930:159). And in the same report, which was addressed to the French
Minister of Public Instruction and Ecclesiastical Affairs, Cousin declared: ‘Thank
God, Sir, you are too enlightened a statesman to think that true popular instruction can

--- [PDF Page 55 / Book Page 30] ---

30

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

exist without moral education, popular morality without religion, or popular religion
without a church. Popular education, ought therefore to be religious, that is to say
Christian’ (p. 223). Elsewhere in the report, Cousin talked about the programme of
studies in the French secondary schools, the collèges. Again addressing the Minister,
he expressed his ‘zeal for classical and scientific studies’, and added: ‘[N]ot only do
I think that we must keep up to the plan of study prescribed in our collèges, and particularly the philological part of that plan, but I think we ought to raise and extend it.’
He further advised the Minister that the French ‘endeavour to rival Germany in the
solidity of our classical learning’, because ‘classical studies are, without any comparison, the most important of all’. And speaking as a humanist, he reasoned: ‘for their
[classical studies] tendency and their object is the knowledge of human nature, which
they consider under all its grandest aspects … classical studies keep alive the sacred
tradition of the moral and intellectual life of the human race’ (p. 213).
Cousin’s observations and reports about foreign education were not limited to primary
education in Prussia. He extended his observations to secondary education in Prussia
and Holland, and at the same time he made comparisons between the French and the
Prussian secondary schools. In one report, a ‘memoir on secondary instruction in the
kingdom of Prussia’ (1837), he referred to the curriculum of the Prussian Gymnasien
where there was an ‘alliance of scientific with literary studies’. And although, in the
report on Prussian primary education, as shown above, Cousin emphasised his zeal for
‘classical’ and ‘philological’ studies, in the 1837 Memoir on secondary education, he
advised that in the collège there could be a ‘redistribution and an extension of time’
so that ‘the ancient humanities and the modern languages, mathematics, and natural
sciences would be studied’ (Brewer, 1971:91–92). As a corpus of knowledge and a
mode of intellectual discipline or a means of training the mind (Cousin, like Jullien,
adhered to the psychological theory known as ‘faculty psychology’ and the associated
idea of ‘mental discipline’), Cousin’s conception of the content of the curriculum of
the secondary collèges—a general education that combined humanistic with scientific
studies—could be interpreted as foreshadowing the ideal of culture générale which
subsequently dominated French educational thought for a long time (Halls, 1965:2).

Victor Cousin and Comparative-International Education
In historical accounts of the modernist course of comparative education that appeared
in the 1960s, Cousin is cited as belonging to a period or ‘phase’ in the development
of the field, which has been conceptualised and interpreted in such terms as ‘borrowing’ (Bereday, 1964), ‘educational borrowing’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969) or ‘selective
cultural borrowing’ (Holmes, 1965; Jones, 1971). Similarly, Brewer in his detailed
study Victor Cousin as a Comparative Educator (1971) described Cousin’s report on
Prussian secondary education ‘as an example of judicious borrowing’ (p. 97). There
is indeed evidence to justify such a historical periodisation in the modernist course of
comparative education. And in the case of Cousin, in his report on Prussian education,
as quoted by Brewer (1971), he averred: ‘The true greatness of a people does not consist in imitating nothing from others, but in borrowing everywhere what is good and in
perfecting it while appropriating for oneself’ (p. vii).

--- [PDF Page 56 / Book Page 31] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

31

The American Discourse: Horace Mann, Calvin Stowe
and Henry Barnard
Interest in European education, particularly in German/Prussian, English and French
education, was conspicuously evident in nineteenth-century America. It was salient in
the first half of the century, and in the case of elementary schooling during the active
period of the common school reform in the second quarter of the century. During this
period, many American scholars and educational reformers travelled to Europe in search
of ideas and practical lessons that could be helpful to them in their efforts to reform
and improve education at home. In this study, we have chosen to write about three wellknown and influential educational reformers: Horace Mann, Calvin Stowe and Henry
Barnard. Mann was a liberal social and educational reformer, a religious humanitarian,
and he served as Secretary of the Board of Education of the state of Massachusetts;
Stowe was a professor of classical Greek and sacred literature, and an educational
thinker who showed great interest in the reform of education in Ohio; and Barnard was
a superintendent of schools in Connecticut, who served as United States Commissioner
of Education and for many years published the American Journal of Education.
Mann, Stowe and Barnard were actively involved, through word and deed, in the
common school movement, itself an integral part of the post-revolutionary republican ideal of education. ‘In the century of republican education [from the 1760s to
the 1860s]’, R. F. Butts, the historian, has written: ‘Americans eventually chose the
common school, control and supported in common, and embracing a supposedly nonsectarian religious outlook … their primary concern was to design a universal, free
comprehensive system of public schools that would promote modern republican [democratic] institutions’ (Butts, 1973:408).
As with the Frenchman Victor Cousin, the three Americans were motivated to study
European education primarily for ‘melioristic’ purposes: to see whether they could
learn something that would be useful to them in their reformist efforts to improve
American education, particularly primary/elementary schooling. Stowe, for example,
was commissioned by the state of Ohio to collect, while in Europe, ‘such facts and
information as he may deem useful to the State [Ohio] in relation to the various systems of public instruction and education’ (Knight, 1930:248). And, as R. B. Downs,
one of Mann’s biographers, quoting Mann has written: ‘ the celebrity of institutions
in foreign countries had attracted his attention, filling him with “an intensive desire of
knowing whether, in any respect, those institutions were superior to our own; and if
anything were found in them worthy of adoption, of transferring it for our improvement”. … Of first importance to Mann was to find “beacons” to terrify as well as lights
to guide’ (Downs, 1974:88). Also, as with Cousin, the Americans had high praise for the
German/Prussian common school education, particularly the active role of the state, and
the governance of schooling. All three were especially impressed by the Prussians’ success in their efforts to establish a system of what Barnard called ‘true national education’
(Barnard, 1872:365). All three also commented favourably on the Prussian teachers and
the internal pedagogical aspects of schooling. Mann, especially, was impressed by the
methods of teaching, the school discipline and generally by what he felt was a humane

--- [PDF Page 57 / Book Page 32] ---

32

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

classroom atmosphere in the Prussian schools (Downs, 1974; Holmes, 1965). Stowe
praised the non-Republican government of the ‘unostentatious’ monarch Frederick
William in that it ‘repeatedly and strenuously insisted in all the laws pertaining to
education, to awaken a national spirit—to create in the youthful mind a warm attachment to his native land, and its institutions’ (Knight, 1930:255). And, like Jullien and
Cousin, all three Americans made special reference to the emphasis the Prussian
schools placed on moral and religious instruction.

The American Liberal Republicanism/Reformism and the
Comparative-International Education Melioristic Discourse
From a political ideological standpoint, Horace Mann, Calvin Stowe and Henry
Barnard could be characterised as liberal democratic-republican thinkers and social
activists who espoused the principles of nineteenth-century ‘liberal republicanism’ also
referred to as ‘classical liberalism’ with its emphasis on freedom, liberal democracy
and popular education. Referring specifically to Horace Mann’s republican ideology and its relationship to public education, Lawrence A. Cremin, the distinguished
American historian, has written:
Mann understood well the integral relationship between freedom, popular education, and republican government. … A nation cannot long remain ignorant and
free. No political structure, however artfully devised, can inherently guarantee
the rights and liberties of citizens, for freedom can be secure only as knowledge
is widely distributed among the populace. Hence, universal popular education is
the only foundation on which republican government can securely rest (Cremin,
1957:7).
Unlike Jullien’s, the American discourse was only tangentially about comparative education, and like Cousin’s, it was more about foreign education, or to use Fraser’s and
Brickman’s terminology, it was Auslandspadagogik (Fraser & Brickman, 1968:19).
Like the francophone discourse (Cousin’s and what Jullien wrote about foreign education in the Plan and elsewhere), the American discourse was descriptive, reportorial,
‘ahistorical’ and for the most part non-comparative, non-systematic and non-analytic,
except with some qualifications in the case of Henry Barnard’s studies.
The comparative educational historian cannot but be impressed by Barnard’s comprehensive account of the history, organisation, administration, studies, curricula,
teachers and pedagogy, discipline and statistics of public schools of every grade and
for all classes, as well as other institutions of general education, in different countries (Barnard, 1872). In his commentary on Barnard’s approach and studies, Holmes
has observed that ‘unquestionably’ Barnard’s ‘approach to comparative education was
largely historical and descriptive’, and his aim to produce an ‘encyclopaedia of education … was virtually achieved’ (Holmes, 1965:14). Noah and Eckstein have also
commented on Barnard’s encyclopedism, but they were more critical of his approach
than Holmes. According to them, Barnard ‘saw merit in the indiscriminate and even
unsystematic recording and republication of all that was available’ (Noah & Eckstein,

--- [PDF Page 58 / Book Page 33] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

33

1969:25–26). It is appropriate to characterise Barnard’s approach as being descriptive, but in our interpretation, it is inappropriate to characterise it as ‘unsystematic’
or ‘indiscriminate reporting’. It would also be appropriate to characterise Barnard as
a good ‘chronicler’ or a good ‘educational narrator’ or ‘educational ethnographer’,
rather than a good ‘educational historian’; his historical accounts of education in the
several European countries lacked the elements of historical interpretation and contextual explanation, two basic desiderata of any historical episteme/science. Nor can
Barnard, and we might add Mann and Stowe, strictly speaking, be described as ‘comparativists’, as Holmes as well as Noah and Eckstein have argued (Holmes, 1965;
Noah & Eckstein, 1969). Barnard, in several of his studies of education in European
countries, always wrote about the ‘history’ or the ‘historical development’ of education
and instruction in the particular countries, or about the ‘educational history’ of each
state, e.g. Prussia (Barnard, 1872:335). But his historical accounts lacked the element
of interpretation and contextual explanation, which are basic desiderata of any historical episteme (‘science’). Barnard’s historical accounts can at best be characterised as
historical narratives or ‘chronicles’. One, however, should not underestimate the value
of good descriptive chronicles or narratives in studying foreign education even today,
and in our judgement Barnard’s ‘educational histories’ deserve high praise, especially
when one considers the times when they were written.

Coda—on Meliorism
Finally, there were two other elements in the nineteenth-century American ‘comparative-international discourse’, as examined above, which differentiated it from
the European, as was exemplified by the aforementioned francophone Victor Cousin
and even Marc-Antoine Julllien. The first, simply stated, was that the Americans were
more disposed to look critically at the European educational experience than the
Frenchmen. The second, which is worthy of some additional comment, pertained to
their ‘meliorism’, an overriding consideration/purpose of all the nineteenth-century
precursors of ‘comparative-international education’, and one we may add which, ab
initio, has been, to a degree more or less, germane to what may be called the ‘comparative epistemic problematique’.
Meliorism, from the Latin melior (better), can be understood as inquiry with the
objective of improvement. As indicated in this chapter, the ‘objective of improvement’
was germane to all the nineteenth-century inquiries into foreign, in this case European,
systems of education. We noted that Jullien talked about collecting ‘facts and observations’ that would help in the reform of education for the betterment of European
societies and, internationally, of the human condition; Cousin, Mann, Stowe and
Barnard talked about the improvement of national education in their own countries. We
have also noted that well-known comparativists like George Bereday, Harold Noah and
Max Eckstein in the United States, and Brian Holmes in England have characterised
all of the nineteenth-century French and American observers and students of European
education, mentioned here, as belonging to the ‘borrowing’ or ‘selective cultural borrowing’ phase in the development of comparative education. According to these later
comparativists, the nineteenth-century precursors were motivated ‘by a desire to gain

--- [PDF Page 59 / Book Page 34] ---

34

Kaloyannaki and Kazamias

useful lessons from abroad’ and to ‘borrow’, transfer or ‘transplant’ useful ideas and
practices for the purposes of educational improvement (Noah & Eckstein, 1969;
Bereday, 1964). The ‘borrowing’ aspect/dimension of meliorism is clearly evident in
Jullien and Cousin. But it is not as clear in the case of the American nineteenth-century
meliorist reformers. It is, of course, the case that, like the Europeans, the American
policy-makers and administrators were motivated ‘by a desire to gain useful lessons
from abroad’, but not for the purpose of ‘educational borrowing’ or ‘transplantation’ as
understood by Jullien and Cousin. It would be more accurate to say that the American
meliorists sought ‘lessons’ from abroad to use as legitimating rationales for the reform
of national public education in the United States.

References
Anderson, C. A. (1961). Methodology of Comparative Education. International Review of Education,
VII(1), 1–23.
Arnove, R. (1982). Comparative education and world-systems. In P. G. Altbach, R. F. Arnove & G. P. Kelly
(Eds.), Comparative education (pp. 453–468). New York: Macmillan.
Barnard, H. (1872). National education: Systems, institutions and statistics of public instruction in different
countries. Part I—Europe— German States. New York: E. Steiger.
Bereday, G. Z. F. (1964). Comparative method in education. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Bowen, J. (1981). A history of western education (vol. three). The modern west: Europe and the new world.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Brewer, W. V. (1971). Victor Cousin as a comparative educator. Teachers College, Columbia University:
Teachers College Press.
Butts, R. F. (1973). The education of the West: A formative chapter in the history of civilization. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Cousin, V. (1930). Report on the state of public instruction in Prussia. In E. W. Knight (Ed.), Reports
on European education by John Griscom, Victor Cousin, Calvin E. Stowe (pp. 113–247). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Cremin, L. A. (Ed.). (1957). The republic and the school: Horace Mann on the education of free men. New
York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University.
Davies, N. (1996). Europe: A history. Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Debeauvais, M. (2000). De Marc-Antoine Jullien aux indicateurs comparatives de l’an 2000. In Congrès
CESE, Bologne.
Downs, R. B. (1974). Horace Mann: Champion of public schools. New York: Twayne.
Foster, P. (1960). Comparative methodology and the study of African education. Comparative Education
Review, 4, 110–117.
Fraser, St. (1964). Jullien’s Plan for Comparative Education 1816–1817. Teachers College, Columbia
University, Bureau of Publications.
Fraser, St. & Brickman, W.W. (Eds.). (1968). A history of international and comparative education:
Nineteenth-century documents. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman & Co.
Gautherin, J. (1993). Marc-Antoine Jullien (‘Jullien de Paris’ 1775–1848). Prospects: The Quarterly Review
of Comparative Education, XXIII(3/4), 757–773.
Habermas, J. (2007) Modernity: An unfinished project. Retrieved October 10, 2007, from http://www.eng.
fiu.edu.tw/Literary-Criticism/postrnodernisrn/haberm.
Halls, W. D. (1965). Society, schools & progress in France. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Hans, N. (1949). Comparative education: A study of educational factors and traditions. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education: A comparative approach. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Jones, P. E. (1971). Comparative education: Purpose and method. St. Lucia, Queensland: University of
Queensland Press.

--- [PDF Page 60 / Book Page 35] ---

The Modernist Beginnings of Comparative Education

35

Kaloyiannaki, P. (2002). Comparative education: A French approach. Athens: Atrapos. (in Greek).
Kant, I. (1784). What is Enlightenment? http:1/philosophy.eserver.org/kant/what-is-enlightenment.txt
Kazamias, A. M. (2001). Re-inventing the historical in comparative education: Reflections on a protean
episteme by a contemporary player. Comparative Education, 37(3/1), 439–449.
Knight, E. W. (Ed.). (1930). Reports on European education by John Griscom, Victor Cousin, Calvin E.
Stowe. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Leclercque, J. -M. (1999). L’Education comparée: mondialisation et spécificités francophones, Actes du
Congres International sur l’histoire et l’avenir de l’éducation comparée en langue francaise, organisé par
l’Association Francophone d’Education Comparée, Centre National de Documentation Pédagogique,
Associations Francophone d ‘Education Comparée, Paris.
Noah, H. J. & Eckstein, M. A. (1969). Toward a science of comparative education. London: Macmillan.
Palmer, R. R. (1993). From Jacobin to Liberal, Marc-Antoine Jullien, 1775–1848. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Roberts, J. M. (1996). A history of Europe. New York/London: Allen Lane/Penguin Press.
Vestal, T. M. (1994). International education. Its history and promise today. Westport, CT: Praeger.

