================================================================================
Chapter 04: Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes: The Historical-philosophical- cultural and Liberal Humanist Motif in Comparative Education
Author(s): Andreas M. Kazamias
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 1: The Creation and Re-creation of a Field
Book Pages: pp. 37–58
PDF Pages: pp. 61–82 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 61 / Book Page 37] ---

4
FORGOTTEN MEN, FORGOTTEN THEMES: THE
HISTORICAL-PHILOSOPHICAL-CULTURAL
AND LIBERAL HUMANIST MOTIF
IN COMPARATIVE EDUCATION
Andreas M. Kazamias

The Historical-Philosophical-Cultural and Liberal
Humanist Comparative Discourses
Historical accounts of the development of Comparative Education (CE) as a field of study
trace its beginnings to several discourses—policy talk and policy practice—in Europe
and America in the nineteenth century. At the beginning of the century (in 1817), the
Enlightenment Jacobin-turned into liberal thinker Marc-Antoine Jullien de Paris (Palmer,
1993: 151) published his Esquisse et vues preliminaries d’un ouvrage sur l’education
compare (Plan/Sketch and preliminary views for a work on comparative education), often
taken to mark the beginning of CE as a modernist episteme. In this short book, Jullien
sought to construct an empirically based ‘positive science’ of CE, one that would provide ‘non-arbitrary’ and ‘non-capricious’ knowledge for ‘the reform and improvement of
education’ (Fraser, 1964: 40–41). In the ensuing years—by the middle decades of the century—another type of comparative discourse became dominant that was quite different
from that of Jullien, in a number of reports on education in continental Europe, written for
the most part by educational administrators, educational policy-makers or policy-advisers,
social thinkers and social reformers, e.g. Horace Mann, Calvin Stowe, John Griscom and
Henry Barnard from the United States, Joseph Kay and Matthew Arnold from England,
and Victor Cousin from France. In observing and studying continental European systems of education, e.g. the German/Prussian, the French, the Italian and the Swiss, the
overriding consideration of these ‘comparative educationists’ was ‘lesson learning’ and
‘borrowing’: to see what useful lessons could be drawn from such observations in order
to press for educational reforms at home (Jones, 1971: 45). In general, as we have noted
elsewhere, these early comparative education discourses were: (a) mostly ‘reportorialdescriptive’; (b) they were governed by a lesson-learning utilitarian-instrumental purpose
in order to reform education at home; and (c) they were melioristic in that the authors were
mainly concerned with the improvement of education based on certain a priori values as to
what a good educational system is (Kazamias & Massialas, 1965: 2).
In the second half of the nineteenth century comparative education discourses began
to take a different epistemic form/trajectory. Beginning in mid-Victorian England with
37
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 37–58.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 62 / Book Page 38] ---

38

Kazamias

Matthew Arnold—the poet, the literary critic and the apostle of Eurocentric humanistic
culture—and in the United States with William T. Harris—the Hegelian philosophereducator and US Commissioner of Education—and culminating in England with
Michael Sadler—Eurocentric classical humanist, historian-comparative scholar and
liberal educational reformer, one observes the adumbration of what may be called the
‘historical-philosophical-cultural and liberal humanist’ motif in CE that came to dominate the field until the middle decade of the twentieth century. In the Anglo-Saxon
world, the ideas of Matthew Arnold and more so those of Michael Sadler exemplify
best the nineteenth century nascent ‘historical-philosophical-cultural’ CE discourse.
Matthew Arnold and, as we discuss in the sections that follow, Michael Sadler, both
nurtured in the nineteenth century hegemonic classical humanistic paideia, were critics of the Victorian polity, society and culture. Arnold, in particular, was a caustic critic
of the Victorian ruling aristocracy, the uncultured ‘barbarians’, and the undemocratic
political ideology of laissez-faire liberalism—with its emphasis on individualism, voluntarism and non-state interference—which he called the creed of the Philistines, the
people who did not possess ‘sweetness and light’ or ‘culture’. Liberalism, according to
him, connoted ‘democratic equality’ or ‘social liberty’, rather than the cult of individualism or the rule of one class. Culture, his favourite word, and the object of education,
could not be achieved without the intervention of the State, which he interpreted as
‘the representative acting power of the nation; the action of the State is the representative action of the nation’ (Nash, 1966: 78; Kazamias, 1966: 103). In continental
Europe, particularly in France, Arnold saw liberal democracy as ‘the growing power’
which he attributed to ‘the action of the French State’ (Nash, 1966: 61).
State action and control, according to Arnold, were responsible for the great development of popular/primary and secondary education in continental Europe, particularly
in France and Germany. And he had high praise for the French Lycea, the secondary
schools that were founded and maintained by the State since the days of Napoleon. In
his famous essay ‘A French Eton’, Arnold commented favourably on the Lyceum of
Toulouse paying particular attention to the ‘programme of studies’ which, in addition
to the heavily classical content (Latin and Greek), included ‘some instruction in natural science’ and modern subjects (e.g. history, geography and modern languages), and
the study of French ‘the mother tongue’ (Nash, 1966: 113–115).
As with the comparative discourses that preceded him, Matthew Arnold, as Her
Majesty’s Inspector of Schools, examined continental educational systems to see whether
he could learn something that would help solve educational problems at home. But, unlike
the mainly descriptive discourses of the nineteenth century educational administrators
and policy-makers, Matthew Arnold’s educational observations were contextualised in
the sense that they were interpreted by being placed within the national political and
cultural contexts of the European states. Viewed from this perspective, Arnold’s comparative approach could be described as quasi-historical, liberal-humanistic and cultural, a
harbinger of the twentieth century ‘historical-philosophical and liberal humanist motif of
CE that was associated with Michael Sadler, Isaac Kandel, Nicholas Hans, Robert Ulich,
and Friedrich Schneider, to name its best-known exponents, and with V. Mallinson, P.
Sandiford, A. H. Moehlman, J. F. Cramer and G. S. Browne (Mallinson & Sandiford,
1918; Moehlman, 1963; Cramer & Browne, 1956/1965).

--- [PDF Page 63 / Book Page 39] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

39

The Historical-Philosophical-Cultural and Liberal Humanist
Motif in Comparative Education: Michael Sadler,
Isaac L. Kandel, Nicholas Hans and Robert Ulich
There were commonalities as well as variations in the historical—philosophical and
liberal humanist approaches to the comparative study of education as represented
by Sadler, Kandel, Hans and Ulich. As analysed below, both the commonalities and
the variations can be attributed to these comparativists’ disciplinary/epistemic and
socio-cultural background, the times and places in which they lived, their professional
activities and the types of questions they asked. In the sections that follow I shall first
identify the elements that are common to all these comparative scholars. Subsequently,
the variations will be brought out as I analyse in greater detail the thought of each of
these doyens of comparative education.

Epistemological, Ideological and Methodological Commonalities
(a) Comparative education is not an empirical or a positivistic ‘social science’. It is
a ‘human science’ in the broad meaning of the term ‘science’ as signified by the
German word Wissenschaft and the Greek equivalent Episteme. As interpreted
by Hans, Kandel, Ulich and I may add, Schneider, the term comparative education (CE) was nearer to the German Vergleichende Erziehungswissenschaft
than the French Education Comparée or the American comparative education.
It was analogous to such studies as Comparative Religion, Comparative Law
and Comparative Anatomy in that ‘comparisons were not limited to contemporary actual situations but were extended to the study of the origin and evolution
of present systems of law, religion or language’. Also, according to Hans, the
German usage included the philosophy of education as well (Hans, 1959: 443).
And again: ‘Comparative Education as an academic discipline is just on the
border line between humanities and sciences and thus resembles philosophy,
which is the formulation of both’ (Hans, 1959: 299).
(b) Comparative Education is an explanatory/interpretive episteme, that aims
at ‘understanding’ and ‘interpretation’ of how national systems of education developed to be what they are, not a predictive or a policy-oriented or
practical/applied social science. Kandel, Hans, and Ulich wrote about or narrated past events, but more significantly, they searched for forces and factors
(political, social, economic and cultural) which, in their judgement influenced,
produced, ‘caused’, or ‘determined’ problems, similarities and differences in
national systems of education, or aspects of it (structures, policies, practices,
etc.). Generally they sought to show that national systems of education were the
outcome of particular and ‘unique’ constellations of social, political, economic
and cultural forces, factors and traditions. As such, they were concerned less
with generalisations and ‘theories’ and more with interpretation/explanation of
temporally and spatially located particular educational phenomena. As Kandel
averred in his Comparative Education (1933): ‘The chief value of a comparative approach to such problems [of education] lies in an analysis of the causes

--- [PDF Page 64 / Book Page 40] ---

40

Kazamias

which have produced them, in a comparison of the differences between the
various systems and the reasons underlying them, and finally, in a study of the
solutions attempted’ (Kandel, 1933: xix).
(c) The above should not be interpreted as implying that these comparative scholars
envisaged CE to be a pure intellectual knowledge producing episteme, without
any ‘instrumental’, ‘utilitarian’ or ‘melioristic’ benefits. Although they were primarily historian-intellectuals ‘intent on explanation rather than activists in the
field of educational policy-making’, they were also ‘historical-meliorists’: they
believed that by studying the educational system of other countries, a broad
philosophical outlook/attitude and the necessary insights could be developed
that would help understand better and improve education in one’s own country
(Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 57; Kazamias & Massialas, 1965: 3).
(d) The epistemic units of comparative study and analysis are nation states and
national systems of education: English, German, French, American, Russian. In
their interpretation and explanation of national systems of education the main
aim is explaining and ‘understanding’ how national systems of education developed the way they did, and why they exhibit the characteristics and peculiarities
that they do. In their historical explanations and interpretations of variations
in national educational patterns and practices, these historically oriented comparativists considered ‘nationalism’, national traditions, national political
ideologies and ‘national character’ to be ‘determining’ factors. As Kandel noted
in his 1933 study: ‘Comparative education would, accordingly, be meaningless,
unless it sought to discover the meaning of nationalism as it furnishes the basis
of educational systems’, and ‘each national system of education is characteristic of the nation which created it and expresses something peculiar to the group
which constitutes that nation; to put it another way, each nation has the educational system that it desires or that it deserves’ (Kandel, 1933: xxiv). Earlier
(1900), Michael Sadler had stated: ‘A national system of education is a living
thing, the outcome of forgotten struggles and difficulties and of battles long
ago. It has in it some of the secret workings of national life. It reflects, while
seeking to remedy, the failings of national character. By instinct it often lays
special emphasis on those parts of training which the national character particularly needs’ (Sadler, 1900). Later (1949), in the same vein, Nicholas Hans
declared: ‘National systems of education as well as national constitutions or
national literatures are the outward expression of national character and as such
represent the nation in distinction from other nations’ (Hans, 1949: 9). And,
according to Mallinson (1957), education ‘is a function of national character’,
which he defined as ‘the totality of dispositions to thought, feeling and behavior
peculiar to and widespread in a certain people, and manifested with greater or
less continuity in a succession of generations’ (Mallinson, 1957: 14).
(e) As an explanatory/interpretive episteme and not an empirical social science,
its data base and modes of investigation are more qualitative than quantitative.
Sadler, Kandel and Hans explicitly eschewed quantitative statistical analyses of
educational systems or problems on practical but, more importantly, on epistemological/intellectual grounds. In the opening years of the twentieth century,

--- [PDF Page 65 / Book Page 41] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

41

Michael Sadler argued against ‘purely statistical inquiries’ in education, because
the interpretation of educational data must be made ‘in the light of the value
system of each country’ (Holmes, 1965: 16). In his seminal text Comparative
Education (1933), Kandel wrote:
There are at present time two outstanding trends which can be distinguished
in the study of education. The first is the attempt to make education scientific
and objective by the application of statistical methods—all education must have
an affirmative value which can be proved and verified statistically.… Assuming
that the methods of statistical tests and measurements have become sufficiently
established to be reliable, all that can be claimed for them is that they can measure results, but they cannot define aims and purposes of education; they may
formulate norms, and that only in a limited range of activities, but they cannot
set up qualitative standards (Kandel, 1933: xxiii).
Writing in the 1950s, Hans noted that in the United States during that period, researchers
employed statistical methods in their comparative investigations of certain aspects of the
educational system of the 48 states (e.g. financing, salaries of teachers, compulsory attendance, percentage of college students in an age group, and teacher/pupil ratios). Americans
also widely used the method of quantitative comparison ‘based on psychological tests
and IQ’ to compare ‘various “racial” groups of immigrants by their IQ with the inevitable
conclusion that Nordic groups are more desirable than the Slavs or Italians’. As to the
first type of investigation, Hans noted that ‘within the limits of one country, where the
terminology is identical and social conditions do not greatly vary statistical methods may
be employed with profit and may lead to some valid conclusions’. But when this method
is used for international comparisons ‘we meet with so many difficulties that it is doubtful whether we can arrive at any valid results’. Commenting on the value for Comparative
Education of both methods—the statistical and the psychological—Hans concluded that
they both ‘need a careful revision and standardization before providing a sure guide for
Comparative Education’. Until this was done ‘comparisons should be mainly concerned
with quality of education’ by which he meant ‘not so much efficiency or curriculum as the
whole atmosphere and structure of the school system’ (Hans, 1959: 447).
(f) Sadler, Kandel, Hans, Ulich, Mallinson, and we might here add Matthew
Arnold, their intellectual predecessor, were all nurtured in the European classical humanistic educational tradition and liberal humanist values. Ideologically,
they were all internationalists and ‘liberal democratic humanists’, not laissezfaire liberals. Not only could Comparative Education be a positive force for the
improvement of education and the fostering of ‘internationalism’; it could also
be a positive force for the development of ‘liberal democracy’ and ‘democratic
citizenship’. Their work was infused with ‘Eurocentric’ and Western liberal
democratic ideas and liberal-humanist values about the polity and the statesystem of education, about the nation state and civil society, about the role of
the individual and the State and about ‘liberty, equality and fraternity’. And in
the spirit of the ‘Enlightenment project’, all of them had an abiding faith in the

--- [PDF Page 66 / Book Page 42] ---

42

Kazamias

idea of progress through enlightenment and education. Speaking about Sadler
and the other university men involved in the University Extension work that had
to do with the ‘labouring classes’, the historian Brian Simon wrote: ‘All shared
a liberal-humanist outlook: education was good for its own sake, the workers
deserved all that the university could offer in the form of extra-mural teaching;
education would spiritualise their lives. This implied a desire to provide a broad,
humane, comprehensive, above all, an impartial education, one rising above,
and so enabling students to rise above the ephemeral and material struggles of
the time’ (Simon, 1965: 305).
(g) Generally, these historically oriented comparativists were predominantly ‘idealists’; they paid more emphasis on the power of ideas, ideals and forms in their
historical explanations of educational systems and problems. Clearly they were
not Marxists, in any ideological and intellectual meaning of the term. Although
they included economic considerations among their historical explanatory
‘forces and factors’, the relative emphasis they assigned to them was less than
the emphasis they place on cultural, intellectual, valuational, religious, ‘spiritual’ and ideological considerations. ‘What do we compare?’ Kandel asked in
1956, to which he responded: ‘The answer should be the comparison of ideas,
ideals and forms’ (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977: 154–155).

Epistemological, Ideological and Methodological Variations
Michael Sadler: Historical-Cultural Comparativist, Liberal-Humanist Reformer
Michael Sadler was a pioneer of what we have called the ‘historical-philosophical-cultural
and liberal humanist motif’ in CE. Intellectually, ideologically and methodologically
he personified all of the aforementioned characteristics of this motif. But in Sadler
the intellectual historian can also detect some interesting particularities/variants, both
of which—commonalities and particularities—as shown below, can be illuminated by
looking at his educational background, his professional career and the historical context
of late Victorian England.
Sadler was nurtured in the classical humanistic literary tradition of Rugby Public
School and Trinity College, Oxford. As I had noted in an earlier study, this type of education left a lasting imprint on his educational ideology as an educational reformer: ‘In
his reports written after 1902 on behalf of various local education authorities, it is clear
that Sadler considered a humanistic literary type of education as the distinctive characteristic of liberal education and mutatis mutandis of secondary schools’. According to
Sadler, I further added: ‘the dominant aim of secondary education should be first and
foremost to humanise through the real and vivid teaching of the humanities, and then
to impart efficiency for life as it has to be lived’ (Kazamias, 1966: 140–141).
Sadler’s intellectual and reformist activities can be illuminated further by looking
at the state of England—English polity, society and culture—vis-à-vis continental
Europe and the United States, and the prevalent intellectual and ideological currents at
the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century. During

--- [PDF Page 67 / Book Page 43] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

43

the heyday of laissez-faire liberalism in the nineteenth century, England was ‘the forge
of the world, the world’s carrier and the world’s entrepot’ (Knowles, 1921: 139). In
the eyes of their European rivals, the English had discovered the secrets of economic
prosperity, political stability and the ‘philosophy of happiness’. But by the end of
the century, all this had undergone significant transformations. Germany in Europe
and the United States of America had challenged England’s industrial and commercial supremacy. Similarly, by that time England’s ‘utilitarian philosophy of happiness’,
associated with Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, and laissez-faire liberalism
had ceased to occupy the intellectual position it did earlier, or to furnish the legitimating rationale for political, social and educational reforms. Instead, the eyes of British
thinkers, statesmen, social and educational reformers had turned to Europe, and especially to Germany, which at that time was dominated by the ‘idealist’ philosophy of
Kant and Hegel. At Oxford, T.H. Green, reputed/considered to be the most influential teacher at Oxford since John (Cardinal) Newman, had inaugurated an ‘idealist’
philosophical tradition that went by the names of ‘Neo-Kantism’, ‘Neo-Hegelianism’,
‘Idealism’ or ‘Neo-Idealism’, and which, in addition to Green, included such other
influential thinkers as F. H. Bradley, B. Bosanquet and J. M. E. Mc Taggart. Drawing
their inspiration from Plato and Aristotle, as well as from Kant and Hegel, these British
‘idealist philosophers’, unlike the utilitarians and the ‘laissez-faire liberals’, conceived
of freedom, not in abstract negative terms, but in more positive terms, and of the State
as a positive actor in society (Kazamias, 1966: 108–109).
The significance of the above for us here is that Sadler, the historian-intellectual
and educational reformer, was influenced by the German-inspired Oxford idealist philosophy, and he attributed the phenomenal commercial and industrial expansion of
Germany to the efficient organization and administration of the German system of
education, the nature/content of instruction, and generally to the ‘spirit’ that gave it ‘a
life’, the ‘intangible, impalpable, spiritual force’ which upheld it and accounted for its
success and ‘practical efficiency’. Apropos of the above, as an educational reformer
Sadler deviated ideologically from the laissez-faire individualistic social philosophy that characterised Victorian England and was nearer to the New Liberalism that
developed in the late Victorian period. Although ‘freedom’ had remained the essential
ingredient of the Liberal creed, the New Liberals, like the aforementioned English
idealist philosophers interpreted ‘freedom’ not entirely in negative terms as ‘freedom
from constraint’, but in more positive terms. In matters of social and educational policy the positive conception of freedom meant ‘state interference’ in social, political,
economic and educational reform. Although he would not sacrifice the freedom and
individualism of the English educational system to the ‘large measure of State control’
that obtained in Germany, Sadler sought to explore, in his own words, ‘that debatable
territory between Individualism and Socialism’ (Sadler, 1898: 95).
Like the other historical-cultural and liberal humanist comparative scholars, e.g.
Kandel, Hans and Ulich, Sadler was a ‘historian-intellectual’ and a meliorist. But
unlike them he was also an educational statesman, and an active educational reformer.
His reports/studies on foreign systems of education (European and American) prepared
on behalf of the newly created Office of Special Inquiries and Reports, an ‘educational
intelligence office’, as Sadler its director called it, were ‘historical’ and ‘comparative,

--- [PDF Page 68 / Book Page 44] ---

44

Kazamias

as he understood the intellectual and methodological contours of the two epistemes to
be in the waning years of the nineteenth century and the opening years of the twentieth
century. In his studies of Prussian and German secondary education, for example,
he explicitly stated: ‘The present results have been obtained by the labour of several
generations. Their full significance can only be understood in the light of their history’
(Sadler, 1898: 246; also see Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 45). And in his comparative essay
‘The Unrest in Secondary Education in Germany and Elsewhere’ (1902) he wrote:
Educational thought all over the world is taking much more account of social
environment in its analysis of the functions of schools in national life. Hence
there is much more sympathy with the customary English view of education. But
‘social environment’ includes not merely material conditions of domicile, food,
clothing, etc., but spiritual, moral, and intellectual surroundings, and the power
of tradition. (Sadler, 1902: x–xi)
And like the other ‘historian-intellectual’ comparativists, in his own historical-contextual studies Sadler also included such explanatory cultural forces as ‘national
temperament’, ‘national sentiments’, ‘national traditions’, ‘national aims and ideals’,
and ‘national character/characteristics’. Thus, in these studies of foreign systems of
education, Sadler was consistent, intellectually and methodologically, with his dicta in
the famous Guilford lecture of 1900 that ‘in studying foreign systems of education we
should not forget that the things outside the schools matter even more than the things
inside the schools, and govern and interpret the things inside’ (Sadler, 1900/1964:
310). But in addition to these non-school contextual-explanatory social-cultural factors, Sadler also talked about the ‘inner life’ of a national system of education and
about ‘intangible, impalpable spiritual forces’, which differentiated his approach from
some of the other ‘historian-intellectual’ comparativists that followed in the twentieth
century. In his own, often-quoted words:
[E]ducation is not a matter of schools or book learning alone. Therefore, if
we propose to study foreign systems of education…we must also… try to find
out what is the intangible, impalpable, spiritual force which, in the case of any
successful system of Education, is in reality upholding the school system and
accounting for its practical efficiency… A national system of education is a living thing, the outcome of forgotten struggles and difficulties, and ‘of battles long
ago.’ It has in it some of the secret workings of national life (Sadler, 1900/1964:
309–310).
Another Sadlerian particularity was that Sir Michael was what may be called an
‘English new liberal humanistic educational reformer’. As early as 1884 he engaged
in a successful campaign for the development of adult education through University
Extension; he served as an active member on the famous Royal Commission on
Secondary Education (the Bryce Commission) of 1894–1895 and was reputed to have
been ‘the chief author of the report’; he was instrumental in setting up the Office of
Special Inquiries and Reports of which he served as Director from 1895–1903; in

--- [PDF Page 69 / Book Page 45] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

45

some of the reports on foreign systems of education and those written on behalf of
various English local education authorities, he included recommendations for reform;
from 1911–1923 he served as Vice-Chancellor of the University of Leeds; and in 1907
he published his plan for ‘A Bureau of Education for the British Empire’ (Kazamias,
1966: 28–29; Jones, 1971: 49–50). It is patently clear, therefore, that as J. H. Higginson,
one of his biographers has pointed out, Sadler viewed comparative education, not only
as a scholarly intellectual activity, but also as ‘an agency of reform’. Although in his
Guildford lecture he stressed that ‘the practical value of studying…the working of foreign systems of education is that it will result in our being better fitted to study and to
understand our own’, and that such study will in turn enable us ‘to enter into the spirit
and tradition of our own national education’, as the Director of the Office of Special
Inquiries and Reports 3 years later he wrote:
The chief work of an educational intelligence office…is to collect, summarise,
and publish various kinds of educational experience, with a view to (1) getting
what is sound and true from a number of discrepant opinions; (2) informing
the nation how it stands in regard to educational efficiency as compared with
other nations; and (3) promoting, as far as possible, general consent and agreement as to the wisest and most fruitful line of development in national education
(Higginson, 1961: 289).
These intellectual, ideological and methodological elements Sadler bequeathed, to a
degree more or less, to the historical-cultural and liberal humanistic twentieth century
comparative education scholars, and notably to his student Isaac Kandel, who dominated the field until the middle decades of the twentieth century.

Isaac L. Kandel: Historian, Philosopher, Humanist
Comparative Educator
In 1933, Isaac Kandel, a European Jewish intellectual and a product of the Eurocentric
liberal humanistic culture, who emigrated to the United States at the turn of the twentieth century, and as a university professor in the United States attained international
reputation as an educational historian-philosopher-comparativist, published an educational book entitled Studies in Comparative Education/Comparative Education.
It was a seminal text in a new educational episteme, in which Kandel sought to define
the epistemological, methodological and ideological contours of comparative education, to identify its subject matter, and to discuss its value in the modern world.
Comparative Education was destined to become a landmark and in the ensuing years
Kandel became a dominating figure in this fledgling/new educational discipline. In the
mid-1950s, Kandel published a sequel to this pioneer study, entitled The New Era in
Education (1955), in which he re-iterated his approach to comparative education as
well as its subject-matter and value.
In the 1960s, the fast-growing field of CE developed in different epistemological
and methodological directions, and Kandel’s approach was criticised by, among others,

--- [PDF Page 70 / Book Page 46] ---

46

Kazamias

the present writer (Kazamias, 1959, 1961, 1965), and by some it was considered to
be passé, bordering on ‘mysticism’ or, at best, ‘non-scientific’ (Holmes, 1965; Noah
& Eckstein, 1969; Epstein, 1970: 313, 314). Nevertheless, Kandel continued to be
widely cited and read, and revered as the grand pioneer of this modernist educational
episteme (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977). In ‘memorials’ to Kandel, when he died in
1965, George Bereday, at the time editor of the Comparative Education Review and
a leading figure in the revival and reconstruction of the field, eulogised: ‘The passing
of Professor Isaac L. Kandel has cast a sombre shadow over the field of comparative
education…Professor Kandel belongs to the generation of universitarian humanists
who will not be easily reproduced in our age of more technological, more rushed, more
narrowly specific applications. Nothing can match the towering stature of that passing
generation and the inspiration they evoked’ (Bereday, 1965: 249).
And quite perceptively, Bereday had this to say about Kandel’s epistemological
identity:
He [Kandel] was a humanist…he was neither a scientist nor a semantic pedant. He believed in intuition…He was a humanist, a man of letters, a cultivated
European-American…He was unmistakably a Jew. His Judaism was of the finest and the staunchest… Now he is gone, a towering landmark, an ivory tower
perhaps, but better a beacon in what by efforts of others has become a surging
tide…We mourn him for we are his children and grandchildren. (Bereday, 1966:
147–150)
Kandel conceived the study of comparative education to be ‘an interdisciplinary study’
and ‘like the history of education, may, in fact, lay greater emphasis on the ancillary
studies than on education’. As such, ‘…so far as methodology is concerned, comparative education may be considered a continuation of the study of the history of
education into the present’ (Kandel, 1959: 273). Echoing Michael Sadler, his mentor,
Kandel explained further his historical approach:
…the comparative approach demands first an appreciation of the intangible,
impalpable, spiritual and cultural forces which underlie an educational system;
the factors and forces outside the school matter even more than what goes on
inside it. Hence the comparative study of education must be founded on an
analysis of the social and political ideals which the school reflects…In order to
understand, appreciate, and evaluate the real meaning of the educational system
of a nation, it is essential to know something of its history and traditions; of the
forces and attitudes governing its social organization, of the political and economic conditions that determine its development (Kandel, 1933: xix).

An Idealistic Philosophical Humanist
As noted above, and as Kazamias and Schwartz had elaborated in an earlier study
(Kazamias and Schwartz, 1977), Kandel was an ‘idealist’ intellectual. What we compare, according to him, was more ideals, aims, ideas and ‘forms’. He conceived of

--- [PDF Page 71 / Book Page 47] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

47

comparative education as a branch of the philosophy of education, and in terms of its
methodology and value, as an inquiry into the history of ideas and ‘forms’. He wrote:
The chief contribution, then of the study of comparative education is that, if
properly approached, it deals ‘with fundamental principles’ and fosters ‘the
acquisition of a philosophic attitude’ in analyzing and therefore stimulating a
clearer understanding of the problems of education. The study makes the education better able to enter the spirit and tradition of the educational systems of his
own nation (Kandel, 1955: 12; Kandel, 1933: xx).
It would be important here to clarify Kandel’s previously mentioned notion of understanding, appreciating and evaluating ‘the real meaning of the educational system of a
nation’. As an idealist, he was more concerned with ‘form’ than with the details that
make up an educational system. Beyond the study of the history and traditions, the
social, political, cultural and economic ‘factors and forces outside the school’, or the
‘political, economic, and cultural context in which it [the educational system] functioned’, Kandel, like Sadler, stressed that the comparative approach demands ‘an
appreciation of the intangible, impalpable spiritual and cultural forces which underlie
an educational system’. And, in contrast to the approach and language of the ‘empirical
scientists,’ Kandel, on occasion, talked about ‘hidden meanings’, ‘real meanings’, and
‘essence’ (Kandel, 1933: xix). Clearly, ‘his intellectual orientation was that of contemporary philosophical humanists’ (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977: 156).

A Liberal Democratic Individualist
In a previous study, Kazamias and Schwartz characterised Kandel as a liberal individualist’ and a ‘passionate devotee of Western democracy’ with its basic principles of
‘liberty, equality and fraternity’. He saw the contemporary political world in terms of
two competing political ‘ideals’ and ‘states,’ namely, liberal democracy and the liberal
democratic state (as exemplified by England and France, but most of all, by the USA),
which he praised, and totalitarianism and the centralised, autocratic and dictatorial
state (exemplified by fascist Italy, Nazi Germany, and communist Russia), which he
abhorred. In this connection, we also noted that Kandel’s liberal ideology ‘bore strong
similarities to traditional British liberalism with its emphasis on “limited state interference in social policy”. Clearly, therefore, he would be against welfare statism, social
engineering, or social reconstructionism’ (Kazamias and Schwartz, 1977: 156–157).
It is pertinent here to comment on the preeminent role Kandel assigned to the
political factor, specifically to the ‘state’ in the operations of society, particularly in
education. In his 1933 classic text he stated that CE was a branch of politics, and more
pointedly, that ‘every state has the type of education that it wills’ and ‘as is the state so
is the school’. He elaborated:
The specialist in comparative education should have a knowledge of varying
political theories, especially as they bear on the relations of the state and the
individual…[both Plato and Aristotle] early enunciated the principle which was

--- [PDF Page 72 / Book Page 48] ---

48

Kazamias

later expressed in the phrase ‘as is the state, so is the school’ or ‘what you want
in the state, you must put in the school’ (Kandel, 1933: 274–75).
This element in his approach differentiates Kandel from the other historical-cultural
and liberal humanist comparativists. The political dimension of education has been
an epistemic concern of most modern comparativists. But Kandel was the first comparativist to use the ‘state’ as a contextual explanatory variable in the comparative
study of education. Stripped of the ideological biases and the melioristic preconceptions, noted below, Kandel’s examination of education from the political prism of the
state was, in my judgement, an important epistemological and methodological insight.
Subsequently, in the 1970s and 1980s, the ‘state’, although interpreted/approached
differently from that of Kandel, was brought in as a crucial variable in comparative
education studies (Carnoy; Carnoy and Samoff; Dale).
Kandel’s important insight on the role of the state in the comparative study of education was vitiated/marred by at least three weaknesses/flaws: (a) First, his categorisation
of contemporary states into two ‘ideal types’, namely ‘totalitarian’ and ‘democratic’;
(b) Second, his bias, on the one hand against non-Western polities, especially Soviet
socialism, and on the other, in favour of Western ‘liberal democracies’, especially
the Anglo-Saxon variety (e.g. UK and USA); and (c) Third, his compounding of the
‘normative’ with the ‘descriptive’ in his conceptualisation of the state; he saw in the
actual states (democratic, totalitarian) what he theorised such states ‘ought to be like’,
rather than what they were. Kandel never really probed into the actual distribution of
power in liberal democracies, a notable omission at a time when it was quite obvious
that in advanced liberal industrial capitalist democracies, class differences, conflicts,
racism and inequalities were the subject of much socio-political and educational discourse as well as much activism.

A Historical-Philosophical Meliorist
In an earlier study (Kazamias, 1961), I wrote that one important element in Kandel’s
historical-philosophical approach ‘may be termed the melioristic purpose’. I explained
further:
In both his 1933 and 1955 works, Kandel exhibits great concern for the improvement of education in the world. He hoped that by studying other systems as well
as his own, the student of comparative education would develop a more desirable philosophical approach that would ultimately result in the improvement of
his own system, and in fostering the spirit of internationalism. This purpose
has led Kandel to assume a certain body of values, e.g., democratic systems
of education are better, centralization is bad, education should aim at the total
development of man, and such beliefs as progress, individual responsibility, and
so on (Kazamias, 1961: 91).
There were several sources of Kandel’s meliorism. In the first place he agreed with
the diagnosis of the need for ‘educational reform and reconstruction’ which many

--- [PDF Page 73 / Book Page 49] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

49

leaders in all walks of life made during the years following the two major world
wars. ‘The new social, political and economic conditions and the cultural and intellectual unrest engendered by these’, he wrote in 1933, ‘gave an added stimulus to
the movements for reform in England, Germany and France’ which had been gathering strength for several centuries (Kandel, 1933: xvi). In the second place, Kandel
saw clearly that the militaristic nationalism and xenophobia of the first quarter of
the twentieth century were becoming anachronistic. He hoped that the comparative
study of education might lead to the ‘development of an internationalism based not
on emotion or sentiment, but arising from an appreciative understanding of other
nations as well as his own’ (Kandel, 1933: xxv). He feared the destructiveness and
anti-individualism of ‘a dictatorship of personal power and authority or of a dictatorship of an idea’ by types of government which he saw spreading in his lifetime. He
hoped, through education, to encourage the development of ‘cultural nationalism’, as
opposed to ‘political nationalism’ (Herzog, 1960). In short, as I stated in an earlier
study, Kandel’s meliorism was shown by ‘(a) the belief in certain values concerning
how men should live and how they should educate their children; (b) the view that the
study of comparative education should be governed by a reforming zeal; and (c) that
education, in the Kandelian sense of formal schooling, can indeed improve society
and guide man’s destiny’ (Kazamias, 1963: 385).

Nicholas Hans—the Historical-Humanistic Approach:
A ‘Factorial Interpretive Framework’
Nicholas Hans, an Eastern European émigré to England, acknowledged his intellectual
debt to both Sadler and Kandel (Hans, 1952), but of all the ‘forgotten’ historicalphilosophical and liberal humanist pioneers in comparative education, he was the most
systematic in his acknowledged historical approach to the study of educational problems in different countries. Unlike Sadler, Kandel and Robert Ulich, Hans sought to
explain and illuminate educational phenomena and systems from the perspective of a
specified conceptual framework. As Tretheway has pointed out:
Hans’ contribution, therefore, was not in supplying a transatlantic version of
Kandel’s method, though their work did have much in common. His particular
contribution was in developing a framework for comparative study comprised
of factors which he believed represented immanent and permanent forces which
shaped nations and their educational systems. The value of such framework
lay in the order or structure it imposed on a potentially unmanageable quantity of relevant data and, of course, in the usefulness of the studies applying it
(Tretheway, 1976: 63–64).
A key concept in Hans’ framework is the term ‘factor’, hence one could describe his
approach as ‘factorial analysis’. The essence of comparison, according to Hans, is
(a) the identification of a set of factors which make up/form/constitute the ‘physiognomy’ or the ‘character’ of a nation-state, and (b) the comparative analysis of

--- [PDF Page 74 / Book Page 50] ---

50

Kazamias

the functional relationship between these factors and education or the influence of
these factors in the ‘creation’ of national educational systems. The main purpose
of comparative education is the ‘analytical study of these factors from a historical
perspective and the comparison of the attempted solutions of resultant problems’
(Hans, 1949: 10–11).
In his classic text Comparative education: A study of educational factors and traditions (1949) Hans explained further:
…national systems of education as well as national constitutions or national
literatures are the outward expression of national character and as such represent
the nation in distinction from other nations. If we could separate and analyse the
factors which historically were active in creating different nations we should get
a long way to a definition of the principles which underlie national systems of
education (Hans, 1949: 9–11).
The pre-determined key factors in Hans’ historical approach were classified in three
groups: Group I-Natural factors, e.g. Race, Language, and Environment; Group IIReligious factors, e.g. Catholicism, Anglicanism, and Puritanism; and Group-III Secular
factors, e.g. Humanism, Socialism, and Nationalism. To these ‘key factors’, Hans added:
‘To Part II we add an introductory chapter on religious influences in general and to Part
III we shall add a concluding chapter on Democracy and Education’ (Hans, 1949:16).
An illustrative example of Hans’ historical-factorial-functional analysis is his use
of ‘nationalism’, a factor that was also important in Kandel’s historical-philosophical
approach. First, Hans identifies ‘nationalism’ as a significant universal ‘secular’ movement, and in language similar to that of Kandel, as the ‘natural expression of national
character’. After clarifying the terms ‘nationality’ and ‘nationalism’ he refers to the
thought of the ‘prophets’ of nationalism, namely, the German J. G. Fichte and the
Italian Giuseppe Mazzini. This is followed by a reference to Slavic nationalism, which
in turn, leads to a more detailed description of the ‘fascist phenomenon’ in the thought
of Giovanni Gentile and the policies of Benito Mussolini, and in the Nazism and racism of Hitler’s Germany. Paralleling the description and explanation of the ‘fascist
phenomenon’, Hans refers to those aspects of national educational systems which, in
his analysis, were related to or were influenced by the nationalist movements. From
Hans’ historical perspective, the educational system of Italy during the hegemony
of Mussolini and Gentile could be illuminated by examining it within the context of
Italian fascism, while that of Germany within the context of German national socialism, i.e., Nazism (Hans, 1949: 215–234).
Another example of Hans’ factorial analysis, which again reminds us of Kandel, is his
comparative analysis of education in different countries from the political-ideological
perspective of ‘democracy’. Hans avoids Kandel’s classification of contemporary polities/political systems into ‘democratic’ and ‘totalitarian’, and, unlike Kandel, he does
not conceptualise uncritically liberal democracy. He distinguishes between the AngloSaxon concept of democracy—represented by England and the USA— with its emphasis
on ‘political freedom’, and the Socialist—represented by the Soviet Union—with its
emphasis on social equality. But both types of state/polities are called ‘democracies’.

--- [PDF Page 75 / Book Page 51] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

51

Like Kandel, Hans considers the Soviet state and existing kindred socialist systems as
not conforming to the democratic principles of equality and freedom to the same degree
as the American and the French states/polities. Nevertheless, neither the political-liberal
democracy of England and the United States, which he favours, nor the socialist democracy of the Soviet Union, when taken separately, ‘can safeguard the freedom of cultural
development and the equality of educational opportunity, which are declared by both to
be their goal’. He then elaborates on this theme and concludes: ‘From these examples it
appears that neither the Anglo-Saxon interpretation of democracy as political freedom
nor its Soviet interpretation as social equality have resulted in practice in establishing
a true equality of educational opportunity for all citizens of their countries. We cannot
escape the conclusion that both interpretations of democracy as practiced at present are
defective’ (Hans, 1949: 236–237).
To a greater degree than the other forgotten historically-oriented comparativists,
Hans envisaged comparative education to be also an ‘applied subject’. Unlike comparative anatomy and comparative religion, according to him, ‘the purpose of Comparative
Education is not only to compare existing systems but to envisage reform best suited
to new social and economic conditions … thus our subject has a dynamic character
with a utilitarian purpose’. However, he went on to say that being an applied subject
it depends largely ‘on conceptions and aims of education supplied by philosophy of
education and on the data supplied by the history of education, and by sociology and
economics’ (Hans, 1952: 57).

Robert Ulich: A Humanist Historian
Unlike Kandel’s and Hans’, Robert Ulich’s approach to the study of education in different nations was more historical than comparative. Its title notwithstanding, his
book The Education of Nations: A comparison in historical perspective (1961), is
really a cultural and intellectual history of the West. In it he first examined the cultural
movements (Medievalism, Renaissance and Reformation, Rationalism, Science and
Technology), which, according to him, characterised the history of the western world
and western culture. He then provided historical accounts of the development of the
educational systems of France, England Germany and Russia. In the end, he formulated certain generalizations about educational problems in the ‘new nations’, through
which, he averred, the older nations had gone.
Ulich’s historical analysis of the stages of development of western culture/civilization is both scholarly and insightful. But the comparative aspect is truncated. As
I have commented shortly after Ulich’s book was published: ‘The reader must make
the comparisons himself based on the assembled historical facts and interpretations’
(Kazamias, 1963: 387).
Robert Ulich was German. Though he held high academic and administrative positions in his native land, at the age of 44 he left Nazi Germany and emigrated to the
United States rather than compromise his social democratic beliefs with the fascist
Nazi regime. Like Sadler, Arnold and Kandel, he was nurtured in the Eurocentric classical humanistic intellectual and cultural tradition, and as a university professor and

--- [PDF Page 76 / Book Page 52] ---

52

Kazamias

researcher in America, he attained national and international reputation as a scholar, an
educational philosopher, a cultural historian and a comparativist.
In an ‘In Memoriam’ note on Ulich, titled ‘A humanistic gift from Europe’, shortly
after his death in 1977, Paul Nash, one of his students and friends at Harvard, characterised Ulich’s ‘contribution to comparative education’ as quintessentially ‘humanistic’
(Nash, 1977: 147). In Nash’s assessment, there were four ‘dimensions’ to Ulich’s humanistic approach. First, there was Ulich’s ‘determination to keep the human being firmly
at the center of the educational picture; for Ulich, the person was always central, rather
than the curriculum, the discipline, the field, the institution, or the research’. Second,
Ulich’s approach was ‘unapologetically and thoroughly historical; he believed that it is
impossible to comprehend the nature of the educational process without understanding
its historical context’. The third dimension of Ulich’s humanistic approach, according
to Nash, ‘lay in the human relevance he saw in comparative education for the education of teachers’. In this respect, Nash added: ‘He [Ulich] viewed without enthusiasm
the development of comparative education as a recondite activity for scholars and
researchers who produce analyses, graphs, tables, and theories that are of interest only
to one another (and sometimes only to themselves)’. Lastly, in Nash’s assessment,
‘Ulich’s humanistic approach was marked by a strongly political value system … he
was a lifelong social democrat’ (Nash, 1977: 148–149).
As a postscript to this intellectual profile of Robert Ulich, I should like to add a personal note. I too was Ulich’s student at Harvard at the same time as Nash, who was a
close friend. With Henry Perkinson, another of Ulich’s students and a friend, Nash and
I co-edited a book entitled The Educated Man: Studies in the History of Educational
Thought (1966), which was dedicated to: ‘Robert Ulich’ with the appropriate added
appellation ‘An Educated Man’ (Nash et al., 1965). Ulich was indeed a classical
humanistic scholar in the best sense of the German tradition that also included, among
others, Werner Jaeger, his contemporary, who wrote the three-volume classic Paideia:
The Ideals of Greek Culture (Jaeger, 19 39/1939). Robert Ulich was also an inspiring
teacher. Strictly speaking, he was not a ‘comparativist’ but a humanistic historian and
a philosopher, but he inspired some of his students, specifically George Bereday and
myself, to become historically-minded comparativists.

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes: A Reassessment
In the 1960s, comparative education as a cognitive episteme went through a major
identity crisis. Partly as a consequence of political, economic and intellectual developments, namely, (a) the emergence of ‘new states’ bent on building both viable
polities/nation-states and viable economies, (b) the emphasis on re-constructing the
‘old nations’ along more welfare-state democratic principles, and (c) the dramatic
developments in technology, the natural sciences and the empirical social sciences,
education as a political, economic and socio-cultural mechanism was given top priority
in the re-shaping and re-construction of the new political, economic and socio-cultural
cosmos. The new political, economic and intellectual climate had a determining influence on the epistemological, methodological and ideological orientations of the new

--- [PDF Page 77 / Book Page 53] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

53

generation of comparative educationists, particularly in the United Kingdom and the
United States.
During this period a new generation of comparative educationists and a new generation of comparative education discourse emerged in the United Kingdom and
North America. At the same time, there was a regeneration of comparative education
as an academic field of study with practical and melioristic extensions; a professional society—the US-based Comparative Education Society, later the Comparative
and International Education Society—was organised; and a scholarly journal—The
Comparative Education Review—was launched in the United States. In this contextual
milieu, the new player-comparativists, many of whom were educated in more modernist epistemic approaches and traditions, searched for new intellectual frameworks and
methodological approaches in their study of foreign systems of education and in making ‘inter-national’ comparisons.
In such a political and intellectual atmosphere, the value of the historical-philosophical-cultural and liberal humanist generation of comparative discourse, examined
above, was discussed and judged to have noteworthy limitations. If the inspirational
deities of the old player-comparativists were history, philosophy and ‘humanistic
culture/paideia’, those of some influential modernist ‘scientific’ parvenus were ‘science’ and the ‘scientific method’, ‘empiricism’, ‘instrumentalism’ and ‘technocratic
rationalism’.
In the many texts on the nature and scope of comparative education that appeared in
this transformative period of the 1960’s, the critical comments and observations about
the historical-philosophical humanist comparativists discussed in this chapter were of
the following kind:
(a) They [‘the historian comparative educationists’ to Holmes’ characterisation]
were ‘humanists’ not ‘scientists’, insightful but ‘qualitative’ not ‘quantitative’,
subjective not objective. Commenting on the ‘historical approach’ as used by
comparativists, the scientifically-oriented methodologists Noah and Eckstein,
in their often-cited text Toward a Science of Comparative Education (1969),
noted critically that ‘their conclusions rely largely on the private insights of
their authors, not only regarding which categories are valid and which data are
relevant, but also on the matter of what quantity and quality of evidence constitute proof of a particular assertion’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 188). In their
historical account of the development of the field, Noah and Eckstein placed
such historically-oriented comparativists as Kandel and Hans in the ‘pre-scientific’, so-called ‘forces and factors’ phase of the field’s evolution. Kandel’s
approach, according to them, ‘provided no way of judging their [the factors’]
importance relative to each other…. Nor was there apparent any criterion for
the inclusion of some factors in the analysis and the exclusion of others, except
on the basis of “self-evident truth” ’. And further: ‘What appeared in Kandel’s
work s persuasive conclusion are in fact important hypotheses remaining open
for testing’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 51).
In England, Brian Holmes, a contemporary exponent of the ‘scientific
approach’ to the comparative study of educational problems, also assessed

--- [PDF Page 78 / Book Page 54] ---

54

Kazamias

‘historical comparative education’ as being no substitute for ‘scientific comparative education’ whose hallmark was ‘prediction’ rather than ‘explanation’.
Comparative education, according to Holmes, must be a ‘generalising science’
and comparative educationists must be ‘social scientists’. And in the same
text: ‘invaluable as historical research and related analyses are, educational
reformers are primarily interested in the consequences of their actions, not in
the causes of their present dissatisfaction’; and, rather gratuitously, he added
that history could be of pragmatic value in ‘illuminating present problems’
or it ‘can … contribute to that practical knowledge which gives directive or
predictive power—namely, science’ (Holmes, 1965: 19–21).
(b) Some were ‘historicists’, in Karl Popper’s meaning of the term (Popper, 1961)
in that they searched for or espoused absolute, final and inexorable laws of
development; others that were ‘historicists’ in C. A. Anderson’s and Philip
Foster’s meaning of the term (Anderson; 1961; Foster, 1960) in that they did
not generalise or they dealt with particular events that were temporally and
spatially located and, therefore, quite unique.
(c) They were mainly concerned with ‘explanation’ and ‘understanding’ not with
‘prediction’ or ‘reform; as such, they were ‘backward’ not ‘forward’ looking;
they searched for ‘antecedent causes’ for ‘forces and factors’. As Noah and
Eckstein asserted: ‘They (e.g. Kandel, Hans and the other “historian comparativists” were primarily intellectuals intent on explanation, rather than activists
in the field of educational policy-making’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 57). And,
in a similar critique, ‘understanding’, according to Holmes, ‘comes through
successful prediction rather than through the discovery of antecedent causes’
(Holmes, 1965: 30).
(d) In 1970, commenting critically on Sadler’s historical approach, one however
that was also espoused by Kandel, E. Epstein wrote: ‘The Sadlerian emphasis on intangible, impalpable, spiritual forces borders on mysticism and in its
extreme leads to unwarranted conclusions about the nature of education’. He
added: ‘The premise that comparative education is basically a humanistic
activity—because the fundamental explanatory concepts that pertain to schools
refer to unempirical forces—is a call for scholars to describe the external manifestations of the structures of school systems, and to speculate loosely on the
rest or leave it to spiritual revelation’ (Epstein, 1970: 45).
It would be quite in order here to point out that as a member of the postwar new generation of students of comparative education, who were actively engaged in the redefinition
and reconstruction of the field, I was one of the first comparativists who commented critically on Kandel as a historian and a comparativist, as well as on Kandel’s methodology
and his intellectual/epistemic orientation. At the same time, I made some general critical remarks on the historical approach of the other historical comparative educationists.
In 1961, commenting specifically on Kandel I wrote that Kandel’s methodology was
governed by at least three major purposes: the reportorial-descriptive, the historicalfunctional, and the melioristic. Referring specifically on Kandel’s historical approach,
I criticised his tendency to blend the descriptive, interpretative and explanatory elements

--- [PDF Page 79 / Book Page 55] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

55

of his historical analysis with the melioristic, the ‘what is’ with the ‘what ought to be’. ‘The
historian’s task’, I explained, ‘should be to describe and illuminate certain phenomena, not
to prescribe’ and added: ‘Any historical treatment that is governed by considerations for
improvement tends to lead to what Herbert Butterfield called ‘Whiggism’…In short, the
historian should view phenomena in their contemporary context regardless of whether
this might lead to future improvement of practices or ideas’ (Kazamias, 1961: 90–91).
Another element in Kandel’s historical approach, and, I might add, in the approach
of other contemporary historically-oriented comparativists (e.g. Sadler, Hans, and
Vernon Mallinson) that I criticised, was his propensity to theorise about society and to
explain the nature of educational systems in terms of the concept ‘national character’.
In the same text, I pointed out that Kandel’s observation that ‘English education is
characterized by lack of system’ (Kandel, 1933: 94) could be explained by the alleged
national English psychological character trait that ‘the Englishman dislikes to think
or formulate plans of action’ (24–25), could not be considered as a creditable historical interpretation that was based on historical or other kind of creditable evidence.
Moreover, as Joseph Lauwerys, whom I quoted, pointed out ‘in the end “national character” could be made to explain anything and everything’ (Lauwerys, 1959: 285–287).
Another example of Kandel’s use of ‘national character’ to explain differences in
national systems of education, that can be questioned, was the following:
If the Englishman is a man of action whose progress is marked by empiricism
rather than by theory, the Frenchman is a man of ideas who enjoys to think
for the sheer pleasure of thinking and generally without much concern for the
outcome of thinking in action. Orderliness, logic, planning, which appear to be
absent as the characteristics of English life and organization, are by contrast the
outstanding features of the French (Kandel, 1933).
In commenting on Kandel’s approach to comparative education—his comparative
methodology—I was quick to make the additional point that my criticisms referred
specifically to certain elements in Kandel’s version/variety of history. Such elements
included, inter alia: his meliorism, his political and educational ideological predilections and biases, the Olympian scope in his examination of national systems of
education, his use of the rather nebulous social-psychological concept of ‘national
character, and the predominant role he assigned to the state in his ‘historical functional
analysis’. However, I also entered the important caveat that my criticisms were not
aimed at the historical method as such in the comparative study of education. I stressed
then and elaborated in subsequent statements on the same theme, that ‘history has a
valuable place in comparative education’. At the same time, I criticised those contemporary comparativists, e.g. Noah and Eckstein and Brian Holmes who saw little value,
if any, in historical comparative education in that it was not a ‘science’ or a ‘generalizing science’. I also commented on Philip Foster’s and C. Arnold Anderson’s critical
observation that in so far as history essentially dealt with unique phenomena with an
ineradicable temporal and spatial locus, its value for comparative education was at best
limited. Since comparisons could not be made of unique events or phenomena, Foster
and Anderson had argued, the comparative educator’s task differed from that of the

--- [PDF Page 80 / Book Page 56] ---

56

Kazamias

historian and became identical to that of the ‘social scientist’ who searched for repetitive patterns and regularities in social relationships (Foster, 1960; Anderson, 1961).
In my comments on the ‘unscientific’ nature of history and the other criticisms leveled against the historically-oriented comparative educators I sought to clarify certain
misconceptions and counter some of the criticisms made by the 1960 new generation of ‘scientifically-oriented’ comparativists. I pointed out that the criticism that
historical comparative education was ‘unscientific’ was itself based on the restrictive
interpretation of the English term ‘science’, which, more often than not, refers to the
epistemology and methodology of the natural sciences or the empirical positivistic
social sciences. But, I argued, the word ‘science’ might also refer, as indeed it does in
other languages, to the ‘human sciences’ or to the systematic study of social, cultural
and human phenomena, the strategies of knowing or the knowledge derived therefrom. The German term Wissenschaft and the Greek word episteme denote intellectual
systems that apply to both the arts and the sciences. If ‘science’ is interpreted in the
broader sense of episteme or Wissenschaft, then Sadler’s, Kandel’s, Hans’ and Ulich’s
versions of historical comparative education could legitimately be called ‘scientific’.
Indeed, as quoted above, Hans’ characterised comparative education, which of course
included his own historical version, as Vergleichende Erziehungwissenschaft, and further, as an academic discipline that ‘[it] is just on the border line between humanities
and sciences and thus resembles philosophy, which is the formulation of both’ (Hans,
1959: 299).
Turning to the assertion made by Foster and Anderson that history deals with unique
phenomena that are temporally and spatially located and consequently its value for
comparative analysis which presupposes abstraction, generalisation and regularity is
questionable, I argued that such a claim has been refuted by several writers, including
historians. In 1963, I wrote:
As Crane Brinton [the eminent comparative historian) has shown, it is quite
possible to categorize or classify historical phenomena and compare them for
the purpose of making generalizations. Although such generalizations may be
of a limited rather than a universal nature, they may in turn be used as working
hypotheses to be tested in other similar situations in order to illuminate them. In
other words, from an examination of the specific, the concrete and the particular,
the historically-minded comparative educator may induce a generalization and
then use it in order to illuminate another particular event or form.
And I added: ‘The concern for the general and the particular is to be found in both the
social sciences and in history, and the difference is one of emphasis and objectives of
research rather than kind and method’ (Kazamias, 1963: 396).
In a reassessment of the historical-philosophical-humanist discourse in comparative
education, I wish to emphasise that Sadler, Kandel, Hans, and Ulich, four of its most
noted exponents, approached education not just from the narrow sense of ‘schooling’
but from the broader sense of paideia/culture, and comparative education as a ‘humanistic episteme’ whose major concern should be with the ‘human being’, the anthropos
(‘man’). As such, it should therefore be anthropocentric (‘man-centred’); it should

--- [PDF Page 81 / Book Page 57] ---

Forgotten Men, Forgotten Themes

57

be pervaded by a ‘humanistic’ philosophy, and it should be concerned with the great
problems—political, social but also ethical—which ‘mankind’ faces.

References
Anderson, C. A. (1961). Methodology of comparative education. Review of Education, VII (1), 1–23.
Bereday, G.Z.F. (1965). Memorials. Comparative Education Review 9(3), 249–256.
Bereday, G.Z.F. (1966). I.L. Kandel. Comparative Education 2, 147–150.
Cramer, J. F. & Browne, G. S. (1956/1965). Contemporary education: A comparative study of national
systems. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Epstein, E. H. (1970). Ecological factors in comparative analysis: Effects on school achievement in
St. Lucia. Comparative Education Review, XIV(3), 312–321.
Fraser, St. (Ed.) (1964). Jullien’s plan for comparative education, (pp. 1816–1817). New York: Bureau of
Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University.
Foster, P. J. (1960). Comparative methodology and the study of African education. Comparative Education
Review, IV(2), 110–116.
Hans, N. (1949). Comparative education; A study of educational factors and traditions. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul.
Hans, N. (1952). English pioneers of comparative education. British Journal of Educational Studies, 1(1),
56–59.
Hans, N. (1959). The historical approach to comparative education, International Review of Education,
V(3), 299–307.
Hans, N. (1959). Comparative education: Definition and methods, pp. 443–448.
Herzog, J. D. (1960). I. L. Kandel: Comparative Education. Unpublished paper.
Higginson, J. H. (1961). The centenary of an English pioneer in comparative education. International
Review of Education, 7(3), 286–297.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education: A comparative approach. New York: Humanities Press.
Jones, P. E. (1971). Comparative education: Purpose and method. University of Queensland: Queensland
Press.
Kandel, I. L. (1933). Comparative education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Kandel, I. L. (1955). The new era in education, A comparative study. Boston, MA, Houghton Mifflin.
Kandel, I. L. (1956). The problem of comparative education. International Review of Education, 2, 1–15.
Kandel, I. L. (1959). The methodology of comparative education, International Review of Education, V,
271–279.
Kazamias, A. M. (1961). Some old and new approaches to methodology in comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 5(2), 90–96.
Kazamias, A. M. (1963). History, science and comparative education: A study in methodology. International
Review of Education, VII, 383–398.
Kazamias, A. M. & Massialas, B. G. (1965). Tradition and change in education: A comparative study.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kazamias, A. M. (1966). Politics, society and secondary education in England. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Kazamias, A. M. & Schwartz, K. (1977). Intellectual and ideological perspective in comparative education:
An interpretation. Comparative Education Review, 21(2/3), 153–176.
Knowles, L. C. A. (1921). The industrial and commercial revolutions in Britain during the nineteenth
century. London: Routledge.
Lauwerys, J. A. (1959). The philosophical approach to comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, V(3).
Mallinson, V. (1957). An introduction to the study of comparative education. Melbourne/London/Toronto:
William Heinemann.
Moehlman, A. H. (1963). Comparative educational systems. Washington, D.C.: The Center for Applied
Research in Education.

--- [PDF Page 82 / Book Page 58] ---

58

Kazamias

Nash, P., Kazamias, A. M. & Perkinson, H. J. (Eds.) (1965).The educated man: Studies in the history of
educational thought. New York: Wiley.
Nash, P. (Ed.) (1966). Culture and the state: Matthew Arnold and continental education. Columbia: Teachers
College, Columbia University Press.
Nash, P. (1977). A humanistic gift from Europe: Robert Ulich’s contribution to comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 21(2/3), 147–150.
Noah, H. J. & Eckstein, M. A. (1969). Toward a science of comparative education. London: Macmillan.
Palmer, R. R. (Ed.) (1993). From Jacobin to liberal: Marc-Antoine Jullien (pp. 1775–1848). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Popper, K. (1961). The poverty of historicism, 3rd edn. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sadler, S. M. (1898). Problems in Prussian secondary education for boys, with special reference to similar
questions in England. Special Reports on Educational Subjects, III. London: HMSO.
Sadler, S. M. (1900). (1964). How far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of foreign
systems of education. Reprinted in Comparative Education Review,VII(February), 307–314.
Sadler, S. M. (1902). The unrest in secondary education in Germany and elsewhere. Special Reports on
Educational Subjects, IX, London: HMSO.
Simon, B. (1965). Education and the labour movement, 1870–1920. London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Sandiford, P. (Ed.) (1918). Comparative education. London/Toronto: J. M. Dent.
Tretheway, A. R. (1976). Introducing comparative education. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Ulich, R. (1961). The education of nations: A comparison in historical perspective. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

