================================================================================
Chapter 05: The Scientific Paradigm in Comparative Education
Author(s): Dimitris Mattheou
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 1: The Creation and Re-creation of a Field
Book Pages: pp. 59–71
PDF Pages: pp. 83–95 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 83 / Book Page 59] ---

5
THE SCIENTIFIC PARADIGM IN COMPARATIVE
EDUCATION
Dimitris Mattheou

The Changing Educational Context and the Quest
for a New Paradigm in Comparative Education
Comparative Education as an academic field of study was born in the aftermath of
the establishment of state systems of education; in an era when the humanities dominated the school curriculum in Europe, when Bildung in Germany, Culture Générale
in France, Liberal Education in England or Klassiki Paedeia in Greece had basically
the same ultimate aim; the preparation of intellectually, morally and aesthetically
cultivated individuals, allegedly capable and willing to provide good service to their
country and to mankind.
Natural sciences, which had only recently (by the second half of the nineteenth
century) managed to find a place in the curriculum, were still struggling to prove themselves in terms of their contribution to the development of human faculties, such as
discipline, accurate observation, critical analysis, etc. (McLean, 1995; Lawton, 1976;
Whitfield, 1971; Mattheou, 2006). Science as a form of knowledge had undoubtedly
won a name for itself (Davies, 1997: 790–794); its achievements could hardly be overlooked. On the contrary, there was a ‘general conviction that scientific methods could
and should be applied to the study of human as well as natural phenomena’ (Davies,
1997: 794).
And it was in this intellectual climate that Comte, one of the fathers of modern
sociology, introduced scientific positivism in the study of society. Yet, despite these
developments and the thorough criticism of people like Herbert Spencer, many intellectuals, educators, educational authorities and members of the leisure class remained
firm in their point of view; for all its weaknesses, drawbacks and failures humanistic
education embedded in the classics continued, to their way of thinking, to constitute
the cornerstone of education, the complete system of timeless values and eternal verities (cf. the views of the 1864 Clarendon Commission in England, Matthew Arnold,
1869, Wilhelm von Humboldt, 1961, etc.).
This humanistic spirit prevailing in education at that time had certainly exerted
an influence on the nascent cognitive domain of Comparative Education. The founding fathers of the field, among them M. Sadler, I. Kandel and later on N. Hans and
R. Ulich, approached the study of foreign systems of education with a melioristic,
holistic and idealistic outlook (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977; Noah & Eckstein, 1969).
59
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 59–71.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 84 / Book Page 60] ---

60

Mattheou

Convinced that ideas and ideals fundamentally influence men’s actions, they looked
for ‘the intangible, impalpable spiritual and cultural forces which underlie an educational system’ (Kandel, 1955: xix) and which, therefore, potentially contribute to the
betterment of society. As genuine humanists they turned to history and to philosophy
for help. Moreover, the international circumstances during the first half of the twentieth century, especially during the mid-war years, favoured this attempt: ‘at a time when
economic depression, rising nationalism, the emergence of modern authoritarian ideologies [threatened peace]… the problems of the democracies preempted the attention
of educators all over the world’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 50) and consequently shaped
the priorities of comparative educators. They looked into the ‘forgotten struggles and
difficulties’ of the past and into ‘battles long ago’ (Sadler, 1964), into the educative
influence of religious and secular factors – democracy, humanism, nationalism and
socialism (Hans, 1958) – in an attempt to understand the dynamics of educational
development that would in turn allow policy makers, if they so wished, to improve
human condition.
By the end of the Second World War, circumstances had changed. Faith in humanistic studies had diminished: not only had educated elites failed to prevent atrocities,
but on several occasions they had played a leading role in the abhorrent war drama:
‘militarism, fascism, and communism found their adherents not only in the manipulated masses of the most afflicted nations but amongst Europe’s most educated elites
and its most democratic countries’ (Davies, 1997: 899). The post-war ‘Dark Continent’
was in search of ‘blue-prints for the golden age’ (Mazower, 1998: 185). Education for
economic development and democratisation – presumably a key element for individual
and social improvement – became a central theme of the educational discourse of the
time (Adams & Farrell, 1967; Sobel, 1982). Policy making and successful reform had
consequently come to the forefront, and both politicians and academics were trying to
find ways to respond to the new demands.
In comparative education, a new generation of comparativists felt increasingly
unhappy with the historical approach. They maintained that the prevailing historical
approach was too macroscopic in its perspective, too ambitious in its orientation,
too qualitative in its approach, heavily melioristic and in any case irrelevant to the
pressing needs of education which at the time had to cope with the problems posed
by the pursuit of reform (Noah & Eckstein, 1969.; Kazamias, 1961; Mattheou, 1997;
Holmes, 1965). The climate for a change of paradigm in the field was thus quite
favourable.
Impressive developments in the natural and the social sciences were already pointing to a most promising paradigmatic alternative. Actually, the ‘growing respect for
science … affected all branches of study. The social sciences [in particular]… exerted
a profound effect on all the older disciplines’ (Davies, 1997: 1076). For instance, in
sociology and economics the refinement of measurement techniques and of the statistical processing of data had generated great hopes that objectivity in the study of
social phenomena could be achieved and that the laws governing their course could be
expressed in a mathematical form (Kerlinger, 1965; Cohen & Nagel, 1934). For many
comparativists the strengths of the scientific method, its explanatory and prognostic
power, its accurate observational techniques, its systematic and thorough empirical

--- [PDF Page 85 / Book Page 61] ---

The Scientific Paradigm in Comparative Education

61

testing of hypotheses, its precise measurements, and its probing and fact-finding
approach could hardly be ignored (Noah & Eckstein, 1969; Anderson, 1961; Holmes,
1965). Equally confident and optimistic for the strengths of the scientific method,
a host of technocrats, technical advisors, bureaucrats and politicians were involved
in the scientific planning of reform, believing that this was the only safe means to
overcome socio-economic difficulties (cf. the work of the International Institute for
Educational Planning).

The Scientific Paradigm: The Question of Aims and Laws
In this context of optimism and wishful thinking it is not strange that by the late 1950s
comparative education was in search of a new ‘scientific’ identity. A fundamental
prerequisite for the field to acquire scientific status was, according to the critics, the
abolition of impressionism, subjectivity, speculation, intuition and predisposition,
generically linked, with its qualitative and value-laden character, as this had been nurtured by the historical and philosophical work of its forefathers (Templeton, 1958;
Epperson & Schmuck, 1963; Clayton, 1972). Yet, transformation was far from easy.
Firstly, established schools of thought or paradigms, according to Kuhn (1970:7), never
die out silently and voluntarily, as their exponents are ready to defend them. Secondly,
consensus as to what actually constitutes science was far from being unanimous, especially in terms of the study of society. Hence, comparative education literature during
the late 1950s and mainly during the 1960s was intensely occupied with questions of
aims, content, theory and practice and most significantly of methodology in comparative education.
One way to follow these debates is to make use of a classificatory system based on
the elements that constitute the Kuhnian paradigm, namely goals and subject matter,
theory and exemplary practice, research rules and standards, application and instrumentation (Kuhn, 1970: 10 ff).
In what follows the discussion focuses on the question of ‘aims and laws’ – the latter
being also an essential part of the ‘subject matter’ and by the same token closely linked
with ‘theory’ – and on ‘epistemological and methodological issues’ pervading both
‘research rules and standards’ and ‘application and instrumentation’.
A significant paradigmatic shift concerned the aims of Comparative Education. In
the new paradigm the field retained its ambitious aim to understand and to explain
the workings of education and its relationship with the broader social context. Yet
understanding and explanation should not be based any longer on the intuitive, cultivated and sensitive mind of the comparativist but on a hard-core scientific theory,
comprising laws and verifiable quantitative hypotheses that would stand exhaustive
empirical test.
The position of Bereday, who served as a bridge between the historical and the
scientific paradigm, is characteristic in this respect. While his first three steps aimed
basically at understanding and explaining specific educational phenomena, his ultimate
aim remained total analysis; an exercise, i.e. which ‘deals with the imminent general
forces upon which all systems are built’ and which lead to ‘the formulation of ‘laws’ or

--- [PDF Page 86 / Book Page 62] ---

62

Mattheou

‘typologies’ that permit an international understanding and a definition of the complex
interrelation between the schools and the people they serve’ (Bereday, 1964: 23–25).
Establishing laws, as the mature sciences did and as some social sciences – especially
economics – aspired to do with significant probability of success, became a dominant
methodological discourse for comparative education.
Agreement on the necessity of formulating laws did not however imply consensus
as to the character of these laws. C. A. Anderson, as a sociologist, for example, would
speak of ‘patterns comprising abstracted social systems, exploring relationships of
essentially undated and often timeless nature’ (Anderson, 1961: 4), while in the same
vein Foster would refer to the invariant relationships that exist ‘between educational
institutions and the institutional matrix in which they function’ (Foster, 1960: 116).
Although ‘the perennial difficulties of sifting out generalities from the maze of institutional particularities’ were recognized, C. A. Anderson – echoing the optimism and
perhaps an element of positivism inherent in functionalism, a dominant theory in sociology at the time – appeared to be certain that the ‘continued pursuit of comparative
education’ in this direction ‘has great promise’ (Anderson, 1977: 415–416). Clearly,
his confidence as to the scope and purpose of comparative education was based on
the assumption that such timeless and universal generalisations do exist and can be
revealed through sociological research, provided that proper use of ever-improving
research methods and techniques would be made.
On their part, Harold Noah and Max Eckstein seemed also confident that the ultimate
aim of comparative education is to provide well-tested and refined generalisations.
These generalisations were seen as ‘functional relationship(s) between dependent and
independent variables’ expressed in propositions that preferably take the mathematical form of ‘as x changes so y changes’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 93). Like structural
functionalists, they too looked for universally valid explanations of how things are and
how they actually function instead of searching for antecedent causes. Being aware
however of the difficulties of such a project and of the pitfalls inherent in covariational relationships they were at pains to underline that ‘a statement of a functional
relationship … need not necessarily refer to causal relationships’, that ‘it may not
reveal the direction of influence from one factor to another’ and that ‘…the precise
mechanism by which x causes y may still remain unstated’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969:
96). They stressed the need for an unceasing refinement of explanatory propositions,
every time that comparative evidence would divulge that these propositions constitute
an ad hoc and a ‘simplistic explanation of the phenomena’ under consideration (Noah
& Eckstein, 1969: 120). Finally, all these elucidations may explain why they did not
give the status of ‘laws’ to their universal explanatory propositions.
This was not the case for Brian Holmes, another prominent adherent of the scientific
approach in comparative education. Trained originally as a physicist he was imbued
with the notion that the world, physical as well as social, is governed by laws; that ‘God
does not play dice’, as Einstein had once said. Consequently, the student of comparative education had to start his work by appreciating the existence of laws governing
the educational world.
Following the Popperian critical dualism, Holmes drew however a distinction between
normative and sociological laws; ‘between the man-enforced normative laws or

--- [PDF Page 87 / Book Page 63] ---

The Scientific Paradigm in Comparative Education

63

conventions and the natural regularities which are beyond his power’. Normative laws
‘are man-made and can be accepted, rejected or changed by man’ (Holmes, 1981: 77), he
argues. ‘Representing man’s beliefs, [they] are part of the context in which schools are
run’, and hence ‘they must be known if we hope to understand how schools function’.
Accordingly, ‘the establishment of … normative laws for particular nations represents
… one of the most important of the many tasks a comparative educationist should
tackle’ (Holmes, 1981: 78). On the other hand, sociological laws, like the laws of physics, ‘are man-made statements’, that ‘apply to the functioning of societal institutions’
both inside the school system and outside it (Holmes, 1981: 80). They are ‘hypothetical,
and if they are to be scientific, [they] should be refutable’. Finally, ‘sociological laws
are not universally valid: they are contingent’, in the sense that, although they constitute
‘universal or general statement(s)’ they are dependent on ‘the conditions under which
[they are] to be applied’ (Holmes, 1981: 78).
Clearly the Holmesian perception of laws that govern education differ in many
respects from those of his American colleagues (e.g. C. A. Anderson and Noah and
Eckstein). In the first place, his laws are diversified into two distinct types which
actually codify and bring together two different intellectual traditions or schools of
thought: the anthropocentric, expressed through man’s freedom of the will that pervade normative laws, and the structural functional, inherent in the sociological laws.
Second, sociological laws are contingent and hence they are neither a-historical nor
unconditionally valid. Prevailing traditions, circumstances and conditions determine
the validity and the application of these laws. The influence of relativity theory in
physics is obvious in Holmes’ perception of sociological laws and overtly stated.
The contingency of sociological laws indicates, among other things, that the aim
of scientific comparative education is not the ultimate formulation of either a grand
educational theory based on thoroughly tested hypotheses or of absolute and unconditional laws; in this sense, contingency might even pose the question of comparability
among substantially different social and educational contexts.
The role Holmes reserves for comparative education is less ambitious. To his way
of thinking, comparative education should focus on the study of a specific educational
problem with the aim to analyse it in context, to understand and to explain it. Through
contextual analysis the ‘pure’ comparative educationist is expected to formulate refutable hypotheses (i.e. ‘hypotheses on which planned reform in education rests’ (Holmes,
1981: 78) ), extrapolate from them all rationally anticipated consequences or, in other
words, proceed to probable predictions as to what the outcomes of policy implementation are likely to be. To the extent that predictions are verified, the problem has been
solved/explained, the hypothesis has been tested and has provisionally acquired the
status of sociological law. Impressed by the striking success of relativity theory to predict phenomena that had only much later been empirically established (and explained),
Holmes inaugurates prediction as the demarcation criterion of science, thus opening
up a debate on the method of science in comparative education.
Irrespective of their differences concerning the aim of comparative education as an
academic field of study, all three versions of the ‘scientific schools of thought’ tend
to agree on the pragmatic dimensions of the field, on its potential to provide sound
advice to policy makers. ‘As “pure” scientists’, Holmes argues, ‘we should attempt to

--- [PDF Page 88 / Book Page 64] ---

64

Mattheou

formulate alternative policies to carefully analysed problems and eliminate those we
think will be less successful in particular countries. As ‘applied’ scientists we should
be prepared to see how far we can help those responsible for policy to implement
adopted policies…’ (Holmes, 1981: 54). After all, hypotheses/sociological laws are, to
Holmes’ way of thinking, identical with education policies.
‘Although explanation is’, for Noah and Eckstein, ‘the ultimate goal of all scientific
(and hence comparative) work in education’, they also readily appreciate the practical
contribution of the field; the help ‘provided to planners trying to improve the effectiveness of educational system’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 187). And of course, many
comparativists’ involvement in several technical assistance programmes for Third
World countries (e.g. World Bank Projects, AID Programmes) or in national policymaking committees testify to the truth of their intention to treat comparative education
as a policy-oriented field of study. This renewed emphasis on policy making on the
part of scientific comparative education, which clearly runs against the humanitarian
tradition of the founding fathers’ ambition to appreciate ‘the intangible, impalpable
spiritual and cultural forces which underlie an educational system’ (Kandel, 1955: xix)
and to grasp ‘the hidden meaning’ or the ‘real meaning’, or the ‘essence’ of things,
certainly reflects the developmental priorities of the time, both economic and social.
This emphasis also reflects faith on the part of political authorities in the effectiveness
of rational central planning (cf. 5-year plans, in vogue during the 1950s and 1960s in
many countries) which in turn was encouraged by economists’ and other social scientists’ reassurances that science (basically social sciences) was by then in a position to
guarantee with a substantial measure of probability the success of the planned, i.e. of
the desired predicted outcomes of educational policies (cf. Parnes, 1962; Harbison &
Myers, 1964).

Epistemological and Methodological Issues
It would not be unreasonable to infer that optimism was to a large extent based on the
impressive record of success in physical sciences (atomic fission and fusion, transistors, etc.) during the war and after it, and of the remarkable advances in social and
behavioural sciences as well. As a matter of fact success stories or ‘finished scientific
achievements as they are recorded in the classics … from which each new scientific
generation learns to practice its trade’ (Kuhn, 1970: 1) have always contributed to the
development of an ‘image of science [which is] persuasive and pedagogic’ (Kuhn,
1970: 1) in the sense that it usually evokes the quest for a ‘more esoteric type of
research’ which in turn constitutes ‘a sign of maturity in the development of any given
scientific field’ (Kuhn, 1970: 11). By mid-1950s comparative education seemed to
have reached this stage. Bereday was among the first to realize it. He insisted that ‘the
discussion of methods of comparative education is perhaps the most urgent task which
those who research and teach comparative education must face’ (Bereday, 1957: 13).
Without rejecting the historical-philosophical approach altogether, he subscribed to
the circumspect use of the scientific method. He retained ‘a basic concern with the
concepts and data of the social sciences, especially sociology and political science’

--- [PDF Page 89 / Book Page 65] ---

The Scientific Paradigm in Comparative Education

65

(Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 65). Other comparativists too, like Kazamias, agreed that
‘comparative education needs to be infected with a more rigorous scientific method’
(Kazamias, 1961: 96).
Although unanimous in criticising the traditional historical approach, the new
generation of comparativists retained substantially different views on fundamental
epistemological and methodological issues.
Each provided a different answer to questions like ‘what is science’; ‘should comparative education develop its own characteristic methodology or should it borrow
from other sciences, and if so, which science should serve as the prototype’; ‘is the
method of science inductive or deductive’; ‘should it be strictly empirical and quantitative or could it be more theoretical and qualitative’; ‘what should be the role reserved
for history’?
Most would agree that comparative education was by definition an interdisciplinary
field, at least in the sense that its interests were overlapping with those of almost all
other social sciences, and was hence dependant on their methodologies – comparativists
were actually ‘shameless borrowers’ of other social scientists’ approaches (Farrell,
1979). Some, like Edmund King, would even argue that comparative education was
itself a method of ‘getting at “the truth” of a situation’ (King, 1976: 18) rather than
an independent field of study.
Yet, each had his own preferences. According to Bereday, comparative education
was an interdisciplinary area of study centered around a geographical perspective of
education: ‘Its specific task’, he argued, ‘is to bring several of the concerns of the
humanities and the social sciences together in application to a geographical perspective of education’ (Bereday, 1964: x). On their part, C. A. Anderson and Philip Foster
of the University of Chicago Comparative Education Center envisaged comparative
education essentially as a branch of sociology. Holmes’ preferences lay basically with
the physical sciences whose elaborate and efficient methodology he tried to transfer
to comparative education by adopting critical dualism which, to his mind, constituted
a productive analytical framework for the study of collective human behaviour and of
law-like regularities related to the functioning of social institutions.
Preferences of comparativists for certain scientific fields were influenced by their
training and occupation as well as by prevailing trends in their academic field of
expertise and led to the adoption of different methodological approaches. Bereday
had studied at the London School of Economics, Anderson was a sociologist, Foster,
a social anthropologist, had studied in the London School of Economics as well as in
Chicago under Anderson, Holmes was a physicist and Noah was an economist. As
sociologists working in the United States in the 1950s Anderson and Foster followed
for the most part the prevailing orthodoxy of structural-functionalism. They investigated both intra-educational and educational-societal relationships, ‘of essentially
undated and often timeless nature’, by isolating and controlling variables, carefully
collecting relevant data, empirically testing hypotheses of a covariational character,
giving emphasis to measurement and quantitative techniques in an attempt to objectify
research, by eliminating the subjective views, beliefs and prejudices of the observer.
Noah and Eckstein too appeared to be confident that post-war developments in social
sciences, ‘the rise of quantitative empirical research’, ‘the greater availability of

--- [PDF Page 90 / Book Page 66] ---

66

Mattheou

numerical data, an improved technology for storing, manipulating and retrieving data,
and the widespread use of new statistical techniques’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 58),
had improved the scientific character of the social science approach in ‘dealing with
problems of bias, tendentiousness and even caprice and willfulness’ (Noah & Eckstein,
1969: 90); hence their call for the accession of comparative education into the realm
of social sciences, especially as it concerns the adoption of ‘empirical and quantitative
methods of inquiry’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 113).
Criticism of this unilateral perception of the scientific method with all its undue
emphasis on co-relational, empirical, quantitative and objective character came from
many quarters. Kazamias for example, who had advocated a synthesis of history and
social science, would not accept as scientific and explanatory covariational studies that
failed to make their theoretical basis explicit (Kazamias, 1963; Kazamias & Schwartz,
1970). Other critics like Toulmin (1961) and Barber (1972) would not accept that there
was a single method of science utilised by working scientists and that this method provided a guarantee for objective knowledge, which, on top of that, could be universally
valid. Interestingly, criticism of this mode of science came also from proponents of the
scientific method in comparative education.
Brian Holmes too was not ready to accept that co-relational studies, no matter how
skillfully carried out, could ever lead to general propositions of universal validity and he
was therefore not ready to accept that these propositions could serve as a reliable basis
for valid predictions and trustworthy policy proposals. His first reservation came from
the hypothetico-inductive character of the empiricist approach. Carefully collected data
on the basis of an intuitively formulated hypothesis – normally involving preconception and bias – could at best lead to its verification only within its frame of reference;
this was, according to him, a limitation inherent in the inductive method, which parenthetically was not anymore accepted as the method of (physical) science. His second
reservation came from the recognition of the fact that in empirical studies ‘too little
attention is usually paid to conceptual analysis prior to operationalising variables’, as it
is assumed that ‘unambiguous and meaningful indicators can be identified and operationalised’ (Holmes, 1981: 68) without due consideration of the different meanings,
different ideologies and value systems they endow concepts with. Finally, according to
Holmes, emphasis on empirical testing and measurement, on variables that can easily
be quantified, leaves no room for an account of important national or cultural peculiarities; of the Sadlerian ‘living spirit’ or of the ideological whims of policy makers that
have on so many occasions played a central role in decision taking.
To address the limitations of the empirical approach Holmes proposes a different
comparative method. He starts by limiting the scope of his investigation. He refuses
to get involved in the unfeasible task of discovering universal laws, but prefers to
deal with the analysis and resolution of a specific problem, preferably of a ‘technical’
problem, which exists under certain characteristic and identifiable circumstances and
which is of significance to policy making. His immediate reaction, in his problemsolving approach, is to proceed – after the careful analysis of the problem and the
appreciation of the ‘initial’ conditions (the context within which the problem exists
and its policy solution will be implemented) have been completed – to the formulation of a hypothesis/policy proposal that would best solve the problem. This proposal

--- [PDF Page 91 / Book Page 67] ---

The Scientific Paradigm in Comparative Education

67

is only tentative, problem-specific and context-specific, refutable and open to testing
only through comparing anticipated results, logically deduced from it, with the actual
outcomes from its implementation. Holmes’ attempt to apply to comparative education
the hypothetico-deductive method which, according to him, is the method of physical
science is plainly clear. His conviction on the issue and on the plausibility of transferring and incorporating it to comparative education led him to the extensive exploration
of relevant epistemological and methodological issues and to the utilisation of various
theoretical perspectives from scholars such as Popper, Dewey, Weber, Myrdral, etc.
From all his theoretical stances, prediction as the demarcation criterion of science
attracted perhaps the most severe criticism. He was reminded that prediction in human
and social affairs is an unfeasible task, given the complexity and uncertainty of society
and man’s freedom of the will (King, 1967); a criticism to which he responded that
prediction is not equivalent to long-term prophesies and in any case it is not about
extracting certainties but rather probabilities, a situation that has not prevented people
from organising systems of public transportation or from calculating insurance premiums (Holmes, 1981: 79). The heat of the debate had actually inflated the issue of
prediction out of its normal proportions.
On the other hand, reflecting perhaps the influence of the English (and European)
humanistic tradition in comparative education, the problem-solving approach reserved a
place for history (Mattheou, 1993). The use of ‘normative patterns’ at the cross-national
level – this highly internalised set of values and norms inherited from the past, codified
in ideal-typical models based on the work of historically renowned thinkers (e.g. Plato,
Dewey, Marx) and responsible for human behaviour – is indicative in this respect. The
same is true for the ‘pattern of mental states’ at the national level; those ‘lower valuations’ or ‘mores’ which ‘constitute, if you will, Sadler’s “living spirit”, or Mallinson’s
“national character” ’ (Holmes, 1981: 83). Thus, in a way, the Holmesian scientific
approach came, in my judgement, closer to satisfying Kazamias appeal for a synthesis
of history and social science (Kazamias, 1963; Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977).
The eclecticism of the problem-solving approach in comparative education prevented its use in actual comparative research. On the other hand, research financiers
and policy makers are sceptical of methodological approaches that do not lead to
clear-cut proposals, that are not supportive to ideologically preconceived policies and
that do not provide reassurances for their success within their own term of office.
So, the scientific method that finally prevailed was that of the American functionalist
and empirical school of thought in the social sciences. Major comparative research
projects like the IEA studies, followed the empirical-quantitative road.
On the other hand, the scientific methodology that finally prevailed seemed to be
compatible with and well-suited to the needs and priorities of educational policy at
the time. To some extent one could argue that comparative research of economists and
human capital theorists interested in Third World development played a substantial
part in laying down the political agenda for education policy making and certainly in
providing arguments to educational reformers. Exponents of development education
(Harbison & Myers, 1964; Adams, 1977; Anderson & Bowman, 1965) and modernisation theorists (like Wiener, 1966; Levy, 1966) with all their reassuring evidence
were the cornerstone of reform almost everywhere, with policy makers prompt to call

--- [PDF Page 92 / Book Page 68] ---

68

Mattheou

upon the hard facts of scientific research. In this sense social science had become a
convenient alibi and/or a legitimising means for the prevailing political orthodoxy in
education. Educational expansion and hence increased funding of the educational sector were argued on the basis of human capital theory (Schultz, 1963; Bowen, 1964)
and of the utilisation of the latent pool of talents. The comprehensive school movement drew support from sociological research findings (Halsey et al., 1961). Technical
assistance programmes to Third World countries were also given the blessings of technocrats and several academic experts prior to their approval (UNESCO, 1972; Adams
& Bjork, 1971).

The Decline of the Search for an All-Embracing Paradigm
By the mid-1970s the scientific approach of the 1960s to comparative education lost its
momentum. Developments in the real world and in academia may be held responsible
for the decline of its appeal.
In the first place, many promises – social justice and mobility, uninterrupted economic growth, elimination of underdevelopment – were not kept: ‘scientific’ research
and planning had failed to live up to their reassurances as to the righteousness and
the effectiveness of their policy proposals (Húsen, 1982). The hard facts of life had
in practice rendered unreliable all the grandiloquent statements about the objective,
infallible and positive character of the scientific approach, thus undermining the
very foundations of its reputation. Scientific comparative education was not in this
sense better suited for the job than other alternative methodological approaches. This
explains perhaps why so many different approaches and perspectives found a place in
comparative education during the following decades.
A second reason for the decline of the supremacy of the scientific method in comparative education should be sought in the changing epistemological pattern in the
natural sciences. The quantum mechanics paradigm in physics was suggesting that
god might eventually play dice; uncertainty and perhaps chaos rather than the rule of
law might be the order of the day in nature. And if this was true for physics, then social
sciences (and comparative education) could not hope for anything more. The scientific method could not claim supremacy on epistemological and practical grounds over
other alternative approaches.
In addition, the post-modern climate, the devaluing of grand theories into grand narratives, favoured in the social sciences the development of new cognitive domains, new
theories and new approaches; despite their more qualitative, participatory or subjective
character, these approaches were given an equivalent academic status. Thus, comparative education itself saw the emergence of new approaches and methodologies that
were disputing and negating the dominance of the scientific paradigm of the 1960s;
academics’ inclination to explore new regimes of truth had certainly played its role.
Already by the 1980s one could rightfully suggest that ‘there are now many schools
of thought in comparative education and none has dominance’ (Altbach, 1991: 493);
consequently it would be more accurate to speak today about comparative educations
rather than about comparative education (Cowen, 2000).

--- [PDF Page 93 / Book Page 69] ---

The Scientific Paradigm in Comparative Education

69

The decline of ‘scientific’ comparative education does not certainly imply that it has
lost all its influence or its adherents. After all, ‘there are always some men who cling to
one or another of the older views’ (Kuhn, 1970: 19). This is even more true for those
past paradigms that had served their stakeholders well. In this sense, the covariational,
quantitative and empirical sort of comparative education has consistently served politicians well. They have repeatedly relied on it for the legitimation and promotion of their
preconceived policies. The longevity of the IEA studies and the influence programmes
like PISA have on policy making bear witness to this fact.

Coda
Referring to the development of national systems of education Hans had argued that
every system corresponds to a complex edifice of various architectural styles, each
related to the historical period its different apartments were built (Hans, 1958: 10).
The metaphor seems somehow appropriate for the development of comparative education too. Its forefathers had discovered a privileged site for educational study amidst
the marshy land of nineteenth century educational borrowing. They had decided to
build an edifice on it that would contribute to the utilisation of its fertile ground; to
a better understanding of the interplay between society and education through history. When later on difficulties arose, their successors, equipped with new ‘scientific
technologies’, built a new and presumably stronger estate. Ever since, new buildings
have been erected, each following different architectural styles and contributing to an
allegedly better utilisation of the land.
From the very beginning some of those buildings were occupied by tenants related
to policy making. Yet the rest remain in the hands of the academic community and are
still being expanded. Fortunately enough, they constitute the habitat of criticism, innovative thinking and creativity; the place where episteme, the art of endless, laborious
but intellectually rewarding search for truth resides.

References
Adams, D. & Bjork, R. (1971). Education in developing areas. New York: David Mc Kay.
Adams, D. & Farrell, J. (1967). Education and social development. Syracuse: Syracuse Center for
Development Education.
Adams, D. (1977). Development education. Comparative Education Review, 21(2/3), 296–310.
Altbach, Ph. (1991). Trends in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 35(3), 491–507.
Anderson, C. A. & Bowman, M. J. (1965). Education and economic development. Chicago: Aldine.
Anderson, C. A. (1961). Methodology of comparative education. International Review of Education, 7(1),
1–23.
Anderson, C. A. (1977). Comparative education over a quarter century: maturity and challenges. Comparative
Education Review, 21(2/3), 405–416.
Arnold, M. (1869). Culture and Anarchy, Project Gutenberg, http://www.gutenberg.org/
Barber, B. (1972). Science, salience and comparative education: Some reflections on social scientific inquiry.
Comparative Education Review, 16(3), 424–436.
Bereday, G. Z. F. (1957). Some discussion of methods in comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, 1(1), 13–15.
Bereday, G. Z. F. (1964). Comparative method in education. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

--- [PDF Page 94 / Book Page 70] ---

70

Mattheou

Bowen, W. (1964). Economic aspects of education. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Clayton, S. (1972). Valuation in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 15(3), 412–423.
Cohen, M. & Nagel, E. (1934). An introduction to logic and scientific method. New York: Harcourt, Brace
& World.
Cowen, R. (2000). Comparing futures or comparing pasts? Comparative Education, 36(3), 333–342.
Davies, N. (1997). Europe, a history. London: Pimlico.
Epperson, D. & Schmuck (1963). The uses of social psychology in comparative education. Comparative
Education Review, 6(1), 182–190.
Farrell, J. P. (1979). The necessity of comparisons in the study of education: the salience of science and the
problem of comparability. Comparative Education Review, 23(1), 3–16.
Foster, P. (1960). Comparative methodology and the study of African education. Comparative Education
Review, 4(2), 110–117.
Halsey, A., Floud, J. & Anderson, C. A. (1961). Education, society and economy. New York: The Free Press
of Glencoe.
Hans, N. (1958). Comparative education: A study of educational factors and traditions. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
Harbison, F. & Myers, A. (1964). Education, manpower and economic growth: Strategies for human resource
development. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education. A comparative approach. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Holmes, B. (1981). Comparative education: Some considerations of method. London: George Allen &
Unwin.
Humbold, W. V. (1961). Von dem griechischen Charakter überhaupt und der idealistischen Ansicht desselben
insbesondere (1808). Zitiert nach Weinstock, Auswahl aus den Werken Humbolds, Frankfurt.
Húsen, T. (1982). The school in question. A comparative study of the school and its future in western societies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kandel, I. (1955). The new era in education: A comparative study. Boston: Houghton Mittlin.
Kazamias, A. & Schwartz, K. (1970). Woozles and wizzles in comparative education. Comparative
Education Review, 14(3), 255–561.
Kazamias, A. & Schwartz, K. (1977). Intellectual and ideological perspectives in comparative education: An
interpretation. Comparative Education Review, 21(2/3), 153–176.
Kazamias, A. (1961). Some old and new approaches to methodology in comparative education. Comparative
Education Review, 5(1), 90–96.
Kazamias, A. (1963). History, science and comparative education: A study in methodology. International
Review of Education, 8(3/4), 383–398.
Kerlinger, F. (1965). Foundations of behavioral research. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Wilson.
King, E. (1967). Comparative studies and educational decision. London: Methuen.
King, E. (1976). Other schools and ours – comparative studies for today. London: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Kuhn, Th. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lawton, D. (1976). Social change, education theory and curriculum planning. London: Hodder &
Stoughton.
Levy, M. J. (1966). Modernization and the structure of societies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Mattheou, D. (1993). National character in comparative education – conceptual, epistemological and
methodological approaches in the English comparative school of thought. Ekpaideutika [Education
Quarterly], 29–30, 187–213. [In Greek].
Mattheou, D. (1997). Comparative study of education. Issues and methods. Athens: ESPAIDEPE. [In Greek].
Mattheou, D. (2006). Physical sciences and the paedeia of the modern citizen – traditions and prospects.
In A. Trilianos et al. (Eds.), Recognition (pp. 295–314). Athens: University of Athens Department of
Primary Education. [In Greek].
Mazower, M. (1998). The dark continent. Europe’s twentieth century. London: Penguin Books.
McLean, M. (1995). Educational traditions compared – content, teaching and learning in industrialized
countries. London: Fulton.

--- [PDF Page 95 / Book Page 71] ---

The Scientific Paradigm in Comparative Education

71

Noah, H. & Eckstein, M. (1969). Towards a science of comparative education. London: Macmillan.
Parnes, H. (Ed.). (1962). Planning education for economic and social development. Paris: OECD.
Sadler, M. (1964). How far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of foreign systems of
education?. Comparative Education Review, 7(3), 307–314.
Schultz, W. (1963). The economic value of education. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sobel, I. (1982). The human capital revolution in economic development. In P, Altbach, R. Arnove &
G. Kelly (Eds.), Comparative education (pp. 54–77). London: Collier Macmillan.
Templeton, R. (1958). Some reflections on the theory of comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, 2(3), 27–31.
Toulmin, S. (1961). Foresight and understanding. London: Hutchinson.
UNESCO, International Commission on the Development Education (1972). Learning to be. Paris:
UNESCO.
Whitfield, R. (Ed.) (1971). Disciplines of the curriculum. London: McGraw-Hill.
Wiener, M. (Ed.) (1966). Modernization. New York: Basic Books.

