================================================================================
Chapter 06: Theories of The State, Educational Expansion, Development, and Globalizations: Marxian and Critical Approaches
Author(s): Liliana Esther Olmos and Carlos Alberto Torres
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 1: The Creation and Re-creation of a Field
Book Pages: pp. 73–86
PDF Pages: pp. 96–109 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 96 / Book Page 73] ---

6
THEORIES OF THE STATE, EDUCATIONAL
EXPANSION, DEVELOPMENT, AND
GLOBALIZATIONS: MARXIAN
AND CRITICAL APPROACHES
Liliana Esther Olmos and Carlos Alberto Torres

Introduction
Education has in modern times been situated within the nation-state. It has been shaped
by the demands within the state to prepare labor for participation in its economy and
to prepare citizens to participate in the polity. This approximate congruence of nationstate and formalized education becomes problematic as globalization processes place
limits on state autonomy and national sovereignty, affecting education in various ways.
The twentieth century has been marked by the expansion of educational opportunities worldwide. It has been the century of education, and the role of the state in the
promotion of public education has been decisive. Yet, at the millennium’s turn efforts
to diminish the role of the state were rapidly changing education, especially in terms
of its role in democracy.
Theories of the state, the nature of the state, and the nature of public policy have substantive importance for an understanding of the political nature of education and public
policy formation. Defining the “real” problems of education and the most appropriate
(e.g., cost-effective, ethically acceptable, and legitimate) solutions depends greatly on
the theories of the state that underpin, justify, and guide the educational diagnosis
and proponed solutions. There is, however, a permanent challenge here. As Martin
Carnoy (1992) has argued, most analyses of educational problems have implicit in
them a theory of the state but seldom are the fundamentals of that theory recognized
or spelled out in educational research and practice. Becoming self-reflective about our
own assumptions seems to be a precondition for solid scholarship.
Therefore, this chapter briefly reviews classical theories of the relationship between
the state and education, in particular neoliberal theories, and Marxist critiques of these
formulations. Obviously, any analysis of the relationships between education and the
state should take into account the multilayered, complex, and dynamic nature of these
relationships, revealing the multitude of tensions and contradictions that emerge out
of the historical and social force buffeting political and educational institutions. This
comment is due to the weaknesses of some theories, which often tend to assume a single causal factor of educational expansion, and ignore the importance, which the state,
73
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 73–86.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 97 / Book Page 74] ---

74

Olmos and Torres

operating under concrete structural, political, and historical constraints, attaches to the
contribution that education might make to its functions in the area of accumulation
and legitimation. Further, most of these theories lack rootedness in specific historical
context of particular educational systems and their development, a historical sensitivity which is indispensable for the formulation of sound theoretical explanations of
educational expansion. On the other side, the type of criticism represented by Marxism
is unique in that it includes a self-critical concept since Marxism is a theory of history,
which in turn, tries to offer a history of theory. P. Anderson cited in Amadeo (2006),
page 53.
Finally, to draw attention to the sort of questions concerning education and the state
which are brought into focus by the argument presented here, the analysis is placed in
the context of the globalization of economies, and cultures, using as a case in point the
educational experience of the last decades within Latin American societies.

Educational Expansion and the State
We have argued elsewhere against grand theories explaining educational expansion,
whether they are functional or world system theories. The approach we attempt to
develop concentrates on the historical circumstances of capital accumulation and
political legitimation in specific countries, and their influences on educational growth.
This approach explains how various Third World countries have developed dual educational systems—one for the wealthier group, and the other for the subordinate ones.
We exemplify our approach by the Latin American experience of social change and
educational expansion. Yet, the conclusions we draw and the further research questions
we pose are applicable to many countries.
In the last 30 years educational expansion has attracted considerable attention from
Weberian, Functionalist, and Marxist scholars alike. Although these analyses have
focused largely on the European and North-American experience, some attempts have
been made in more recent years to examine and explain patterns of educational expansion in countries of the so-called Third World.
This latter line of inquiry has been guided by a primary concern with the impact of
the world system of which each nation-state in the contemporary world is a constituent
element.
In conceptualizing the world as a single social system, it is argued that its organizational and cultural milieu penetrates the various structural characteristics of all
countries. The key elements of this shared culture are: (1) common national economic
development goals; (2) an educated citizenry seen as a prized asset from all political
perspectives; (3) the belief that individuals and countries are not static but improvable;
and (4) that in the context of a capitalist world economy “development means success in economic competition.” The causes of this universal educational expansion are
therefore seen to lie in characteristics of the contemporary world system, which affect
all nations simultaneously in similar ways.
However, this particular argument and body of literature suffer from a number of
problems. It simply postulates the existence of a world historical transformation which

--- [PDF Page 98 / Book Page 75] ---

Theories of the State, Educational Expansion, Development, and Globalizations

75

gave rise to it, and why it is that one is justified in treating educational systems and
their recent development as being autonomous of or discontinuous with their prewar
legacy. It is as if some sort of a “Big Bang” brought into being a unique world system
and the associated patterns of educational developments. The causes and consequences of educational expansion prior to 1945 are treated as irrelevant for explaining
later developments. Likewise, educational reform in societies undergoing rapid social
transformation has attracted the attention of scholars (Carnoy & Samoff, 1990; Torres,
1991; Ginsburg, 1991).

Capital Accumulation and Educational Development
It is true that most “Third World” societies, including those which have achieved independent nationhood in the wake of postwar decolonization, have been subjected to the
historical experience of underdevelopment and, thus, share certain structural characteristics relative to the constraints inherent to their economic development and the process
of capital accumulation. Yet, it is questionable whether they share, along with the
advanced capitalist nations of the world, a common organizational and cultural milieu.
We argue in this chapter that, analytically, it is more fruitful to approach the study of
educational development in these societies in relation to the global process of capital
accumulation, to which they were subjected under the historically concrete conditions
of capitalist expansion and/or colonization. Colonial and postcolonial eras represent
two different sets of conditions for capital accumulation and educational development
or expansion. While postcolonial expansion of education has been taking place in
changed domestic and international context, it is conditioned in important ways by the
patterns of educational growth during the colonial period. The study of educational
expansion or growth in relation to the process of capital accumulation, as it proceeds
at the national and global levels, calls for a political economy framework of analysis.
This should systematically explore the historical linkages between the pre- and postwar developments, by focusing on the dynamic interaction between the state, capitalist
accumulation and educational expansion.
Political economy’s starting premise is that we can come to know a society’s key structures and understand its diverse and specific social practices by examining the way in
which the members of that society produce and reproduce the conditions of their existence.
In this perspective, schooling in contemporary societies is treated as a distinct institutional
complex with its own diverse and distinct social practices and purposes, but one that is
shaped by both the dynamics and contradictions of the capital accumulation process and
the power relations between different economic, political, and social groups. Because
power relations among groups are expressed in increasingly important ways through a
society’s political structures, and more specifically the state, any political economy analysis of the educational system must be based on some implicit or explicit analysis or theory
of the purposes or functioning of the democratic state.
The modern state refers to a complex of institutions, such as the government—which
means the bureaucracy, the military, the judiciary, and representative assemblies—
including provincial and municipal institutions of government. According to the

--- [PDF Page 99 / Book Page 76] ---

76

Olmos and Torres

traditional approach, the liberal democratic state must perform two basic but often contradictory functions: to foster capital accumulation and social harmony and consensus.
These “functions” refer to what are merely tendencies at work within the capitalist
state. Whether the state meets these requirements, and the manner and the extent to
which it is able to do so, is not preordained in the state structure, but is conditioned by
the historical specificities attendant upon its operation. While this model of the dual
functions of the sate might be theoretically adequate for analyzing democratic state,
this is not so with respect to policies of the colonial state or, in many cases, the postcolonial one. The colonial state, because of its inherently unrepresentative and coercive
character, has been much less concerned with the so-called legitimation function.
It follows, therefore, that educational expansion policies pursued by the colonial state
cannot fruitfully be interpreted in terms of the contradictory demands of capital accumulation and legitimation. Capital accumulation functions, and minimal requirements
of constructing the state apparatus with adequate administrative-coercive capacity,
have historically weighed far more heavily in the development of the educational policies of the colonial state.
Indeed, it is necessary to identify different phases in the development of the capitalist
accumulation process on a global scale, and then analyze the dynamics of educational
expansion nationally, in relation to the timing and mode of insertion of particular societies into the global system. The time and mode of insertion of historically distinct
national political economies into the global accumulation process, the legacy of educational systems which predated such insertion, and the social and cultural specificities
of their social structures, are the three sets of factors which have been and continue to
be crucial in shaping the structure and growth of their educational systems.

Marxism as a Critical Theory
In order to examine such decisive features as the ones developed in this chapter, a
brief but necessary explanation about the reasons we have to privilege the Marxian
theoretical corpus is required here. Furthermore, how do we understand the significance of going back to such fundamental and irreplaceable source of critical thinking
as Marxism? And, if the matter of returning is at hand, why was it that so many of us
chose to distance ourselves in the first place and are now coming back to it?
First, the destiny of Marxism as a critical theory—or, in paraphrasing Jean-Paul
Sartre cited by Boron, A. Por el necesario (y demorado) retorno del marxismo, as the
indispensable critical horizon of our time, has been indifferent neither to the changes
generated by socialist revolutions nor to the highs and lows of popular wars fought
in the twentieth century. We are convinced that a theory of history such as Marxism
which in turn offers a history of theory, has survived as an intellectual and political
tradition due to two principal factors that are not the only ones but appear to be the
most important. The first factor is capitalism’s constant incapacity to confront and
resolve the problems and challenges that originated through its own being. As long as
the capitalist system proceeds to condemn the growing sector of modern societies to
exploitation and all forms of oppression—such as poverty, marginalization, and social

--- [PDF Page 100 / Book Page 77] ---

Theories of the State, Educational Expansion, Development, and Globalizations

77

exclusion—and creates nonstop damage to the environment through its brutal commercialization of water, air, and earth, the conditions to pursue an alternative vision for
society along with a practical methodology to end these effects will always be present.
J. P. Sartre, cited in Boron (2006), page 35.
The second factor is that this theory has demonstrated an unusual capacity to deepen
itself in accordance with the historical developments of societies and the struggles for
emancipation of those who are exploited and oppressed by the system. Yet, it cannot be
ignored how Marxism is negatively affected by the lack of strategic dialogue in terms
of a political project capable of unifying and combining the energies, which is one of
its central problems that must be resolved if Marxism wants to be retransformed into
a philosophy of praxis.
To conclude, we would like to bring back Sartre’s analysis of Marxism. This still
possesses vigor. In Questions de Méthode, the French philosopher affirmed that a
philosophy will continue to be efficient as long as the praxis through which it was
engendered and sustained remains alive. Once everyone has access to a margin of
real freedom from the production of life, Marxism will disappear and a philosophy of
freedom will emerge in its place. However, we are devoid of any intellectual tool or
concrete experience that would allow us to conceive of this freedom or philosophy. For
these reasons, Marxism continues to be the unsurpassable philosophy of our time, as
the circumstances that engendered it have yet to be overcome (Amadeo 2006).

Education and the State
The concept of the state has become one of the very few in contemporary social sciences
endowed with the capacity to foster a rich theoretical and methodological debate, not to
mention the inflamed political controversy raised by its practical existence. It has regained
recognition as a key concept in the history of political research. Discussions about theories of the state acquired new vigor in the early 1970s, as a result of debates concerning
the Marxist political theory of the state and the work of Antonio Gramsci, and in the
1980s, in mainstream political science discussions of the autonomy of the democratic
state. Now, why is the notion of the state so important in an understanding of educational
policies and practices? The literature shows that the answer to this question should be
drafted in the context of the relationships between education and government, education
and the economy, and education and citizenship building. This is in view of the fact that
educational systems and practices are sponsored, mandated, organized, and certified by
the state, therefore their analysis cannot be separated from role, purpose, and functioning
of the government.
However, the relationships among education, politics, and the state cannot be discussed only from the perspective of mainstream political culture. Despite what those
advocating “technocratic” or “technicist” views of educational research, curriculum,
and educational policy would like to believe education is neither politically neutral nor
technically “objective.” As Paulo Freire has consistently claimed in his work, there is
an inherent “politicity” of education that has epistemological, analytical, and ethical
implications. This politicity relates foremost to the explicit but also the subtle linkages

--- [PDF Page 101 / Book Page 78] ---

78

Olmos and Torres

between education and power. At the same time, it is related to the political nature of
the state and public education as contested arenas and sites for exchanges of goods
and services and competition involving political-economic projects (Freire, 1994). In
summary, prevailing notions of the state held by policymakers and researchers influence the dominant research agenda, the analysis of educational problems, and policy
prescriptions. Theories of the state also influence educational research per se. At a concrete and practical rather than abstract level, theories of the state held by government
coalitions and educational bureaucracies will influence not only research but also the
planning and operation of educational systems. Discussions about theories of the state
and education encompass a broad range of theories regarding the relationships among
education, the state, and civil society. By implication, theories of the state define the
nature, purpose, and role of educational research, policy, and practices.
Theories of the state give substance to the range of moral and ethical dimensions
(and roles) attributed to education and schooling in the process of cognitive socialization and construction of cultural identities. Moreover, theories of the state (and their
precepts regarding the linkages among power, state, and society) will guide the constitution of national, regional, or local educational policies of schooling, including job
training programs, and the knowledge that is deemed legitimate and official.

Liberal, Neoconservative, and Neoliberal States
Liberal-pluralist theories of the state conceive this as a political system, as an autonomous political institution independent from the system of production and class
structure. The state appears, then as a neutral referee overseeing and regulating the
clashes between interest groups and eventually elites competing for resources conflict with the general interest of all citizens or when the state, pursuing independent
activities, attempts to modernize society. The liberal view suggests that the state is the
collective creation of its individual members, providing a set of common social goods,
including defense, education, a legal system, and the means of enforcing that system
to all the majority of citizens and legal residents. At this point, we would like to posit
the following question: are there any connections between the conservative and the
neoliberal state? Taking a world system approach based on Wallerstein’s work, the
distinction of metropolitan, semiperipheral, and peripheral countries plays an important role in designating the nature of the state. Neoconservative political economy has
emerged, partly, as a reaction to welfare states in metropolitan state formations. Many
of these state formations have been characterized as industrially advanced societies or
late capitalism. Indeed, the majority of neoconservative experiences have taken place
in states that have not been historically subject to colonization. Moreover, with few
exceptions, these states have not been colonized themselves, profiting from colonizing
regions of the world later identified as Third World states.
The notions of neoliberalism and the neoliberal state appear to be “exported” from
the center to the periphery and semiperiphery. The point can be illustrated with a discussion of Latin America and regions of the South in the last few decades. No doubt,
a neoliberal ideology and narrative are consolidated in the central countries. Given the

--- [PDF Page 102 / Book Page 79] ---

Theories of the State, Educational Expansion, Development, and Globalizations

79

implications of the liberal past of metropolitan societies, the specific debates within the
political parties and the influence of neoconservative economics in globalization, the
notion of neoliberalism in central countries appears almost interchangeable with the
notion of neoconservatism in political economy. Lomnitz and Melnick (1991) argue
that, historically and philosophically, neoliberalism has been associated with structural
adjustment programs. Structural adjustment, in turn, is usually described as a broad
range of policies recommended by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund,
and other financial organizations. Although the World Bank differentiates among stabilization, structural adjustment, and adjustment policies, it acknowledges that the
general use of these terms “is often imprecise and inconsistent” (Samoff, 1990).
Neoliberalism offers similar prescriptions. The politics of neoliberalism, when
transported to the countries of the periphery, constitute a set of proposals that refer to
the conditions of the countries of the South in the international context, particularly
in the division of labor. Neoliberalism strives to pass the cost of educational services
to clients through user fees, increasing the participation of the private sector in education (i.e., privatization), and promoting decentralization of educational services as a
means of redefining the power and educational relations among federal, provincial,
and municipal governments. These standard policy prescriptions overlap heavily with
neoconservatism (Torres, 2007).
Changes in state formation entail a change in the production of hegemony and commonsense interpretations of everyday life and, particularly, a change in the political
alliances controlling the state, from liberalism to neoconservative and neoliberalism.
Replacing the role of the state with the logic of the market in determining educational
policy is criticized as a class strategy in the neoliberal state (Ball, 1993). A similar
argument is made about the withdrawal of state investment in public education in Latin
America and how that would affect the constitution of citizens as pedagogical subjects
(Torres & Puiggrós, 1995). Changes in the labor process relate to the move away from
a mode of production defined as the transformation of Fordism to a post-Fordist model
(with implications for the process of skilling and deskilling of the labor force and the
logic of technical control in curriculum) (Apple, 1982).

From the Nation-State to Globalizations: A Critical Perspective
Despite their increasing historical specificity, and because of their normative and analytical orientations, critical perspectives have, by and large, focused on the nation-state
as the locus of politics and education. The notion of globalization, however, has transformed the debate, raising the stakes of emancipatory politics in education.
Globalization has been defined as “the intensification of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in such a way that local happenings are shaped by
events occurring many miles away and vice versa” (Held, 1991). Among other things,
Held suggests that globalization is the product of the emergence of a global economy,
expansion of transnational linkages between economic units creating new forms of collective decision making, development of intergovernmental and quasi-supranational
institutions, intensifications of transnational communications, and the creation of new

--- [PDF Page 103 / Book Page 80] ---

80

Olmos and Torres

regional and military orders. The process of globalization is seen as blurring national
boundaries, shifting solidarities within and between nation-states, and deeply affecting
the identities of national and interest groups. Neil Smelser (1993) captures the spirit of
this theme quite well.
A convenient starting-point for depicting the world situation is to consider the status
of the nation-state. Once commonly supposed to be the natural and sovereign focus of
the loyalty and solidarity of its citizens, this idea of the state has recently been challenged with respect to all of these constituent elements. The international boundaries
of the state have become permeable through the greater globalization of production,
trade, finance, and culture with a resultant loss of control of all states over their own
fortunes. The sovereignty of states has been further compromised through shifting patterns of regional political federations and alliances. At the sub-national level, the state
has found itself challenged by the efflorescence and revitalization of solidarity groupings with multiple bases—regional, linguistic, religious, ethnic, gender, and solidarity.
All of these compete with the state for the loyalties of peoples and sometimes for
jurisdiction over territory. In a word, the contemporary state has been pressured from
both above and below by contested boundaries and shifting solidarities.
The capitalist state, although territorially defined, was born and develops a loose
network of interrelated and overlapping jurisdictions. The regulatory framework for
corporate capitalism which emerged from the last part of the nineteenth century was
based on the nation-state but involved emulation and transplantation of forms, as
well as international coordination; and it facilitated international ownership of capital
through the transnational corporation which became the dominant form in the twentieth
century. Transnational corporations have favored minimal international coordination
while strongly supporting the national state, since they can take advantage of regulatory differences and loopholes. Processes of international coordination of states
relying on national legitimation, have taken the form of bureaucratic-administrative
bargaining though a motley network of informal structures as well as the more grand
organizations. The growing globalization of social reactions has put increasing pressure on both national and international state structures (Ruccio et al., 1991)
The growing internationalization of the state is still an open quo terms of its scope
and dynamics. Likewise, the implications of this internationalization and globalization for educational policies, textbooks, and curriculum are hitherto lacking empirical
and theoretical research. There are exceptions. In an eight-country study of reforms of
teacher education, Popkewitz and Pereyra (1993) argued that international organizations, such as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD);
and the European community are playing crucial roles in promoting changes in regulations governing teacher education.
The role of international organizations in the process of globalization and the
nation-state has been aptly discussed by Joel Samoff, who studied the World Bank’s
logic of lending in education. By his account, the World Bank is one of the most
prominent regulatory agencies of the capitalist system. Samoff argues persuasively
that the World Bank is a major player in an intellectual and financial complex pursuing
the transnationalization of knowledge and expertise, using a community of experts
for hire in a process where there is a strong confluence of research and educational
financing. The world is seen as having a pivotal role in the network of power and

--- [PDF Page 104 / Book Page 81] ---

Theories of the State, Educational Expansion, Development, and Globalizations

81

decision making in education worldwide, influencing in peculiar ways research and
policy-making in developing countries as well as influencing the international discourse in education by different means. First and foremost is the commissioning of
long-term research with abundant budgets. This terminology, as presented in most of
the World Bank’s documents, is based mostly on a neoclassical economy of education, human capital theory, and a theory of the firm applied to education. Through its
financial weight and operational reach, the World Bank also influences the methods of
analysis considered appropriate and legitimate (e.g. cost-benefit analysis, input-output
analysis, and rate of return), defends a technocratic instrumental rationality rather than
a politically and historically informed policy orientation, and confers legitimacy to
hypotheses and research findings that its experts deem useful and necessary for educational investment and development. Samoff (1992, 1993) would agree that there is a
diversity of theoretical perspectives within the ranks of the World Bank’s researchers.
But he points out that the organization’s logic is implacably applied in the context of
its lending and that the workings of its managers in charge of lending are distant from
the theoretical and empirical analysis of its researchers. The World Bank’s logic of
analysis cannot be characterized as pluralistic. Although not free from tensions and
contradictions, the organization is quite monolithic (Samoff, 1992, 1993). Similarly,
in studying the influence of the World Bank in higher education throughout the world,
Daniel Schugurensky has argued that the World Bank plays a role at an international
level similar to the one played by the Business Roundtable in the United States with
its agenda for educational reform. In short, there is an elective affinity between the
policies promoted by the World Bank and the many neoliberal and neoconservative
proposals emanating from the Business Roundtable (Schugurensky, 1994)

The State and Education in Latin America
We offer here a brief account of historical and theoretical context for a discussion on
the state and education expansion in the Latin American region. The nineteenth-century liberal state, and the diverse state models that emerged in the wake of the struggles
of the 1920s and the depression of the 1930s, granted to public education systems a
major role in the integration and legitimation of the political systems a major role
in the integration and legitimation of the political systems and the modernization of
Latin American countries. As part of its development policies the state extended social
benefits to vast sectors of the population, particularly in Argentina, Costa Rica, and
Mexico. Education played a key role in these social programs, because mass schooling
was viewed as a means of building a responsible citizen, skilled labor, and increasing
social mobility. In the early 1960s, human capital theories and educational planning
justified educational expansion not only as a good investment in skill training but also
as a prerequisite for liberal democracy.
The Latin American educational expansion during the early phase of industrialization in the 1960s accounts for the highest rates of educational growth in the world.
Between 1960 and 1970, the indices of growth for higher education and secondary
education were 247.9% and 258.3%, after which it grew by only 167.6%, while the
illiteracy rate remained more or less constant in most countries of the area. One

--- [PDF Page 105 / Book Page 82] ---

82

Olmos and Torres

study of the late 1970s shows a fundamental continuity in this pattern of educational
development. Ernesto Schiefelbein has argued that in the last four decades of the last
century, Latin America made significant progress toward democracy by “(i) expanding
access to education for most the children reaching school age; (ii) extending the years
of schooling; (iii) improving timely entrance to school, (iv) providing early care to an
increasing number of deprived children, and (v) increasing the provision of minimum
inputs and eliminating tracks for social levels.” However, changes took place against
this background, and were perhaps the result of a new global economy which was
emerging and operated in very different ways from the former industrial economy.
The old economy was based on high volume and highly standardized production with
a few managers controlling the production process from above and a great number of
workers following orders. Because of advances in transportation and communications
technology and the growth of service industry, production has become fragmented
around the world. The new global economy is more fluid and flexible, with multiple
lines of power and decision making thus, while the public education system in the old
capitalist order was oriented toward the production of a disciplined and reliable work
force, the new global economy seems to have redefined the goals of public educations
in development. The new roles for public education (and for many, the future of public
education) is at stake in the current debates about education policy.
From a political economy of education perspective, the performance of the economy
is a major issue underpinning educational policies. The question is to what extent the
prescribed recipes of structural adjustment as a cure to the economic malaise will
help or hinder educational expansion, quality of education, and equality of educational
opportunity in the region. This is the bedrock underscoring the political behavior of the
main actors concerned with educational services in Latin America today, particularly
teachers’ organizations, the neoliberal state and its agencies, and the role of international organizations, particularly the World Bank.
It is imperative to situate the national and regional educational policies of Latin
America within the context of global economic, political, and social changes of the past
years. The current regional context was affected by innumerable changes including the
rise of the newly industrialized countries in Asia and the Pacific rim, and its impact
on the models of economic development in Latin America; the promise of consolidation of regional economic markets (European Economic Commission, NAFTA, and
MERCOSUR); the intensification of competition among the major industrial powers of
Germany, Japan, and the United States; the opening of Eastern Europe; and the resurgences of regional ethnic and religious conflicts. These changes and contradictions were
increasingly related to the process of globalization of economies, cultures, and societies,
showing how very powerful are structural forces involved in education at times of severe
crisis and re-structuring of policy priorities and systems.

State Corporatism and Theories
Public education plays a major role in the legitimation of the political systems and the integrations and modernization of countries in Latin America in the context of corporatism

--- [PDF Page 106 / Book Page 83] ---

Theories of the State, Educational Expansion, Development, and Globalizations

83

and dependency. Although the “dependency perspective” should be placed in the context
of broad schools of development as modernization, postimperialism, and interactive local
political economy perspective among others, it focuses on the structure of international
capitalism and the lack of availability of capital for autonomous expansion of a less developed economy. Modernization focuses on the nature and characteristics of the social
structure of less developed countries as causes of underdevelopment. Postimperialism
theories attempt to explain underdevelopment as part of a process of transnational class
formation in the developing world. Finally the perspective that focuses on the interaction
of social domestic forces using a modern political economy emphasizes that the complex
interaction of domestic socioeconomic and political trends determine policy outcomes,
insisting on the centrality of economic pressures by domestic socioeconomic actors in the
determination of policy options and outcomes.
Political economists of education and political sociologists from a dependency
perspective have helped to identify the institutional identity of the state as crucial in
understanding the role education has played in development and social change. The
theory of the “conditioned states” in the Third World, expanding upon and clarifying
the notion of the dependent state, argues that the state is conditioned “by the nature of
the peripheral role that its economy plays in the world system and the significant (postfeudal) elements in its own political system”. Therefore, Latin American “conditioned
states” have not been able to carry out their public functions properly for a number of
reasons. On the one hand, the fragility of local economies made local dominant groups
unwilling to allow the pluralist participation of the masses in the selection of the state
bureaucracy. On the other hand, since the state historically has been identified by the
popular sectors more as a pact of domination by the dominant classes, or a surrogate
state, it has not been seen as an independent state working on behalf of the citizenry.
Another question is the ability of the state to consolidate the nation and the market.
Since the boundaries of the market are externally defined by the presence of external
powers and multinational corporations, the definition of the nation is continually and
historically re-elaborated by a complex matrix of exogenous-endogenous processes.
More often than not the conditioned state has little control over its own political economy dynamics.
While the notion of dependency, dependent-development, and the conditioned state
set the tone for a discussion on the nature of the state in Latin America, drawing from
the tradition of political corporatism, the notion of state corporatism from the political sociology of education has been employed to study the peculiar characteristics of
political regimes in the region, in particular educational policy formation in Mexico.
Education has played a fundamental role in the legitimation of the postrevolutionary state, and has contributed to state hegemony in Mexico. It has been argued that
the corporatist nature of the postrevolutionary state has deeply conditioned the way
educational policy has been organized, implemented, and evaluated, and that education
(particularly adult education) in Mexico is part of a comprehensive project of compensatory legitimation. While the Mexican case is perhaps too specific, it could be argued
that historical changes in the patterns of relationships between state and society during
this century created the conditions for the widespread implementation of corporatist
arrangements, and the development of corporatist states.

--- [PDF Page 107 / Book Page 84] ---

84

Olmos and Torres

The role of the conditioned state continues to be problematic for democracy and
public education in the region. While we have argued that the institutional identity
of the state is crucial in understanding the role education has played in development
and social change, the notion of the dependent or “conditioned” state helps to understand not only the contradictions in public policy formation, but also the disparate
roles and functions that the Latin American states play in the context of peripheral
capitalism. Conditioned by the dynamic of metropolitan capitalism, the significant
noncapitalist (although perhaps postfeudal) elements in its own political system, and
the political alliance in power, the nature of the democratic state in the region continues to pose serious constraints to the political and economic democratization of
civil societies. This is more so when, despite the political shortcomings of the Latin
American democracies and their limitations in endowments and resources, the liberal
state in the region attempted to develop a system of public education that provided
access and permanence to the system of public education that provided access and
permanence to the system to vast sectors of the population, including the poor. The
policy rationale was clearly synthesized by the premise that the state should “educate
the sovereign”. A critical extension but also de-construction of this premise emerged
in the 1960s with the notion of a pedagogy of the oppressed, conscientization, and
popular education. The current debate in the region is, on the one hand, whether the
systematic withdraw of resources from public education under the political economy
of neoliberalism has deeply affected the traditional educational role of the states, the
performance of the systems vis-à-vis equality of educational opportunity and quality of education, and by implication the nature of the democratic pact. On the other
hand, the prevailing theories and methodologies and the political–technical rationale
for educational planning, are seen as subsidiary to the main goals of neoliberalism.
These goals were expressed by international institutions like the IMF and World Bank
with their political economy of conditionalities and policy references, but were also
accepted and graciously implemented by neoliberal states in the region. The question
is whether, given the processes of globalization, these internationally induced policies are compatible with fundamental notions of democratic accountability national
sovereignty, and community empowerment. The question about the nature of the state
and public policy is also a question about the future of public education in Latin
America.

Conclusion
Current social, political, and economic changes in Latin America underscore the pace,
texture, and scope of educational development, educational quality, and the relevance
of education. In this context, educational planners and communities deal with the implications of the lack of economic growth in the 1980s and 1990s, the growing external
debt, increasing fiscal constraints, and intended and unintended impacts of structural
adjustment of economies and neoliberal states and policies. Alas, the relationships
between education and social change continue to be revisited by those seeking educational reform, but the challenges of poverty remain seemingly intractable for public
policies—especially education—and democracy.

--- [PDF Page 108 / Book Page 85] ---

Theories of the State, Educational Expansion, Development, and Globalizations

85

It is in the framework of this historical dialectical totality where the comprehension
of neoliberalism and globalization should insert themselves as foundational phenomena
of a new articulation of capitalistic domination, as primogenital forces from an intent
of rearticulating the relationships between the economic-technical subsystems and the
social-political-institutional sphere with a new qualitative connection among them.
Globalization is a sine qua non condition for the modern day phase of capitalism,
given the widespread movement of capital and the necessity to squash/destroy worker
resistance throughout the planet. One must remember that globalization is constructed
from the pillars of liberalization of the flow of capital, deregulation (flexibilization in the
capital-work relationship and liquidation of the social security) and competitiveness—
the last one understood as the unrestricted application of the two previous requisites.
The crisis of the neoliberal model does not follow a symmetric rhythm thus, given
the particularity of Latin America in historic cycles, it is very likely that this model
intends to implant itself in a phase in which it has lost international sustentation.
A large spectrum of alliances should be constructed, all of their efforts concentrated,
to coincide with the anticapitalist and libertarian character from the construction of an
alternative to neoliberalism and exclusionary globalization.
As Daniel Bensaid affirms, Marxist thought flourished as a result of the rigorous
research that demonstrates the extent to which the spectrums of Marxism impact the
present. The new century appears to be a promising period of creativity for the tradition of this theoretical framework.
The Marxist tradition as a social and political science of emancipation tied with the
sciences of current times, as part of a cognitive process of transformation and joint
action, is an interwoven praxis which should be recuperated. To reconstruct this critical
reason in the face of the growth of cynical reason is essential.
Constructing partial synthesis and successive approximations, reconstructing the
dialectic as a method and way of knowing, and associating the “cold” side of Marxism
(science) with its “hot” phase (utopia), knowledge and praxis, will be how the creation
and revolutionary interpretation of reality develops, so that Marxism continues to be
as Gramsci said, a “Philosophy of Praxis.”

References
Amadeo, J. (2006). Mapeando el marxismo. In: A. Boron, J. Amadeo & S. González (Eds.), La teoría marxista hoy. Problemas y perspectivas. Buenos Aires, CLACSO.
Apple, M. W. (1982). Curricular form and the logic of technical control: Building the possessive individual.
In M. W. Apple (Ed.), Cultural and economic reproduction in education: Essays on class, ideology, anti
the stale (pp. 247–274). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Arnove, R. & Carlos A. Torres (Eds.) (2007). Comparative education: The dialectics of the global and the
local, 3rd edn. Lahman, MD: Rowman & Littlefield (in press).
Audry, C. A. (1998). “Los orígenes del Neoliberalismo”. En: Desde los cuatro puntos, N 1, p. 22. México.
Ball, S. J. (1993). Educational markets, choice and social class: The market as a class strategy. British
Journal of Sociology of Education, 14, 3–19.
Bensaïd, D. (1999). Marx, o intempestivo. São Paulo: Civilização Brasileira.
Boron, A. (2005). Las ciencias sociales en la era neoliberal: entre la academia y el pensamiento crítico.
Conferencia Magistral pronunciada en el XXV Congreso ALAS (Asociación Latinoamericana de
Sociología), Porto Alegre, Brazil.

--- [PDF Page 109 / Book Page 86] ---

86

Olmos and Torres

Borón, A. (2006). Por el necesario (y demorado) retorno del marxismo. In A. Borón, J. Amadeo & S.
González (Eds.), La teoría marxista hoy: problemas y perspectivas, Buenos Aires, CLACSO.
Carnoy, M. (1992). Education and the state: From Adam Smith to perestroika. In R.F. Arnove, P. G. Altbach,
& G. P. Kelly (Eds.), Emergent issues in education: Comparative perspectives (pp. 143–159). Albany,
NY: State University of New York Press.
Carnoy, M. & Samoff, J. (1990) Education and Social Translation in the Third World: China, Cuba, Tanzania,
Mozambique and Nicaragua, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Chesnais, F. (1994). La mondialisation du capital. Editions Syros, París dos Santos, Theotonio. La Teoría de
la Dependencia. Un balance histórico y teórico. En: Los retos de la Globalización. Ensayo en homenaje
a Theotonio Dos Santos. TOMO I. UNESCO – Caracas. Unidad Regional de Ciencias Sociales Humanas
para América Latina y el Caribe 1998.
Freire, P. (1994). Cartas a Cristina. São Paulo: Paz e Terra
Ginsburg, M. (Ed.) (1991). Understanding Educational Reform in Global Context: Economy, Ideology, and
the State. Garland Publishing, Inc., New York, NY.
Ginsburg, M. (1993). Book Review of The State, Corporatist Politics, and Educational Policy Making in
Mexico by D. A. Morales-Gómez and C. A. Torres. Comparative Education Review, 3(37):325–326.
Held, D. (1991). Political Theory Today. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Lomnitz, L. & Melnick, A. (1991). Chile’s middleclass: A struggle for survival in the face of neoliberalism.
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
Morrow, R. & Torres, C.A. (2007). The State, Social Movements, and Educational Reform. In: R. Arnove
& C. A. Torres (Eds.). Comparative education: The dialectics of the global and the local. Lahman, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Petras, J. (1997). Neoliberalismo en América Latina. Rosario, Argentina: Homo Sapiens Ed.
Popkewitz, T. S. & Pereyra, M. A. (1993). An eight country study of reform practices in teacher education:
An outline of the problematic. In T. S. Popkewitz ( Ed.) Changing patterns of power: Social regulation
and teacher education reform. Albany, State University of New York Press.
Ruccio, D., Resnick, S., & Wolf, R. (1991). Class beyond the nation-state. Capital and Class, 43, 25–42.
Samoff, J. (1990). More, Less, None? Human Resource Development: Responses to Economic Constraint.
Unpublished paper, Palo Alto, CA.
Samoff, J. (1992, July). The financial intellectual complex. Paper presented at the World Congress of
Political Science, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Samoff, J. (1993). The reconstruction of schooling in Africa. Comparative Education Review, 37, 181-222
Schiefelbein, E. (1998). Financing Education for Democracy in Latin America, page 32. In C. A. Torres
and A. Puiggros (Eds.), Latin American Education: Comparative Perspectives. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
Smelser, D. H. (1993). International Sociological Association Bulletin, 60, 5.
Schugurensky, D. (1994). Global economic restructuring and university change: The case of Universidad de
Buenos Aires. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
Torres, C. A. (1991). State corporatism, education policies, and students’ and teachers’ movements in
Mexico. In: M. Ginsburg (Ed.) Understanding reform in global context: Economy, ideology and the
state (pp.115–150). New York: Garland.
Torres, C. A. & Puiggrós, A. (2007). The State and Public Education in Latin America. In C. A. Torres, The
political sociology of education. Collected works. New York: Teachers College Press.
Torres, C. A. (2007). Education and neoliberal globalization: Oppositional essays. New York: Routledge.
Torres, C. (2007a). The political sociology of education. Collected works. New York: Teachers College
Press—with a foreword by Michael Apple (in press).
Torres, C. (2007b). Education and neoliberal globalization: Oppositional essays. New York: Routledge—
with a foreword by Pedro Noguera (in press).
UNESCO (1974). Evolución Reciente de la Educación en América Latina Santiago de Chile: UNESCO pp.
167 and 127.
UNESCO/CEPAL/PNUD (1981). Desarrollo y Educación en América Latina: Síntesis General. Buenos
Aires: Proyecto DEALC.
Wallerstein, L. (1979). The capitalist world economy. Cambridge, England: Cambridge, University Press.

