================================================================================
Chapter 07: Comparative Education in Europe
Author(s): Wolfgang Mitter
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 1: The Creation and Re-creation of a Field
Book Pages: pp. 87–99
PDF Pages: pp. 110–122 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 110 / Book Page 87] ---

7
COMPARATIVE EDUCATION IN EUROPE
Wolfgang Mitter

Historical Retrospect
Contextualising comparative education in the regional framework of Europe cogently
leads to the basic structural principle that has determined the mainstream of European
history since the early Middle Ages: the dichotomy between diversity and unity. This
basic argument explains that this introductory chapter takes up this theme and uses it
as the continuous motif of the present analysis on the whole. It seems that the facts
and trends that indicate diversity can be asserted as the stronger pole at first sight. This
assumption has exercised its significant impact on comparative education throughout
the development of this discipline. Consequently, our main attention is directed to the
geographical, institutional and thematic map of Europe with its distinctive working
places, whenever we are invited to investigate events, trends or attainments in any
comparative approach: universities, research institutes, documentation centres, academic societies, regional units and, finally, states.
It is this latter kind of territorial limitation that has become the most significant determinant of comparative education from its origin to the threshold of
the twenty-first century. May it suffice to trace the history of the discipline back
to the beginning of the nineteenth century, when Marc-Antoine Jullien de Paris
designed his project dealing with a plan of comparing state education systems all
over Europe within the outer borders of the Holy Alliance that claimed to lay the
ground for a peaceful order after the Napoleonic wars. (Jullien, 1992; Vandaele,
1993). However, Jullien’s idea was overlapped and eventually replaced by the political and ideological alliance of state and nation, which should become the focus of
comparative educational studies, namely in the configuration of the nation state, as
an essential heritage of the French Revolution. It has gradually expanded from its
emergence throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The current trends,
however, signalise the end of the modern nation state’s monopolising educational
sovereignty in favour of competitors in the regional and global dimensions (Mitter,
2004; Bray et al., 2007).
In accordance with the dominance of Europe in producing the conditions and in setting the norms for the progress of science and technology as well as (institutionalised)
education all over the ‘rest of the world’, the origin of comparative education on that
continent has exercised enormous influence on the expansion of the discipline in substantial, methodological and organisational terms. In the course of the twentieth century,
87
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 87–99.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 111 / Book Page 88] ---

88

Mitter

in particular since the emigration of prominent educationists from Nazi Germany and
Central Europe in the 1930s, the focal position of Europe in comparative education
studies has been continuously contested and finally displaced by rising competitors,
the ‘counter trend’ starting in northern America, where the origins of the discipline
date back to the nineteenth century, and spreading to further world regions, in particular to eastern Asia.
Though focusing their attention on the diversity pole, embodied by particular features of national education systems, European comparativists have never abandoned
their interest in their commonalities. Moreover, some prominent figures among them
have felt dedicated to the overarching idea of a ‘European unity’ to be derived from
spiritual and material events and developments in pre-modern periods, as well as from
contemporary trends in science and philosophy, literature, music and the fine arts.
In the history of comparative education this ‘European idea’ was expressly reflected
in the theories of the driving forces expressing convergences in the interrelations of
national education systems and cultural configurations. Taken as a whole, all those
trends have laid the ground for the fundamental tension between universalism and cultural pluralism which we are aware of in the globalising world of today as the modern
manifestation of the perennial dichotomy mentioned at the beginning.
The European history of comparative education as an academic discipline (Hilker,
1962) began in London, when Michael Sadler devised his concept of exploring education systems and trends abroad and of comparing them with the education system
of his home country. In his considerations Germany was the favourite subject of reference. To implement his concept, he convinced the British government to establish
the Office of Special Inquiries and Reports. Taken as a whole, his engagement was
aimed at providing the educational authorities of his country with advice to improve
education and schooling (Higginson, 1979). Sadler’s ‘European’ initiative, however,
had been preceded at universities in the United States with Peter Sandiford and Paul
Monroe as pioneering researchers and teachers.
Moreover, outlining this academic start would be incomplete without its inclusion
of the ‘preparatory’ period of comparative education pervading the nineteenth century.
It seems to be useful to refer to these three ‘precursors’ (Hilker, 1962; Vandaele,
1993):
(a) Marc-Antoine Jullien’s theoretical approach which, though incomplete and forgotten for decades, anticipated modern approaches to collecting and comparing
data about items of national education systems for the sake of harmonising and
improving them on the base of empirical evidence.
(b) The policy-oriented approach materialised by the thorough and reflective
reports of ‘educational travellers’, school inspectors as a rule, who went abroad
to study documents and to talk to ministers, administrators, headmasters, teachers and higher education representatives, also served as support for educational
reforms, in this case related to their home countries only.
(c) Wilhelm Dilthey’s philosophical approach resulted from his reflections on the
use of comparing education systems on the base of historical studies and the
application of hermeneutic-interpretive methodology.

--- [PDF Page 112 / Book Page 89] ---

Comparative Education in Europe

89

Jullien’s oeuvre was theoretically based, insofar as he deliberately devised a consistent
and well-structured system of grids as base for his intended inquiries. In this approach
he acted as a typical representative of rationalism and enlightenment and an early
precursor of what has developed into the positivist model in comparative education.
Dilthey, on the other side of the spectrum, paved the way for the humanistic (geisteswissenschaftlich) stream of the discipline. Finally, the travellers’ projects give insight into
a combination of both contrasting approaches. By their method to explore statistical
surveys and legal documents they have proved to be Jullien’s followers, though limiting their inquiries to two or few national education systems and without knowing his
oeuvre. With him they also shared the aim of making contributions to the improvement
of really existing manifestations of education. On the other hand the analyses of their
experiences and their efforts to contextualise them in the socio-political and cultural
environments of the education systems explored bear witness of their own academic
background in the humanities and their expertise in applying historical and hermeneutic approaches.

Criteria of Analysis
The following set of criteria is proposed as an outline for describing the current state
of comparative education, as it has come out of the twentieth century. Focusing on
European particularities does not mean, of course, concluding that these selected
criteria are meaningful with regard to Europe only. The aforementioned worldwide
expansion of the discipline indicates their trans-European validity.

The ‘European Map’
The map of Europe mirrors the diversity of extension and strength of comparative
education with special regard to the territorial location of universities and research
institutes. The following survey cannot, of course, claim any completeness, but is
presented to give an exemplary insight into the whole scene (Wilson, 1994; Watson,
1998; Paulston, 1999; Mitter, 2005). As mentioned above, the start was made in Great
Britain. Michael Sadler’s legacy was taken up by the Institute of Education at the
University of London whose history has been associated with a good number of prominent scholars: Joseph Lauwerys, Nicholas Hans, Brian Holmes, Janusz Tomiak, Robert
Cowen and Martin McLean. Other universities joined that trend: King’s College in London
(Edmund King), Oxford (William Halls, David Phillips), Cambridge (Witold Tulasiewicz),
Reading (Vernon Mallinson, O. H. Dobinson, Keith Watson), Manchester (Raymond
Ryba), Leeds (Margaret Sutherland), Hull (Colin Brock), Edinburgh (Nigel Grant),
Warwick (Rosemary Preston). In Germany as the second focal country, the first period
was represented by the individual contributions of Friedrich Schneider and Franz Hilker,
while their successors were in charge of university chairs or independent research institutes: University of Hamburg (Walther Merck, Gottfried Hausmann, Neville Postlethwaite,
Hans-Peter Schäfer), University of Marburg (Leonhard Froese), University of Heidelberg
(Hermann Röhrs, Volker Lenhart), University of Bochum (Oskar Anweiler, Christel
Adick), University of Münster (Detlev Glowka, Marianne Krüger-Potratz), German

--- [PDF Page 113 / Book Page 90] ---

90

Mitter

Institute for International Educational Research in Frankfurt am Main (Walter Schultze,
Wolfgang Mitter), Max Planck Institute for Educational Research in Berlin (Saul
Robinsohn, Dietrich Goldschmidt). Further universities followed, though restricted to
individual chairs where comparative education has been as a component of ‘general
education’ (educational foundations) until today. The reunification of Germany opened
new chances for the discipline in the Eastern part, just when the main institutions
in the Western part of the country had to cope with structural and financial restrictions or even closings. Consequenty, the ‘torch’ was passed to the East, where the
Humboldt University with Jürgen Schriewer as Director of the Institute of Comparative
Education and Jürgen Henze as Professor has developed into an exceptional place of
comparative education. Corresponding chairs, founded at the University of Leipzig
(Wolfgang Hörner) and the Technical University of Dresden (Diethmar Waterkamp)
have reinforced this recent start. In this context brief attention should be devoted to
efforts that had been undertaken in the former German Democratic Republic to establish a ‘Marxist-Leninist Comparative Pedagogy’ with Werner Kienitz and Hans-Georg
Hofmann as leading representatives. Those efforts, however, suffered under continual
restrictions due to the changing ideological and political pressures by the communist
regime and came to an end with the republic itself.
From the 1960s onwards the developments in Great Britain and Germany were paralleled in other European countries. Here the list should be opened with France that
had been within the ‘inner circle’ from the beginning with the Centre International
d’Études Pédagogiques (Sèvres) as stimulating and hosting institution, above all under
Edemée Hatinguingais’ directorship. The 1970s and 1980s were characterised by
Michel Debauvais’ extended activities, succeeded in recent years by Francois Orivel
and Jean-Michel Leclerq. Besides Lê Thán Khôi’s comparative reflections, based on
his comprehensive reference to cultural history and sociology, needs to be mentioned
as an independent contribution to comparative education (Lê Thán Khôi, 1981). While,
in recent years, comparative education in Great Britain and Germany had to cope with
institutional reorganisation and budgetary curtailments, other parts of Europe revealed
new initiatives; some of them have definitely made considerable progress during the
past decades. As for western Europe, the following list signalises this advancement:
Italy (Lamberto Borghi, Aldo Visalberghi, Mauro Laeng, Vittorio Telmon, Donatella
Palomba), Spain (Victor Garcia-Hoz, Juan Tusquets, Ricardo Marin, José Luis Garcia
Garrido, Miguel Pereyra), the Netherlands (Josep Branger, Elzo Velema, Sylvia vande Bunt-Kokhuis), Belgium (Cyriel de Keyser, Henk Vandaele, Willy Wielemans),
finally the Nordic countries (Thyge Winther-Jensen, Torsten Harbo, Reijo Raivola),
on the solid ground of Torsten Husén’s comprehensive and creative initiatives in transnational research and co-operation. Among the South European ‘newcomers’ Greece
has asserted a stable place (Andreas Kazamias, Dimitrios Mattheou), in this position
followed by Malta (Ronald Sultana). Comparative education in the Soviet Bloc could
not establish itself as a truly scientific discipline because of changing interventions
by the ruling party authorities, as was already mentioned in the context of the GDR’s
contribution. However, a few remarkable initiatives could be observed nevertheless in
the Soviet Union (Zoya Mal’kova, Boris Wul’fsson), Poland (Mieczsław P˛echerski),
Czechoslovakia (František Singule), Hungary (Magda Illés) and Bulgaria (Najden

--- [PDF Page 114 / Book Page 91] ---

Comparative Education in Europe

91

Chakarov). Following the revolutionary changes in the beginning of the 1990s there
have been new starts in Central and Eastern Europe, namely in Bulgaria (Nikolay
Popov), the Czech Republic (Jiří Kotásek, Jan Průcha, Eliška Walterová), Hungary
(Tarrás Kozma) and Poland (Ryszard Pachociński Józef Kuzma). Finally, the discipline might not have reached its current position without the continuous support it has
received from the big international world organisations, mainly from UNESCO and
its institutes in Paris (IIEP), Geneva (IBE) and Hamburg (UIE, now ILL/Institute for
Lifelong Learning). It proved its efficiency on various occasions, in particular with
regard to the organisation of conferences and meetings.

Academic Associations
Progress, success and survival of comparative education in Europe must be certainly
ascribed to the strategic efforts of active and far-sighted persons and the existence
of institutionalised working places (Cowen, 1980). These assets, however, needed
reinforcement to be provided by professional associations. The history of the discipline gives evidence of various efforts aimed at constituting, developing and asserting
comparative education as well as at representing ‘European achievements’ to the colleagues and competitors in the ‘rest of the world’. On the whole the strategies, however,
have been neither equal nor consistent, as regards individual intentions and decisions.
Furthermore, they have depended on specific actions and circumstances, according
to the fundamental dichotomy between unity and diversity. Surprisingly enough the
beginning has been marked by the foundation of the Comparative Education Society
in Europe as a transnational association in 1961, resulting from preparatory discussions and activities of comparativists from several European countries, supported
by colleagues from overseas, in particular northern America. The decision for this
comprehensive model, even confirmed by the principle of individual membership and
against the alternative of any federal and nation-based structure, may be interpreted by
the founding-fathers’ preference for an association which should be both independent
of political influence and ‘élitist’ which included hesitation in opening it to a clientèlle
of ‘practitioners’. It is true that both criteria have been loosened in the course of the
past decades in terms of membership and openness to practice-oriented persons (predominantly from the areas of educational policy and planning) and themes, but they
have not entirely disappeared from the agenda of CESE’s policies and may be recognised as a, though modified, trademark of the Society until today. The approaches to
surrounding CESE with national Sections in Great Britain and Germany, immediately following CESE’s foundation did not prove to be solid enough. Both ‘off-springs’ were,
formally transformed into nation-oriented associations. It is only the Italian Section of
CESE which has remained as a survivor of that organisational type.
Instead, CESE has been increasingly confronted with the constitution of competing
societies, mostly based on the principles of nationality, either as independent organisations like in most countries (Bulgaria, Great Britain, Greece, Poland, Russia, Spain
and, recently, Turkey), or sections of ‘pedagogic societies’ (Czech Republic, Germany,
Hungary). Alternative strategies have led to the foundation of the regional Nordic
Society (including Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden) as well as linguistically

--- [PDF Page 115 / Book Page 92] ---

92

Mitter

based associations with transnational catchment areas, such as the Dutch-speaking
Society of Comparative Education addressing their native speakers in Belgium and the
Netherlands and the Association Francophone d’éducation comparée (AFEC) with its
membership in Europe and overseas. In recent years the region-oriented trend seems
to have reached its strongest manifestation by the foundation of the Mediterranean
Society of Comparative Education with its branches spread over Southern Europe,
Northern Africa and the Middle East, thanks to Giovanni Pampanini’s exceptional initiative. The local model of the London Association of Comparative Education (LACE)
has existed only as a temporary organisation (during the mid-1970s), while a new
alternative type (Association française pour le développement de I’éducation comparée et des échanges) has emerged in France with emphasis on the dissemination of
comparative education into the practice-bound area of the education system.
Some of the individual societies have undergone formal changes with regard of
name and status. These changes have been connected with definitions of content and
range of the discipline within the whole of educational sciences and in relation to
neighbouring social sciences to be exemplified by the British and German groupings.
Finally, mention should be made about the parallel membership shared by CESE and
their individual European counterparts in the World Council of Comparative Education
Societies. It should be added that this ‘duplication’ has not affected any conflicts, but,
instead, rather strengthened the ‘European’ position in this world organisation.

Shifts of Theory Paradigm
When looking back to one hundred years of ‘true’ comparative education in Europe,
the observer gets aware of changes of theory paradigm referring to
- Key concepts of analysing and interpreting facts and developments in educational
reality and discussion
- Impacts on the discipline from neighbouring sciences and humanities
Moreover, these paradigms mirror specific interrelations between socio-political
trends and research priorities. Yet, the various historical overlaps and intersystemic
references underline the complexity of such changes with regard to the dominance
of discontinuity and continuity throughout the single periods, let alone ‘survivals’ of
paradigms which had been considered to have already become obsolete. Concerning
the centres of the paradigms, the ‘European map’ calls our attention to certain local,
i.e. university-bound focuses, some of them materialising in ‘schools’, when specific
individual constellations in the form of university chairs or directorates of research
institutes are given. Consequently, in most cases such ‘schools’ have existed as individual centres within a national environment of different academic structure and
orientation, and they haven often ended with the departure of the leading figure (chair
holder, director, chief of department, etc.). The two following examples are suited to
illustrate such shifts. First, the continuous theoretical dedication of the Department
of Comparative Education at the University of London could be called ‘culturalist’,
with Nicholas Hans, Joseph Lauwerys and Janusz Tomiak as renowned representatives
and reinforced by Edmund King who taught at King’s College. However, between the

--- [PDF Page 116 / Book Page 93] ---

Comparative Education in Europe

93

1960s and the 1980s this focus was challenged by Brian Holmes’ concern for positivistic theory and methodology (Holmes, 1965; Holmes, 1981). The Ruhr University
at Bochum, to mention the second example, was developed as a centre of Soviet
(Russian) and East European Studies by Oskar Anweiler and his associates between
the 1960s and the 1980s too. This dedication was not continued by Christel Adick, his
successor, who turned to concentrating on the impacts of globalisation and the world
system theory on comparative education. As regards the current period, the Humboldt
University of Berlin has signalled a new departure, since Jürgen Schriewer’s concept
of comparative education is distinctly related to the world as a whole, and of applying and modifying the Stanford variant of the world system theory as well as Niklas
Luhmann’s system theory (Schriewer, 1987; Schriewer, 1999). On the other hand his
concept demonstrates that it would be erroneous to regard such ‘national schools’ as
exclusive centres.
On the whole, throughout the twentieth century the trend toward transnational
commonalities has never been abandoned. Furthermore, the history of comparative
education gives evidence of ‘transcontinental’ initiatives. In this respect the ‘European’
influence on the growth of the discipline in the United States before and after World
War II is worth mentioning. It is closely associated with the works by the prominent
‘emigrants’, such as Isaac Kandel, Robert Ulich, George Z. F. Bereday, Harold Noah,
Max Eckstein, Andreas Kazamias and Hans Weiler. In the development of comparative education this wave of migration has, in turn, proved to promote transcontinental
co-operation in the form of various approaches to reconsidering theoretical and methodological topics. In this context the Commission dealing with the observation and
development of theory shifts within the World Congresses of Comparative Education
Societies is worth particular attention. It was initiated by Brian Holmes at the beginning of the 1990s and has been essentially advanced by Robert Cowen and Jürgen
Schriewer on the ‘European’ and by Erwin Epstein and Anthony Welch on the ‘overseas’ side. Finally, teaching and doing research on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean can
be recognised as a reinforcing factor of such co-operation, to be exemplified by Andreas
Kazamias’ long-year professorships in Madison (USA) and Athens (Greece).
Overall, this analysis of theory positions – offered above – permits the following
attempt to structure the twentieth century into a number of periods:
- The decades between the 1920s and the 1950s were characterised by the overarching
panoramas composed by Nicholas Hans in England and Friedrich Schneider in
Germany, the latter being distinctly influenced by traditional Roman Catholic
thinking. They reveal their authors’ profound insight into the universal and, in
particular, European dimension of educational history and its driving forces.
Parallel approaches, though after World War II, could be observed in Italy (Flores
d’Arcais) and Spain (Juan Tusquets).
- The decades between the 1960s and the 1980s were dominated by the crossnational impacts of the Positivist dispute in German Sociology between the
adherents of Karl Popper and Jürgen Habermas on content and methodology of
comparative education. Besides, neo-Marxist arguments (in various configurations)
completed the spectrum.

--- [PDF Page 117 / Book Page 94] ---

94

Mitter

- The recent period can hardly be ascribed to certain dominating streams, but
is rather characterised by competition between converging and diverging
theoretical approaches under the universal tension between modernism and
post-modernism on the one hand and between universalism (as represented by
the world system theory) and cultural pluralism on the other. Besides, the diversified picture gives ample insight into ‘new’ comparative research areas, such as
gender studies, educational planning and politics, lifelong learning, vocational
education and, ultimately, the booming field of intercultural education to be
resumed in the concluding chapter.
The European mainstream in comparative education has been dominated by ‘culturalist’ studies until the end of the twentieth century, regardless of its ties to the inherited
humanities (Geisteswissenschaften) or the advancing social studies. This dominant feature has been complemented by the affiliation with historical studies, beginning with
the aforementioned ‘grand panoramas’ to be exemplified by Nicholas Hans’ following
comment: ‘The first step is to study each national system in its historical setting, and its
close connection with the development of national character and culture’ (Hans, 1949).
The ‘contemporary heritage’ of that dedication, though rooted in different theoretical
roots, is represented by Robert Cowen, Andreas Kazamias, Antonio Nóvoa and Jürgen
Schriewer. In contrast to the long-existing and growing trend in the United States, empirical inquiries, in particular those conducted with quantitative methods, remained in the
shadow until the last third of the twentieth century. The gap between ‘culturalists’ and
‘empiricists’ was even deepened by the independent start of IEA under Torsten Husén’s
and T. Neville Postlethwaite’s leadership which took place in, if at all, only loose connection with the ‘established’ comparative education centres and associations.

Comparisons in Space
Space has always played an essential role in comparative education (cf. Cowen, 1998).
Throughout the twentieth century most studies were based upon the principle of the
nation state according to the concept represented by Marc-Antoine Jullien de Paris as
well as by Michael Sadler. That means that, outside the ‘pure’ theory-bound analyses,
the nation state was defined as the dominant, in fact, almost exclusive subject of comparison. Nevertheless the bibliography of the discipline abounds in comprehensive and
detailed studies devoted to the description or analysis of one ‘foreign’ national education system. Studies dealing with the comprehension of two or even several national
education systems remained to be exceptional until the last decades of the twentieth
century. This apparent deficit was, however, qualified by the ‘comparative view’ inherent in many ‘country studies’.
Responding to trends on the macro-level of educational policies, the nation-related range
was widened into regional comparisons in the following three exemplary directions:
First, comparative educationists were motivated to establish ‘new’ institutions and
to initiate research projects by the expansion of home-based education to colonies and
other dependent territories. Their commitment was strongly reinforced by the fact that
the discipline attracted educationists who had worked as school inspectors or teachers
in those areas and wanted to apply their experience by scientific exploration. It seems to

--- [PDF Page 118 / Book Page 95] ---

Comparative Education in Europe

95

be evident that Great Britain and France were the countries where this focus of interest
has flourished until today, having survived the end of colonialism in the liberated
states which have, to a great extent, inherited the structural and curricular features
of their former rulers’ education systems. However, for comparative education as an
academic discipline this expansion has turned out to be ambivalent, insofar as many
of the practice-oriented ‘newcomers’ realised that the ‘old’ institutes and chairs of
the discipline did not satisfy their desires as they hoped. Consequently, at some
universities, such as the University of London, new institutes arose with special focus
on studies in the education of developing countries and separated from the ‘traditional’
centres of comparative education. This trend was also taken up in countries without
any (immediate) colonial past, but with distinct commitment to the new challenge. For
instance, Hermann Röhrs (succeeded by Volker Lenhart) established ‘third world’oriented research, in this case, however, within the institutional and curricular framework
of comparative education at the University of Heidelberg.
Second, from the 1950s to the 1980s, comparativists in Western Germany, under
the pressure of the near Iron Curtain and the German partition, were greatly occupied
with the impacts of the West-East conflict on education. In this orientation, however,
the German comparativists were not isolated at all. Among their European colleagues
Janusz Tomiak (London) is especially worth mentioning as a ‘foreign’ paramount
example. It should be added that this orientation was underlined by the descent of
some of the prominent representatives from Central and Eastern Europe (e.g. Oskar
Anweiler, Leonhard Froese, Wolfgang Mitter, Janusz Tomiak).Their studies were
related to the context of the ideological, political and administrative frameworks of the
education systems concerned. After the collapse of the communist regimes the authors
of those studies were surprised (and satisfied) at being told by their colleagues in that
region that their comments and conclusions had been considered as important, sometimes even the only available and reliable sources and therefore attentively read.
Third, beside the comparative studies whose range was limited to communist countries
the history also records some projects dealing with region-crossing themes including
West and East European education systems. In this respect Saul Robinsohn’s comprehensive project (conducted with Frank Braun, Detlev Glowka and HelgaThomas) on
School Reform in the Societal Process (Robinsohn, 1970/75; cf. Glowka/Braun, 1975)
could claim the quality of a pioneer achievement. Unlike parallel German projects initiated in Bochum, Frankfurt am Main and Marburg, its theoretical scope was explicitly
conceived from a sociological point of view and focused on comparing societal factors with their impacts on the national education systems. At the same time Edmund
King conducted his comparative project on Post-Compulsory Education in five West
European countries with its focal explorations of the effects the new trends in vocational education had on ‘young adults’, in particular concerning their entrance into the
labour market (King et al., 1974).

Policy-Orientation
Joseph Lauwerys expressly perceived similarity of comparative education with navigation, insofar as both are only aimed at providing the navigator or the policy-maker,

--- [PDF Page 119 / Book Page 96] ---

96

Mitter

respectively with information on alternative strategies without trying to exercise
influence on their decision-making (Lauwerys, 1958). Considering the history of the
discipline as a whole, his position entirely contradicted Saul Robinsohn’ concept of the
direct advisory function of his proposals in immediate reference to his aforementioned
project of the ‘Grand School Reform’ in Germany at the beginning of the 1970s. While
these two radical views can be recognised as the poles of a wide range, the middle
is occupied by moderate positions. These definitely accept the melioristic function
of the discipline and are ready to provide information for political consideration by suggesting alternative solutions with predictable consequences, but refrain
from directly influencing decision-making. As ‘ìndirect’ influence is concerned, the
judgement is, of course, more difficult, due to the ‘informal’ channels characterising
interrelations among researchers and policy-makers (Husén & Kogan, 1984). In
contrast to the situation in other countries including Great Britain, the majority of
comparativists in Western Germany were rather reserved to engaging in direct policy
consultation and therefore came nearer Lauwerys’ than Robinsohn’s standpoint, which
can be called paradoxical with regard to the tense political situation in the divided
country. This estimation is legitimate even with respect to an apparently policy-oriented
project like Vergleich von Bildung und Erziehung in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
und in der Deutschen Demokratischen Republik which was conducted under Oskar
Anweiler’s leadership and finalised just immediately before the collapse of the GDR
(Anweiler, 1990).
It seems that in the current period the scenario indicates a fundamental shift. This has
been caused by the apparently triumphal progression of the international large-scale
assessments achieved by IEA and, much more directly, by PISA. Their spectacular
success among policy-makers and the public has been considerably caused by the
growing position of an economy-oriented educational policy, as strongly promoted by
OECD. Comparative education is entirely involved in this process, the more so as in
most countries direct intervention of governmental agencies not only on contents and
finance, but also on objectives of research projects is increasing.

Perspectives
Like all over the world, comparative education in Europe has to cope with new challenges. However, in this region these seem to be exceptionally strong, insofar as they
are connected with deep changes, as regards tasks and aims of institutions, professional competencies of the teaching staffs and supervising agencies. Moreover one has
to consider that these bodies are indirectly, of not directly, subjected to interventions
by external – political and economic – agencies, both at national and international
levels, the latter mostly represented by the European Union as well as by OECD and the
World Bank. Apart from this framework the perspectives of the discipline are dependent
on the overarching trends resulting from the globalisation processes, among which the
following three seem to be worth emphasising.
First, the thematic area is getting broader and broader in geographical terms. There
is a need for comparisons across continents or between comparative subjects on different

--- [PDF Page 120 / Book Page 97] ---

Comparative Education in Europe

97

continents. It has the positive effect of uniting researchers from different countries
and regions in the initiation and conduction of comparative projects and therefore
of connecting the insider’s expertise with the foreigner’s distant view qualified by an
attitude of estrangement. On the other hand such co-operation presupposes the mastering of language and competence issues, caused by academic training under different
national and cultural conditions. Modern traffic, electronic communication and the
worldwide trend toward using the English language in the global science and communication systems are likely to minimise these difficulties, although these should not be
underestimated for the foreseeable future. Finally, globalisation stimulates comparison
between themes of local (national and regional respectively) range with worldwide
trends, underlined by the inclusion of the historical dimension.
Second, the traditional concentration of comparative studies and projects on comparing national education systems and issues has got powerful competition by the
identification of cultural configurations as significant subjects of comparative education. It is true that culture and cultural pluralism had fascinated the minds of all the
aforementioned ‘pioneers’ of the discipline who were considerably interested in the
philosophical and historical concerns of language, religion and ethnicity on processes
of socialisation and education as driving forces of humankind. The recent trend, however, reveals new features, insofar as the spokesmen of those educationists who have
introduced the term intercultural as complementary to international or even comparative, are mainly committed to policy-oriented goals. They want to pay a contribution
to integrating members of multicultural societies, and that within and beyond national
borders. At the same time they are directly practice-oriented, insofar as their efforts
are aimed at ameliorating schooling and instruction, e.g. by providing curricula and
textbooks and other learning aids and by promoting intercultural communication
projects (among students, teachers, local communities, etc.). The special priorities of
their goals explain their preference for ‘independent’ institutions and also associations. Recent evidence, however, shows that divergences from comparative education
are not irreversible which has become manifest in joint organisational and substantial
ventures, such as demonstrated in Germany by the re-association of the ‘comparativists’ and ‘interculturalists’ who had separated in the eighties. Anyway, comparative
education has to continue to cope with this challenge and to include the interrelation
between nation and culture in its range of comparative research and teaching, the more
so as the traditional concept of nation is undergoing essential changes as a concomitant and corollary of trans-national and trans-cultural migrations all over the world.
Living up to this challenge, comparative education can pay a valuable contribution to
analysing the essentials of multicultural societies, while at the same time this task can
be estimated as enriching the thematic and theoretical dimension of the discipline.
Third, academic debate and practice reveal the continuity of the fundamental question of how to define comparative education as an educational and social science area
of research and reflection. In the present paper mention has been repeatedly made of
the ‘discipline’ which was, however, focused on the aspect of institutionalisation
(in form of institutions, departments or chairs) and needs to be clarified in this concluding
context. As the position of comparative education in the science system in total is concerned, the ‘European map’ indicates different manifestations. The ‘German’ model and

--- [PDF Page 121 / Book Page 98] ---

98

Mitter

its counterparts in a good part of Europe (in particular in Central and Eastern Europe) has
been characterised by the descent of the discipline from the philosophically (and before
theologically) based ‘general pedagogy’, although Oskar Anweiler, already in the sixties
of the twentieth century – though contested in that period – defined is as a “crosssectional area” in reference to its historical and sociological neighbours (Anweiler, 1967).
In this respect he contributed to laying the ground for opening its borders to interdisciplinarity without, however, abandoning its traditional affiliation to ‘general pedagogy’
as its ‘mother-discipline’. The ‘British model’ had never favoured the construction of a
‘general’ education and rather preferred the institutionalised and structural formation of
individual education disciplines, among which comparative education could be placed
without any effort to undergo ‘problematic’ debates. This traditional duality seems to
become more and more obsolete, because the increasing and worldwide trend toward
interdisciplinary studies has included comparative education all over Europe (and moreover the whole globe) to a growing extent, and this trend will go on.
Finally, the way ahead signals a revival of the European dimension in comparative education. In former decades it had been avowedly favoured by Nicholas Hans,
Friedrich Schneider and Bogdan Suchodolski, to remember the oeuvres of three grand
‘Europeans’. While their thoughts were rooted in idealistic and historical reflections,
the current drive rather indicates pragmatism, centred round the political debates
within the European Union and the Council of Europe including the domain of educational politics, as practised, for instance, by Colin Brock and Witold Tulasiewicz
(2000). Philosophical and historical essays have given way to comparative re-analysis of political documents and empirical inquiries. This‘new’ European dimension
has also caught wide-spread response among comparative educationists at the recent
CESE Conferences, beginning with the sixteenth conference in Copenhagen (1994)
and, up to the present, ending with its twenty-second successor in Granada (2006)
(Winther-Jensen, 1996; Kazamias & Spillane, 1996).
It is just this recent ‘return to Europe’ which, in interdependence with the three aforementioned trends, has opened the perspectives of comparative education. However,
this estimation should not be restricted to its lights. The observer should not overlook the shadows either which are caused by fears that comparative education might
lose its specific contours when realising that ‘everybody compares and claims to be a
comparativist’. Such claims often lack the requirements of theoretical and methodical
training concerning the particularities of the comparative foundations of the discipline
including the continuity of the efforts to define its epistemological identity. However,
comparative education, looking back to a history covering two centuries – including
its preparatory stage throughout the nineteenth century – has coped with various challenges which seems to legitimate the prediction of its further progress. It is underlined
by the articulate participation of European comparative educationists in the worldwide
thematic and methodological debate.

References
Anweiler, O. (1967). Konzeptionen der Vergleichenden Pädagogik. Georg Geißler zum 65. Geburtstag.
Zeitschrift für Pädagogik, 13, 205–318.

--- [PDF Page 122 / Book Page 99] ---

Comparative Education in Europe

99

Anweiler, O. (1990). Vergleich von Bildung und Erziehung in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland und in der
Deutschen Demokratischen Republik. Köln: Verlag Wissenschaft und Politik.
Bray, M., Adamson, B. & Mason, M. (Eds.). (2007). Comparative educational research. approaches and
methods. Hong Kong: Comparative Education Centre, The University of Hong Kong (Springer).
Brock, C. & Tulasiewicz, W. (2000, 2nd ed.). Education in a single Europe. London & New York: Routledge.
Cowen, R. (1980). Comparative education in Europe. A note. Comparative Education Review, 24, 98–108.
Cowen, R. (1998). Thinking comparatively about space, education and time: An approach to the
Mediterranean rim. In A. M. Kazamias & M. G. Spillane (Eds.), Education and the structuring of
European space: North-South, centre-periphery, identity-otherness. Athens: Seirios Editions.
Glowka, D. & Braun, F. (1975). Schulreform und Gesellschaft: Vergleichende Studien über die gesellschaftlichen Bedingungen von Schulreformen in sieben europäischen Ländern. Berlin: Max Planck-Institut für
Bildungsforschung.
Hans, N. A. (1949). Comparative education. A study of educational factors and traditions. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Higginson, J. H. (1979). Selections from Michael Sadler: Studies in world citizenship. Liverpool: Dejall &
Meyorre.
Hilker, F. (1962). Vergleichende Pädagogik. Eine Einführung in ihre Geschichte, Theorie und Praxis.
München: Max Hueber.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education. A comparative approach. New York: Humanities Press.
Holmes, B. (1981). Comparative education. Some considerations of method. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Husén, T. & Kogan, M. (Eds.) (1984). Educational research and policy. How do they relate? Oxford:
Pergamon.
Jullien de Paris, M.-A. (1817). Esquisses d’un ourage sur l’éducation comparée. Paris: de Frais. Reprinted
by Bureau International d’Education, Genève (new reprint 1992).
Kazamias, A. M & Spillane, M. G. (Eds.). (1996). Education and the structuring of European space: northsouth, centre-periphery, identity-otherness. Athens: Seirios Editions.
King, E., Moor, H. & Mundy, J. A. (1994). Post-compulsory education. A new analysis in western Europe.
London/Beverly Hills: Sage.
Lauwerys, J. A. (1958). Methoden der Vergleichenden Erziehungswissenschaft. Bildung und Erziehung,
11, 65–77.
Lê Thàn Khôi (1981). L’éducation comparée. Paris: Colin.
Mitter, W. (2005). Akteure und Netzwerke in der Vergleichenden Erziehungswissenschaft. Pädagogische
Rundschau, 59, 207–220.
Mitter, W. (2004). Rise and decline of education systems. A contribution to the history of the modern state.
Compare, 34, 351–369.
Paulston, R. G. (1999). Mapping comparative education after postmodernity. Comparative Education
Review, 43, 438–463.
Robinsohn, S. B. et al. (1970/75, vols. 1 and 2). Schulreform im gesellschaftlichen Prozess. Stuttgart:
Klett.
Schneider, F. (1961). Vergleichende Erziehungswissenschaft. Geschichte, Forschung, Lehre. Heidelberg:
Quelle & Meyer.
Schriewer, J. (1987). Vergleich als Methode und Externalisierung von Welt: Vom Umgang mit Alterität und
Reflexionsdisziplinen. In D. Baecker, et al. Theorie als Passion: Niklas Luhmann zum 60. Geburtstag
(pp. 629–668), Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Schriewer, J. (1999). Vergleich und Erklärung zwischen Kausalität und Komplexität. In H. Kaelble, &
Schriewer, J. (Eds.), Diskurse und Entwicklungspfade. Gesesellschaftsvergleiche in Geschichts- und
Sozialwissenschaften. Frankfurt am Main: Campus.
Vandaele, H. (1993). L’éducation comparée. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Watson, K. (1998). Memories, models and mapping: The impact of geopolitical changes on comparative
studies in education. Compare, 28, 5–31.
Wilson, D. (1994). Comparative and International Education. Fraternal or Siamese Twins?. A preliminary
genealogy of our twin fields. Comparative Education Review, 38, 449–486.
Winther-Jensen, T. (Ed.) (1996). Challenges to European education: Cultural values, national identities and
global responsibilities. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

