================================================================================
Chapter 08: World-systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization
Author(s): Robert F . Arnove
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 1: The Creation and Re-creation of a Field
Book Pages: pp. 101–119
PDF Pages: pp. 123–141 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 123 / Book Page 101] ---

8
WORLD-SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND COMPARATIVE
EDUCATION IN THE AGE OF GLOBALIZATION
Robert F. Arnove

This chapter explores the application of world-systems analysis (WSA) to the comparative
study of education systems. Two main theoretical approaches to the study of transnational trends in education are identified: namely political realist and neoinstitutionalist.1 Following a discussion of their intellectual origins and basic assumptions,
the chapter turns to an analysis of the articulation of world-systems analysis with the
growing body of globalization research. The interactions between global economic
and cultural forces and local contexts are illustrated in representative case studies
in the field of comparative and international education. Special attention is given to
the impact of major international governmental agencies as well as nongovernmental
organizations on education policy agencies. Advances in telecommunication technologies, which compress time and space, are then analyzed with regard to how they shape
the nature of work and education system responses. A penultimate section contrasts
“globalization from above” with “globalization from below,” the cross-national linking
of social protest movements aimed at achieving more equitable education systems and
just societies. The concluding section summarizes how different approaches to worldsystems analysis, within the more general framework of globalization research, can
contribute to theory-building and more enlightened educational policy and practice—
principal goals of the field of comparative and international education.

Differing Approaches
Two major streams of world-systems analysis (WSA) appeared in the social sciences
and history literature in the late 1960s to early 1970s. One was associated with Marxistbased analyses of the workings of the international capitalist system, beginning with
the dependency theories of Gunder Frank (1969), Fernando Henrique Cardoso and
Ernesto Falleto (1969), and Theotonio Dos Santos (1970a, b) on Latin America, and
Walter Rodney (1972, 1974) and Samir Amin (1970, 1973) on Africa, and culminating in the world-systems scholarship of Emanuel Wallerstein (1974, 1980, 1989).2
The other stream is associated with what has been called the “world culture” theory
and the “neoinstitutionalist” approaches of Stanford sociologist John W. Meyer with
his students and colleagues.3 The more consensus-oriented approach of Meyer and
associates to the workings of a transnational cultural and social system has focused
101
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 101–119.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 124 / Book Page 102] ---

102 Arnove

on the establishment and expansion of schooling around the world, principally in the
post-World War II period, and particularly in relationship to the creation of citizens and
modern polities. The more conflict-oriented school of researchers has focused on the
economic dimensions of the world capitalist system with little, if any attention, to the
cultural and educational dimensions of the system. In his 1980 essay Robert Arnove,
a former student of Meyer, urged his colleagues in the field of comparative and international education to take up world-systems analysis as the necessary framework for
understanding educational trends around the world, from curriculum reform to the
language of instruction, and the outcomes of school expansion (Arnove, 1980).

Institutionalist Perspectives
The world culture and society work of Stanford University professor John W. Meyer
and associates began with attempts to explain the determinants of the global expansion of education systems. In his earliest study, Meyer (1971) first examined country
indicators of levels of economic growth and per capita expenditures on education, type
of political regime, and colonial past among others to explain the conditions under
which countries were likely to increase access to education. Although his findings
indicated that wealthier countries were more likely to expand education at all levels,
with modernization-oriented governments tending to expand secondary education,
and mobilization political systems (e.g., socialist countries) giving emphasis to primary and higher education, these national-level variables did not adequately explain
why education was expanding everywhere at a rapid rate (Meyer, 1971).
In a significant collective work entitled National Development and the World-System:
Educational, Economic, and Political Change, 1950–1970, Meyer and Hannan (1979)
concluded that school expansion during this period could better be explained as “a
function of the available population to be educated and the level of education existing in
1950.” The important point for world-systems analysis, however, was this: “Education
everywhere expanded independent of the constraints and stimuli that economic,
political, and social structures provided in previous times. This universal increase in
education has led us to speculate that the causes of this expansion lie in the characteristics of the contemporary world system, since such characteristics would affect all
nations simultaneously. We offer these speculations as directions for future research”
(Mayer & Hannan, 1979: 53).
Further research by Boli and Ramirez (1992), for example, postulated that the
institutionalization of compulsory schooling around the world in relation to widely
prevalent norms and an ideology concerning the nature of societal and personal development can be traced to the Enlightenment project that followed the break-up of
Latin Christendom. The glorification of God was replaced by the celebration of the
human project which, by the late twentieth century, became identified with economic
growth; and a preoccupation with the salvation of the soul evolved into the notion
of the development of human potential. Boli and Ramirez maintain that formal systems of education represent, according to a universalistic ideology, not only the means
by which nations modernize and prosper economically, but also the surest route to

--- [PDF Page 125 / Book Page 103] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 103

enhancing the talents of individuals. As a mandatory requirement of all children and
youth of certain ages and as an institution that is regulated by the state, schooling also
becomes the agency for creating citizens with equal responsibilities and rights.4 Their
findings, based on an analysis of six cohorts of countries in relationship to the time
lapsed between political independence or state formation between 1820 and 1990 and
the establishment of compulsory education systems, indicate that “mass schooling has
become the norm in every region throughout the world” (Boli & Ramirez, 1992: 37).
Moreover, those regions most incorporated into the Western model of society or
attempting to resist Western domination in modernizing their countries (e.g., Japan
1872–1886) also tended to establish rule-governed schooling earlier and more extensively (Boli & Ramirez, 1992: 38).
According to the neoinstitutionalist theoretical framework, the constitution of institutions, like schooling, as well as the construction of nation-states with citizens, is
based on widely held and deeply ingrained norms and expectations concerning the way
the world is and should be ordered. Meyer et al. (1997) argue that “Diffuse functional
models about [e.g., the importance of formal schooling to economic growth] . . . actors,
actions, and presumed causal relations, are centrally constitutive of world culture.”
They provide an example that dramatically illustrates the workings of contemporary world society and culture. They hypothesize what would happen if a previously
unknown island society had been discovered, one that had been totally isolated from
contact with the rest of the world:
Our island society would obviously become a candidate for full membership in
the world community of national and individuals. Human rights, state-protected
citizen rights, and democratic forms would become natural entitlements. An
economy would emerge, defined, and measured in rationalized terms and oriented
to growth under state regulations. A formal national polity would be essential,
including a constitution, citizenship, laws, educational structures, and open forms
of participation and communication (Meyer et al., 1997: 173–74)
The basis for universalistic rights and obligations of individuals and an emphasis on the
rational ordering of society derive from the persuasive power of contemporary world
culture, rather than the imposition of norms based on unequal relationships between
nation-states. Here the institutionalists draw a distinction between themselves and
the world-systems perspectives of the “realists” (i.e., Wallerstein, and other conflict
theorists): “Prevailing social theories account poorly for these changes [in the hypothetical island]. Given a dynamic sociocultural system, realist models can account for
a world of economic and political absorption, inequality, and domination. They do
not well explain a world of formally equal, autonomous, and expansive nation-state
actors” (Meyer et al., 1997: 174). The institutionalists’ emphasis on culture—something which realists tend to downplay—may account for the extension of citizen rights
to women, specifically the franchise in 133 countries from 1890 to 1990 (Ramirez
et al., 1997) or to improvements in the status of young people (Stanford Center on
Adolescents, 2005), but the achievement of fundamental political and human rights
may be as much the result of struggles of dispossessed peoples as it is the outcome of a

--- [PDF Page 126 / Book Page 104] ---

104 Arnove

benevolent worldwide system of entitlements based on universalistic norms.5 Levinson,
for example, examines changing notions of adolescence and secondary education in
Mexico, not only with regard to external norms but the response of the Mexican state
to pressures from the global economy and various political groups that contest governmental education policies they view as eroding the ideology of the 1910 Revolution
(Levinson, 1999).

Realist Perspectives
The assumption of the institutionalists of an international system of autonomous
nation-states being able to simultaneously achieve comparable levels of development
is precisely what dependency and “realist” world-systems theorists challenge. By the
late 1960s, Wallerstein, and his associates questioned the basic assumptions of prevalent theories in the social sciences as well as in international aid agencies concerning
the causes of underdevelopment throughout Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa,
and Asia. It was not lack of capital and expertise that was holding back these countries,
but the very unequal relationships that existed between these countries in the “periphery” of the world economy and the “core” industrialized countries of North America
and Europe. The longer the contact between the “core” and “periphery” in an unequal
exchange of goods, if not exploitive colonialism, the more likely the country or region
was to be underdeveloped—classic cases being the impoverished Northeastern Region
of Brazil (Frank, 1969; Cardoso & Falleto, 1969), or Haiti, once the richest colony in
Latin America and the Caribbean and now the poorest country in the region.
Wallerstein (2000: 3), who had written his dissertation “comparing the Gold Coast
(Ghana) and the Ivory Coast in terms of the role voluntary associations played in the
rise of the nationalist movements in the two countries,” had spent a decade living in
and writing about Africa as a political sociologist. In his quest (Wallerstein, 2000:
1–4) for “an adequate explanation of contemporary reality, so that . . . [he] and others
might act upon it,” he eventually came to the conclusion that “all analysis had to be
simultaneously historic and systemic. . . .” In adopting this analytical framework, he
was attempting to provide more adequate descriptions of the worldwide upheavals
that were occurring in the late 1960s, and why they were likely to fail without radical
structural change in the world capitalist system.6 At the same time, he was endeavoring to reframe the very nature of the social sciences by bridging the gap that existed
in the social sciences “between ideographic humanism and nomothetic science” (the
divide between human agency in particular contexts and normative laws of society
and nature),7
By analyzing vast stretches of history and various cycles in the world economy from
the emergence of a capitalistic Western Europe between 1450 and 1600 (the “long century”), he was building on and refining “dependency theory,” which some criticize as
a stagnant view of relations between the core and the periphery. According to Clayton
(2004), Wallerstein added the dynamic of historicity to this analysis as well as the
notion of semi-peripheral countries and zones of the world, with some countries rising
and falling from their previous positions in the global economy. For these reasons, the

--- [PDF Page 127 / Book Page 105] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 105

United States, which has been a successful hegemonic world power, is following the
pattern of the Dutch and British empires, in losing its exclusive position as “hegemon”
to China and possibly India.
While the institutionalists, particularly those associated with Meyer, definitely have
an eye on education systems as a fundamental subject of their research on the workings of a global culture and society, Wallerstein’s analysis has been criticized by Sklair
(1999) and others for being too economistic as well as overly focused on nation-states
as the principal actors in the global economy.8 Whatever these criticisms, the value of
Wallerstein’s approach to the world-system as the unit of analysis for understanding
contemporary reality, especially the impact of transnational economic actors on national
education systems, was perhaps first brought to the attention of comparative and international education in Arnove’s 1980 essay in the Comparative Education Review.

Applying World-Systems Analysis to Comparative Education
Arnove’s essay departed from the more consensual approach of institutionalists by
problematizing the workings and outcomes of agencies promoting educational expansion and reform. Earlier essays had given only a brief nod to the fact that the Western
model was a creation of “the economic and military success of the Western powers,”
(Boli & Ramirez, 1992: 38). There was an initial tendency not to give much attention
to the workings of the major technical assistance and financial agencies involved in
promoting, and in many cases imposing, education policy agendas. At the same time,
insufficient attention was given to historically unequal economic and political relationships between countries based on various forms of direct domination (for example
colonialism) or more indirect forms of overbearing influence (sometimes referred to
as “neocolonialism”). Enrolment patterns were one thing; but dropout and completion
rates, and how unequal social structures determined who would attend the highest and
most prestigious levels of schooling related to future income, power, and status also
were not analyzed in great depth. Meyer and Hannan (1979), in their introductory
chapter to National Development and the World System, do briefly mention inequalities between and within countries; and later writings by Meyer, Boli, Thomas, and
Ramirez (1997), Boli and Thomas (1997) certainly discuss the workings of United
Nations agencies as well as nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in promoting
educational agendas with an emphasis on inclusion and extension of human rights.
But, as noted above, the world culture theorists differ markedly from the realists, who
emphasize interstate power relations.
Political realists document the systemic ways in which hegemonic powers in core
countries extract surplus labour from the coerced or semi-coerced labour of the noncore regions with consequent deleterious consequences for their education systems.
Schooling, rather than serving the interests of the majority in the periphery, abets
the process of capital accumulation by hegemonic actors. By contrast, Meyer et al.
(1997: 173) view various models of societal development as being “Carried by rationalized others whose scientific and professional authority often exceeds their power
and resources.” For Meyer et al., “world culture celebrates, expands, and standardizes
strong but culturally somewhat tamed national actors.”

--- [PDF Page 128 / Book Page 106] ---

106 Arnove

Favoring the viewpoint of the realists, Arnove (1980, 2003) argued that these international financial and technical assistance agencies—notably the World Bank (WB),
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID), the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), the
Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA)—the large philanthropic foundations, especially the so-called “progressive ones” (Carnegie, Rockefeller, and Ford),
and related research institutions financed by them, as well as lead universities in the
North, were promoting policies and relationships that were not beneficial to the recipients of aid and essentially favored dominant groups in the metropolitan centres of the
core countries. He concluded his essay by noting how world-systems analysis restored
the international dimension to the field of comparative and international education and
provided a framework for understanding educational development and reforms—at
that time, comprehensive high schools, educational technologies such as television,
open universities, and nonformal education. He argued that linking education policy
initiatives to the workings of an international economic order helped “explain why
expansion and reform, in so many cases, have failed to effect structural change in
education or society, and indeed, why externally induced educational innovation may
contribute to perpetuation of existing stratification systems within and between countries.” While not discounting the usefulness of institutionalist analyses of the workings
of a transnational cultural system, Arnove noted, much in accord with Wallerstein’s call
for a more comprehensive social science linking the nomothetic with the ideographic,
that “World-systems analysis not only expands macro analyses to take into account
the actions of educational agencies in a truly international system, but it enhances our
understanding of the sources of change and conflict in the micro system of school and
classroom” (Arnove, 1980: 62).

The Challenge of Globalization Theory
Throughout the 1980s, the expanded focus provided by world-systems analysis spawned
numerous studies linking macro- and micro-level variables to explain the workings
and outcomes of education systems. By the 1990s, these differing schools of worldsystems analysis were increasingly eclipsed by the catch-all phrase of “globalization,”
the most salient current theme in the field of comparative and international education
according to a recent survey by Cook, Hite, and Epstein (2004: 136).9 Developments
in computerization, telecommunications technologies, and the ways in which work
was now organized—from “Fordist” mass production within national boundaries to
“Toyotism” just-in-time production distributed across the globe, led many to believe
there was a qualitative change in the nature of capitalist accumulation that could not be
adequately explained by diverse Marxist interpretations, including Wallerstein’s WSA,
or the world culture and polity approach of Meyer and associates.10
This is a complex and extended debate that transcends the limitations of this chapter.
Briefly, however, if there is a qualitative difference between globalization and WSA, it
may be attributed to the dramatic compression of time and space (Harvey, 1989), with
greatly improved technologies facilitating the flow of information and capital across

--- [PDF Page 129 / Book Page 107] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 107

national boundaries and bringing the distant and the local into closer relation in ways
previously unimagined (Held, 1991; Held, 1999; Giddens, 2003). Others will argue
that the expanded scope and intensity of these linkages are but a variation on the evolution of the world capitalist system or a universalistic world culture.11
What is important to note here is that the space-time dimensions of globalization
be distinguished from the content of these informational and financial flows. Much
of the literature in comparative education on globalization has equated increased
interconnectedness with what has been called the “neoliberal” economic and education agendas that have been implemented across the globe. The term neoliberal
derives from the neoclassic economic theories expounded by the dominant international institutions shaping national development policies (i.e., the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund). As summarized by Arnove, Franz, Mollis, and Torres
(2003: 324), the theories are based on the work of the classic economists Adam Smith
and David Ricardo, who believed that the role of the state consisted in establishing the
conditions by which the free play of the marketplace, the laws of supply and demand,
and free trade based on comparative advantage would inevitably redound to the benefit
of all. Government policies based on these notions have led to a drastic reduction in
the state’s role in social spending, deregulation of the economy, and liberalization of
import policies. The educational counterparts of these policies have included moves
to decentralize and privatize public school systems. Also part of this package of education “reforms” is the emphasis on choice, accountability, standards, and testing by
which the state’s role is to specify goals and priorities and evaluate whether or not
the various subnational administrative units, and even individual schools, achieve the
desired results. At the higher education level, there is the “new managerialism” that
applies the language and logic of the market place to overseeing the operations and
outcomes of academic units (Deem, 2001; Hartley, 2003; Marginson & Mollis, 2001;
Arnove, 2005).
In many respects, the abovementioned developments exemplify the standardization
of rules and norms, the isomorphism that Meyer and colleagues had predicted in the
constitution of national education systems. Divergence also is contained within their
predictions based on certain tensions created by the incongruence between universalistic forces and diverse national characteristics.12

Illustrative Studies of WSF
The following sections review how the more consensual (institutionalist) and the
conflict streams of WSA have merged in part with the more comprehensive, but amorphous, framework of globalization to shape research in the field of comparative and
international education.
Clayton (2004) in a noteworthy review, “Competing Conceptions of Globalization,”
points out how WSA, with its historical dimensions, may contribute to comparative
education research in ways that most globalization research (because of its short-term
perspective) cannot. For example, as he notes, “We would ask not only how educational institutions around the world are today mediating and advancing the neoliberal

--- [PDF Page 130 / Book Page 108] ---

108 Arnove

agenda but how (or if) educational institutions mediated and advanced liberalism in
centuries past, and how (or if) these successive clusters or ideologies differ” (Clayton,
2004: 294). According to Clayton, other studies benefiting from a critical, historical,
economic perspective would include those on “the emergence of English as the global
language, the global standardization of education credentials or knowledge, the loss of
identity and so on” (Clayton, 2004: 294).
In a major statement of the value of a world culture and society perspective, Meyer et al.
(1997) suggest fruitful lines of inquiry. They include studying issues generated by the
tension between external pressures to create modern school systems and internal realities that prevent the realization of beneficial reforms at the school and classroom levels;
between ideals related to the equitable distribution of school and policies promoted
by reactionary governments and dominant groups who might view democratization of
education systems and the teaching of democratic ideals as antithetical to social control
and regime stability; or, between international models of years of schooling for different levels of an education system (e.g., 6, 3,3 for primary, middle, and secondary as
specified by UNESCO) and what is appropriate for a specific country.
Time allocated to different subjects in national curricula has spurred a number of
studies—notably Meyer, Kamens, and Benavot (1992) on School Knowledge for the
Masses—that show both convergence, in amount of time given to science and mathematics instruction as part of the process of becoming a modern polity, as well as different
local adaptations to this international trend. Benavot and Resh (2001: 505) have selected
the case of Israel to show how convergence in the diffusion of common categories of
curricular subjects across the world is paradoxically modified by another strong policy
trend to devolve central state authority over education to subnational levels, a policy
bolstered by an ideology promoting school autonomy. Moreover, Benevot, and Resh
note that their findings of variations in implementing instruction in nationally mandated
subjects “suggest that contextual factors like school structure, the socioeconomic background of students, and the successful mobilization of instructional resources affect the
construction of school structure” (Benavot & Resh, 2001: 505).
Anderson-Levitt’s (2003) edited collection on Local Meanings, Global Schooling
problematizes from an anthropological perspective the convergence toward a single
schooling model. In her introductory chapter, Anderson-Levitt raises the question
“Is there one single global culture of schooling, or many?” Without taking into account
local contexts and cultural meanings, it is unlikely that we will be able to explain adequately what content is actually transmitted, and learned. Her 2004 article on “Reading
Lessons in Guinea, France, and the Unites States: Local Meanings or Global Culture?”
explores how it is possible that reading instruction is both significantly similar and different across these three societies. Based on case studies of specific classrooms, she
reaches the conclusion that a multi-level perspective (a “double vision”) is required to
see how both the transnational and national/local are interacting and simultaneously
enabling and inhibiting teaching practices: “[T]he double vision of teaching leads to
a double vision of educational reform efforts. On the one hand, we cannot expect any
top-down reform to produce the same results in different places. On the other hand,
local attempts to reform operate within a broad but real framework, the current transnational model of good teaching.” (Anderson-Levitt; 2004).

--- [PDF Page 131 / Book Page 109] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 109

The importance of taking into account human agency when studying teacher
responses to international educational currents is the object of a study by Stacki
(1999), on a UNICEF-funded innovative in-service teacher education program in Uttar
Pradesh, India.13 The case study provides a richly textured, multi-layered account of
the history of teacher education reform efforts in India; the role different agencies
(international, national, and local) play in formulating and implementing this particular teacher empowerment project; and specifically how two female teachers respond to
this professional development program.
How do students and community members respond to “the constraints placed upon
their lives by the world system of incommensurate differences and their marginalized
place within it”? These are the questions examined in Demerath’s (1999) ethnographic
study of Pere Village in Papua, New Guinea.14 He documents how the subjects of his
study negotiate tensions emanating from global and cultural and economic forces that
result in a situation of increasing educational credentialism, limited job markets, and
threats to traditional community life. In order to cope with dim job prospects, many
students reject continuing with their education and even belittle their peers who do.
These disenchanted youths glorify village life. Yet, it remains true that higher educational attainment could lead to jobs in the modern sector of the economy as well as
access to desirable commodities not available outside urban areas. Villagers themselves are caught in the same dilemmas of choosing between the old and the new
(Demerath, 1999: 102).
These studies (Benavot and Resh, Anderson-Levitt, Stacki, and Demerath) examine
what Monkman and Baird (2002) have called the “how” of globalization. They give
meaning to what otherwise remains an unexplained context or something that happens
without understanding the processes at work:
Thus, much of the case study research on globalization focuses on national and
local responses to “globalizing” pressures. A useful mapping of the relationships
of the local within the global would result in a focus on the nature of national
and local involvement or interaction within globalization processes. This conceptualization would more adequately reveal the interpenetration of the global
and local and the mediating influence of nation-states and local communities.
(Monkman & Baird, 2002: 498)
Monkman and Baird, in addition to calling for multiple-level analyses of the working of global forces on national and local contexts, argue for the value of studying
discourse and participation—who is defining globalization in what terms and who is
involved in international and national decisions defining educational strategies and
policies.

International Institutions and the World-System Revisited
The issues of discourse and participation are addressed in Carnoy and Rhoten’s (2002)
guest editorial essay in a special issue of the Comparative Education Review on “The

--- [PDF Page 132 / Book Page 110] ---

110 Arnove

Meanings of Globalization for Educational Change.” They call attention to the
“ideological packaging” of globalization and its “effect on the overall delivery of
schooling, from transnational paradigms, to national policies, to local policies” (Carnoy
& Rhoten, 2002: 2). As they note, this ideological packaging favors an emphasis on
the economic goals of an education system—how it contributes to the internationally
competitive position of a country—rather than to such important goals as contribution
to national cohesion through equal treatment of various ethnic groups in a country.
This ideological agenda, according to Carnoy and Rhoten (2002: 2), is increasingly
tied not only to global economic forces, but to “international institutions that promulgate particular strategies for educational change” (a point made earlier by Arnove,
1980). The discourse of these international agencies is tied to cost-benefit and production function analyses of the value of different levels and types of education, an
analytical framework that former World Bank education staff member Heyneman
(2003) admits has had serious limitations and negative consequences for more equitable and effective education policies15
The workings and inter-institutional relations of the major international technical
assistance and financial agencies is the subject of a growing body of scholarly work by
Mundy (1999, 2002) and Jones (1992, 1993). Mundy (1999) for example, traces how
UNESCO with its humanistic orientation toward life-long learning systems has lost
its position as the leading United Nations agency setting policy directions for education to the more economically minded World Bank (a point reaffirmed by Heyneman,
2003). According to Mundy (1999: 46), UNESCO’s views on education had changed
by 1996. An internal report, Learning, The Treasure, noted that “technical change and
economic globalization were rapidly undermining existing social policies, the structure
of work, and global equity in general.” In an earlier article, Mundy (1998) documented
how the ideology of multilaterialism (institutionalized coordination of relations among
three or more states on the basis of generalized principles of conduct)16 has changed
from one of a “limited redistributive” set of values involving education (1945–1965)
to a period of contestation, coming especially from the less-developed countries of
the South “demanding a social welfare model of national development” (late 1960s
to late 1970s) to the current, or ongoing, stage “during which neoliberal defensive
and disciplinary forms of educational cooperation emerged” (Mundy, 1998: 476).
A consequence of this latest stage furthers the erosion of the redistributive model of
educational multilateralism.
The emerging structures of global governance, economically, and educationally, now include major regional organizations like the European Union, the North
American Free Trade Association, and the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (Dale
& Robertson, 2002). In addition to the emergence of these regional organizations, the
World Trade Organization has achieved an ascendant position in international commerce in education. The mechanisms and processes by which these organizations
shape education systems have been analyzed by Dale and Robertson among others.
Dale (1999) specifies eight nontraditional mechanisms and related organizational features that influence the nature of external effects on national policy.17
In a further effort to open the “black box” of globalization, Robertson, Bonal, and
Dale (2002) examine the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). They

--- [PDF Page 133 / Book Page 111] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 111

provide a conceptual framework and a “rigorous set of analytic categories that might
enable us to make sense of the profound changes now characterizing education in
the new millennium” (1999: 472). Their model of “pluri-scalar governance of education,” comprehends three dimensions: 1) three scales of governance going from the
supranational, to the national, to the subnational; 2) the institutions of governance– the
state, market, community, and household; and 3) governance activities consisting of
funding, ownership, provision, and regulation (1999: 478). As they note, in 1995, the
General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) was replaced by the World Trade
Organization (WTO). The WTO is now a major, if not the most significant, player
in constructing “a hypothetical world education system, free of barriers” that would
involve “internationalization of educational credentials or a possible globalization
of knowledge production and consumption but also would affect central aspects that
largely have been under the control of nation-states. . .” (1999: 489). An important point
is that for many countries the WTO is not simply “an instrument of global capital,”
but something that a number of nation-states are eager to join “as they seek to advance
their own national interests in the global knowledge economy” (1999: 495).
Clayton (1998), in his article “Reconnecting World-System Theory for Comparative
Education,” made a similar point about the need to study the various ways in which
nation-states respond to globalization and specifically international educational assistance. These responses range from resistance to accommodation by “periphery students,
teachers, administrators, and policy makers aware in varying degrees of the implications of their actions” (1998: 496). Clayton argues that these actions are best explained
in relation to concepts of hegemony, class relations, and human agency.
An interesting question is how the position of a country in the world economy and
its size, resources, and political strategic significance influence how much autonomy
it has in responding to the policies and regulations of the World Trade Organization.
To what extent is state control over the nationally important and culturally sensitive
domain of education compromised by joining the organization? What are the implications for a country like China (Zhou & Shi, 2003) as compared with an island-nation
like Jamaica or an impoverished country like Nicaragua?
At the same time, another set of actors, namely nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), also erode state control over educational policy and practice.

Ascendancy of NGOS as International Actors
As Mundy and Murphy (2001) and others have pointed out, international financial and
technical assistance agencies are increasingly working with nongovernmental organizations, many of whom are international in reach, to provide educational services once
the exclusive domain of the state.18 NGOs have become major transnational advocates
for the universal extension of education as a human right. In many cases, binational,
and multilateral donors consider it preferable to work with NGOs rather than government bureaucracies that are considered to be corrupt and/or inefficient. This preference
raises a number of major issues explored by Sutton and Arnove (2004) in their edited
volume Civil Society or Shadow State? State/Ngo Relations in Education. The set of

--- [PDF Page 134 / Book Page 112] ---

112 Arnove

case studies ranging from Papua New Guinea to Peru examine these questions: As
educational services providers and innovators, do NGOs relieve the burden on the
state of providing universal basic education as well as adult education and literacy programs? Conversely, do they erode the legitimacy of the state as the primary entity that
establishes the goals, content, credentials, and materials of public schooling while also
regulating key features of the system’s administration and financing? Do the NGOs,
themselves, lose their legitimacy, moral authority, flexibility, and sensitivity to local
needs, as well as their roles as advocates on behalf of grassroots initiatives as they
serve as contractors for national governments or international and binational donor
agencies? Moreover, as a consequence of their close relationship with these agencies, are they more likely to manifest the possible negative features associated with
them like partisanship, cronyism, and corruption (Sutton & Arnove, 2004: x; Kamat,
2004)?
Illustrative of these questions is the case study by Christina (2001, 2006) which
examines government-NGO relationships in the formulation and implementation of
early childhood education in the West Bank. This study places the Palestinian case
in historical and comparative context, illustrating the relations between global social
forces and local cultural and political contexts. The study compares the differing
visions and policy orientations of a model NGO with those of the Palestinian National
Authority and international donor agencies. A wealth of data details the struggles of
the principal actors in the early childhood program to remain sensitive to their goals of
honoring indigenous culture while retaining their ideals of a child-centered, progressive education corresponding to international norms.

Ether Space and the Flow of Information
In addition to the traffic in aid, trade, and services across national borders, there is the
flow of information. Instantaneous access to information is an integral component of
the “new knowledge economy” (Castells, 2004; Carnoy, 2000). Telecommunication
technologies have led to changes not only in the organization of work in the production
of material goods but to how services like education are delivered. The impact of these
technologies is particularly notable at the higher education level, where courses and, in
some cases, entire academic programs are offered on-line and various partnerships or
“franchising agreements” are forged between universities in the metropolitan centres
of North America and Europe and the rest of the world. Problematic issues in these
arrangements concern the language of instruction and the appropriateness of curricula.19 The most extreme form is a “virtual university.” They raise questions concerning
who “attends” such institutions and what the outcomes are for these students in relation
to those who study in more traditional universities. Do universities, for example, lose
their role in contributing to national culture or being centres of critique, if not opposition, to corrupt and repressive governments? Are public schools no longer the primary
state-controlled locus for creating a collective identity and preparing citizens?20
These issues are raised in the book by Edwards and Usher (2000) on Globalization
and Pedagogy: Space, Place and Identity. New information and communications

--- [PDF Page 135 / Book Page 113] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 113

technologies create a “ ‘diaspora space’ in which individuals can liberate themselves
from the limitations of established norms and create their own hybrid identities” (as
summarized by Monkman & Baird, 2000: 501). The upside of this “ether space” is that
individuals and their social groupings can now connect across national boundaries to
those sharing similar interests or learn about those who otherwise would be a distant
and unknown “other.” The educational potential for creating more globally minded and
multiculturally sensitive individuals is enormous. Teachers as well as students, at all
age levels, can communicate with one another to share their everyday concerns and
aspirations for a better world.
Politically, transnational movements for social justice are able to reinforce one
another and call on the international community to support their struggles. This
has happened with various movements—feminist, ecological, ethnic minority, trade
union, and refugee among many—as they demand fundamental human rights for their
members, one of which is a right to a quality education. Education and the rights of
indigenous groups, for example, is a current topic of interest in comparative education
(see the special issue of Comparative Education (2003) as are themes pertaining to
the citizenship status of immigrant and refugee groups.21 Just as there is globalization
from above, there is globalization from below (Brecher et al., 2000).

Globalization from Below
Arnove (2005) has taken this notion to provide a framework for studying the locus of
educational reform initiatives (a vertical axis indicating whether they are top-down
or bottom-up) and their goals (a horizontal axis indicating whether they are primarily
economic or political-cultural).22 A review of recent dominant policies—privatization, decentralization, choice schemes, and various accountability measures based on
standardized testing—finds that they are largely initiated at the top in international
and national bureaucracies, and that they are oriented, as previously discussed, toward
economic goals. At the same time there are, as just mentioned, a growing number of
grassroots initiatives aimed at the achievement of more equitable societies and education systems that are closely related to cultural identity movements.
How do these various initiatives relate to world-systems analysis? As is evident in
the literature review, the programs initiated from above are integrally related to changes
in the dynamics of the global economy, the demands for a different type of work force
based on certain skills and knowledge. The new information age economy is one in
which many individuals will be displaced and the rights of organized labor will be
threatened by transnational corporations. These corporations seek out countries, and
regions within them, where the greatest profits can be obtained for differing reasons—in
many cases because labor is cheaper and more exploitable (Mexico, Indonesia, Guam,
Vietnam), or because it is both cheaper and skilled (e.g., Bangalore, India) or, for all
three reasons (China). As described, these trends reflect the predictions of world-systems
analysis as formulated by Wallerstein and his associates. The disruptions caused by
changes in the way capital is accumulated also help explain the phenomena of social
protest movements from below. At the same time, these movements are inspired by the

--- [PDF Page 136 / Book Page 114] ---

114 Arnove

widely circulating ideals of human, civil, and political rights as explained by the writings
of “world culture” neoinstitutionalists Meyer and associates.
The disruptions, manifestations of what Wallerstein (1997: 6) has called the “terminal
crisis” in the historical system in which we live, present the opportunity for moving
world-systems analysis to a more centrally prominent position in the social sciences
and “formulating the central questions of the enterprise.” (Wallerstein, 1997: 6)
Among these questions for the social sciences are: “What are the processes of transition from one historical system to another?” And “What is the theoretical relation
between the quest for truth and the quest for a just society.” For Chase-Dunn (1999:
16), the current disruptions and crises represent an opportunity for diverse progressive
movements to unite to bring about “global social democracy.”

Conclusion
The diffuse phenomenon of globalization has reinforced the importance of world-systems analysis, whether of the consensus or conflict type, for the field of comparative
education. One could say that the two streams of world-systems analysis have entered
the ocean of globalization research. This confluence of systematically evolving intellectual currents has been beneficial. It has stimulated further inquiry to refine and
elaborate the theories and methodologies that will enable scholars, policy makers, and
practitioners to better understand the multidimensional, transnational trends shaping the workings and outcomes of education systems everywhere. Understanding the
world is a key to changing it for the better—a goal much in accord with scholarship
in the field of comparative education and its missions of contributing to theory building, more enlightened educational policy and practice, and ultimately to international
understanding and peace.

Notes
1.

2.

3.

Paulston (1977) and Ginsburg et al. (1990) have referred to these major theoretical approaches
as “equilibrium” and “conflict,” while Hurn (1993) uses the terms “consensus” and “conflict” to
describe two major paradigms for studying education and society. This author prefers Hurn’s terms
and will occasionally use them to describe the institutionalist and realist approaches to world-systems analysis.
Wallerstein, it should be noted, is indebted to the French school of socioeconomic historians associated with the journal Annales d’ Histoire Economique et Sociale and especially Fernando Braudel
whose “long view” of historic formations and attention to minute detail is best illustrated by his
magisterial three-volume Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Centuries (1981).
Wikipedia encyclopedia (2005) defines the “New Institutionalism” as “a social theory that focuses on
developing a sociological view of institutions, the way they interact and the effects of institutions on
society. It is significant in that it provides a way of viewing institutions outside of the traditional views
of economics. . . .” Bruce Fuller (2004: 328) elaborates on this definition: “Old institutional theory,
advanced by sociologists such as Arthur Stinchcombe and Jerald Hage, argued that formal organizations work from articulated goals and specified technologies and eagerly attempt to deliver on their
promises. . . . Instead, the neoinstitutionalists emphasize that nations must make sense of their membership in a global social arrangement not always defined by their position in the world economy.” For
purposes of this essay, however, I have decided to use the term “institutionalist” perspectives.

--- [PDF Page 137 / Book Page 115] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 115
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.

18.
19.

20.
21.

22.

For further discussion of this point, see Bendix (1996).
See, for example, Zinn (2003), esp. pp. 683–688.
From an autobiographical statement by Wallerstein (2000). Also see Chase-Dunn (1999) and ChaseDunn & Boswell (2000).
Wallerstein (1997, p. 4) is careful to note that “world-systems analysis is not a theory but a protest
against neglected issues and deceptive epistemologies.” He continues, “It is a call for intellectual
change, indeed for ‘unthinking’ the premises of nineteenth-century social science.… It is an intellectual task that has to be a political task as well, because – I insist – the search for the true and the
search for the good is but a single quest.”
Clayton (2004), however, believes this criticism isn’t accurate as Wallerstein sees a decoupling
between the economic and political spheres of the global system with the nation-state being but one
component of various political formations working in conjunction with and sometimes in opposition to the world capitalist economy. Also see Chase-Dunn (2000) on this disconnect.
Among the books in the field of comparative education taking globalization as a major organizing theme are Arnove & Torres (1999, 2003), Burbules & Torres (2000), Stromquist & Monkman
(2000), Suárez-Orozco & Qin-Hilliard (2004).
For further discussion of qualitatively different aspects of globalization, as compared with WSA,
see McMichael (2000) and Martin (2000).
For further discussion, see Clayton (2004).
The importance of the local is the focus of Deem’s (2001) study of the “new managerialism” in
higher education.
The study won the Comparative and International Education Society (CIES) Gail P. Kelly outstanding
dissertation award in 1999. A summary of the case study is found in Stacki (2004).
The study, based on his dissertation research, won the George Bereday Award for the best article in the
Comparative Education Review in 1999. A noteworthy feature of Demerath’s research is its illustration of
the limitations of “rational choice theory” and “cost-benefit” analyses of education, as well as the social
utility of certain courses of action, when specific sociocultural contexts are not taken into account.
For further discussion of World Bank policies and their consequences, see King (2002), Soudien
(2002), Moura Castro (2002), King (2002), and Bonal (2004).
For further discussion, see Ruggie (1992, p. 571).
Two of the categories involve “borrowing” and “learning.” For the difference between these two and
their significance for comparative education, see Phillips and Ochs (2003). Also pertinent to the literature
on “borrowing” and “lending” in education is the edited collection by Steiner-Khamsi (2004).
Boli and Thomas (1997), for example discuss NGOs as major constitutive elements of an emerging
“world polity.”
For a more general discussion of issues and challenges facing higher education institutions in the
age of globalization, see Altbach, Bloom, Hopper, Psacharopoulos, and Rosovsky (2004), and
Marginson & Mollis (2001), esp. pp. 599–600.
With regard to challenges to the state from globalization as well as issues concerning theoretical
frameworks for studying international education trends, see Welch (2001).
A different theoretical lens for viewing the ways in which different groups coalesce around common
concerns is provided by International Regimes Theory. For an application of this theory to studying how
an indigenous group in Colombia is resisting encroachment of foreign oil corporations on their territory,
see Wirpsa (2004). Also relevant to this discussion is Relational Theory, the subject of the 2000 CIES
Presidential Address by Ross. The role of education systems in preparing marginalized groups for
democratic citizenship is a subject of the co-edited volume by Stevick and Levinson (2006).
This framework is based on one initially proposed by Paulston and Leroy (1980) to study nonformal
education programs.

References
Altbach, P., Bloom, D., Hopper, G., Psacharopoulos, G., & Rosovsky, H. (2004). Moderated discussion: The
task force on higher education and society. Comparative Education Review, 48, 70–88.

--- [PDF Page 138 / Book Page 116] ---

116 Arnove
Amin, S. (1970). L’accumulation à l’échelle mondiale; critique de la théorie du sous-développement.
Dakar: IFAN.
Amin, S. (1973). Neo-colonialism in West Africa. Hamondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Anderson-Levitt, K. M. (Ed.). (2003). Local meanings, global schooling: Anthropology and world culture
theory. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Anderson-Levitt, K. M. (2004). Reading lessons in Guinea, France, and the United States: Local meanings
of global culture? Comparative Education Review, 48, 229–252.
Arnove, R. F. (1980). Comparative education and world-systems analysis. Comparative Education Review,
24, 48–62.
Arnove, R. F. (2003). Reframing comparative education. In R. F. Arnove & C. A. Torres (Eds.), Comparative
education: The dialectic of the global and the local (2nd ed., pp. 1–23). Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Arnove, R. F. (2005). To what ends: Educational reform around the world. Indiana Journal of Global Legal
Studies, 12, 79–96.
Arnove, R. F., Franz, S., Mollis, M., & Torres, C. A. (2003). Education in Latin America: Dependency,
underdevelopment, and inequality. In R. F. Arnove & C. A. Torres (Eds.), Comparative education: The
dialectic of the global and the local (2nd ed., pp. 313–337). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Arnove, R. F. and Torres, C. A. (Eds.). (1999). Comparative education: The dialectic of the global and the
local (lst ed.). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Benavot, A., & Resh, N. (2001). The social construction of the local school curriculum: Patterns of diversity
and uniformity in Israeli junior high schools. Comparative Education Review, 45, 504–536.
Bendix, R. (1996). Nation-building and citizenship: Studies of our changing social order. New Brunswick,
NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Boli, J. and Ramirez, F. O. (1992). Compulsory schooling in the Western cultural context. In R. F. Arnove, P.
G. Altbach, & G. P. Kelly (Eds.), Emergent issues in education: Comparative perspectives (pp. 25–38).
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Boli, J., Ramirez, F. O., & Thomas, G. M. (1997). World culture in the world polity: A century of institutional non-governmental organization. American Sociological Review, 62, 171–190.
Bonal, X. (2004). Is the World Bank education policy adequate for fighting poverty? Some evidence from
Latin America. International Journal of Educational Development, 24, 649–666.
Braudel, F. (1981). Civilization and capitalism, 15th-18th century (3 vols.). New York: Harper & Row.
Brecher, J., Costello, T., & Smith, B. (2000). Globalization from below: The power of solidarity. Brookline,
MA: South End Press.
Burbules, N. C. & Torres, C. A. (Eds.). (2000). Globalization and education: Critical perspectives. New
York: Routledge.
Cardoso, F. H. and Falletto, E. (1969). Dependencia y desarollo en América Latina. Mexico City: Siglo
Ventiuno.
Carnoy, M. (2000). Sustaining the new economy: Work, family, and community in the information age.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Carnoy, M. and Rhoten, D. (2002). What does globalization mean for educational change: A comparative
approach. Comparative Education Review, 46, 1–9.
Castells, M. (2004). The network society: A cross-cultural perspective. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
Publisher.
Chase-Dunn, C. (1999). Globalization: A world-systems perspective. Journal of World-Systems Research,
5(2), 165–185.
Chase-Dunn, C. and Boswell, T. (2000). The spiral of capitalism and socialism: Toward global democracy.
Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner Publishers.
Christina, R. (2001). NGOs and the negotiation of local control in development initiatives: A case study of
Palestinian early childhood programming. Ph.D. dissertation, School of Education, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN.
Christina, R. (2006). Tend the olive, water the vine: Globalization and the negotiation of early childhood in
Palestine. Stamford, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Clayton, T. (1998). Beyond mystification: Reconnecting world-system theory for comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 42, 479–496.

--- [PDF Page 139 / Book Page 117] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 117
Clayton, T. (2004). ‘Competing conceptions of globalization’ revisited: Relocation the tension between
world-systems analysis and globalization analyses. Comparative Education Review, 48, 274–294.
Cook, B. J., Hite, S. J., & Epstein, E. H. (2004). Discerning trends, contours, and boundaries in comparative education: Survey of comparativists and their literature. Comparative Education Review, 48,
123–149.
Dale, R. (1999). Specifying globalization effects on national policy: A focus on the mechanisms. Journal of
Education Policy, 14(1), 1–17.
Dale, R. and Robertson, S. L. (2002). The varying effects of regional organization as subjects of globalization of education. Comparative Education Review, 46, 10–36.
Deem, R. (2001). Globalisation, new managerialism, academic capitalism and entrepreneurialism in universities: Is the local dimension still important? Comparative Education, 37(1), 7–20.
Demerath, P. (1999). The cultural production of educational utility in Pere Village, Papua New Guinea.
Comparative Education Review, 43, 162–192.
de Moura Castro, C. (2002). The World Bank policies: Damned if you do, damned if you don’t. Comparative
Education, 38(4), 387–399.
Dos Santos, T. (1970a). Dependencia económica y cambio revolucionario. Caracas: Nueva Izquierda.
Dos Santos, T. (1970b). The structure of dependency. American Economic Review, 60(2), 231–236.
Edwards, R. and Usher, R. (2000). Globalisation and pedagogy: Space, place and identity. London/New
York: Routledge.
Frank, G. (1969). Capitalism and underdevelopment in Latin America. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Fuller, B. (2004). Book review: Local meanings, global schooling: Anthropology and world culture theory.
Comparative Education Review, 48, 327–330.
Giddens, A. (2003). Runaway world. How globalization is reshaping our lives. New York: Routledge.
Ginsburg, M., Cooper, S., Raghu, R., & Zegarra, H. (1990). National and world-explanations of educational
reform. Comparative Education Review, 34, 474–499.
Hartley, D. (2004). Education as a global positioning device: Some theoretical considerations. Comparative
Education, 39(4), 439–450.
Harvey. D. (1989). The condition of postmodernity: An enquiry into the conditions of cultural change.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Held, D. (1991). Political theory today. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Held, D. (1999). Global transformations: Politics, economics and culture. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Heyneman, S. P. (2003). The history and problems in the making of educational policy at the World Bank
1960–2000. International Journal of Educational Development, 23, 315–337.
Hurn, C. J. (1993). The limits and possibilities of schooling: An introduction to the sociology of education
(3rd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Jones, P. (1992). World Bank financing of education: Lending, learning and development. London, UK:
Routledge.
Jones, P. (1993). United Nations Agencies. In M. C. Alkin (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Educational Research (6th
ed., pp. 1450–1459). New York: Macmillan Reference.
Kamat, S. (2004). The privatization of public interest: theorizing NGO discourse in a neoliberal era. Review
of International Political Economy, 11, 155–176.
King, K. (2002). Banking on knowledge: The new knowledge projects of the World Bank. Compare, 32,
311–326.
Levinson, B. (1999). Concepts of adolescence and secondary education in Mexico. Comparative Education
Review, 43, 129–161.
Marginson, S. and Mollis, M. (2001). ‘The opens and the tiger leaps’: Theories and reflexivities of comparative education for a global millennium. Comparative Education Review, 45, 581–615.
Martin, W. G. (2000). Still partners and still dissident after all these years? Wallerstein, world revolutions
and the world-systems perspective. Journal of World-Systems Research, 6(2), 234–263.
May, S. and Altman, S. (Guest Eds.) (2003). Indigenous education: New possibilities, ongoing constraints.
Comparative Education, 39(Special Number 27).
McMichael, P. (2000). World-systems analysis, globalization, and incorporated comparison. Journal of
World-Systems Research, 6(3), 68–99.

--- [PDF Page 140 / Book Page 118] ---

118 Arnove
Meyer, J. W. (1971). Economic and political effects on national educational enrollment patterns. Comparative
Education Review, 15, 28–43.
Meyer, J. W. and Hannan, M. T. (1979). Introduction. In J. W. Meyer and M. T. Hannan (Eds.), National
development and the world-system: Educational, economic, and political change, 1950–1970 (pp. 3–16).
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Meyer, J. W., Kamens, D. H., & Benavot, A. (1992). School knowledge for the masses: World models and
national primary curricular categories in the twentieth century. Washington, DC: Falmer.
Meyer, J. W., Boli, J., Thomas, G. M., & Ramirez, F. O. (1997). World society and the nation-state. American
Journal of Sociology, 103, 144–181.
Monkman, K. and Baird, M. (2002). Educational change in the context of globalization. Comparative
Education Review, 46, 497–508.
Mundy, K. (1998). Educational multilaterialism and world (dis)order. Comparative Education Review, 42,
448–478.
Mundy, K. (1999). Educational multilaterialism in a changing world order: UNESCO, the limits of the possible. International Journal of Educational Development, 19, 27–52.
Mundy, K. and Murphy, L. (2001). Transnational advocacy, global civil society? Emerging evidence from
the field of education. Comparative Education Review, 45, 85–126.
Paulston, R. G. (1977). Social and educational change: Conceptual frameworks. Comparative Education
Review, 21, 370–395.
Paulston, R. G. and Leroy, G. (1980). Nonformal education and change from below. In R. G. Paulston (Ed.),
Other dreams, other schools: Folk colleges in social and ethnic movements (pp. 1–25). Pittsburgh, PA:
University Center for International Studies, University of Pittsburgh.
Phillips, D. and Ochs, K. (2003). Processes of policy borrowing in education: Some explanatory and analytical devices. Comparative Education, 39(4), 451–453.
Ramirez, F. O., Soysal, Y., & Shanahan, S. (1997). The changing logic of political citizenship: Cross-national
acquisition of women’s suffrage rights, 1880–1990. American Sociological Review, 61, 735–745.
Robertson, S. L., Bonal, X., & Dale, R. (2002). GATS and the education service industry: The politics of
scale and global re-territorialization. Comparative Education Review, 46, 472–496.
Rodney, W. (1974). (c1972). How Europe underdeveloped Africa. Washington, DC: Howard University Press.
Ross, H. (2000). The space between us: The relevance of relational theories to comparative and international
education. Comparative Education Review, 46, 407–432.
Ruggie, J. G. (1992). Multilaterialism: The anatomy of an institution. International Organizations, 46(3),
561–597.
Sklair, L. (1999). Competing conceptions of globalization. Journal of World-Systems Research, 5(2),
143–162.
Stromquist, N. P. and Monkman, K. (Eds.) (2000). Globalization and education: Integration and contestation across cultures. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Soudien, C. (2002). Education in the network age: Globalisation, development, and the World Bank.
International Journal of Educational Development, 22, 439–450.
Stacki, S. (1999). Rays of hope for women teachers in India. Ph.D. dissertation, School of Education,
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN. (A revised version of the dissertation is in press at Rowman &
Littlefield)
Stanford Center on Adolescence. (2005). John W. Meyer: Professor of Sociology, Emeritus. Retrieved
December 16, 2005 from the Stanford Center on Adolescence Web site: http://www.stanford.edu/group/
adolescent.ctr/Research/meyer.html
Steiner-Khamsi. (Ed.). (2004). The Global politics of educational borrowing and lending. New York:
Teachers College Press.
Stevick, D. and Levinson, B. (Eds.). (2006). The time of the dictators is over: How diverse societies and
cultures shape democratic citizens. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Suárez-Orozco, M. M. (2004). Building a partnership for teacher empowerment in India. In M. Sutton &
R. F. Arnove (Eds.), Civil society or shadow state? State/NGO relations in education (pp. 203–225).
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Suárez-Orozco, M. M. and Qin-Hilliard, D. B. (Eds.). (2004). Globalization: Culture and education for a
new millennium. Berkeley: University of California Press.

--- [PDF Page 141 / Book Page 119] ---

World-Systems Analysis and Comparative Education in the Age of Globalization 119
Sutton, M. and Arnove, R. F. (Eds.). (2004). Civil society or shadow state? State/NGOs relations in
Education. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Wallerstein, I. (1974). The modern world-system, vol. I: Capitalist agriculture and the origins of the
European world-economy in the sixteenth century. New York: Academic Press.
Wallerstein, I. (1980). The modern world-system, vol. II: Mercantalism and the consolidation of the
European world-economy, 1600–1750. New York: Academic Press.
Wallerstein, I. (1989). The modern world system, vol. III: The second great expansion of the capitalist worldeconomy 1730–1840s. San Diego: Academic Press.
Wallerstein, I. (1997). The rise and future demise of world-systems analysis. Paper delivered at the 91st
annual meeting of the American Sociological Association, New York. Retrieved December 12, 2005,
from http://fbc.binghamton.edu/iwwsa-r&.htm
Wallerstein, I. (2000). The development of an intellectual position. Adapted version of the introductory
essay to The essential Wallerstein. New York: New Press. Retrieved December 16, 2005 from http://yale.
edu/sociology/faculty/pages/wallerstein/
Welch, A. R. (2001). Globalisation, post-modernity and the state: Comparative education facing the third
millennium. Comparative Education, 47(4), 475–492.
Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia. (2005). New institutionalism. Retrieved December 16, 2005 from the
Wikipedia Web site: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_institutionalism
Wirpsa, L. (2004). Oil exploitation and indigenous rights: Global regime network conflict in the Andes.
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of International Relations, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA.
Zhou, M. and Shi, C. (2003). Trends in international educational services: Implications for China after
entering WTO. Educational Research for Policy and Practice, 2, 41–54.
Zinn, H. (2003). A people’s history of the United States: 1492–present New York: Perennia Classics.

