================================================================================
Chapter 09: Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education
Author(s): Val D. Rust, Brian Johnstone, and Carine Allaf
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 1: The Creation and Re-creation of a Field
Book Pages: pp. 121–138
PDF Pages: pp. 142–159 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 142 / Book Page 121] ---

9
REFLECTIONS ON THE DEVELOPMENT
OF COMPARATIVE EDUCATION
Val D. Rust, Brian Johnstone, and Carine Allaf

This chapter deals with our reflections on the development of the field of comparative
education. We ask three major questions. What are its beginnings? Where has it gone?
Where is it going?

The Beginnings of Comparative Education
Beginnings are often vague, ill-defined, and tangled. Accounts of a beginning are
often best associated with the mind of the storyteller than the thing itself, and so it
is with reports of the beginning of comparative education. Some people are satisfied
with vague generalities. And so, comparative education began during a shadowy time
in antiquity, when descriptive tales of “useful lessons from foreign practices” were
brought home by travellers to foreign parts, by “amateurs,” who happened to take
note of an exotic educational situation or school in another culture (Noah & Eckstein,
1969). It is believed to have begun in the West when classical Greeks such as Pindar,
Herodotus, Xenophon, Cicero, and Julius Caesar described educators and education in
lands beyond their own borders (Fraser & Brickman, 1968).
In this context, the origins of comparative education are “ancient” and associated
more with an art, in that those practicing it were concerned with the practice of learning and teaching (Hilker, 1962). Stewart E. Fraser and William W. Brickman remind
us of a “growing awareness of the monumental comparative writings of previous
centuries” related to comparative and international education (Brickman & Fraser,
1968). One task comparative educators have is to catalogue these writings in some
systematic form.
Even the origins of the term “comparative education” are a bit muddled. As early as
1785, Thomas Jefferson made reference to “comparative advantages of an American
rather than a European Education” (Jefferson, 1785), but the actual term was likely
first used by William Russell in 1826, in his translation of Marc-Antoine Jullien’s
questions on l’éducation comparée, written in 1816–1817. Thus, Jullien may have
been the first to use the term, at least in the French language. In 1888–1889, William
T. Harris made reference to “a science of comparative pedagogy,” suggesting that the
term “comparative education” had not been universally accepted in Americans by
that time (Harris, 1889). The Germans continue to debate whether the term should
121
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 121–.138
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 143 / Book Page 122] ---

122 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf

be Vergleichende Erziehungswissenschaft (comparative educational sciences) or
Vegleichende Pädagogik (comparative pedagogy) (Hilker, 1962; Schneider, 1961).
In 1816–1817 Marc-Antoine Jullien began perhaps the first documented initiative in
the field of comparative education. He recommended that nation-states collect data and
catalogue educational conditions through questionnaires he would design that would
be reviewed by a special committee, composed of experts from various countries. This
information would then be shared by countries and serve as a frame of reference for
formulating educational reform policy in various countries (Fraser, 1964).

Comparative Education and the Academy
For most scholars, comparative education began when it became recognized in the
modern academy, with its growing orientation toward specialization and scientific
investigation. Comparative education did not appear as a subfield of education until
educational studies were adopted by teacher training institutions and universities.1 With
university programs in education came appointments of faculty devoted to comparative education, courses in comparative education, textbooks for comparative education
students, and academic journals that published research findings and self-reflections
on the field. Thus, comparative education is popularly believed to have begun in 1899,
when Teachers College, Columbia University in the United States developed the first
course in comparative education one year after Teachers College became a part of
Columbia University (Bereday, 1963). Curiously, George Bereday, who had already
published James Russell’s syllabus of the 1899 course, stated that the tradition of
comparative and international studies at Teachers College dates back to World War I,
with the publication of the first textbook in comparative education by Peter Sandiford
(1918). That textbook, of course, was titled Comparative Education (Bereday, 1960).
As was the case with Sandiford’s edited volume, almost all of these early textbooks
introduced university students to comparative education as the notion of “education
in” this or that country or world region (Bereday, 1963).
The first journal devoted to comparative education was begun by Friedrich Schneider,
a professor at Köln University in Germany, who in 1931 established the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Erziehungswissenschaft (International Review of Educational Sciences).
In the first edition, Schneider outlined what he felt was the history, system, method,
purposes, and contributions of comparative education, and he attempted to establish a
terminological base from which the discipline would function (Schneider, 1931/32).
Some scholars set the beginning of the field with the formal establishment of professional associations dedicated to comparative education. The first such organization
was initially named the Comparative Education Society, and its constitution was ratified in 1956, though its name would later be changed to its current title, Comparative
and International Education Society (CIES). In that same year, a formal journal, the
Comparative Education Review, was established by CIES, intending to provide an
outlet to scholars of research and reviews of works appearing in the field.
The senior author of this essay, Val Rust, had a personal experience with beginnings,
related to doctoral students in the field, who would be expected to take over university

--- [PDF Page 144 / Book Page 123] ---

Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education 123

appointments as specialists in comparative education. Even though university appointments had been made prior to doctoral programs in the field, these appointments
consisted of people who had been trained in fields other than comparative education.
The foundations of the field of comparative education were established by scholars
representing historical and humanistic inclinations, including historians Isaac Kandel,
Friedrich Schneider, Nicholas Hans, Robert Ulich, Andreas Kazamias, Claude A.
Eggertsen, and William Brickman, and scholars who rely on what Robert Cowen calls
“the culturalist motif,” such as Joseph Lauwerys, W. D. Halls, Vernon Mallinson, and
Edmund King. Of course, there were good early comparative education scholars whom
we identify with the more conventional disciplines within the social sciences, including C. Arnold Anderson in sociology, Philip Foster, and Harold Noah in economics.
Interestingly, Max Eckstein is so closely identified with Harold Noah that his name is
usually connected with Noah’s orientation, although Eckstein comes from a literature
and humanities background.
Val D. Rust’s own doctoral advisor, Claude A. Eggertsen, mentioned above, was
born in a little railroad junction in Utah known as Thistle in Spanish Fork Canyon. At
Thistle, his father was a railroad man, but he saw to it that Claude had the preparation
necessary to go to College at Brigham Young University where he studied history,
then to Stanford University, then the University of Minnesota, and finally he moved to
the University of Michigan where he established himself as a prominent historian of
American education. World War II had a profound impact on his life and upon returning to his office in Ann Arbor, he felt cramped by his field of research: it was too small,
too confined, too limited. He embarked on the field of comparative education, transforming himself from a student of America to a student of the world (Rust, 1987).

Influences Across Cultures
It is unfortunate that many of those explaining early academic comparative educationists have been so locked into a certain view of scholarship that they have tended to
discount early versions of the field or cast them as inferior and defective. It has been
difficult for them to recognize that even “amateur” traveller’s tales had their virtues
and value. Academic comparative educators have tended to judge so much of the
nineteenth-century comparative education studies as inferior in that it was “utilitarian”
filled with “description,” “without reasoned analysis” and “eulogistic” (Templeton,
1954). These academic assessments were quite accurate about the nature of these
comparative works. They were indeed utilitarian, practical, and oriented toward the
general improvement of schools and educational systems. But the studies have been
harshly judged because they reflected a type of comparative study that is not common in the field today. That is, they focused on what might today be referred to as
“influences across cultures.” In fact, there are contemporary academic fields of study,
including comparative literature, that rely almost exclusively on this type of activity. Comparative literature scholars are certainly humanities oriented, but their basic
quest has strong science overtones in that they attempt to unravel interrelationships
between individuals, schools of thought, or national literatures across time and space.

--- [PDF Page 145 / Book Page 124] ---

124 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf

In terms of time, comparative literature specialists wish to chart how German Catholic
literature influenced German classicism and how it, in turn, influenced romanticism;
how Shakespeare changed English literature; and how modern European literature is
in debt to Greek and Latin literature. In terms of space, the comparative literature
scholar wishes to trace the movement of themes and genres from place to place: how
religious themes in Switzerland migrated to the Netherlands, then to America; how
Tolstoi, Emerson, and Thoreau influenced Indian writers in South Asia; how Africa
incorporates European writing styles; how the Don Juan archetype moves from culture
to culture (Highet, 1992; Weisbuch, 1989).
Just as in the field of comparative literature, “influences across cultures” is a definite and wonderful part of the comparative education heritage that ought to be more
highly prized and appreciated than it sometimes is. Comparative education specialists
could make a great contribution to the field’s work by paying attention to historical
and contemporary endeavors. The work of countries such as Norway, in terms of
national reform policy formation, has been especially significant. In the Norwegian
educational reform tradition, for example, a commission has usually been established
either by Parliament or a Department of the government to study the situation and
make recommendations for change. Their recommendations have come in the form of
white papers, and, from their inception in the 1840s, these commissions have always
described relevant conditions in all Scandinavian countries, the rest of Western Europe
and even North America that served as options for consideration of alternative courses
of action and models for potential adoption (Rust, 1990). By exploring the “external”
educational world, Norway was able to make appropriate and useful improvements to
their own educational system.
Just as Norway looked to other European countries, the United States also took a
vested interest in Europe, developing relationships with France, Germany, and England.
The American involvement in Prussia was part of a general swell of interest throughout
Europe in the 1830s and 1940s initiated mainly through the report of a French scholar,
Victor Cousin, who had been sent to Germany by the French Ministry of Education in
1831. Sarah Austin’s English translation in London of Cousin’s report in 1834 found
its way to the United States and served as a trumpet-call for a general exodus of educators and statesmen from the United States to Europe, in particular to Prussia. Indeed,
Burke A. Hinsdale eventually came to write that Cousin’s report “produced results,
direct and indirect, that far surpass in importance the results produced by any other
educational volume in the whole history of the country” (Hinsdale, 1906).
Of course it was utilitarian, descriptive, and eulogistic. Following a trip to Europe,
Calvin E. Stowe returned to America to declare before the Ohio legislature that the
Prussian educational system was no “visionary scheme,” but represented a program of
instruction “in the best school districts that have ever been organized” (Stowe, 1930).
Alexander Dallas Bache returned to America from a 2-year study of European schools
to report that Prussian primary education was the “most perfect of the centralized systems” (Bache, 1839). Horace Mann, Secretary of the Board of Education of the State
of Massachusetts from 1837–1848, stated in his Seventh Annual Report: “Among
the nations of Europe, Prussia has long enjoyed the most distinguished reputation
for excellence of its schools” (Mann, 1844). The same praise was expressed by the

--- [PDF Page 146 / Book Page 125] ---

Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education 125

Superintendent of Common Schools in Connecticut, Henry Barnard, who claimed that
the Prussian schools had “attained a degree of excellence, which has attracted attention
of statesmen and commanded the admiration of intelligent educators in every part of
Christendom” (Barnard, 1854).
Comparative educator Isaac Kandel would certainly have condemned such accounts
of Prussian education because he felt they were permeated with “mere descriptions of
administration, organization, and practices . . . written wholly from the point of view
of education alone, without any closely reasoned analysis of what the systems stood
for or represented in the field of national progress and development . . .; they were in
general not prepared in the light of their bearing on specific American problems, or,
if they were prepared with this end in view, sufficient allowances were not made for
differences in national environments” (Kandel, 1930).
Such condemnations, including that of Kandel, took these reports out of context
and discounted the acute awareness American educational specialists had of the situation in Prussia. The recommendations of the American reports were not universally
accepted by American policy makers, who opposed adoption of the Prussian schools,
because the schools were seen to be used by the Prussian state to perpetuate monarchical aims and to check the growing revolutionary spirit within the boundaries of that
Prussian state. In response to this challenge, the reformers quickly admitted there was
a relationship between Prussian schools and despotism. Calvin E. Stowe openly conceded that the whole educational program of Prussia was “to unite with the military
force which always attends despotism, a strong moral power over the understanding
and affections of the people” (Stowe, 1930). However, the American reformers countered this negative argument by stating that the evils were naturally separable from the
good. Horace Mann maintained that if the Prussian schoolmaster could teach reading,
writing, geography, and arithmetic in half the time that was required in America, then
surely they could “copy his modes of teaching these elements, without adopting his
notions of passive obedience to government” (Mann, 1844). He argued that human
faculties were the same everywhere. The best means for their growth and development
would therefore also be the same, and good schools can be used to strengthen the
democratic and republican spirit in America. Certainly, context and analysis mattered
to the American school reformers who were engaged in comparative education study.
Comparative educators have been sensitive to foreign influences on education; as
comparative education became an academic field, its founders were generally more
sensitive about the possibilities of drawing on foreign models with the purpose of
“perfecting national systems with modifications and changes” than of including past
influences from abroad in their own analyses of a nation’s educational system (Hans,
1955). Clearly, early comparative studies were intended to make a direct contribution to
the American common school movement that led to the establishment of an American
school system. Consequently, the American common school was almost an exact copy
of the Prussian Volksschule. Curiously, these American reformers often retained the
French terms used by Cousin. Consequently, the American normal school is a replica
of the German teacher training seminar, though the term we use is French.
Fortunately, these types of early, pre-academic comparative education activities
have not disappeared from our current academic activities. Some important work

--- [PDF Page 147 / Book Page 126] ---

126 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf

has been done in comparative education circles related to tracing influences in educational change and reform. Harry Armytage, for example, has written four books
tracing the influence of America, France, Germany, and Russia on English education
(Armytage, 1967, 1968, 1969a, b). Friedrich Schneider devoted most of his period of
exile from Nazi Germany tracing the influences of German education on other countries (Schneider, 1943). Even though his choice of topics is understandable, given the
National Socialist context within which he was working, his contribution to “influences” remains significant. Some of the work of the senior author of this essay has
focused on the reciprocal influences on education between Germans and Americans
(Rust, 1967, 1968, 1997). In fact, Rust’s own dissertation represents one of the few
studies of a single country’s historical interest in education beyond the borders of that
country (Rust, 1967).
Fortunately for specialists in comparative education, significant contemporary work
is being engaged in relation to “influences across cultures” at least in borrowing terms.
Recently, scholars at Oxford University, under the leadership of David Phillips have
engaged in a process of conceptualizing what goes on in the “borrowing” process
between nations, particularly as they relate to policy formation and implementation
(Phillips & Ochs, 2003). The Oxford framework is not dissimilar to that developed by
Rust in his study of educational policy formation and the implementation process in
Norway, which involve a series of phases: initiation study, consensus-building, legal
framework, and implementation (Rust, 1989).
Phillips and his colleagues have engaged in a large number of case studies, both
geographically and historically that demonstrate part or all of the borrowing process (Phillips, 2004). These Oxford scholars have been joined by people such as Gita
Steiner-Khamsi at Teachers College, Columbia University, who is concerned not only
with the borrowing process but also the lending process (Steiner-Khamsi, 2004).
The borrowing process has gone on as long as there have been separate administrative units that have maintained relations with each other. It is not clear how
globalization provides special contextual and circumstantial issues to be dealt with.
Most of the borrowing that has been documented has been between nation-states or
between systems of education in the modern age. With the emergence of transnational
conditions within the context of globalization, new models are yet to be developed that
illuminate the borrowing and lending process in education, as will be discussed in the
final section of this essay.

Comparative Education as a Scientific Enterprise
If there is a common theme that runs through the history of comparative education, at
least as an academic field, it is its quest to be a science. Such a quest is also reflected in
the whole field of educational studies. In 1887, the first American professor of education, William H. Payne, posed the specific nature of the issue, by noting “education is
chiefly an empirical art.” There is “no science of education” but a major purpose of the
field in higher education “is the development of educational science” (Payne, 1887).
This is not just an American issue. We noted earlier that some Germans have preferred

--- [PDF Page 148 / Book Page 127] ---

Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education 127

to use the term comparative pedagogy, because it reflects a middle ground between the
idealistic and the realistic, an educating art, an empirical art, the contradictory notion
of the “art of science.” Our own position related to comparative education is that it
has never been devoid of science impulses. Even the pre-academic practice comparative education, which we refer to as “influences across cultures,” has clear scientific
dimensions.
Comparative education must be viewed as one of a number of comparative fields
of study that have emerged at the time science was becoming a part of academic studies. Comparative fields of learning were seen to emerge in the life sciences in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries AD, as subfields of anatomy, paleontology, and
embryology, but they quickly expanded to almost every field coming into existence. In
fact, some of these fields, including sociology, were initially identified as comparative
in nature.2 In 1905, Louis Henry Jordan, wrote a large volume entitled Comparative
Religion, where he extolled no less than 26 comparative fields, claiming that the common property of all these fields was their “distinctive methodology.” That is, they all
used the scientific method and aimed “to expound those fundamental laws of relation.”
And, according to Jordan, comparative education was one of the more exemplary of
these “scientific” comparative fields, because “no method of inquiry has proved more
fruitful of wise suggestions.”3
If the example of Jordan serves us, we see that as comparative education entered the
academy, it had already been identified with being a science. We must consider methods, methodology, and epistemology related to comparative education in the context
of the broad landscape of higher education and mainly in the context of science. The
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, for example, deals with the meaning of the terms method
and methodology under the heading scientific method (Edwards, 1967).
The terms are inextricably associated with intentions of academic fields to be
scientific. Bernard S. Phillips echoes most texts dealing with social science research
as he defines the scientific method as “(1) defining problems so as to build on available knowledge, (2) obtaining information essential for dealing with these problems,
(3) analyzing and interpreting these data in accordance with clearly defined rules,
(4) communicating the results of these efforts to others” (Phillips, 1976). Robson also
claims research strategies usually involve four levels: (1) research design, (2) methods
of data collection, (3) analysis of the data, (4) and interpretation and implications of
the analysis (Robson, 1993). There is a crucial difference between the terms methodology and methods in our research. The first and last of the strategies noted by Phillips
and Robson rely so heavily on conceptual issues that they are mainly methodological
in nature while only the second and third levels deal explicitly with methods.
When we refer to research methodologies, we refer to the larger context for methods
being applied. In addition, methodologies usually have theoretical implications in that
they provide theories of how research does or should proceed. There is a long methodological tradition in comparative education. The first academic comparative education
scholars, such as Isaac Kandel, Nicholas Hans, and Friedrich Schneider, argued that
education can only be understood within the context of broad economic, political,
cultural, and social forces of a country. And their methodology demanded that educational systems not only be described in detail, but that the meaning of educational

--- [PDF Page 149 / Book Page 128] ---

128 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf

phenomena be derived by interpreting the economic, political, cultural, and social conditions that defined the educational systems (Hans, 1955; Kandel, 1933; Schneider,
1961). This deems that education is not a separate or isolated aspect of society – rather
it is deeply rooted within a society’s political, cultural, and economic conditions.
As education came to be caught up in the drive to be more scientific, the methodological debates shifted to issues of the social sciences. One of the main issues
comparative education scholars such as Brian Holmes and George Bereday argued
over was whether research should proceed inductively or deductively (Bereday, 1960;
Dewey, 1910; Holmes, 1965; Popper, 1963). The early scholars noted in the preceding paragraph took for granted that the process was inductive. Educational systems
were described and then interpreted from the broader economic, political, cultural,
and social context. Bereday’s comparative methodology was also inductive in that it
began with descriptions of two or more countries; then these systems were interpreted
from the broader context. The next phase was to juxtapose the data for the countries.
Finally, this data was compared. Clearly, their methodology was inductive in nature.
Brian Holmes challenged this tradition by relying on people such as John Dewey and
Karl Popper to expound on his so-called hypothetico-deductive approach to research
and he criticized his colleagues for their tendency to begin the research process with
descriptions of educational phenomena and only arrive at theory at a later stage in the
process. This discussion is not dead and continues as a methodological issue in the
debate over so-called grounded theory (Strauss & Glasser, 1967).
Methodologies are also related to the selection of research methods. The choice of
data collection ought to be made on theoretical grounds and what data sources provide
the most compelling evidence. This is particularly the case with regard to when and
to what degree research ought to be qualitative or quantitative in nature (Crossley &
Vulliamy, 1984; Heyman, 1979; Masemann, 1976). This issue focuses on the uses put
to research. Robert Stake explains the different orientations of those doing qualitative
research as opposed to those doing quantitative research: “Quantitative researchers
have pressed for explanation and control; qualitative researchers have pressed for
understanding the complex interrelationships among all that exists” (Stake, 1995).
Comparative education methodological issues also deal with the degree to which
studies ought to be descriptive, interpretive, or prescriptive, or whether it ought to be
melioristic, ideological, or strictly neutral (Kazamias, 1961), or the degree to which
studies ought to be problem based (Holmes, 1965). Other methodological concerns
involve the relationship between action and research, the relationship between the
researcher and the object of research,4 or whether a single perspective or multiple
perspectives are more appropriate (Kellner, 1988).
Methods have to do with how we collect and analyze data. When one decides on
the methods of data collection, one is asking the following questions: what kind of
information is being sought, from what sources, and under what circumstances? When
one decides on how to analyze the data, one is deciding how to make sense out of the
data that has been collected.
Science was particularly important in the development of comparative studies, and
early comparative scholars uniformly identified their field as one which relied on the
use of the scientific method. In the more general scientific sense, comparative scholars tested hypotheses about causal relations between phenomena. However, from the

--- [PDF Page 150 / Book Page 129] ---

Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education 129

beginning comparative scholars also restricted their scientific research in two ways.
First, they examined similarities and differences between phenomena or classes of
phenomena. Second, whereas science was generally committed to experimentation
as a way of making classifications and testing theory, the comparative scholar relied
almost entirely on studying variations in the natural setting.
We make no claim that comparative education studies are fundamentally different
from social sciences in general. In fact, all social sciences are comparative in nature,
at least insofar as all thought, especially considering that scientific thought is comparative in nature. The major complication of comparative studies is that it involves
the analysis of “dissimilar units” (different societies and cultures) (Smelser, 1976). In
comparative education the unit of analysis is usually the educational system or a subset of that system in two or more nation-states (Thomas, 1998). We recognize that no
single research method or methodology has ever characterized the field of comparative
education. Isaac Kandel, in his classic work, Comparative Education, explained that
“the methodology of comparative education is determined by the purpose that the study
is to fulfill.” In other words, Kandel assumed that different questions require somewhat
different ways of answering them. However, our research projects at UCLA have confirmed that the types of research strategies available to people such as Kandel were
rather limited, in that they focused mainly on historical and humanistic strategies.

Comparative Education Matures
Since comparative education entered the academy, it has undergone great change. In
general, this change represents increasing complexity and diversity in the field. Such
change represents both advantages and disadvantages, which we intend to discuss and
interpret.

Internationalization of Comparative Education
Comparative education began as an academic field in the United States, but quickly
developed a presence in Canada, Great Britain, Germany, and other European countries. This Eurocentric situation remained the major base of the field until the last
quarter of the twentieth century, when programs and professorships rapidly began to
expand to other parts of the world.
Erwin Epstein refers to this process as the internationalization of comparative education (Epstein, 1981). The expansion of the field is best illustrated by the growth of
the World Council of Comparative Education Societies (WCCES) that was organized
in 1970 to advance the field globally. WCCES has held 12 world congresses, the last
being held in Havana, Cuba in 2004. At the time this essay was written in 2007, 33
different comparative education societies are listed as members of the World Council.5
In the literature, a number of accounts are found of comparative education in specific
areas of the world. The United States claims the earliest account of its association
origins (Templeton, 1954), but there are also historical accounts of comparative education in Japan, of Mainland China, of India, of Germany (Rust, 1967), of the former
Soviet Union, of Europe in general (Cowen, 1980), and other geographic units. Gary
Tsuchimochi claims comparative education in Japan was a direct outgrowth of World

--- [PDF Page 151 / Book Page 130] ---

130 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf

War II, when the Japanese wished to gain access to the educational advantages the
West presented to them (Tsuchimochi, 1982). Sureshchandra Shukla also feels India’s
interest in comparative education sprang from its colonial past, but also from an interest in understanding the educational conditions of its neighbors in China, Indonesia,
and elsewhere (Shukla, 1983). The Chinese Comparative Education Society was established in 1979 with the intention that the Chinese educational community break away
from its isolation with the rest of the world, so that it would learn from developments
elsewhere, but also to disseminate research findings about educational developments
in China (Chen, 1994). The former Soviet Union encouraged the development of comparative education within its sphere of influence, but its intentions were unique among
comparative educators. It used education as a tool of propaganda in that the West
was willing to publish articles written by Soviets, even though these articles glorified
developments in the Soviet Union and castigated the West for is decadent, capitalistic
educational policies and programs (Hans, 1964).

Expanding Scope of Research Options
The methodologies of early pioneers of the field were remarkably similar, in that no
single method has ever characterized the field of comparative education. Although data
collection research strategies several decades ago were limited to literature reviews
and historical data, they increased dramatically over time. By literature reviews, we
mean studies that are argued on the basis of secondary literature and could therefore be
seen as interpretive essays. The more conventional social science approaches, such as
interviews, ethnographies, participation/observation, questionnaires, and other types
of field research has increased dramatically. In addition, one finds in comparative education journals additional strategies such as project reviews, content analysis of texts,
analysis of census data, and other large survey databases.6

Expanding Scope of Data Analysis Options
Data Analysis in comparative education began almost exclusively as qualitative in
nature. That is, the tradition was constructivist, interpretive, and naturalistic in that
it was based on a paradigm that the researcher was continually interacting with the
subject matter being researched and that the researcher was a part of the evaluation
process. That process remains in reduced form even today, although a more positivistic, objective social science orientation has become a mainstay of the field. In fact,
our work at UCLA indicates that the primary fields with which comparative educators
today identify with are sociology, political science, and economics (Henrickson et al.,
2003). There remains a pervasive tendency to rely on qualitative data, but there has
been a significant increase in quantitative studies since the mid-1960s. These quantitative studies are largely related with surveys and questionnaires.

Expanding Geographic Orientation of Research
The first major observation is that the geographic focus of comparative research
has shifted dramatically from the 1960s until the present. In the 1960s comparative

--- [PDF Page 152 / Book Page 131] ---

Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education 131

education studies were largely focused on the developed world. In fact, in some
areas of the world, comparative education was seen as something quite theoretical
and separated from the developing world. At the University of London, for example,
there was a clear separation between the comparative education program and the old
Department of Education in Developing Countries, which was initially focused on
colonial issues, then became generally concerned with “British foreign assistance
projects and with training administrators and practitioners in the Third World . . .”
(Altbach, 1991). This has changed, and even at the University of London, the two
departments merged for a while as the Department of International and Comparative
Education.
The geographic origins of scholars have also shifted. Early centers for the study of
comparative education were staffed by specialists almost exclusively from the developed world. Thus, Brickman, Eggertsen, and Anderson were American; Hans was
from Russia and of German descent; Kandel was Romanian and lived and taught in
England and then the States; Bereday were Polish; Rosello was Swiss: Schneider and
Hilker were German; Foster, Noah, Eckstein, Lauwerys (by birth, a Belgian), King
and Holmes were English. Kazamias was Greek who was educated in England who
later taught in the United States. Today, scholars increasingly originate from various
parts of the world. They tend to come from countries falling in all spheres of human
development, though because of the political economy of countries reflecting low
human development, scholars from these countries are not as visible as scholars from
other parts of the world, mainly because they do not have the resources necessary
to engage in international research projects. Some remarkable developments can be
observed. For example, in the 1990s China had no less than seven journals devoted
exclusively to comparative education (Chen, 1994). According to a recent Nan Tou
University bulletin in Taiwan, the university maintains six comparative education faculty positions, more than found at any American comparative education university
center.

Theory in Comparative Education
Nowhere is greater change seen in recent decades than in theory. We have already
noted that a liberal, humanistic tradition exemplified the early years of comparative
education at universities, but this quickly gave way to endeavors to make comparative education a scientific enterprise. The theoretical foundations for comparative
education shifted toward the social sciences, and the field was identified with two
closely allied theoretical orientations: structural functionalism and modernization.
Kazamias and Schwartz note that structural functionalism emphasized “social functions, societal interdependence, social order or consensus, and value free science”
(Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977). In the comparative education context they feel it
seeks to describe the interrelations between the educational system and other social
institutions. Without question, structural functionalism stood alone as the pervasive
sociological theory orientation of the period. It so dominated the landscape that it
was simply taken for granted that any legitimate study of social forces and factors
would be based on that orientation.

--- [PDF Page 153 / Book Page 132] ---

132 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf

At the same time, comparative education was coming to devote itself to modernization, or the change process by which traditional societies would become modern. The
mechanism by which this process would occur was seen to be schooling and education, and so comparative education became a central element in any modernization
scheme (Altbach, 1991). A number of specific theoretical orientations came into play
in modernization, including human capital theory, structural functionalism, and systems theory. Comparative education specialists were comfortable with their role in the
modernization process, because the field had always had a reformist bent, a practical
role in transforming not only education in any society but using education to transform
society itself (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977). This ambition had been central to many
of the activities of those early reformists, who were anxious to influence others across
cultures through educational reform.
By the 1970s, the domination of structural functionalism and modernization precipitously declined, as the hegemonic domination of earlier theoretical orientations
was successfully challenged. The major challenges came from a wide array of “emergent critical and interpretive knowledge communities” (Paulston, 1993), which were
attempting to change America into a more open, pluralistic society. If they were not
successful in transforming society, they were certainly successful in changing academic environments, including comparative education.
With the decline of the hegemonic impulses of the 1950s and 1960s, comparative
educationists became increasingly theory oriented, in large part because the journals
publishing comparative education works reflected an increasing number of theories.
In addition, our work at UCLA confirmed that authors included multiple perspectives
in their work. In our inquiries of authors of comparative studies, we compiled a list of
at least 26 different theoretical orientations authors publishing in major comparative
education journals were relying on.7
We must emphasize that scholars who rely on and develop theory are generally
committed to science. We have found that almost all of the people contributing to
comparative education journals are committed to theory, and those few scholars who
deny their work is theory-driven see their work as descriptive and practice-oriented.
They are “profession-” more than “academics”-driven.
One of the major concerns that have been raised over the years is the lack of unity
in comparative education. Surely, at the time the field entered the academy, there was a
sense of unity with regard to the disciplines in the field, the geographic focus, the origins of the early comparative education scholars, the methodology, and the theoretical
orientation. Over time, this unity has been lost, and there has been some concern that
the field has begun to spin out of control and fragment itself in all of the above respects
to the point that it may have little coherent identity.
From our vantage point we see the field becoming pluralistic rather than fragmented,
and that pluralism can be seen as a strength in that it indicates a break from the stifling
orthodoxy, that characterized the field in the 1950s and early 1960s, both theoretically and methodologically. However, any phenomenon that gyrates has the potential
of spinning out of control, loosing any sense of the identity and cohesiveness necessary for a field to grow and thrive. This is certainly not yet the case; we see comparative
education as a healthy, defined field of endeavor.

--- [PDF Page 154 / Book Page 133] ---

Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education 133

Where Is Comparative Education Headed?
It is our general perspective that comparative education is in a state of good health; it
is now opting for directions that introduce a fresh perspective for those who have been
in the field for several decades. This is being highlighted by comparative education students just entering the field. The field reached a decisive and optimistic point in the late
1960s, with the publication of Toward a Science of Comparative Education by Harold
Noah and Max Eckstein. The general tone of the book was that the field was finally
establishing itself as a legitimate science. The authors catalogue various phases of
the field, including travellers’ tales, educational borrowing, international educational
cooperation, forces and factors shaping education. All of these were “predecessors of
modern comparative education” (Noah & Eckstein, 1969).
Discourse about modern comparative education inherently encompasses the notion
of globalization. Val Rust addressed the intersection of education and globalization in
his publication Foreign Influences in Educational Reform, which raises the question as
to whether or not research in the field of comparative education has been able to keep
up with the rapid progression of globalization. Rust cites three categories of educational response to globalization – receptivity, resistance, and restoration (Rust, 2004).
Receptivity, also referred to as “cross-national attraction and borrowing,” is the
process through which education communities respond positively to external influences by adopting aspects of other educational systems with the desired objective of
improving their own. This has been the main concentration of the field since its origin.
The second response by education communities is resistance. Advocated by radical
theorists, resistance attempts to counter the oppressive, capitalist forces of neo-liberal globalization through concerted efforts to maintain and celebrate differences in
cultures, languages, and political ideologies. Throughout the world, cultural imperialism, a consequence of colonialism and now globalization, has been responsible for the
decline and decimation of countless indigenous languages and cultures. Restoration,
the third identified response, is initiated to ensure the preservation and promotion of
such indigenous knowledge.
Receptivity, resistance, and restoration adequately portray a historical focus of
comparative education. However, as up and coming professionals in this field, the junior authors of this essay feel there has been a lack of focus on the oppressive nature
of the forced imposition of educational programs or requirements from dominant to
dominated countries in non-symbiotic relationships, which has been the trigger for
educational resistance and restoration. This relationship between dominant and dominated countries is substantially different from Rust’s description of “reception theory,”
and we feel that another category should be considered within the field of comparative education. Such a category is comparable to the theory of reproduction, in which
“schools function in the interest of the dominant society” (Giroux, 1983). Whereas
receptivity reflects the internal efforts to improve an educational system by incorporating selective aspects of external systems, reproduction is the forced implementation
of educational systems by an external, dominant society. In this case, the “dominant
society” refers to the developed or core countries, with a “hidden curriculum” of promoting the dominant, core culture and maintaining a relationship of inequality and

--- [PDF Page 155 / Book Page 134] ---

134 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf

dependency. This is a significant consequence of globalization that needs the full attention of future comparative education researchers.
Mainstream comparative education has conscripted the advancement of modernity
as the underlying definition of education. As new professionals in the field, we challenge this notion and urge progressive comparative educators to cooperatively consider
a meaning of education that advances humanity instead of modernity. As part of this
consideration it is necessary to pose the question, has mainstream comparative education promoted a liberating “education” or rather a hegemonic neo-liberal political
ideology? Paulo Freire states unambiguously that education is politics (Shor & Freire,
1987). By promoting modernity, comparative education has sided with the capitalist economic model, which Freire describes as having “absolute insensitivity to the
ethical dimension of existence” (Freire, 1998). What comparative education requires
is a shared discourse about the political forces that have infused modernity into the
definition of education. A brief consideration of UNESCO’s Education for All (EFA)
initiative provides the impetus for this discourse.
The EFA goals, as accepted almost universally, represent a meaningful and comprehensive humanist-based definition of education, which emphasizes educational equity,
access, and literacy. Based on the latest quantitative evaluation of EFA by UNESCO,
almost none of the African, Middle Eastern (with the exception of Israel), non-English
speaking Caribbean, or Latin American countries, many of which had been coerced
into adopting capitalist-based educational systems, have yet met their EFA goals
(UNESCO, 2006). The notable exception is Cuba, which has succeeded by working
outside of the dominant global capitalistic structure. Disappointingly, Cuba has not
received any distinction for achieving the EFA goals due inevitably to its marginalized status for not supporting the dominant capitalist ideology. Considering that EFA
promotes a humanistic educational outlook, Cuba should be applauded for its achievement in realizing the EFA goals and be considered as a model for other countries.
Comparative education, in a historical context, has provided a strong foundation
for international cooperation for the advancement of receptive education. However,
neglecting the reproductive aspect of mainstream comparative education has led to
the necessity of resistance and restoration. The recognition of the latter two should
have been a warning sign that the focus and interventionist approach of the field has
resulted in non-symbiotic international relationships and an increasingly dependent
and exploitative global community. As up and coming comparative educators, we concur with Arnove’s statement, “We believe that comparative education can – and should
– play a significant role in contributing to the possibility that coming generations will
use their talents on behalf of international peace and social justice in an increasingly
interconnected world” (Arnove, 1999). In order to play this role, comparative education would do well to return to its roots. Isaac Kandel, the previously mentioned
pioneer in the field, wrote in 1955, “Because a nation seeks through education to mould
the character of its citizens and so reflects its aims – political, social, economic, and
cultural – a study of its educational system, as here defined, can contribute as richly
to an understanding of its aims in general as a direct study of its political policies”
(Kandel, 1955). With this understanding of comparative education as a field dedicated
to research and receptivity, not interventionism and reproduction; with the acceptance

--- [PDF Page 156 / Book Page 135] ---

Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education 135

that education be defined in terms of humanism, not capitalism; and with a praxis of
liberation, not domination, individual countries and societies can take ownership for
defining their own educational systems for the benefit of their people, culture, economics, and politics.

Notes
1.

2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

The first professors of education were appointed in Scotland in 1876. Simon Somerville Laurie
received the appointment at Edinburgh and John Miller Dow Meiklejohn at St. Andrews. William
H. Payne was the first in the United States in 1879 at the University of Michigan. At the time of his
appointment, William H. Payne had been serving as the superintendent of Adrian School District in
Michigan, and it is significant that the very first lectures he gave at the University of Michigan were
on the schools and the educational systems of Europe. Of course, the term comparative education was
not in use at the time (see Payne, 1887).
Auguste Comte, father of sociology, initially named the field “comparative sociology” (see Compte,
1988).
(Jordan, 1905: 35). The fields Jordan discussed were Comparative Anatomy, Comparative Philology,
Comparative Grammar, Comparative Education, Comparative Philosophy, Comparative Psychology,
Comparative History, Comparative Geography, Comparative Antiquities, Comparative Art,
Comparative Architecture, Comparative Agriculture, Comparative Forestry, Comparative Statistics,
Comparative Ethnology, Comparative Mythology, Comparative Sociology, Comparative Hygiene,
Comparative Hygiene, Comparative Physiology, Comparative Zoology, Comparative Jurisprudence,
Comparative Economics, Comparative Colonization, Comparative Civics, and Comparative Politics.
There are some wonderful essays from feminists about the dilemmas they face in international work
(see, for example, Cook & Fonow, 1991; Wolf, 1996).
See http://www.hku.hk/cerc/wcces.html
For specific information concerning these strategies, see (Rust et al., 1999)
These included human capital, modernization, structural functionalism, systems theory rational
choice, political pluralism, organizational/institutional theory, dependency, Marxian/neo-Marxian,
World systems, ethnography, phenomenology, constructivism, symbolic interactionism, critical theory, cultural revitalization, feminism, post-structuralism, post-modernism, pragmatic interactionism,
and neo-colonialism (see Henrickson et al., 2003).

References
Altbach, P. (1991). Trends in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 35, 491–507.
Armytage, W. H. G. (1967). The American influence on English education. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Armytage, W. H. G. (1968). The French influence on English education. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Armytage, W. H. G. (1969a). The German influence on English education. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Armytage, W. H. G. (1969b). The Russian influence on English education. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Arnove, R. F. (1999). Introduction: Reframing comparative education: The dialectic of the global and the
local. In R. F. Arnove & C. A. Torres (Eds.), Comparative education: The dialectic of the global and the
local. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Bache, A. D. (1839). Education in Europe. Philadelphia: Lydia Bailey.
Barnard, H. (1854). National education in Europe. Hartford: Case Tiffany & Co.
Bereday, G. Z. F. (1960). Comparative education at Columbia University. Comparative Education Review,
4(1), 15–17.
Bereday, G. Z. F. (1963). James Russell’s syllabus of the first academic course in comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 7(2), 189–196.
Brickman, W. W., & Fraser, S. E. (Eds.) (1968). A history of international and comparative education.
Boston: Scott, Foresman & Co.

--- [PDF Page 157 / Book Page 136] ---

136 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf
Chen, S.-C. (1994). Research trends in mainland Chinese comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, 38(2), 233–252.
Compte, A. (1988). Introduction to positive philosophy (F. Ferre, Trans.). Indianapolis: Hackett.
Cook, J. A., & Fonow, M. M. (Eds.) (1991). Beyond methodology: Feminist scholarship as lived research.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Cowen, R. (1980). Comparative education in Europe: A note. Comparative Education Review, 24(1),
98–108.
Crossley, M., & Vulliamy, G. (1984). Case study research methods and comparative education. Comparative
Education, 20, 273–286.
Dewey, J. (1910). How we think. Boston: D. C. Heath.
Edwards, P. (Ed.). (1967). The encyclopedia of philosophy. New York: Macmillan/Free Press.
Epstein, E. (1981). Toward the internationalization of comparative education: A report on the World Council
of Comparative Education Societies. Comparative Education Review, 25(2), 261–171.
Fraser, S. E. (1964). Jullien’s plan for comparative education: 1816–1817. New York: Teachers College,
Columbia University.
Fraser, S. E., & Brickman, W. W. (Eds.) (1968). A history of international and comparative education.
Atlanta: Scott, Foresman & Company.
Freire, P. (1998). Pedagogy of the heart. In A. M. A. Freire & D. Macedo (Eds.), The Paulo Freire reader
(pp. 263–282). New York City: Continuum.
Giroux, H. A. (1983). Theory and resistance in education: A pedagogy for the opposition. South Hadley,
MA: Bergin & Garvey Publishers.
Hans, N. (1955). Comparative education: A study of educational factors and traditions. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul.
Hans, N. (1964). The Soviet approach to comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 8(4),
90–93.
Harris, W. T. (1889). The annual report of the commissioner for 1889. In U. S. Board of Education (Ed.):
US Printing Office.
Henrickson, L., Faisaon, S., & Rust, V. (2003). Theory in comparative education. World Studies in Education,
4(1), 5–28.
Heyman, R. (1979). Comparative education from an ethnomethodological perspective. Comparative
Education, 15(no. 1), 241–249.
Highet, G. (1992). The classical tradition: Greek and Roman influences on Western literature. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Hilker, F. (1962). Vegleichende Paedagogik: Eine Einfuehrung in ihre Geschichte, Theorie und Praxis.
Muenchen: Max Hueber Verlag.
Hinsdale, B. A. (1906). History of the University of Michigan. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in educaton: A comparative approach. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Jefferson, T. (1785). The comparative advantages of an American rather than a European education. In
S. E. Fraser & W. W. Brickman (Eds.), A history of international and comparative education. Glenview,
Illinois: Scott, Foresman & Co.
Jordan, L. H. (1905). Comparative religion. Edinburgh, Scotland: T. & T. Clark.
Kandel, I. (1930). Essays in comparative education. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University.
Kandel, I. (1933). Comparative education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kandel, I. (1955). The new era in education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kazamias, A. (1961). Some old and new approaches to methodology in comparative education. Comparative
Education Review, 5(October), 90–96.
Kazamias, A., & Schwartz, K. (1977). Intellectual and ideological perspectives in comparative education:
An interpretation. Comparative Education Review, 21(3), 153–176.
Kellner, D. (1988). Globalization and the postmodern turn. http://www.gseis.ucla.edu/courses/ed253a/dk/
GLOBPM.htm
Mann, H. (1844). Mr. Mann’s seventh annual report: Education in Europe. Common School Journal, 6, 72.
Masemann, V. (1976). Anthropological approaches to comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, 20(October), 368–380.
Noah, H., & Eckstein, M. (1969). Toward a science of comparative education. London: Collier Macmillan.

--- [PDF Page 158 / Book Page 137] ---

Reflections on the Development of Comparative Education 137
Paulston, R. (1993). Comparative education as an intellectual field: Mapping the theoretical landscape.
Comparative Education, 23(2), 101–114.
Payne, W. H. (1887). Contributions to the science of education. New York: Harper & Brothers.
Phillips, B. S. (1976). Social research: Strategy and tactics. New York: Macmillan.
Phillips, D. (2004, March 9–12). Educational borrowing policy: Historical and contemporary perspectives.
Paper presented at the Comparative and International Education Society Annual Meeting, Salt Lake
City, Utah.
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (2003). Processes of policy borrowing in education: Some explanatory and analytical devices. Comparative Education, 39(4), 451–461.
Popper, K. (1963). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge. New York: Harper & Row.
Robson, C. (1993). Real world research: A resource for social scientists and practitioner-researchers.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Rust, V. D. (1967). German interest in foreign education since world war i. Unpublished dissertation,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Rust, V. D. (1968). The common school issue–a case of cultural borrowing. In W. Correll & F. Suellwold
(Eds.), Forschung und erziehung. Germany: Donauwoerth.
Rust, V. D. (1987). Claude a. Eggertsen: His formative years. In R. F. Lawson, V. D. Rust & S. M. Shafer
(Eds.), Education and social concern: An approach to social foundations. Ann Arbor, Michigan:
Prakken Publications.
Rust, V. D. (1989). The democratic tradition and the evolution of schooling in Norway. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Rust, V. D. (1990). The policy formation process and educational reform in Norway. Comparative Education,
26(1), 13–26.
Rust, V. D. (1997). The German image of American education through the Weimar period. Paedagogica
Historica: International Journal of the History of Education, 33(1), 25–44.
Rust, V. D. (2004). Foreign influences in educational reform. In H. Ertl (Ed.), Cross-national attraction in
education. Oxford: Symposium Books.
Rust, V. D., Soumare, A., Pescador, O., & Shibuya, M. (1999). Research strategies in comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 41(1), 86–109.
Sandiford, P. (Ed.). (1918). Comparative education, studies of the educational systems of six modern nations.
London: J. M. Dent & Sons.
Schneider, F. (1931/32). Internationale paedagogik, auslands paedagogik, vergleichende erziehungswissenschaft: Geschichte, wesen, methoden, aufgaben und ergebnisse. Internationale Zeitschrift fuer
Erziehungswissenschaft, 1.
Schneider, F. (1943). Geltung und einfluesse der deutschen paedagogik im ausland. Muenchen: R. Oldenbourg.
Schneider, F. (1961). Vergleichende erziehungswissenschaft. Heidelberg: Quelle & Meyer.
Shor, I., & Freire, P. (1987). A pedagogy for liberation. Boston: Bergin & Garvey.
Shukla, S. (1983). Comparative education: An Indian perspective. Comparative Education Review, 27(2),
246–258.
Smelser, N. J. (1976). Comparative methods in the social sciences. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Stake, R. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2004). Lessons from elsewhere: The politics of educational borrowing and lending.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Stowe, C. (1930). Report on elementary public instruction in Europe. In E. Knight (Ed.), Reports on
European education. New York: McGraw Hill.
Strauss, B. G., & Glasser, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.
Chicago: Aldine.
Templeton, R. G. (1954). The study of comparative education in the United States. Harvard Educational
Review, 24(3), 141–158.
Thomas, R. M. (1998). Conducting educational research: A comparative view. Westport, CN: Bergin &
Garvey.
Tsuchimochi, G. (1982). Comparative education in japan: A note. Comparative Education Review, 26(3),
435–431.
UNESCO (2006). Strong foundations: Early childhood care and education. Paris: UNESCO.

--- [PDF Page 159 / Book Page 138] ---

138 Rust, Johnstone, and Allaf
Weisbuch, R. (1989). Atlantic double cross: American literature and British influence in the age of emerson.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wolf, D. L. (Ed.). (1996). Feminist dilemmas in fieldwork. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

