================================================================================
Chapter 10: Comparative Education: Historical Reflections
Author(s): Andreas M. Kazamias
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 1: The Creation and Re-creation of a Field
Book Pages: pp. 139–157
PDF Pages: pp. 160–178 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 160 / Book Page 139] ---

10
COMPARATIVE EDUCATION: HISTORICAL
REFLECTIONS
Andreas M. Kazamias

Time present and time past are both perhaps present in time future. And time
future contained in time past (T.S. Eliot).

Prologue
The term comparative education (CE) is not a mono-faceted or monophonic concept/
intellectual system. It is an inter- and multidisciplinary ‘human science’, an episteme
in Nicholas Hans’ sense of Vergleichende Erziehungwissenschaft (Hans, 1959: 299).
Historically, the genealogical roots of CE have been traced to the ‘modernist’ epoch
of the European Enlightenment of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
Since that time, comparative studies of educational systems, problems, phenomena
or processes have been conceptualised, approached and constructed from a variety of
perspectives, through a variety of methodological prisms/lenses, and using a variety
of research methods and techniques. Like the Greek mythical demigod Proteus, CE
at different historical periods has donned different attire, woven by differently coloured epistemological, methodological and ideological threads. Consequently, it has
appeared in a variety of guises reflecting to a large degree, the intellectual, methodological and cultural strands and fads of the times. Hence, the appellation of CE as a
protean episteme (Kazamias, 2001). To put it differently, in reflecting historically on
CE as a ‘human science’, as this chapter purports to do, I shall ‘theorise’ about ‘generations’ and ‘types’ of comparative education discourse.

The ‘Proto-Scientific’ and the Administrative ‘Meliorist’
Generation of Comparative Education Discourse
Conceptualised as a ‘modernist’ episteme, the beginnings of CE have been traced to
the intellectual and cultural terrain of the European Enlightenment of the late eighteenth
and the early nineteenth centuries. Among the cluster of ideas assumptions and expectations, that have gone into the construction of the Enlightenment ‘paradigm’, or what
has otherwise been referred to as the ‘project of modernity’ are taken to include
reason, empiricism, science (including social science), universalism, progress, and the
139
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 139–157.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 161 / Book Page 140] ---

140 Kazamias

nation state. It is in the intellectual and institutional matrix of the Enlightenment era
that modernist epistemic elements of CE may be historically traced. This is manifest, for example, in the pioneer efforts of Marc-Antoine Jullien de Paris (1775–1848)
who sought to construct an empirically based ‘nearly positive science’ of CE, one
that would provide ‘non-arbitrary’ and ‘non-capricious’ knowledge for ‘the reform and
improvement of education’. In his Esquisse et vues preliminaires d’ un ouvrage sur I’
education comparee (Plan and preliminary views for a work on comparative education), published in Paris in 1817 and unearthed in the 1940s, Jullien laid out what may
be called a ‘proto-scientific’ paradigm of comparative education:
Education, as all other sciences and all the arts, is composed of facts and observations. It, therefore, seems necessary to form, for this science as one has done for
the other branches of knowledge, collections of facts and observations, arranged
in analytical charts, which permit them to be related and compared, to deduct
from them certain principles, determined rules, so that education might become
almost nearly a positive science. Researches on comparative anatomy have
advanced the science of anatomy. In the same way the researches on comparative education must furnish new means of perfecting the science of education
(Fraser, 1964: 40–41).
The scientific template and culture of the Enlightenment, which must have informed
Jullien’s ‘preliminary views’ towards the construction of his Plan for what may be
called the prototypical social science of CE, were not restrictive in their scope and
signification, namely, the production of ‘reasoned and empirically based knowledge’.
Social science, according to the intellectuals of the Enlightenment, was bound up with
the concept of progress. These reformist significations, social ideas and values (i.e.
social and moral meliorism, liberalism and humanitarianism) were integral constituent parts of what may be called the ‘proto-modernist comparative canon, which is
more fully discussed in another chapter of this Handbook by Pella Kaloyiannaki and
Andreas M. Kazamias.

The Nineteenth-Century Administrative Melioristic/
Reformative Motif, European-French and American
As noted in other historical accounts of comparative education, the ‘scientific’ and
universalistic elements of this proto-modemist/‘proto-scientific’ generation of comparative discourse were not fully inscribed onto the epistemic template of CE in the
nineteenth century (Kazamias & Massialas, 1965; Fraser; 1964; Noah & Eckstein,
1969; Jones, 1971; Tretheway, 1976). For the most part, what one observes in the
nineteenth century was another generation of comparative discourse, which was more
‘international’ than ‘comparative’ in that it dealt with ‘foreign education’ or education
in other countries, with only incidental, if at all, comparative references. Some of the
notable representatives of this discourse were Victor Cousin in France and Horace
Mann, John Griscom, Calvin Stowe, Henry Barnard and W.T. Harris in the United

--- [PDF Page 162 / Book Page 141] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 141

States. These ‘international’ educationists sought to gather information and data on
aspects and problems of foreign education that were of immediate concern to them in
their roles as policy-makers and administrators in their respective countries or ‘states’.
Their overriding consideration was to see what useful ideas and practices they could
‘borrow’ for the reform of their own system. In the case of most Americans, such
‘borrowed’ ideas and information were used as legitimising rationales for mainly politicoideological, melioristic and reformative purposes. As we have written elsewhere
(Kazamias & Massialas, 1965), some of these characteristics (e.g. meliorism, reformism and, we may add, nation-state formation) were present in the previous generation.
Indeed, they were germane to the spirit and culture of the Enlightenment, and pari
passu, to the ‘modernity project’. Such elements went into the making of the ‘quasiethnographic’, ‘quasi-historical’ and descriptive national reports by mainly practically
minded school administrators, policy-makers and policy-advisers such as Horace
Mann, Henry Barnard, Calvin Stowe and William T. Harris of the United States, Victor
Cousin of France, and Mathew Arnold of England, to name but a few of the betterknown ones (Holmes, 1965; Kazamias & Massialas, 1965; Noah & Eckstein, 1969).
Of these comparativists, however, the views of Sadler and to a degree those of Harris
are especially illustrative of this transitional generation of discourse. For, although
their studies/reports on foreign systems of education were for the most part descriptive, ‘scholiocentric’ (i.e. centred in aspects of the school system, of schooling and
of pedagogy as isolated institutional and socio-cultural phenomena) and hortatory,
these writers can also be credited with adumbrating a new comparative epistemic
discourse.
In his much-quoted Oxford address of October 20, 1900, entitled ‘How Far Can We
Learn Anything of Practical Value from the Study of Foreign Systems of Education?’,
Michael Sadler framed the conceptual template of the emerging historical-meliorist
and cultural canon in these words:
Therefore, if we propose to study foreign systems of education, we must not
keep our eyes on the brick and mortar institutions, nor on the teachers and pupils
only, but we must also go outside into the streets and into the homes of the people, and try to find out what is the intangible, impalpable, spiritual force which,
in the case of any successful system of Education, is in reality upholding the
school system and accounting for its practical efficiency . . .; In studying foreign
systems of Education we should not forget that the things outside the schools
matter even more than the things inside the schools, and govern and interpret the
things inside. A national system of Education is a living thing . . . . The practical
value of studying, in a right spirit and with scholarly accuracy, the working of
foreign systems of education is that it will result in our being better fitted to study
and to understand our own (Sadler, 1900, reprinted in Bereday, 1964: 309–10,
italics mine).
And in another context, Sadler wrote: ‘The educational question is not a question by
itself. It is part of the social question. And the social question is at bottom largely an
ethical question’ (quoted in Noah & Eckstein, 1969: 47).

--- [PDF Page 163 / Book Page 142] ---

142 Kazamias

In these discursive statements, Sadler brings together most of the epistemological
and methodological strands that went into the making of the ‘historical-meliorist’ form
of comparative education that emerged from the social, cultural and intellectual context
of the late Victorian period which also marked the waning of an era – a fin de siecle – and
the dawn of another. These strands can be summarised as follows:
(a) Educational questions are not ‘scholiocentric’; hence, schools and schooling
must be studied in the context of the societies in which they function.
(b) The primary aim of comparative study is, ‘in a sympathetic spirit, to understand
the real working of a foreign system of education’, not to judge it.
(c) In order to understand the workings of an educational system, however, one
must try and find out the historical, non-school ‘intangible, impalpable spiritual
force’ that moves it and gives it its national character and identity; one must
probe into ‘the secret workings of national life’.
(d) In comparative education one studies foreign systems of education, and the
focus is on national systems and on national education.
(e) The ‘practical value’ of a scholarly study of other national systems of education
is that it will help us ‘to study and to understand our own’.
(f) Lastly, it could also be said that by making us better fitted to understand our own
system of education, the study of foreign education would have the added value
of helping us to improve it.
Some of these strands are to be found in the reports of continental European education by Mathew Arnold, the Victorian poet, essayist, literary, social and cultural
critic, apostle of Eurocentric ‘high culture’, and Her Majesty’s Inspector of Schools.
However, as an inquiring reporter on European education and culture, Arnold, the
‘comparative educator’, emphasised types of discourse that were either excluded or
lay hidden in the writings of his predecessors and his contemporaries. For example,
he used the experience of other European nations, e.g. France, as an exemplar of what
might be done in his own nation, i.e. in England, and comparison as an aid to criticism
of the English polity, society, culture and education. In this connection, it is significant
and, considering Arnold, the Victorian liberal intellectual, rather ironic to note that
he condemned the then dominant ideology of laissez-faire liberalism and its political
doctrine of a ‘minimal state’. Referring to the French polity and culture, which he had
found more democratic than the English, he argued for greater state interference at
home. Arnold, in other words, grappled with ‘state-steering in education’ and, more
broadly, in culture.
This new generation of comparative discourse, what we have called the ‘historicalmeliorist’ and ‘liberal humanistic’ canon, emerged in and formed part of a world, a
cosmos that in many respects was different from the world of the Enlightenment. It was
a polymorphous, tension-ridden and uncertain socio-political, economic, intellectual
and cultural cosmos made up of a motley of human actors: ‘laissez-faire liberals’, ‘liberal democrats’, ‘radicals, ‘conservatives’, ‘welfare statists’, and even ‘collectivists’,
elitists and egalitarians, ‘barbarians’, ‘philistines’ and the ‘populace’ (to use Matthew
Arnold’s classic sociological-anthropological description of the English industrial
bourgeois society and culture); romantics, humanists and rationalists; macro-historical

--- [PDF Page 164 / Book Page 143] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 143

functional and conflict social scientists; optimists and nihilists; Christians, moralists
and sceptics; nationalists and imperialists.

The Historical-Philosophical cum Liberal-Humanist
Generation of Comparative Discourse
It is in this new and variegated multicultural mosaic of the ‘modernity project’ that
the revised ‘paradigm’ of comparative education, represented by Michael Sadler,
was generated and took the modernist form that it did, what could be described as
the ‘historical-philosophical’ cum ‘liberal-humanist’ form. However, it was left to a
succeeding generation of comparative educators, foremost among whom were historian-philosophers and liberal humanists like Isaac Kandel and Robert Ulich in the
United States, Nicholas Hans in Great Britain, and Friedrich Schneider in Germany,
to construct and help institutionalise CE as a ‘historical-philosophical’ and ‘liberalhumanist’ explanatory/interpretive episteme. Here we shall sketch the distinctive
intellectual/epistemological and methodological contours of this generation of comparative discourse drawn from the works of Kandel, Hans and Ulich.
(a) Comparative education, according to Hans, entails the identification of the ‘factors’ – social, political, economic, cultural – which have gone into ‘the creation
of different nations’ and different ‘national systems of education’. Such factors
have included: natural factors (race, language, environment – mainly geographic
and economic), religious factors (catholicism, anglicanism and puritanism), and
secular factors (humanism, socialism and nationalism). Hans adds: ‘The analytical study of these factors from a historical perspective and the comparison of
attempted solution(s) of resultant problems are the main purpose of comparative education’ (Hans, 1949: 9–11). Kandel injected an ‘idealist’ philosophical
element in this historical approach by conceiving CE to be an inquiry into the
history of ‘ideas, ideals and forms’. He wrote:
The chief contribution then, of the study of comparative education is that, if
properly approached, it deals ‘with fundamental principles’ and fosters ‘the
acquisition of a philosophic attitude’ in analyzing and therefore stimulating a
clearer understanding of the problems of education. The study makes the educator better able to enter into the spirit and tradition of the educational system of
his own nation (Kandel, 1955: 12; Kandel, 1933: xx).
And in language that echoed Michael Sadler, as well as contemporary philosophical
humanists, he searched for ‘the hidden meaning of things found in the schools’, and he
called for ‘an appreciation of the intangible, impalpable, spiritual and cultural forces
which underlie an educational system’ (Kandel, 1933: xx–xv, 1955: 8–12).
(b) Comparative education is not an ‘empirical social science’. It is an interpretive/
explanatory and a ‘melioristic’ episteme. It is neither a predictive nor a policyoriented social science. In the tradition of the earlier generation of discourse,

--- [PDF Page 165 / Book Page 144] ---

144 Kazamias

especially in the work of Kandel, it is ‘melioristic’ in the sense that the knowledge,
insights and understandings acquired through the historical-philosophicalhumanistic comparative approach would help develop a ‘a broad philosophical
attitude’ that would help in the improvement of education at home and abroad,
and, ultimately, it would foster the spirit of internationalism (Kandel, 1955: 12,
1933: xx). As we have written elsewhere, being an idealist, Kandel was more
concerned with ‘form’ than with the details that make up a national system of
education. Such ‘form’ could be grasped through study of the ‘history and traditions . . . the forces and attitudes . . . the political and economic conditions that
govern the social organization and determine the development of an educational
system’ (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977: 156; Kazamias & Massialas, 1965: 3).
(c) An essential aspect of Kandel’s notion of understanding, as indeed of Hans’ and
Ulich’s, was the ‘national’ or national-state context of human and educational
activity. His, as well as their units of analysis were national systems of education: English, German, French, Russian, American (USA). All of them were
explicit in their accounts that schools and educational practices were influenced
by national traditions, national political ideologies, and the ubiquitous, at the
time, ‘national character’ (Kandel, 1933: xxiv).
(d) Not only could CE be a positive force for the improvement of education and the
fostering of ‘internationalism’; it could also be a positive force for the development of ‘liberal democracy’ and ‘democratic citizenship’. The comparative
work of Kandel, Ulich and Hans was infused with ‘Eurocentric’ and Western
liberal democratic ideas and principles about the polity and the economic system, about the nation state and civil society, about the role of the individual
and the state and about ‘liberty, equality and fraternity’. And in the spirit of the
‘Enlightenment modernity project’, all three had an abiding faith in the idea of
progress, and progress through enlightenment and education. In this connection,
it would not be inappropriate to note that Kandel was born a Rumanian Jew,
who abhorred Nazism and considered all forms of authoritarianism and totalitarianism, especially the Soviet type, as ‘blasphemous anathema’; Ulich was a
German émigré to the United States, who had escaped from Nazi Germany in
the 1930s; and Hans was also an émigré from Eastern Europe.
(e) Lastly, the conceptual tapestry of this generation of comparative discourse was
marked by the prominence given to the political element – the political relations
of schooling – and specifically in the work of Kandel, to the concept of the ‘state’.
In the Kandelian episteme of comparative education, the state, by which he meant
the ‘nation state’, was a determining factor in categorising, understanding and
evaluating national systems of education. ‘As is the state, so is the school’, and
conversely, ‘As is the school, so is the state’, or, stated otherwise, ‘Every state has
the type of education that it wills’ (Kandel, 1933: 82, 1955: 21).

Re-Inventing the Social Scientific Canon
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the nature, scope, methodology and value of CE as
the modernist episteme presented above, came under intense scrutiny and reassessment.

--- [PDF Page 166 / Book Page 145] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 145

A group of young scholars, some of the more prominent of whom were nurtured in
the Euro-American Eurocentric intellectual tradition, questioned the then dominant
historical approaches and other ‘international’ activities that went by the name of CE,
namely, descriptive and/or impressionistic accounts of foreign systems of education.
Calls were made for approaches that would be more systematic than impressionistic,
more empirical and analytical than purely speculative and descriptive more ‘microcosmic’ than ‘macrocosmic’ and Olympian, and more ‘scientific’ than ‘historical’ or
‘philosophical’. An unprecedented output of articles on the theory and method of CE
appeared, no less than 25 in the newly established Comparative Education Review
alone during the period 1957–1965. In addition to the Comparative Education Review,
an American-based Comparative Education Society was established, and all major universities in England and the United States set up comparative education departments
or units, all of which sought to promote the study of CE and elevate its status as a
respected academic discipline.
In the ensuing years, the ferment of controversy over the epistemological and methodological contours of the field continued unabated: whether CE was an art, a science
or a combination of both; whether it was a discipline in its own right or an area of study
on which several disciplines were brought to bear; whether it was a theoretical or an
applied activity/episteme; or whether its techniques of analysis should be empiricostatistical, historical or philosophical. Concurrently, the controversy revolved around
the appropriate subject-matter of CE – whether, for example the emphasis should be
on school-centred problems or on school–society relationships.
In the mid-1950s, it was possible to identify individuals who were recognised as
authoritative spokespersons for CE, and texts which defined its parameters and codified its subject matter. Such was the case, for example, with Kandel and his books
Comparative Education (1933) and The New Era of Education (1955) and N. Hans with
his Comparative Education: A Study of Educational Factors and Traditions (1949).
Twenty years later, in the mid-1970s, such identifications were no longer possible.
In 1977, the Comparative Education Review (of which the present writer was the
editor), the official scholarly journal of the Comparative and International Education
Society, put out a special issue on ‘The State of the Art’. The cover of this edition
was adorned by a cartoon showing a reflective Humpty Dumpty sitting, with his short
legs hanging down, atop a sketchy map of the United States. With a pondering look
on his disproportionately large face, Humpty Dumpty gazed at what was inscribed
on the map: structural-functionalism, cost-benefit, production, pedagogy, development, mankind. This cartoon graphically symbolised some of the dominant themes
that went into the making of the episteme of CE in America in the post-Kandelian,
post-Hansian period of the 1950s and 1960s period, at least as this intellectual field
was conceptualised and cultivated by some of the major contemporary writers. Such
features reflected quite a different ‘generation of comparative discourse’ from the previous one depicted above. One may interpret this ‘modernist’ form of comparative
discourse as a reinvention of the ‘scientific’ tradition inaugurated by Jullien during
the period of Enlightenment. I shall refer to this generation as the era of ‘scientism’,
an era characterised by a frenzy of activity to make CE a ‘science’, and a positive and
predictive social science at that. The ‘historical-philosophical-humanist’ school, was,
by and large, judged by prominent people in the field to be ‘unscientific’ and, therefore,

--- [PDF Page 167 / Book Page 146] ---

146 Kazamias

neither productive of objective and reliable knowledge, nor particularly helpful for
purposes of theory-building, educational policy formation, development, modernisation and educational planning. Historical comparative education, as promulgated by
Kandel, Hans and Ulich, for all meaningful purposes, was according to that new scientific school interred with their bones.
The reinvented and redefined scientific comparative ‘paradigm’ appeared in a variety of epistemological and methodological guises or forms, and it permeated both the
theoretical and the practical comparative discourse in the immediate decades after the
1960s. To a large extent, what may be called the ‘neo-scientific’ comparative canon in
its various forms continued to permeate much of the discourse in the 1980s and after.

Functionalism: The Functional-Sociological Chicago School
The most salient and pervasive form of the ‘neo-scientific’ generation of comparative
discourse in the Anglo-Saxon world was the multifaceted paradigm of functionalism
(Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977; Kazamias & Massialas, 1982). Originally associated with
the eminent anthropologists Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown, structural-functionalism
was developed and applied to American sociology by its greatest representative Talcott
Parsons. By the 1950s, according to Floud and Halsey, it became the prevailing orthodoxy in American sociology of education (Halsey et al., 1961). C. Arnold Anderson,
the founder of the University of Chicago structural-functional school of thought, was
nurtured in the American structural-functional school of sociology, while Philip Foster,
another member of the Chicago School, had studied economics, sociology and anthropology at the University of London (the academic habitat of Malinowski), and had
completed his graduate education under Anderson at the University of Chicago.
At the risk of oversimplification, it may be said that functionalism in CE examines
the social, political and economic functions or relations of schools and schooling.
It emphasises societal functional interdependence (i.e. interrelations between the educational system and other societal sub-systems), and, the ‘equilibrium’ variant of it,
social order or consensus and value-free ‘scientific’ enquiry.
Some general tenets of the functionalist framework – namely, that education does
not function sui generis; it is interrelated with other social and political institutions,
and it can best be understood if examined in its social context – have been espoused
by most educational comparativists. Certainly such features can be found in many of
the well-known works in the field, especially the classic historical studies of Kandel
(1933, 1955) and Hans (1949).
In contrast, however, to the ‘historical functionalism’ of Kandel and Hans, CE in
the 1960s and 1970s was characterised by the following traits: (1) efforts to ground
the study of education in scientific, empirical, mostly quantitative methods and techniques; (2) a quest for ‘invariant’ and ‘timeless’ relationships and thus the assumption
that it is possible to develop a theory of education; (3) a focus on the actual role of
schooling in social, political and economic processes, as in socialisation (including
political socialisation), social selection or social differentiation, recruitment of elites,
social or national integration, human resource development, and the like; (4) a view of
educational change as essentially ‘reformist’ or ‘adaptive’, that is, a process of adaptation

--- [PDF Page 168 / Book Page 147] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 147

of educational structures and forms to changes in other sectors or subsystems of the
social order; and (5) a vision of the modern society – ‘meritocratic’, ‘democratic’ and
‘expert’ – towards which socio-educational developments should strive (Hurn, 1978;
Karabel & Halsey, 1977).
The rise of the functional paradigm in CE coincided with a variety of other intellectual currents: the prevalent school of American sociology (Parsons, Merton), British
social anthropology (Malinowski, Radcliffe-Brown), human capital theory and its corollaries (Schultz, Harbison and Myers), theories of development and modernisation
(Levy, Lerner, Rostow, McClelland and Black), and the political culture and system
analysis schools of thought in political science (Coleman, 1965). At the same time,
functionalism and social theories of educational change or modernisation, as well as
policy recommendations based on functionalist analyses, were a response to the socioeconomic and political conditions of the times and were reinforced by institutional
and/or individual support from governments, foundations and international organisations for promotion of their own policy interests.
The functionalist paradigm in the emerging ‘neo-scientific’ CE of the 1960s was most
apparent in productive research on the social, political and economic relations/functions of education. Themes investigated from the functionalist perspective included,
inter alia: (a) the structure and context of educational opportunities and inequalities,
(b) the mechanisms of educational recruitment, selection and discrimination, (c) the
role of education in development and modernisation (social, political, economic),
(d) education, political socialisation, political integration and nation-building, and
(e) education and economic growth (Kazamias & Massialas, 1982).
Of these ‘problem areas’, that of ‘education-development-modernisation’ constituted
a wide range of activities both inside and outside the halls of academia. One distinguishing feature of this perspective was the ‘instrumental-developmental’ conception
of the role of education and its extension into the development of strategies (policies and plans) for change and reform. Scientific inquiry, according to this approach,
could instruct us not only to understand the problematic of the education-development-modernisation nexus; it could also provide solutions or guidelines for change
and improvement. Developmentalists held the view that education is a determining
factor in improving the conditions of people. To quote a contemporary apophthegm:
‘Education is the key that unlocks the door to modernisation’. The functionalist paradigm, it should be re-emphasised, informed much of the literature – and there was a
great deal of it – that approached education through the theoretical lenses of modernisation and development, as well as, it may be added, the literature that approached
education from a systems-analytic perspective.

Methodological Empiricism, Methodologism, and Scientific ‘Modernism’
The other approach or ‘research strategy’ to ‘scientific’ CE was what we have elsewhere
called ‘methodological empiricism’ (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977: 173–175) and what
B. Barber has called ‘methodologism’ (Barber, 1972). This intellectual perspective was
elaborated in the writings of H. Noah and M. Eckstein, two influential comparativists
during the period under consideration. In many respects, it also pervaded the work of

--- [PDF Page 169 / Book Page 148] ---

148 Kazamias

G. Psacharopoulos, an influential economist of education, who, studied at the University
of Chicago and, subsequently, operated within the intellectual tradition associated with
the Chicago school of ‘human capital theory’ (Psacharopoulos, 1987). Central to this
‘scientific’ approach was a ‘monistic’ view of science and the assumption, in the words
of Stephen Toulmin, that there is ‘a single, all purpose “scientific method” ’ (Toulmin,
1963: 15–17). Calling for the transformation of CE into a ‘pure social science’ akin
to methodological developments in other contemporary social sciences, Noah and
Eckstein advocated a comparative episteme that would conform to all the requirements
of ‘scientific modernism’ or simply ‘scientism’, namely, hypothesis-formation and
hypothesis-testing, verification, control, explanation, prediction, quantification, positivism and theory construction. In their influential Toward a Science of Comparative
Education, published in 1969, Noah and Eckstein cite the work of the newly established Council for the International Evaluation of Educational Achievement, later
called the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement
(IEA), as an example of what they meant by ‘science of comparative education’. The
epistemological and methodological perspective of the newly initiated IEA research
project was described and exemplified in the much-publicised and acclaimed twovolume International Study of Achievement in Mathematics, edited by Torsten Husén
and published in 1967. ‘ln the IEA project’, Noah and Eckstein wrote in 1969, unlike
previous ‘original efforts of social scientists making a contribution to the growth of
comparative study in education, . . . the stimulus to cross-national research comes from
educators and psychometricians who have enlisted the skills of empirically-oriented
social scientists’. And, significantly for our purposes here, they elaborate on their
brand of ‘scientific comparative education’:
As a result, preoccupation with scientific methodology emerges as an increasingly dominant theme in the latest stage of comparative research. There is a
growing readiness and ability to employ the essential elements of scientific
method. Heightened recognition is being given to the importance of hypothesis
formulation and testing; the concept of controlled investigation through careful
selection of cases is being developed; much attention is being paid to precise
specification of variables and to qualification of the indicators by which they
may be decided. Finally, researchers are becoming accustomed to seek quantitatively expressed explanations of the relationships between variables (Noah &
Eckstein, 1969: 789).
Commenting on the IEA type of comparative research a few years later, Max Eckstein
noted that ‘in many respects [the IEA effort] is a realization of Jullien’s outline of a
century and a half ago of what comparative education might be’ (Eckstein, 1977: 350).
The social scientific paradigm of CE advocated by Noah and Eckstein contrasts
sharply with the traditional historical paradigms which held sway until the mid-1950s.
In some aspects it was also different from the functionalist social scientific approach,
at least the brand of functionalism advocated by Philip Foster of the Chicago School.
For one thing, the Noah and Eckstein brand of CE research was thoroughly ‘ahistorical’, which was not the case with the functionalist approach as exemplified by

--- [PDF Page 170 / Book Page 149] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 149

Foster in his study Education and Social Change In Ghana (1965). More importantly, the challenge of the Noah and Eckstein style of social-scientific comparative
study, as stressed by Noah in another statement in 1973, was ‘to move from the
particular to the general, from identification-description-classification to hypothesistesting, theory building and prediction’. In such an effort, an attempt is made to
establish law-like, ‘cross-system statements’ or generalisations by replacing ‘names
of systems’ or observable facts by ‘names of concepts (variables)’. Here are two
examples that according to them exemplify the type of ‘law-like’ statement that
social-scientific comparative research should seek to establish. One example refers
to a cross-national investigation into ‘the relationship between the size of a family’s
income and the probability of the children in the family enrolling in the full-time
post-secondary education’:
In all countries, size of family income is positively associated with the probability of children in the family being enrolled in full-time post-secondary schooling,
and differences in family income can explain at least one-half of within-country
differences in the probability of enrollment. In all countries where income
inequality and the proportion of costs defrayed from non-tuition sources are
low, the explanatory power of differences in family income rises to at least three
quarters. Consideration of the fraction of the age-group graduated from secondary education, and the recency of growth of the post-secondary system does
not improve [the] explanation appreciably in any case except in the Soviet-type
countries, where there factors do seem to be important (Noah cited in Marshall,
1973: 91–94).
Another important illustrative example of what Noah and Eckstein meant by comparative education as ‘pure science’ referred to the much researched question of
educational reform and development. In such a case, according to them, the ‘pure
scientific’ researcher, in contrast to the ‘applied researcher’ is less concerned with particular questions such as ‘Why did the plan for educational development fail in India?’
or ‘Why is there a shortage of teachers in Nigeria?’ and more with general questions
such as ‘what are the conditions for the success of educational reforms?’ and ‘What
are the factors which influence the supply and demand of teachers?’ (Noah & Eckstein,
1989: 104).
Such a ‘modernist’ view of science, according to Barber, assumes an objective,
value-free form of inquiry; it presumes that ‘reliability, precision and certitude can be
attained by the dutiful application of specific methods and techniques – irrespective of
the nature of the subject under study’ (Barber, 1972: 425); and it ‘views science as axiomatic and mathematical and takes the realm of science to be separate from the realm
of form, value, beauty, goodness, and all unmeasurable quantity’.

The Problem Approach: Brian Holmes
Brian Holmes of the University of London Institute of Education, before Noah and
Eckstein, and consistently for several years after them, advocated another ‘scientific’

--- [PDF Page 171 / Book Page 150] ---

150 Kazamias

approach to comparative education, what he called The Problem Approach. The main
parameters of this approach and Holmes’ conception of CE as a field of study may be
reconstructed as follows:
(a) Comparative Education should be conceived and developed as a predictive
social science. Drawing from Karl Popper’s ‘hypothetico-deductive’ method
– it should be post-relativity social science.
(b) As such, it should eschew the positivism, determinism, absoluteness, and
unconditionality of pre-relativity empirical science, as well as any universality or inexorableness in laws of social development as are to be formed in the
‘historicist’ analyses of societies (e.g. those of J.S. Mill, Karl Marx and Herbert
Spencer).
(c) Further, post-relativity social science ‘espouses relativistic theories of science’
which presuppose the specification of problems, the formulation of hypotheses
or ‘sociological laws’, a detailed specification of ‘the complete range of determinants’, an analysis/description of the initial conditions or the context, upon
which the outcome to a solution to the problem will be predicted. In Holmes’
own words:
The test of a good theory is its predictive usefulness . . . but no theory can be
used to predict events unless it is accompanied by a careful analysis and statement of the initial conditions or circumstances likely to affect the predicted event
(Holmes, 1958: 247).
(d) Schematically, Holmes’ methodological formula may be reconstructed as
follows:
L⫹I=P
where L = Law (“sociological law”)
I = Initial conditions
and P = Problem
(e) Predictions, the distinctive feature of scientific comparative education, must
be ‘tentative’ and ‘conditional’, which differentiates them from ‘unconditional’
prophesies about the future of education.
(f) From the perspective of post-relativity social science, ‘explanation is provided
by the process of prediction and verification’. Within such ‘hypothetico-deductive’
methodological framework, in contrast to Noah’s and Eckstein’s, and to other
similar hypothetico-inductive frameworks, prediction of a specific event also
entails explanation. In Holmes’ own words:
Hypothetico-deductive procedures, whether for the purpose of explanation, prediction, or testing, are the same. Indeed the outcomes are not very different either. If
a specific event is predicted it is also explained and a general statement has been
tested. A theory or hypothesis is verified when predicted events are conformed by
actual observations; refuted when predicted and observed events differ (Holmes,
1965:30, 1981: 51).

--- [PDF Page 172 / Book Page 151] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 151

(g) Comparative education research must be centred in problems, and must be
pragmatic. More than being conceptualised as a ‘pure’ scientific enterprise,
it should be approached as a pragmatic enterprise that aims at the solution of
problems. Thus it should develop both as a predictive science and as ‘an instrument of reform’. And it should look towards the future not the past (Holmes,
1965: 32).

History, Social Science and Comparative Education: Quest for a Synthesis:
A Personal Testament
In the 1960s, during the heyday of the intellectual ferment to chart new methodological trajectories, a distinct minority of the new “advocates” of the reform movement
sought to revise the historical approach to CE and bring about a synthesis of the historical and the scientific elements. One of these people was Kazamias, the present
writer of this chapter. In the early 1960s, reflecting the intellectual mood of the time, I
criticised the traditional historical cum melioristic approach as exemplified by Kandel.
But in my efforts to make CE a more systematic and a more theoretical comparative episteme, I did not reject the importance of the historical element. I called for a
revised historical approach that would combine history with social science. I held that
what vitiated the approach of the doyens of comparative education, especially that of
Kandel, was not their historical orientation as such, but, among other things, ‘their
historical propensities, especially their assumptions that history deals with ‘unique’
and different phenomena which cannot be generalised’. Influenced by a debate that
was carried out at the time in academic circles about the nature and methods of history
and its similarities, as well as its differences with the social sciences, I argued that a
historical approach to the comparative study of education did not necessarily preclude
conceptualisation (the use of concepts) and generalisation, or indeed quantification,
which were considered basic elements of the scientific paradigms. Commenting on
the ‘functional-sociological’ approach, I argued that it was limited for ‘understanding’
and ‘explaining’ educational phenomena. My views regarding the value of history in
comparative education were stated in 1963 as follows:
The assertion that history deals essentially with unique and particular events,
and that consequently its value for comparative analysis, which presupposes
abstraction, generalisation and regularity is questionable, has been refuted
by several writers including historians. As Crane Brinton, the comparative
historian, has shown, it is quite possible to categorise or classify historical
phenomena and compare them for the purpose of making generalisations.
Although such generalisations may be of a limited rather than a universal
nature, they may in turn be used in working hypotheses to be tested in other
similar situations in order to illuminate them. In other words, from an examination of the specific, the concrete and the particular, the historically-minded
comparative educator may induce a generalisation and then use it in order to
illuminate another particular event or form. The concern for the general and
the particular is to be found in both the social sciences and history, and the

--- [PDF Page 173 / Book Page 152] ---

152 Kazamias

difference is one of emphasis and objectives of research rather than kind or
method (Kazamias, 1963: 396).
In lively debates in international conferences and in the columns of international
journals such as the Comparative Education Review and the International Review of
Education, I criticised the emergent scientific paradigms – the structural-functionalism
of the University of Chicago, the positivistic methodologism of Noah and Eckstein,
and Psacharopoulos and the problem approach of Brian Holmes – as well as the then
much acclaimed IEA international studies. One of his main criticisms was that they
were ahistorical.

Conflict Paradigms: Marxist, Neo-Marxist, Weberian and World-Systems
The ‘functionalist’ and the ‘methodological empirical’ versions of CE, as outlined
above, held sway until well into the 1970s. But other paradigms, that can also be said
to fall under the ‘scientific’ epistemological rubric, were visible during this period;
and some of these became more salient in the years that followed. I shall refer to this
variety of ‘scientific’ comparative education as ‘conflictual paradigmatic discourse’.
Within this generation of comparative discourse, a particularly significant radical
genre can be discerned. By ‘radical paradigms’ I mean approaches or theories that
view schools as instruments of domination or as ideological apparatuses of the state,
that reproduce and perpetuate the hegemonic interests of particular groups; as arenas of imbalanced social conflict; as repressive and inegalitarian institutions; and as
places that inculcate ‘monocultural’ ideas, values and attitudes (based on class, race,
ethnicity and gender). Therefore, to understand school–society relationships and the
role of schooling in, for example, capitalist social formations, one must inquire into
the power structure of such modernised societies and into the social relations of production. Or from another conceptual prism, namely, a ‘world-systems’ perspective, to
examine comparatively education–societal interrelationships, one must probe into the
‘international’ or ‘world’ context and dynamic of such relationships and transactions.
Among other things, a ‘world-systems’ macro type of comparative analysis deviates
from others in at least two respects. In the first place, it challenges the commonplace
traditional approaches that take the nation state as the exclusive framework of analysis,
and by extension, it does not take education ‘as a parochial national institution anywhere in the world’. As Klaus Hufner, John W. Meyer and Jens Nauman in the volume
Comparative Policy, Research: Learning From Experience (1987: 188–189) put it:
Put simply, education is not a parochial national institution anywhere in the
world; it is a rationalized part of the technology of progress and modernisation, and modernisation is a central and world- legitimated goal practically
everywhere. This means that education is itself a scientific construction, built
not around primordial traditions of society, but around a general technology of
resocialising populations to achieve progress. As a world-wide technology, it
is built on research and policy comparisons that tend to flow rapidly from one
setting to the next.

--- [PDF Page 174 / Book Page 153] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 153

In the second place, one variant of the ‘world systems’ comparative education discourse, based on Immanuel Wallerstein’s theory of the ‘modern world system’, not
only probes into the ‘international’ or ‘global’ context/dimension and dynamics of
educational systems; it also perceives such context or dynamic as being of a hierarchical, unequal and exploitative nature existing or taking place within a ‘core- or
centre-periphery’ dependency framework. Robert Arnove, an exponent of this variant
of the ‘world-systems’ comparative analysis, in Comparative Education (1982: 454),
put it as follows:
Dependency theory basically articulates a descending chain of exploitation from
the hegemony of metropolitan countries over peripheral countries to the hegemony of the center of power in a Third World country over its own peripheral
areas. Closely related to such notions of center and periphery are the concepts
of Wallerstein concerning convergence and divergence in the global system. As
summarized by Meyer et at, the world market and society produce convergence
by subjecting all societies to the same force; they produce divergence by creating
different roles for different societies in the world stratification system.
The intellectual provenance of ‘radicalism’ in this generation of comparative education
discourse may be traced to, among others, conflict theorists (Weberian, Marxist and
Neo-Marxists), dependency theorists, and the so-called new sociologists (Kazamias &
Massialas, 1982). The distinguishing features of the ‘conflict’ paradigms vis-à-vis the
‘functional-equilibrium’ paradigms, for example, were well brought out by Rolland
Paulston, a leading comparativist who has written extensively on the methodology
of comparative education, in the 1977 ‘State of the Art’ issue of the Comparative
Education Review. There, Paulston identified, among others, such central concepts
as power, exploitation, contradictions, ruling class, control of knowledge and cultural hegemony (Paulston, 1977: 386). To this conceptual tapestry I later added: class
conflict, social and political inequalities, reproduction, oppression, alienation, imperialism, dependence and the capitalist state (Kazamias, 1991).
Another prominent variant of this radical discourse is best represented by the work
of Martin Carnoy, a Chicago-trained economist turned revisionist neo-Marxist comparative political economist of education. Carnoy’s reputation as a radical comparative
educator, will, in all likelihood, rest on his influential book Education as Cultural
Imperialism (1974), but, more so in my judgement, it should rest on his state-centred
perspective in the comparative study of national systems of education. In one of those
recurrent debates on what we have called the protean nature of the comparative episteme, occasioned by the 1993 presidential address by Erwin Epstein (1983), Martin
Carnoy explained his revisionist neo-Marxist state-centred approach which, according
to him, differentiated it from the ‘positivist’ as well as from the more orthodox Marxist
and neo-Marxist approaches, as follows:
We are trying to understand what schooling is, how it works, and how it relates
to the society in which it functions. Positivists approach these problems from the
standpoint of individual choice, because they believe that power is subjective

--- [PDF Page 175 / Book Page 154] ---

154 Kazamias

and the ideal organization of schooling is one in which that subjective (individual) power is allowed to find its full expression. Neo-Marxists generally see
schooling as serving an objectively determined set of power relations – in capitalist
society, relations that give control over institutions to a ruling capitalist managerial class . . . . With that kind of discussion in mind I would like to draw attention to
the ongoing neo-Marxist debate on the State . . . unlike conventional neo-Marxist
writing, we argue that schools are not simply the tools of capitalists (in capitalist
society) but an institution where the tensions among the forces for reproduction (reproduction of the objective relations of production) – which Bowles and
Gintis call correspondence – and the forces of democratization (individual and
collective expression) – which we call contradiction – are played out. Thus, the
schools contain elements of reproduction and democracy, just as the State as
a whole in capitalist and state bureaucratic societies contains these elements.
Therefore, we do assume that the State in both capitalist and state bureaucratic
societies fundamentally reproduces hierarchical and inequitable power relations,
but that it and the educational system it uses in reproduction contain important
contradictions (Carnoy, 1983).
In a later text, entitled Education and Social Transformation in the Third World (1990),
where Carnoy and his co-author Joel Samoff engage in an actual comparative inquiry
into educational change in Third World ‘transition societies’ (e.g. People’s Republic of
China, Cuba, Tanzania, Mozambique and Nicaragua), we are presented with similar
ideas. In this, for our purposes here most important text, as in the aforementioned one,
Carnoy distances himself from orthodox Marxists and from orthodox neo-Marxists.
And, one may add, he distances himself from the Marxist-informed dependency theorists, another contemporary breed of radical comparativists. Focusing on ‘the state
and politics’, Carnoy and Samoff seek to ‘analyse whether and why education develops
differently in societies that seek to make a transition from capitalism to socialism
than in their Third World capitalist counterparts’. Their thesis is stated as follows:
‘It is the state, much more than the production system, we argue, that is the source
of the dynamic of revolutionary societies, and politics, much more than relations in
production that drives their social developments’. Continuing in the same vein, they
add: ‘The importance of the state and politics is not limited to the analysis of societies
undergoing social transformation. We also make a case for increasing focus on the
state and its relation to the economy in understanding how social structures in Third
World capitalist societies remain relatively unchanged’. According to them, ‘notions
of correspondence, cultural reproduction, and contradiction’ are important ‘in developing an analysis of education’s role in social transformation’, but they fail to develop
a coherent theory of the relations among economy, ideology, and political system (the
state) and, in turn, a theory of the relationship between the state and the educational
systems. And reasserting what may be referred to as a ‘state-centred’ thesis, they
argue that a theory of the state is even ‘more crucial in understanding present-day
transition societies in the process of social transformation, for in them politics is the
primary arena in which the transformation is played out’ (Carnoy & Samoff, 1990:
3–9, italics mine).

--- [PDF Page 176 / Book Page 155] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 155

Reclaiming a Lost Legacy: Reinventing the Historical
in Comparative Education
In the 1980s and the 1990s there was a noticeable retrenchment in the institutional
expansion of programmes in comparative education. Yet, cross-national educational
studies and research, as well as activities that dealt with international education, broadly
defined, continued to grow. Comparative and international education showed considerable robustness in terms of membership in professional associations, participation
in international conferences and publications in leading journals. Epistemologically
and methodologically new paradigms were incorporated into comparative research,
such as the feminist critique, and even postmodernity, which in one sense enriched the
conceptual tapestry or mosaic that has characterised the field since its aforementioned
explosive development in the second half of the twentieth century (Arnove & Torres,
1999; Masemann & Welch, 1997). As the Editor of the Comparative Education Review
wrote in 1991 about American CE:
Comparative education has changed significantly since the 1970s. Topics that
were considered unimportant, such as the role of gender in education, have
become the subject of research and analysis. New methodologies, such as ethnography and participant observation, have become important. And alternative
ideologies such as Marxism have been used to inform analysis in comparative
education. The domination of such paradigms as structural functionalism was
broken. It is significant that nothing has emerged to replace these ideas as the
primary direction of the field. Rather, a variety of different perspectives have
entered into comparative education research . . . . In many respects, these developments mirror the situation in the social sciences generally (Altbach, 1991: 504).
On the British comparative education landscape, several other differentiating epistemological-cum-methodological characteristics and new orientations are patently visible.
First, there is the renewed emphasis on what many years back we had called ‘comparative
pedagogy’, a most important aspect of the process of education, and what Broadfoot has
called ‘learneology’ of education (Alexander et al., 1999; Broadfoot, 1999). Second,
I wish to underline the British traditional and lately reinvented emphasis on contexts and
cultures, both of which figured prominently in the millennium special issue of Comparative
Education. These two epistemic emphases render the British comparative education more
human and humane than the American, and the way of reading the world less mechanistically and economically motivated, a point which I develop elsewhere (Kazamias,2001).
And, lastly, the British comparative education discourse is less prone to intellectual fads
and to epistemological-cum-methodological cannibalism as the American.

Epilogue
But such developments, I would argue, were made at an epistemological cum methodological cost, namely, the sacrifice or almost total abandonment of the historical
dimension in comparative educational research. According to a recent study, ‘research

--- [PDF Page 177 / Book Page 156] ---

156 Kazamias

strategies in comparative education from 1955 to 1994 revealed that only 10.5 per cent
of almost 2000 articles in the International Journal of Educational Development,
Comparative Education and Comparative Education Review relied on historiography
and historical research’. And, even more disappointing: ‘From 1985–1995, less than
5 per cent of all articles published were characterized as historical studies’ (Larsen,
2001), comparative-historical or historical-comparative. This state of affairs has
prompted one commentator to observe that our field suffers from ‘historical amnesia’
(Larsen, 2001).

References
Alexander, R., Broadfoot, P. & Phillips, D. (Eds.) (1999). Learning from Comparing: New directions in comparative educational research, Vol. 1. Contents, classrooms and outcomes. Oxford: Symposium Books.
Altbach, P. G. (1991). Trends in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 35, 491–507.
Arnove, R. & Torres, C.A. (Eds.) (1999). Comparative Education: The Dialectic of the Global and the
Local. Lahman, MD: Rowan and Littlefield.
Barber, B. R. (1972). Science, salience and social scientific inquiry. Comparative Education Review, 16,
424–436.
Broadfoot, P. (1999). Stones from other hills may serve to polish the jade of this one: towards a neocomparative ‘learnology’ of education. Compare, 29, 217–231.
Carnoy, M. & Samoff, J. (1990). Education and social transformation in the Third World. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Carnoy, M. (1974). Education as cultural imperialism. New York: David McKay.
Carnoy, M. (1983). The state and political theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Coleman, J. S. (1965). Education and Political Development. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Eckstein, M. (1977). Comparative study of educational achievement. Comparative Education Review,
21(2/3), 345–357.
Fraser, S. (1964). Jullien’s plan for comparative education 1816–1817. New York: Teachers College,
Columbia University.
Halsey, A.J., Floud, J. & Anderson, C.A. (Eds.) (1961). Education, economy and society. London:
Collier-MacMillan.
Hans, N. (1949). Comparative Education: a study of educational factors and traditions. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul.
Hans, N. (1959). The historical approach to comparative education, International Review of Education,
V(3), 299–307.
Holmes, B. (1958).The problem approach in comparative education: Some methodological considerations.
Comparative Education Review, 2(1).
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education: A comparative approach. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Holmes, B. (1981). Comparative education: Some consideration of method. London: Allen & Unwin.
Hufner, K., Meyer, J. W. & Nauman, J. (1987). Comparative education policy research: a world society perspective. In M. Dierkew, H. N. Weiler & A. B. Antal (Eds.), Comparative policy research learning from
experience. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Hurn, Ch. J. (1978). The limits and possibilities of schooling: An introduction to the sociology of education.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Jones, P. E. (1971). Comparative education: Purpose and method. Queensland: University of Queensland
Press.
Kandel, I. L. (1933). Comparative education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kandel, I. L. (1955). The new era in education: a comparative study. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Karabel, J. & Halsey, A. H. (1977). Power and ideology in education. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kazamias, A. M. & Massialas, B. (1965). Tradition and change in education: A comparative study.
Englewood-Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

--- [PDF Page 178 / Book Page 157] ---

Comparative Education: Historical Reflections 157
Kazamias, A. M. & Massialas, B. (1982). Comparative education. In Encyclopedia of Educational Research.
New York: Free Press.
Kazamias, A. M. & Schwartz, K. (1977). Intellectual and ideological perspectives in comparative education:
an interpretation. Comparative Education Review, 21, 153–176.
Kazamias, A. M. (1963). History, science and comparative education: a study in methodology. International
Review of Education, 8, 383–398.
Kazamias, A. M. (1991) Pangosmia Krisi stin Ekpaideusi – ennoiologikes diasafiniseis kai provlimatismoi
[World crisis in education – conceptual clarifications and problematics]. In Y. Pyrgiotakis & Y. Kanakis
(Eds.), Pangosmia Krisi stin Ekpaideusi [World crisis in education]. Athens: Grigoris.
Kazamias, A. M. (2001). Re-inventing the historical in comparative education: reflections on a protean
episteme by a contemporary player. Comparative Education. 37(4), 439–449.
Larsen, M. (2001). Reinventing the historical in comparative education: Bridging the gap through Foucault.
Paper presented at the Comparative and International Conference in San Antonio.
Marshall, P. (1973). Comments on Noah and Eckstein’s “Model Hypothesis I”. Comparative Education
Review, 17(1), 91–94.
Masemann, V. & Welch, A. (Eds.) (1997). Tradition, Modernity and Post-modernity in Comparative
Education. International Review of Education, 43(5&6).
Noah, H. & Eckstein, M. (1969). Toward a Science of Comparative Education. London: Macmillan.
Paulston, R. (1977). Social and educational change. Comparative Education Review, 21, 371–395.
Psacharopoulos, G. (Ed.) (1987). Economics of Education: Research and Studies. Amsterdam: Elsevier, San
Francisco; Jossey Bass.
Sadler, M. (1964). How far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of foreign systems of
education?. Comparative Education Review, 7(3), 307–314.
Toulmin, S. (1963). Foresight and understanding: An enquiry into the aims of science. London:
Hutchinson.
Tretheway, A. R. (1976). Introducing comparative education. Oxford: Pergamon.

