================================================================================
Chapter 11: Paideia and Politeia: Education, and The Polity/state in Comparative Education
Author(s): Andreas M. Kazamias
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 161–168
PDF Pages: pp. 179–186 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 179 / Book Page 161] ---

11
PAIDEIA AND POLITEIA: EDUCATION, AND THE
POLITY/STATE IN COMPARATIVE EDUCATION
Andreas M. Kazamias

Interest in the political relations of education/paideia, particularly in the relationships
between education and the polity/politeia or the state, has been longstanding in the
Western educational and political traditions. It has been especially evident in the
texts of influential social thinkers such as Plato, Aristotle, J. J. Rousseau, John Locke,
Karl Marx, J. S. Mill, Herbert Spencer, Antonio Gramsci, Louis Althusser, Cornelius
Castoriadis, John Dewey and Paulo Freire. In his most famous political treatise, the
Politics (Politika), Aristotle, for example, as a ‘comparative political philosopher/
scientist’, averred:
Now nobody would dispute that the education/paideia of the young requires the
special attention of the lawgiver. Indeed, the neglect of this in ‘city-states’ is injurious to the polities; for one ought to be educated [and ‘habituated’] in accordance
with the particular form of the polity/politeia, for the particular character/ethos
of each polity both guards the polity generally and originally establishes it—for
instance the democratic ethos promotes democracy and the oligarchic ethos oligarchy; and a better ethos always produces a better polity/politeia.
Aristotle further emphasised that the paideia of the young should be ‘public’ and
not ‘private’, since ‘matters of public interest should be under public supervision’
(Aristotle, 1958, Bk. VIII).
In the history of comparative education, the influential older doyens, e.g. Isaac
Kandel and Nicholas Hans, considered the ‘political’ as an important dimension,
factor or contextual explanatory variable in their historical-philosophical-humanist
studies of national systems of education. And as critically analysed by the present
writer in the first section of this Handbook, Kandel, in particular, echoed Aristotle
in considering the ‘state’ as a determining variable in explaining the character of
national systems of education. As Kandel himself had stated: ‘every state has the
type of education that it wills”, and “as is the state so is the school’ (Kandel, 1933:
274, 275).
In the post-Kandelian post-Hansian development of comparative education in the
1960s and 1970s, the political perspective that characterised much of the research and
writing in comparative education was twofold: (a) the ‘education politics’ perspective,

161
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 161–168.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 180 / Book Page 162] ---

162 Kazamias

to use Roger Dale’s terminology, and (b) the ‘functionalist-modernisation political
systems’ perspective.

The ‘Education Politics’ Perspective
Contrasting what he called the ‘education politics’ and the ‘politics of education’ perspectives, Dale has noted:
Those political scientists who have focused on education have confined their
studies very much to education politics rather than the politics of education. By
this I mean that they have concentrated much more on studying the effectiveness
of education systems and forms of education government in achieving goals presented to them, rather than on the relationships between the production of goals
and the form of their achievement. To put it another way, political questions are
bracketed out and replaced by questions about processes of decision-making;
politics are reduced to administration; The focus is on the machinery, rather
than on what powers it, or how and where it is directed (Dale, 1982: 128–129,
underlining mine).
The ‘education politics’ perspective in comparative education was evident in at least
two wide-ranging and quite extensive types of studies. First, there were the many predominantly descriptive and generally non-theoretical works that recounted the powers,
duties and responsibilities of the decision-making and policy-making apparatuses of
the government, the administration and the control of educational systems. Where
efforts were made to typologise patterns of governance and administration, control
was often used and comparisons made between ‘centralised’ and ‘decentralised’ systems (Litt & Parkinson, 1979). The second type of studies, more theoretical than the
first, but still carried out through a similar epistemological prism, included those that
conceptualised the education-politics interaction in terms of what may be called an
‘interest-group’, often a ‘pluralist interest-group’ theoretical framework or paradigm.
Examples of this genre of the ‘political’ in education abounded in the literature on
educational policy-making and reform. In one common variant of the interest group
model—the pluralist democratic model—education was conceptualised as a site, an
arena of political conflict involving different social interest groups (teacher organisations or unions, political parties, religious groups, business, labour, students, etc.),
which vied with each other for power, influence and prestige. Educational reform from
this perspective was the outcome of such conflict, either because consensus had been
reached or because the views of one group or of a coalition of groups had prevailed.
Alternately, reforms were thwarted or failed because in the group struggle the balance
of power was tipped in favour of opposing interests (Peterson, 1973; Heidenheimer,
1974; Kazamias, 1978; Thomas, 1983; Lauglo & McLean, 1985).
In a paper presented at the annual meeting of the Comparative and International
Education Society held in Washington, DC in March, 1987, I pointed out that inquiries
based on the interest group pluralist model, although enlightening conceptually and

--- [PDF Page 181 / Book Page 163] ---

Paideia and Politeia 163

sophisticated methodologically, had certain limitations; they did not probe beneath the
visible arena of conflict and policy formation into the structural context of the larger
national and international society in their search for explanations. Returning to Dale’s
characterisation, I argued that interest-group pluralist analyses did not engage in the
‘politics of education’, i.e. into what powers the machinery of the governance of education, or how and where the machinery was directed; that is, their explanations were
restricted and their directions were indeterminate (Kazamias, 1987). As with pluralism
in general, the pluralist approaches to the political relations of schooling and educational reform have the following inadequacies:
(a) They assume that ‘the structure of power is segmented, not organized into a
clear hierarchical pattern’, or, to put it in another way, ‘power is non-hierarchically and competitively arranged’.
(b) They provide limited, piecemeal explanations of political power and processes.
(c) They tend to move toward a functional equilibrium theory.
(d) They assume that (i) the state is a ‘neutral arbiter among social interests’,
and an ‘empty state’, and (ii) that all groups have equal access ‘to the minimum resources for political mobilization’, and compete favourably (Miliband,
1969).
(e) They tend ‘to concentrate group bargaining with a nation-state’, without relating
the state ‘to the context of international conditions and pressures’ (Held, 1984:
67–68).
(f) They are predominantly ‘society-centred’ in that their conceptualisation of
school–society relationships and their explanatory strategies view the state simply as an arena of competition/struggle to gain advantage, or as a ‘functional
entity’ responding to societal ‘needs’, social imperatives and ‘societal strains’
(Skocpol, 1979: 29).

The ‘Functionalist-Modernisation Political Systems’
(FMPS) Perspective
The ‘functionalist-modernisation political systems’ perspective in comparative education, that was prominent in the 1960s and 1970s, was best exemplified by the
influential Princeton series on political culture and political development, sponsored
by the Committee on Comparative Politics of the Social Science Research Council.
In the comparative education literature, it was best exemplified in the volume entitled
Education and Political Development (1965) in the same series, and edited by J. S
Coleman.
As with the aforementioned pluralist perspective, analyses of the educationpolity relationships from the FMPS perspective were predominantly society-centred.
Indeed, the Princeton School of political culture and development eschewed the use of
the concept of the ‘state’ because, according to its spokesmen: (a) it was too restrictive, (b) it was more applicable to Western developed societies, (c) often it was used
synonymously with the government, (d) it did not take account of the concept of

--- [PDF Page 182 / Book Page 164] ---

164 Kazamias

political culture, and (e) it would not accommodate the notion of ‘interdependence’ of
the various parts of the polity, an essential characteristic of the ‘political systems’ and
the functionalist approach. For these reasons, the FMPS Princeton School replaced the
‘state’ with ‘political system’, which was defined as follows:
What we propose is that the political system is that system of interactions to
be found in all independent societies which performs the functions of integration and adaptation (both internally and vis-à-vis other societies) by means of
the employment, or threat of employment, of more or less legitimate physical
compulsion. The political system is the legitimate, order-maintaining or transforming system in the society (Almond & Coleman, 1960: 7).
Referring specifically to the functions of political systems and their relation to education, Coleman wrote: ‘For our purposes … at least three processes or functions of
the political system can be identified which have a fairly clear relationship to education. These area political socialization, political recruitment and political integration’
(Coleman, 1965: 17–18).
Reviewing the extensive work done in these three political relations of education,
Massialas in 1977 concluded:
The review indicates that researches have sought to find out, in a systematic way,
how the schools affect the development of citizen political attitudes, how the
schools function as agents of recruitment into political leadership, and how they
contribute to the development of a modern nation. On the first question, i.e., in
the formation of political attitudes and knowledge, research indicates that the
school, overall, is not as significant as other social agents. The school becomes
significant, however, with regard to political recruitment albeit in a fashion that
to many is ideologically unacceptable, i.e., it tends to promote the perpetuation
of power elites. With regard to the third question, dealing with nation-building,
the research indicates that the schools tend to reinforce preexisting social cleavages and inequalities (Massialas, 1977: 294).

Bringing the State Back in Comparative Education
In the 1970s, critical political theorists, political sociologists and other social scientists,
in seeking to understand the power structure, the policy formation, the functioning
and the dynamics of government of contemporary polities and societies, particularly
the economically advanced capitalist and politically liberal democratic nation states,
focused their critical enquiries and investigations on the nature, the institutional structure and the mechanisms of government which together make up and shape ‘the state’.
Particularly worthy of note during this period was a highly publicised ‘leftist’ debate
on the nature, activities and functioning of the liberal capitalist state involving distinguished critical social and political theorists on both sides of the Atlantic: Ralph
Miliband (1969) and Perry Anderson (1979) in England; Nicos Poulantzas (1978) in

--- [PDF Page 183 / Book Page 165] ---

Paideia and Politeia 165

France; Claus Offe (1973) in Germany; Goran Therborn (1980) in Sweden; and Erik
O. Wright (1985) and Martin Carnoy (1984) in the United States.
In the 1980s, the state, in the words of Theda Skocpol (1985), a historical sociologist, was ‘brought back in’ comparative studies of the past in order to find out how
societies work and change. Historical sociology, according to D. Smith, ‘is carried out
by historians and sociologists who investigate the mutual interpenetration of past and
present, events and processes, acting and structuration. They try to marry conceptual
clarification, comparative generalization and empirical exploration’ (Smith, 1991: 3).
Taking my cue from Skocpol’s proposal, at about the same time (1987), as a historically oriented comparativist with research interests in the ‘politics of education’
more than in ‘education politics’ – to go back to Dale’s distinction – and the role of
education in the development of nation states, I suggested to the community of comparative educationists to ‘bring the state back in comparative education’. Yes, ‘bring
the state back in’, but not in the Kandelian conceptualisation and interpretation. At the
Washington, DC Conference, mentioned above, I said:
Our conceptualization of the state is quite different from Kandel’s. Kandel’s
typology of states into “totalitarian” and “democratic” was too general and ‘simplistic’, as were his criteria for such differentiation, namely (a) the ostensible
locus of control, which led Kandel to such general categories as centralized and
decentralized; monolithic and dispersed; metaphysical and experiential; authoritarian, autocratic/dictatorial and unjust, and liberal and just; and monopolistic
and laissez-faire, and (b) the putative relation of the individual to the state (i.e.,
in the case of the liberal democratic state, the individual was allowed more freedom, while, for its part, the state seeks to promote the well-being of each of its
members (Kazamias, 1987).
I then added that my view of the state was not a hypostatised entity independent of
civil society, a concept that is often conjured up in people’s minds perhaps because
of the historical and influential German Hegelian idealism. Furthermore, I said the
following:
Our concept of the state is not synonymous with the government. Nor is our
view of the state system synonymous with Almond and Coleman’s or David
Easton’s “political system” . . . As Stuart Hall explained: “The complex character
of the state cannot be reduced to the ways in which the institutional machinery
of government functions.” And according to Miliband: “What the state stands
for is a number of particular institutions which, together, constitute its reality,
and which interact as parts of what may called the state system”. Institutions
include: the government, the administration, the military and the police, the
judiciary, units of sub-central government, and parliamentary assemblies
(Kazamias, 1987).
On the distinction between the state and the government, I quoted Alfred Stephan who
had written:

--- [PDF Page 184 / Book Page 166] ---

166 Kazamias

The state must be considered as more than the “government”. It is the continuous
administration, legal, bureaucratic and coercive systems that attempt not only
to structure relationships between civil society and public authority in a polity
but also to structure many crucial relationships within civil society (Quoted by
Skocpol, 1985: 7).
Education, I pointed out in the same forum, is an important function/activity or, as
Louis Althusser famously said, an ideological apparatus of the state (Althusser, 1971).
I explained:
Today, the public sector in education, which is regulated, controlled or planned by
the state accounts for the overwhelming percentage of educational provision from the
lowest to the highest levels of the educational system. Even the private sector is subject
to state regulation. There is hardly an aspect of the educational system – organisation,
administration, curriculum, teacher training, financing, examinations, etc. – that is not
directly or indirectly related to the state.
And I concluded:
Given the above, I need not elaborate on the significance of examining education
from the perspective of the state. Not from the mainstream perspective, nor from the
Kandelian perspective, but from a structural, conflict, relational, ‘state as actor’, and
state ‘as relatively autonomous’ perspective. Locating education in the conceptual and
epistemological problematic of the state, as previously defined, would allow us not
only to ascertain and analyse its workings and social dynamics; it would also go a long
way towards providing more complete explanations of educational patterns, policies
and reforms, what accounts for similarities and differences among systems, and what
conditions have obtained for educational change and reform (Kazamias, 1987).
In the 1990s, the state was indeed brought back in comparative education, and
I am pleased to say, not from the ‘mainstream perspective’ nor from that of Kandel.
A noteworthy comparative study approached from a revisionist neo-Marxist perspective was Martin Carnoy’s and Joel Samoff’s Education and Social Transformation in
the Third World (1990). I discuss this book in another chapter in Section One of this
Handbook. Suffice to note here that in this state-centred study, Carnoy and Samoff
sought ‘to analyze whether and why education develops differently in societies that
seek to make a transition from capitalism to socialism than in their Third World capitalist counterparts’. The societies studied were: the People’s Republic of China, Cuba,
Tanzania, Mozambique and Nicaragua. The authors’ thesis was that it was the state,
much more than the production system that was ‘the source of the dynamic of revolutionary societies and politics, much more than relations in production that drove their
social developments’ (Carnoy & Samoff, 1990).
Other examples of noteworthy studies that appeared in the 1990s on the educationpolity nexus were Green’s Education and state formation: The rise of education
systems in England, France and the USA (1990) and C. A. Torres’s Democracy, education and multiculturalism: Dilemmas of citizenship in a global world (1998). Green’s
path-breaking comparative historical-sociological study examined the role of education
in the process of state formation and nation-building in three modern Western liberal
democracies (England, France and the USA): how education as a state mechanism

--- [PDF Page 185 / Book Page 167] ---

Paideia and Politeia 167

acted to cultivate social cohesion, citizenship, national culture and national identity
as well as to train personnel for the civil bureaucracy and the apparatuses of government at the national and local levels (Green, 1990). In a lengthy chapter on ‘The State
and Education’, Torres first grapples with problems of defining ‘the State’ and with
the significance of a state – centred approach to the study of educational policies and
practices, or ‘the connections between citizenship, democracy and multiculturalism’
(Torres, 1998:14). In subsequent subsections he examines from a critical theoretical
perspective (a) classical theories of the state from ‘Liberalism’ to ‘Marxism’ and education, (b) the contemporary ‘neoconservative’ and ‘neoliberal’ states and education,
(c) ‘neo-marxist theories of the state and the critique of neoconservatism and neoliberalism’, (d) ‘postmodern perspectives on the state and education’, and (e) ‘against the
patriarchal state? feminism and the color of the state’ (Torres, 1998:26–69).

Epilogue
The significance of engaging in state-centred comparative educational research today,
despite the talk about the shrinking role of the state, was underscored quite recently
by Martin Carnoy in his Presidential address to the Comparative and International
Education Society in 2006. Carnoy explained the reasons for engaging in such
research:
First, most education in most countries is provided by the state. Second, even
when education is partly “private” and partly “public”, it is the state that defines
the meaning of public and private education. In most countries private school
teachers are paid by the state. Third, because the state is the supplier and definer
of education, the way changes take place in educational systems is largely defined
by the political leadership of the nation’s citizenry to the state and the way that
the state has organized the educational system politically (Carnoy, 2006: 555).
To these reasons, one could add that education is still an important mechanism in the
formation of states and in nation-building in many countries of the world; and, lastly, to
paraphrase Aristotle as quoted in the beginning of this chapter, ‘one’s paideia (education)
ought to be in accordance with one’s politeia (the state)’.

References
Almond, G. A. & Coleman, J. S. (Eds.) (1960). The politics of the developing areas. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Althusser, L. (1971). Lenin and philosophy and other essays. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Anderson, P. (1979). Lineages of the absolutist state. London: New Left Books.
Aristotle (1959). Politics, with an English translation by H. Rackam. London: William Heinemann.
Carnoy, M. (1984). The state and political theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Carnoy, M. (2006). Rethinking the comparative—and the international. Comparative Education Review,
50(4), 551–570.
Carnoy, M. & Samoff, J. (1990). Education and social transition in the third world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

--- [PDF Page 186 / Book Page 168] ---

168 Kazamias
Coleman, J. S. (Ed.) (1965). Education and political development. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Dale, R. (1982). Education and the capitalist state: Contributions and contradictions. In M. W. Apple (Ed.),
Cultural and economic reproduction in education: Essays on class, ideology and the state. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Green, A. (1990). Education and state formation: The rise of education systems in England, France and the
USA. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Heidenheimer, A. J. (1974). The politics of educational reform: Explaining different outcomes of school
comprehensivisation attempts in Sweden and West Germany. Comparative Education Reviews, 18(3),
388–410.
Held, D. (1984). Central perspectives in the modern state. In G. McLennan, et al. (Eds.), The idea of the
modern state. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Kazamias, A. M. (1978). The politics of educational reform in Greece: Law 309/1976. Comparative
Education Review, 22(1), 21–45.
Kazamias, A. M. (1987). Bringing the state back in comparative education: Toward a state-centered conceptual framework in the comparative analysis and explanation of educational systems, policies and
reforms. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Comparative and International Education Society,
Washington, DC, March 1–15.
Lauglo, J. & McLean, M. (Eds.) (1985). The control of education: International perspectives in the centralization-decentralization debate. London: Heinemann Education Books.
Litt, E. & Parkinson, M. (1979). U.S. and U.K. educational policy: A decade of reform. New York: Praeger.
Massialas, B. G. (1977). Education and political development. Comparative Education Review, 21(2/3),
274–295).
Miliband, R. (1969). The state in capitalist society. New York: Basic Books.
Offe, C. (1973). The capitalist state and the problem of policy formation. In L. Lindberg (Ed.), Stress and
contradiction in modern capitalism. Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.
Peterson, P. E. (1973). Politics of educational reform in England and the United States. Comparative
Education Review, 17(2), 160–179.
Poulantzas, N. (1978). State, power, socialism. London: New Left Books.
Skocpol, T. (1979). States and social revolutions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Skocpol, T. (1985). Bringing the state back in: Strategies of analysis of current research. In P. Evans, et al.
(Eds.), Bringing the state back in. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, D. (1991). The rise of historical sociology. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Torres, C. A. (1998). Democracy, education, and multiculturalism: Dilemmas of citizenship in a global
world. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.
Therborn, G. (1980). The ideology of power and the power of ideology. London: Verso.
Thomas, R. M. (Ed.). (1983). Politics and education: Cases from eleven nations. Oxford: Pergamon.
Wright, E. O. (1985). Classes. London: Verso.

