================================================================================
Chapter 12: Empires and Education: The British Empire
Author(s): Gary McCulloch
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 169–179
PDF Pages: pp. 187–197 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 187 / Book Page 169] ---

12
EMPIRES AND EDUCATION: THE BRITISH EMPIRE
Gary McCulloch

This chapter analyses the interactions involved in the relationship between Empires and
education by exploring the case of the British Empire. Over the past few years, increasing
attention has been given to the history of the British Empire and the nature of its contribution and legacy in the modern world (Louis, 1999; Ferguson, 2003; Brendon, 2007).
Much of this general literature, for example, the recent five-volume Oxford History of the
British Empire (Louis, 1999), has included little material specifically on education. At
the same time, a substantial literature has also developed on the ways in which the ideas
and practices of education in Britain influenced the character of education in different
parts of the British Empire. This literature has generated interesting debates around the
nature of cultural imperialism, the relationship between the ‘centre’ and the ‘periphery’
(e.g. McCulloch & Lowe, 2003), the extent to which imperial influences were beneficial
and the ways in which these influences were played out in different nations and areas.
Latterly, there has been increasing interest in the kinds of resistance that developed on
the part of colonised and indigenous groups. The case of New Zealand (Maori name
Aotearoa), 12,000 miles away from Britain, will be examined in particular detail to
demonstrate the extent and the characteristics of the imperial writ.
Yet the educational relationships between Britain and her Empire did not run only
in one direction. As Peter Burke has pointed out, there are evident dangers in a simple model of ‘centre’ and ‘periphery’ in which knowledge is diffused from Europe
to other parts of the globe, in particular for the tendency of such an approach to take
sufficient account of ‘flows of knowledge from periphery to centre as well as in the
opposite direction’ (Burke, 2000: 57). Over the last decade, there have developed the
beginnings of historical interest in the reverse process, that is, how ideas and practices
of education in different parts of the British Empire exerted influence in the imperial homeland. This new literature, stimulated in part by Edward Said’s Culture and
Imperialism (1994), has potential for a great deal of further development to investigate
the dynamics of education in the British Empire which were rarely stable and often
unpredictable in their nature and effects.

English Education and the British Empire
What J.A. Mangan described as the ‘imperial diffusion’ of British education (Mangan,
1978: 110) around the British Empire from the nineteenth century onwards has become
a familiar feature of educational historiography. More specifically, as Mangan’s work
169
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 169–179.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 188 / Book Page 170] ---

170 McCulloch

among many others has demonstrated, English traditions were dominant in this process, and differed significantly from those of Scotland, Wales and Ireland. These latter
traditions tended to be subordinated to the English while still retaining local support
and potency (Raftery et al., 2007). Mangan’s own research emphasised the ways in
which the great independent or ‘public’ schools of England established the ideals that
were to become dominant in many different social and cultural contexts around the
world, and also the active involvement of the products of these schools in proselytising
and implementing them in the British colonies. The universities were also to the fore
in advancing the imperial theme, in particular Oxford with the strong encouragement
of men such as Benjamin Jowitt, Master of Balliol from 1870 to 1893. Other Oxford
men who pursued the dream of cultivating the English tradition in the colonies were to
include Sir Cyril Norwood, Master of St. John’s College from 1934 until 1946. Yet it
has also become clear that these powerful influences did not hold sway unchallenged.
In a number of colonies, local conditions led to significant variations, adaptations and
often active resistance to the imperial blueprint.
The public schools created an identifiable elite, a community of men with shared
outlooks, values and codes of honour imbued in them through their shared boyhood
experiences. They were indeed a breed of ‘philosopher-kings’ in the Platonic model,
prepared for public service and the running of an Empire (Wilkinson, 1964; Honey,
1977; McCulloch, 1991a). They inculcated high ideals of Christianity and liberal education, as well as a rugged brand of moral character and patriotism. By the end of
the nineteenth century, the ideals and practices of the public schools could be widely
portrayed as representing an English tradition, legitimising status and relations of
established authority.
Mangan’s work in the 1980s and 1990s made a significant contribution to the understanding of this quintessentially English version of cultural imperialism. His key work
The Games Ethic and Imperialism (1986) examined in extensive detail the significance
of games and sports in the education of the Empire. The ‘games ethic’ lay at the heart of
the values disseminated by the public schools, imparting not only initiative and self-reliance but also loyalty and obedience. Public school headmasters in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries actively supported imperial ideals, and sent their pupils to the
furthest outposts of the Empire to put them into practice. In this way, according to Mangan,
‘a unique educational ideal was disseminated throughout the British Empire – the ideal
of character-training through games’ (Mangan, 1986: 42; see also Mangan, 1988, 1993).
Rugby football and cricket in particular were the chosen instruments of imperial purpose.
In Sudan, for example, the Sudan Political Service, created in 1899, drew copiously on the
products of the English public schools and of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge
to form an elite cadre of administrators. Many of these had themselves achieved sporting
success in their former schools and universities, and strove to pass on the values underlying their achievements to their new charges. In Nigeria, Sir Frederick Lugard led an
educational crusade in his position as Governor from 1912 (Governor-General from 1914),
preaching the virtues of conformity and obedience both in the classroom and on the playing field. In India, Mayo College, founded in 1878, was a notable example of a new school
based on the precepts of the English public schools, which spread the word through the
development of cricket and other games.

--- [PDF Page 189 / Book Page 171] ---

Empires and Education: The British Empire 171

Further detailed accounts of the educational sources of this set of imperial
influences developed this general theme. Donald Leinster-Mackay noted the significance of the English preparatory schools as the ‘cradle and crèche of Empire’ with
their close associations with the public schools (Leinster-Mackay,1988). Paul Rich
delved into the contribution of public school freemasonry to the cultural hegemony
of the British throughout the Empire, involving the development of rites and
rituals in the gentleman’s clubs and Masonic lodges (Rich, 1988, 1989, 1991). The
textbooks used as part of the curriculum both in Britain and around the Empire
also attracted increasing attention, to understand the messages and stereotypes that
they conveyed to pupils. Racial stereotypes, for example, were widely depicted in
school history and geography textbooks (Marsden, 1990; Castle, 1993; Lilly, 1993;
Coolahan, 1993).
The University of Oxford established connections with the British Empire that were
especially significant, as was evident from Richard Symonds’ detailed study (1986).
This work investigated Oxford’s contribution to the philosophy of and national attitudes
towards Empire, particularly through its teaching of the classics. It also examined the
purposes and motives behind support for the Empire, and the role of Oxford graduates
who went out to different parts of the Empire as administrators, teachers and missionaries. A famous example of an Oxford graduate who set out to colonise the world was
Cecil Rhodes, who studied Latin, Greek, Political Economy and Law at Oriel College
between 1873 and 1881. Rhodes’ Will, published in 1902, became the basis for the
Rhodes Scholarships which appointed thousands of Scholars from all over the Empire
in subsequent decades.
Cyril Norwood was a prominent educator who also had roots in Oxford, having
attained a First in classics at St. John’s College in the 1890s before becoming headmaster of Bristol Grammar School, Master of Marlborough College and then Head
of Harrow School, finally returning to his old Oxford college as President in 1934
(McCulloch, 2007a). Norwood was influenced by his father Samuel, the ultimately
unsuccessful headmaster of Whalley Grammar School, who waxed lyrical on the
benefits of Britain’s Indian Empire. As the headmaster of Bristol Grammar School
before the First World War, he emphasised the duties and the inherited ideals of the
British Empire, and the need to defend these if necessary through resort to arms.
Later in his career, Norwood identified and celebrated an English tradition of education that was associated above all with the qualities of character found in the English
public schools, including the shared values inculcated by games (Norwood, 1929).
There has been much controversy over whether the influence of the British Empire
has been malevolent or beneficial. Recent sympathisers have insisted that the Empire
had a positive role in the making of the modern world (Ferguson, 2003). Such admiration is evident in some of the historical literature on the British Empire and education.
Clive Whitehead in particular has defended the record of the British Empire, and
rejected the idea that it was a means of exerting economic and political control over
colonised peoples. Whitehead emphasises both the idealism and the confusion of
purpose that underlay British colonial policy, and insists that this did not amount to
cultural imperialism designed to perpetuate cultural and political hegemony: ‘Most
colonial schooling certainly mirrored schooling in Britain, but there is ample evidence

--- [PDF Page 190 / Book Page 172] ---

172 McCulloch

to suggest that this was more a reflection of local demand on the part of indigenous
peoples themselves, than an indication of any deliberate British policy to colonise
the indigenous intellect’ (Whitehead, 1988: 215). Whitehead’s research on the British
Indian and Colonial Education Service exemplifies this argument as he highlights the
contributions of many men and women to building and maintaining public facilities
and services in India, based as he argues on ‘a genuine concern for the welfare of
indigenous peoples’ (Whitehead, 2003: p. xiv).
Yet it is also true that tensions developed in a number of colonial contexts over the
character and effects of these imperial influences. In some parts of the Empire, these
conflicts grew into open challenge and resistance on the part of colonial and indigenous groups seeking a greater measure of independence, or an assertion of national or
local character. In relation to India, for example, the British mission schools according
to Allender failed to recruit a clientele beyond their central city schools into the rural
areas despite expensive programmes of evangelism and conversion in the mid nineteenth century (Allender, 2003: 273). They remained the preserve of the wealthy few,
and had little impact on the general population. Instead, rival nationalist and religious
movements took the initiative to extend their educational influence before the end of
the nineteenth century (Allender, 2003: 288; see also Allender, 2007).
Other British colonies also experienced such educational differences and conflicts.
In colonial Fiji, White argues that the educational and ‘native’ policies of the colonial
government helped to encourage uneven educational development and lower Fijian
educational attainment (White, 2003). Meanwhile, Swaziland in south-eastern Africa,
a British protectorate after the Boer War at the start of the twentieth century, experienced tensions not only between the colonial power and the colonised, but also within
those colonised populations (Zoller, 2003). We may observe such tensions in more
detail in the historical development of one particular British colony 12,000 miles away
from the Homeland: New Zealand.

Educating New Zealand?
The essentially colonial characteristics of education in New Zealand have long attracted
comment. The growth of modern schooling in Britain and the dissemination of its educational ideals and practices had a crucial impact on the character of structures of schooling
in New Zealand, the furthest outpost of the Empire that continued into the twentieth century. The precedents of established institutions, the practices of schools and teachers, and
the traditions that underpinned and rationalised a wide variety of educational arrangements all had their sources in full or in part in what was widely regarded as ‘Home’.
Such ideals and practices were continued or else adapted in subtle ways by teachers
who themselves had in many cases been educated and trained in Britain, with textbooks
that often came from Britain, for examinations based largely on British experience,
values and culture. A.E. Campbell, later Director-General of Education, suggested in
1941 that ‘the education system of New Zealand as it stands today is incomprehensible
unless one bears ever in mind that it originated and developed in a British colony in
the nineteenth century’ (Campbell, 1941: p. 1). He emphasised the nostalgia of the

--- [PDF Page 191 / Book Page 173] ---

Empires and Education: The British Empire 173

colonists for their homeland which contributed to their desire to surround themselves
‘with a barrier of familiar social institutions’:
If they could not surround themselves immediately with the flowers and trees and
quiet hills of England, they could at least transplant the forms of social life with
which they were familiar, and which they needed to assuage the homesickness
that almost every colonist carries with him to the end. Just because they sought
new worlds they did not necessarily seek a new way of life (Campbell, 1941: 3).
For this reason, Campbell concluded, ‘the historical principle of maintaining cultural
continuity played a greater part in forming the education system of New Zealand than
did the geographical principle of adaptation to a new environment’ (Campbell, 1941: 6).
Auckland Grammar School, for example, imitated and interpreted the practices and
ideals of the English public and grammar schools to cultivate its own grammar school
tradition. The reflected glow of such schools was intended to convey a cultural message to the pupils and patrons of Auckland: that it was a symbolic link with ‘Home’
(McCulloch, 1988). The school curriculum no less than the visible structures of the education system also saw unmistakable marks of the colonial heritage. Alan Mulgan,
a pupil at Auckland Grammar School in the 1890s, commented looking back that ‘Our
curriculum was English, but we were colonials and conscious of it’ (Mulgan, 1958: 71).
Often, too, there was an idealised and somewhat unreal quality about the images
of England that were influential in New Zealand education. For example, F.B. Malim,
visiting New Zealand in the 1940s, enthused over the English features of the leading
independent schools. Of Christ’s College, in Christchurch, Malim remarked that ‘Her
grey walls and her elms suggest a civilisation more peaceful and stable than seems
likely to be the portion of the New Zealand of today, and they remind us of an England
with foundations still unshaken by the invention of the internal combustion engine’
(Malim, 1948: 160). Malim’s observations also highlighted something of the missionary zeal with which English educators had transported their own cultural baggage. He
was especially glowing about Waitaki High School, which he described as ‘a museum
devoted to the history of Britain’ (Malim, 1948: 163).
At the same time, there were many important specificities and differences in the
New Zealand situation that cannot be merely ‘read off’ from the British case. It
may be argued, indeed, that educational reforms developed in New Zealand in many
instances in explicit opposition to the trends identified as being associated with the
‘Old Country’. New Zealand educational reforms had a liberal and egalitarian thrust
that could be contrasted with the class-based, differentiated and hierarchical structures
of schooling in England. It was common for those extolling the virtues of education in New Zealand to emphasise its advantages over that of class-divided England.
According to the Director of Education, T.B. Strong, in 1928, for example:
I am told that the teaching profession in England suffers even to the present day
the humiliating effects of the old-time perfunctory provision for the education of
the masses. There are still localities in England where the teacher has little or no
social standing. In the Dominions, fortunately, the trend has been for the teacher

--- [PDF Page 192 / Book Page 174] ---

174 McCulloch

to occupy an honoured position in society, and this fact has undoubtedly operated to the benefit of the schools. One cause, or it may be the effect of this, is the
high social regard in which our “public schools” are held (Strong, 1928: 145).
Meanwhile, conservatives such as E.M. Blaiklock, a classics professor at the University
of Auckland (Shaw, 1986), tended to paint the ingrained social purposes and structural
differentiation of the English education system in more flattering colours to provide a
respectable source of right-wing opinion, and to discredit the egalitarianism towards
which New Zealand educational policies tended to lean (McCulloch, 1988, 1991b).
In some ways, the egalitarian tendencies prominent in New Zealand education were
akin to those of Scotland, which had also developed partly in opposition to English traditions and precepts. As Robert Anderson has noted, there was an ‘advanced and distinctive
educational tradition’ in Scotland that could be traced back to the Reformation, which
nineteenth-century Scots considered to be ‘both a point of superiority over England and
a guarantee of Scotland’s social and cultural autonomy within the Union’ (Anderson,
1983: 1). According to Anderson, the Scottish ‘democratic myth’ of education became
a vital part ‘both of the Scottish sense of nationhood and of the image which others
have formed of the Scots’ (Anderson, 1983: 1). Underlying the ‘myth’ there were many
unresolved problems and deep-seated inequalities that usually went unacknowledged
(Humes & Paterson, 1983; Raftery et al., 2007). English-based structures and expectations also increasingly encroached upon educational institutions north of the border to
undermine the distinctive character and independence of the Scottish tradition. In New
Zealand, the threat of such encroachment was more distant and yet at the same time more
insidious. The English cultural origins of the New Zealand education system and its continued influence through the importation of the latest ideas, practices, teachers and texts
posed a constant threat to the integrity of New Zealand’s egalitarian myth.
Thus it was a Scottish visitor, Dr. William Boyd, who warned most clearly of the
dangers of the English influence at a major conference of the New Education Fellowship
held in New Zealand in July 1937. Relating the development of the education system in
New Zealand explicitly to that of Scotland, he argued that the key problem facing New
Zealand education was the influence of the English tradition, which had already had a
major impact at a structural level. According to Boyd, ‘the serpent in the garden is the
English influence in New Zealand education which has demoralised your institutions’
(Boyd, 1938: 475–476). Rather than developing along ‘good Scotch lines’, Boyd continued, New Zealand education was based on ‘the English separation between primary
and secondary education’. This in turn encouraged differentiation and selection at the
secondary school level: ‘Your high schools, rather of the English sort, were meant for an
aristocracy, a selected group, and the old primary schools for the common or ordinary
people. This is the English principle as opposed to the Scotch practice of having a primary system which grows into a secondary system and forms a satisfactory unity’ (Boyd,
1938: 476). This constituted a direct critique of the views of Cyril Norwood, who was a
speaker at the same conference and continued to promote an idealised ‘English tradition’
of education (Norwood, 1929; McCulloch, 2007a). To address this issue, Boyd strongly
advocated that the secondary school curriculum should become less ‘orientated towards
the university’ and more a ‘preparation for ordinary living’ (Boyd, 1938: 484).

--- [PDF Page 193 / Book Page 175] ---

Empires and Education: The British Empire 175

A further key dimension of cultural tensions in colonial New Zealand lay in the
relationship between the colonists (pakehas) and the indigenous Maori population, the
tangata whenua or ‘people of the land’. Judith Nathan has argued that the Governor
of New Zealand, Sir George Grey, established industrial boarding schools under the
Education Ordinance of 1847 in order to consolidate Christianity, foster Western
standards, maintain racial harmony, and provide instruments of assimilation (Nathan,
1973). The Maori Schools Act of 1867 established a national system of secular village day schools under the Department of Native Affairs, with a curriculum based on
the subjects of English elementary schools (Harker & McConnochie, 1985; Simon,
1998). By the late twentieth century, however, Maori-based resistance to assimilation
had grown to the point that it was able to establish alternative and rival forms of educational institutions (Jesson, 1992; Smith, 1992).
This case-study of Aotearoa/New Zealand demonstrates that while the imperial heritage exerted a vital influence on the development of schooling and education more
generally, the colonial outpost also developed a number of characteristics that challenged the primacy of these cultural origins. First, the colonists increasingly asserted
their own national traditions and national identity in a way that was suited to the conditions of their new home, and which did not necessarily accommodate the precepts
and practices of ‘Home’. Second, there were rival international influences such as
the distinct values of Scottish education from those of the English, and increasingly
other sources of educational ideas and practices such as those of the United States and
Australia, with which to contend. Finally, the indigenous culture of the Maori posed
particular challenges and suggested important differences in approach in catering for
the educational needs of different ethnic groups. Such tensions played themselves out
in a number of ways around the British Empire, and the legacies of the British presence were not always similar, but the complexities of the debates experienced in
New Zealand had parallels and resonances with those that developed elsewhere.

Small Island
Unlike historical literature on the outward influence of British educational ideas and
practices on the different parts of the British Empire, historical attention on the reverse
processes by which the Empire has influenced education in Britain has until recently
been somewhat scant. A leading writer on this latter theme has been John MacKenzie,
whose interest has been directed toward popular culture more generally, but there is
much more to be developed in this direction specifically around the character and
effects of education.
Said’s work considers the ‘overlapping territories’ and ‘intertwined histories’ of
imperial culture (Said, 1994: 1), examining how ‘a post-imperial intellectual attitude
might expand the overlapping community between metropolitan and formerly colonised societies’ (Said, 1994: 19). He goes on to investigate how images of the Empire
have permeated Western culture, for example in major works of fiction: ‘Cultural texts
imported the foreign into Europe in ways that very clearly bear the mark of the imperial enterprise, of explorers and ethnographers, geologists and geographers, merchants

--- [PDF Page 194 / Book Page 176] ---

176 McCulloch

and soldiers’ (Said, 1994: 229). This key insight has underpinned a new historical
literature focusing on the influence of Empire on the imperial homeland.
Early indications of this new interest have included interesting contributions by the
historians Raphael Samuel and Linda Colley. Samuel’s Island Stories (Samuel, 1998)
insists on the interplay of the imperial and the domestic, citing as an example the utopian strains of English life, reflected in the open-air movement and the rise of the Boy
Scouts and the Girl Guides in the twentieth century, which were located originally in
Britain’s colonising fortunes. Colley emphasises the insecurity of Britain in relation
to powerful neighbours and rivals as a key factor in its social and political development. According to Colley, ‘Self-consciously small, increasingly rich, and confronted
with European enemies that were often bigger and militarily more formidable than
themselves, the British were frequently on edge, constantly fearful themselves of being
invaded, necessarily alert and ready for a fight’ (Colley, 2002: 11). The consequence
of this in Colley’s view was that the Empire came to dominate Britain’s culture and
self-image (Colley, 2002: 326). Like Samuel, then, she regards Britain’s domestic culture and politics and the growth and development of its Empire as being interlinked:
‘The history of Britain and the histories of its various overseas ventures cannot be
adequately approached separately. For good, and for ill, they were interlinked’ (Colley,
2002: 305). Such points are open to debate. For instance, many historians and commentators have suggested that Britain’s perceived security from invasion from overseas
encouraged complacency and conservatism, rather than restlessness, in its social development (McCulloch, 2007b). However, these arguments provide a point of departure
for detailed historical research in a number of different areas.
A number of other recent works have further developed a new historical literature
around this theme. In relation to politics, a key example would include Thompson’s
The Empire Strikes Back? (Thompson, 2005), which has explored the role of Empire
in British politics in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Cultural dimensions
have been explored in greater depth by Paris (2000) and Porter (2004). Bush has also
assessed the significance of Empire for gender relationships in the early twentieth
century (Bush, 2000). The result is what Wilson (2004) has described as a ‘new imperial history’, actively conscious of the relationship between the British Empire and
Britain’s own national identity.
The implications of this new historiographical trend for education have thus far been
traced out only lightly and unevenly. John MacKenzie led the way in this area as long ago
as the 1980s with his study of propaganda, public opinion and Empire and an important
edited collection on imperialism and popular culture (MacKenzie, 1984, 1986), and he
has continued in this vein (see for example MacKenzie, 1999a, b). These contributions
have highlighted how the Empire impressed itself on the British public through such
media as the cinema, the popular press, consumer propaganda and popular literature.
He singles out the Empire Exhibitions of the 1920s as exemplars of this kind of influence. The first, at Wembley in London, opened by King George V on St. George’s Day in
1924, attracted over 17 million visitors during the rest of 1924 and nearly 10 million the
following year (MacKenzie, 1999b: 214–215). Its impact on popular awareness and construction of Empire is also vividly depicted in Andrea Levy’s recent novel Small Island
(Levy, 2004) which recounts a visit to the Exhibition by the main narrator Queenie and

--- [PDF Page 195 / Book Page 177] ---

Empires and Education: The British Empire 177

her family: ‘the whole world and only one day to see it’ (Levy, 2004: 3–4). MacKenzie
points out the significance of social class, the differences between the regional and urban
centres of Britain, and the new immigration from the former Empire since the 1950s
as factors in the reception of Empire in the twentieth century. These aspects are still to
be developed in detail by educational historians, although there is some interesting and
important work for example by Castle and Heathorn on national identity and the elementary school curriculum (Castle, 1996; Heathorn, 2000).

Conclusions
We may therefore point to two general types of historical approach to the British
Empire and education. The first, well-rehearsed but by no means played out, has investigated the significance of the British Empire for the development of education in its
many colonies around the world. This was based on a peculiarly English version of
cultural imperialism but was often reinterpreted and challenged in a range of ways
in different local, national and regional conditions. The effects have lasted in many
societies well after independence and the end of the British Empire itself, reflected
in the continued strength and cultural authority of particular institutions and types of
curriculum and practice.
The second, developed more recently, pursues the impact of the Empire on Britain
itself. This involves the ways in which ideas and practices developed in different parts
of the Empire have come to have an influence in the educational system and broader
culture and politics of Britain over the past two centuries. This latter type of work is
still only in its infancy so far as education is concerned, and it is to be expected that
much more will be developed in this respect over the next decade. Again, it is of great
potential significance for an understanding not only of historical changes but of outstanding issues in the early twenty-first century. Debates about national identity and
‘Britishness’ are bound up with the continuing impact of the Empire on public debate
in Britain (see for example Bunting, 2007). Knowledge and culture have clearly flowed
from the ‘periphery’ to the ‘centre’ as well as in the opposite direction.

References
Allender, T. (2003). Anglican evangelism in North India and the Punjabi missionary classroom: The failure
to educate “the masses”, 1860–77’. History of Education, 32(3), 273–88.
Allender, T. (2007). Surrendering a colonial domain: Educating North India, 1854–1890. History of
Education, 36(1), 45–63.
Anderson, R. (1983). Education and opportunity in Victorian Scotland: Schools and universities. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Boyd, W. (1938). A Scotsman looks at New Zealand schools. In A. E. Campbell (Ed.), Modern trends in
education. Wellington: New Zealand Council of Educational Research.
Brendon, P. (2007). The Decline and fall of the British Empire. London: Cape.
Bunting, M. (2007). Don’t overlook the impact of empire on our identity. The Guardian, 1 January, p. 20.
Burke, P. (2000). A social history of knowledge: From Gutenberg to Diderot. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bush, J. (2000). Edwardian ladies and imperial power. Leicester: Leicester University Press.
Campbell, A.E. (1941). Educating New Zealand. Wellington: Department of Internal Affairs.

--- [PDF Page 196 / Book Page 178] ---

178 McCulloch
Castle, K. (1993). The imperial Indian: India in British history textbooks for schools 1890–1914. In J.A.
Mangan (Ed.), The Imperial Curriculum (pp. 23–39). London: Routledge.
Castle, K. (1996). Britannia’s Children: Reading Colonialism through Children’s Books and Magazines.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Colley, L. (2002). Captives: Britain, Empire and the World 1600–1850, London: Jonathan Cape.
Coolahan, J. (1993). The Irish and others in Irish nineteenth-century textbooks. In J.A. Mangan (Ed.), The
Imperial Curriculum (pp. 54–63). London: Routledge.
Ferguson, N. (2003). Empire: How Britain made the modern world. London: Allen Lane.
Harker, R. & McConnochie, K. (1985). Education as cultural artifact: Studies in Maori and aboriginal
education. Palmerston North: Dunmore Press.
Heathorn, S. (2000). For home, country, and race: Constructing gender, class and englishness in the elementary school, 1800–1914. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Honey, J. (1977). Tom Brown’s universe: the development of the English public school in the nineteenth
century. London: Millington.
Humes, W. & Paterson, H. (Eds). (1983). Scottish culture and Scottish education, 1800–1980. Glasgow.
Jesson, J. (1992). Science Aotearoa. In G. McCulloch (Ed.), The school curriculum in New Zealand: History,
theory, policy and practice. Palmerston North: Dunmore Press.
Leinster-Mackay, D. (1988). The nineteenth-century English preparatory school: Cradle and crèche of
Empire? In J. A. Mangan (Ed.), Benefits bestowed? (pp. 56–75). Manchester: Manchester University
Press.
Levy, A. (2004). Small island. London: Review.
Lilly, T. (1993). The black African in Southern Africa: Images in British school geography books. In J. A.
Mangan (Ed.), The imperial curriculum (pp. 40–53). London: Routledge.
Louis, W. (Ed.) (1999). The Oxford history of the British Empire (5 vols). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
MacKenzie, J. W. (1984). Propaganda and empire: The manipulation of British public opinion. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
MacKenzie, J. W. (Ed.) (1986). Imperialism and popular culture. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.
MacKenzie, J. W. (1999a). Empire and metropolitan cultures. In A. Porter (Ed.), The Oxford history of the
British Empire, vol. III, The Nineteenth Century (pp. 270–293). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MacKenzie, J. W. (1999b). The popular culture of Empire in Britain. In J. Brown (ed.), The Oxford History of
the British Empire, vol. IV, The Twentieth Century (pp. 212–231). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McCulloch, G. (1988). Imperial and colonial designs: The case of Auckland Grammar School. History of
Education, 17(4), 257–267.
McCulloch, G. (1991a). Philosophers and Kings: Education for Leadership in Modern England. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
McCulloch, G. (1991b). ‘Serpent in the garden’: Conservative protest, the ‘New Right’, and New Zealand
educational history. History of Education Review, 20(1), 75–87.
McCulloch, G. (2007a). Cyril Norwood and the ideal of secondary education. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
McCulloch, G. (2007b). National security and the history of education. In D. Crook and G. McCulloch
(Eds.), History, politics and policy-making in education: A festschrift for Richard Aldrich. London:
Institute of Education.
McCulloch, G. & Lowe, R. (Eds.) (2003). History of Education, 32(5), special issue, ‘Centre and periphery:
Networks, space and geography in the history of education’.
Malim, F. B. (1948). Almae Matres: Recollections of some schools at home and abroad. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mangan, J. A. (1978) Eton in India: The imperial diffusion of a Victorian educational ethic. History of
Education, 7(2), 105–118.
Mangan, J. A. (1986) The games ethic and imperialism: Aspects of the diffusion of an ideal. London:
Viking.
Mangan, J. A. (Ed). (1988). ‘Benefits bestowed’? Education and British imperialism. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.

--- [PDF Page 197 / Book Page 179] ---

Empires and Education: The British Empire 179
Mangan, J. A. (Ed.) (1993). The imperial curriculum: Racial images and education in the British colonial
experience. London: Routledge.
Marsden, W. E. (1990). Rooting racism into the educational experience of childhood and youth in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. History of Education, 19(4), 333–353.
Mulgan, A. (1958). The making of a New Zealander. Wellington: A.H. & A.W. Reed.
Nathan, J. (1973). An analysis of an industrial boarding school: 1847–1860. A phase in Maori education.
New Zealand Journal of History, 7(1), 47–59.
Norwood, C. (1929). The English tradition of education. London: John Murray.
Paris, M. (2000). Warrior nation: Images of war in British popular culture, 1850–2000. London: Reaktion
Books.
Porter, B. (2004). The absent-minded imperialists: Empire, Society and Culture in Britain. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Raftery, D., McDermid, J., & Jones, G. E. (2007). Social change and education in Ireland, Scotland and
Wales: historiography on nineteenth-century schooling. History of Education, 36(4–5), 447–463.
Rich, P. (1988). Public-school freemasonry in the empire: ‘mafia of the mediocre’? In J. A. Mangan (Ed.),
Benefits Bestowed? (pp. 174–192). Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Rich, P. (1989). Elixir of empire: The english public schools, ritualism, freemasonry, and imperialism.
London: Regency Press.
Rich, P. (1991). Chains of empire: English public schools, masonic cabalism, historical causality, and imperial clubdom. London: Regency Press.
Said, E. W. (1994). Culture and imperialism. London: Vintage.
Samuel, R. (1998). Theatres of memory, vol. II, Island Stories. London: Verso.
Shaw, T. (1986). E.M. Blaiklock: A Christian scholar. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Simon, J. (1998). Nga Kura Maori: The native schools system, 1867–1969. Auckland: Auckland University
Press.
Smith, L.T. (1992). Kura kaupapa Maori and the implications for curriculum. In G. McCulloch (Ed.), The
school curriculum in New Zealand: History, theory, policy and practice, Palmerston North: Dunmore
Press.
Strong, T.B. (1928). Present trend of education in New Zealand. In I. Davey (Ed.), Fifty years of national
educati on in New Zealand, 1877–1928. Wellington: New Zealand Education Department.
Symonds, R. (1986). Oxford and empire: The last lost cause?. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thompson, A. (2005). The empire strikes back? The impact of imperialism on Britain from the midnineteenth century. Harlow: Pearson Longman.
White, C. (2003). Historicizing educational disparity: colonial policy and Fijian educational attainment.
History of Education, 32(4), 345–365.
Whitehead, C. (1988). British colonial educational policy: A synonym for cultural imperialism? In J. A.
Mangan (Ed.), Benefits Bestowed?. pp. 211–230.
Whitehead, C. (2003). Colonial educators: The British Indian and colonial education service 1858–1983.
London: I.B. Tauris.
Wilkinson, R. (1964). The prefects: British leadership and the public school tradition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Wilson, K. (Ed.) (2004). A new imperial history: Culture, identity and modernity in Britain and the empire,
1660–1840. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zoller, M. (2003). Settler, missionary, and the State: Contradictions in the formulation of educational policy
in colonial Swaziland. History of Education, 32(1), 35–56.

