================================================================================
Chapter 13: Comparing Colonial Education Discourses in the French and Portuguese African Empires: An Essay on Hybridization
Author(s): Ana Isabel Madeira
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 181–194
PDF Pages: pp. 198–211 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 198 / Book Page 181] ---

13
COMPARING COLONIAL EDUCATION
DISCOURSES IN THE FRENCH AND
PORTUGUESE AFRICAN EMPIRES:
AN ESSAY ON HYBRIDIZATION
Ana Isabel Madeira

Colonial Discourse Analysis
For different reasons, the idealized discourses and the official versions about colonial
education in the African context clash with the local circumstances of government
forcing the revision, sometimes the subversion, of principles and objectives defined by
the metropolitan governments. Very often we realize that the same ‘author’ interprets
the reality he observes according to the statute and the locale from where he speaks
and acts, frequently making use of arguments of a total opposite signal.1 Following
what Michel Foucault called ‘the governmentalisation of the State’ to govern at a distance2 implies the invention and the construction of a vast set of technologies which
link calculations and strategies developed in the political centres thousands of points
distributed in the space.3 As such, the analysis of the discourse is linked to the superposition of discourses produced at the global level with the discourses produced at the
local level, a process through which the relations of power–knowledge are developed
in parallel to the technologies of government at a distance. These discontinuities in
the scripts of educational governance (Meyer et al., 1997) permit us to understand
the coexistence of cultural references and clear political positions, even opposite, in
the lusophone (and francophone) space. They underline, on the other hand, the importance of the networks of global diffusion (Ramirez & Rubinson, 1979; Ramírez &
Boli, 1987) and of a specific reception, of internationalization and of indigenization, of
supranational integration and of intra-national diversification (Schriewer, 1993). This
sharing, as I did demonstrate elsewhere (Madeira, 2005 and 2006), results in totally
different appropriations, sometimes even opposed, from presuppositions inscribed in
the discourse about education, making clear how the discourse productions are used to
legitimize the practices of inscription and domination destined to the populations and
cultural contexts with characteristics very different among them.
This essay proposes to go beyond a ‘traditional’ vision of educational change,
i.e. a concept based on the analysis of influences, forces or relations of cause–effect
about the political aspect of education (Wolf, 1982; Murray & Postlethwaite, 1983;
Wesseling, 1991). In contrast with the perspectives which consider the colonies as
181
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 181–194.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 199 / Book Page 182] ---

182 Madeira

homogeneous cultural identities, as extensions of the metropolitan ideas and practices,
I tend to emphasize the symbiotic relations which developed between the empires and
the metropolis (Said, 1993; Cooper, 1994; Thomas, 1994). This position contradicts
a representation of colonialism as a coherent and consistent process and defines the
colonial scenario as a context of conflict between colonizer and colonized, in which
the ideas and practices about the processes associated with the civilization of Africans
are open to negotiation and restructuring of a different kind (Kumar, 1991; Thomas,
1994; Bhabha, 1997; Cooper & Stoler, 1999). Therefore the approach that I will sketch
here emphasizes the contradictory and conflicting aspects contained in the colonial
discourse (Thomas, 1994; Stoler & Cooper, 1997). This implies in particular an understanding about the political and cultural relationship which was developed among the
colonies and the metropolis and, within this perspective, exploits it from the configuration of the discourse field about education considering that it limits a historical space
in a set of other mechanisms that crossed the colonial space.
This methodological choice is tried and aims at exploring two possibilities which
have been of interest to the scientific community within the frame of historical-comparative research in education: on the one hand, to analyse the lack of continuities
between the official ideological concepts about education (incorporated in the discourses which originated in the metropolis or even locally) and the strategies of school
expansion put in practice in the colonial contexts; on the other hand, to map the circulation of discourses about education at the level of colonial peripheries, highlighting
the processes of transfer and of selective taking up which go across the colonies themselves (Nóvoa et al., 2002; Schriewer & Keiner, 1992; Schriewer, 2006; Popkewitz,
2005; Steiner-Khamsi, 2004; Madeira, 2006).
As such, to look at educational changes from a comparative perspective means to analyse
how the discourses about colonial education became known and circulated, at the transnational level, and also to understand how these discourses became accepted as a norm and
therefore transformed in local strategies and concrete programmes of action. In that sense it
is easy to understand why discourses about education which crossed the colonial space produced internal disparities relatively to the processes of school expansion, to the pedagogical
models and to curriculum organization, contradicting the concept of educational policy as
the local implementation of programmes produced in the European metropolis.
I believe that, from this theoretically defined place, we are able to question other
types of relations between the colonial administration and the central structures of
power, as well as to question ambiguities and ambivalences which went across the different structures of imperial authority, namely the discourses about the government,
the civilization and the education of the colonized (Slemon & Tiffin, 1989).

‘National’ Types, Systems of Government and Comparison
of Educational Policies
L’autre est la raison d’être de l’Éducation Comparée: l’autre qui sert de modèle ou
de référence, qui légitime des actions ou qui impose des silences, que l’on imite
ou que l’on colonise. L’éducation comparée fait partie d’un champ de pouvoirs

--- [PDF Page 200 / Book Page 183] ---

An Essay on Hybridization 183

au sein duquel s’organisent des centres et des périphéries, se construisent des
pratiques discursives qui consacrent des sens et définissent des limites . . . . Notre
attitude intellectuelle subit l’influence du rôle joué par l’Europe (l’Occident) en
tant que référent silencieux de toutes les histoires. Comme si l’Europe était la
seule catégorie théoriquement connaissable, toutes les autres histoires n’ayant
droit qu’à un statut empirique. (Nóvoa, 1998: 51–52)
The characterization of educational policies through the identification of differences
and similarities of the colonial administrative systems implemented by France and
England in Africa is widely documented in the literature which compares the governments of the two European powers (Bets, 1961; Deschamps, 1963; Crowder, 1964;
Clignet & Foster, 1964; Ipaye, 1969). These descriptions, generally originated in the
metropolis and frequently supported in official reports and in speeches of political
propaganda, tend to oppose the French colonial system, essentially bureaucratic, centralized and assimilating to the English system, which was considered more pragmatic,
decentralized and liberal. The differences between these two ideal types would have
originated in the ‘historical’ characteristics and in the ‘political’ culture of the two
nations. One is republican, even Jacobine, based on a humanism defined by theoretical and abstract principles, thus resulting in a universalistic, unifying and egalitarian
tendency. The other, embedded in a political culture more ‘aristocratic’, inspired on a
liberal conservative and in the laissez-faire doctrine, would rather tend to respect the
position and the culture of local authorities, considered to a certain extent as ‘peers’
according to the noble tradition of the English gentry – attitudes which supposedly
favour the practice of a kind of ‘indirect government’.
Another series of myths were associated to the construction of a polarized image
of the French and English political systems: for example, the one that argued that the
French implemented a colonization system without doctrine and method, in contrast to
the British colonization (and decolonization) process, based from its onset on the preparation for ‘self-government’; the persistence of direct government methods, based on
the principles of domination–subordination, on the French system, in contrast to the
autonomy the English gave to the Africans, in relation to meeting the needs and the ‘welfare’
of the indigenous populations. This set of representations would have re-enforced the
idea according to which the French cultural policy tended, especially, to administrative
uniformity, unification between the metropolitan territories and those from overseas,
tending therefore to the construction of an educational system aiming at assimilating
the Africans to the French culture, or at least, submitting the interests of the indigenous
people to the civilizing mission of the mother-Nation. In summary, France would have
set up the training of a local elite cultivated according to the French moral values and
cultural habits, a process which could be considered based on the ‘assimilation’ doctrine.
Regarding England, the discourse about colonial policy tended to present a representation based on opposing principles, based on the adaptation to the local conditions and
on the respect for the native indigenous authorities – the ‘indirect rule’ – implying in a
truly decentralizing policy aimed at training the Africans for ‘self-government’.
It is not difficult to imagine that, similarly to the ‘national’ and governmental
types, the comparative styles also tended to reproduce the sets of evidence which the

--- [PDF Page 201 / Book Page 184] ---

184 Madeira

historiography of European colonization in Africa crystallized around the opposition between the francophone and Anglo-Saxon ‘systems’, thus making it possible to
describe the educational results met by both nations. The construction of representations, based on the principle of complementarity between the art and the science of
government, subordinated to political interests of a supranational nature, aimed at very
often illustrating the ‘good government’ of the colonized populations. In fact, despite
the ruptures of paradigms implemented by British and French critical anthropology
and sociology during the 1960s and 1970s, the reading of the colonial phenomenon
went on, in recent times, to inspire stereotyped representations of these deliberately
radicalized representations:
British Europeanizers . . . hoped to turn their subjects into black Englishmen,
complete with middle-class standards and Methodist morality. French
Europeanizers . . . hoped to transform tribesmen in French-speaking citizens
of the ‘republic one and invisible’. Portuguese Europeanizers dreamed of their
country’s Lusitanian mission and envisaged their future empire as an overseas extension of Portugal with a special pattern resembling Brazil’s. (Gann &
Duignam, 1971: 216)
The analyses of the governor’s reports, of the local administration and of private
groups, for example, constitute a fundamental basis of work for the dismantling of
this stereotyped perspective, exclusively centred on official documents, with permits
to mix up the similarities and relativize – or re-enforce – the differences, underlying the contradictions of the discourses about education in a colonial context. On the
other hand, to work on discourses about education originated in different spaces and
times (the colonial space of France and Portugal) makes it possible to widen up the
table of comparison centred in the unit state-nation for the vast dimension of the colonial empires. By enlarging the scope of comparison, analysing these discourses as
configurations allows us to analyse the diffusion, transformation and appropriation
of concepts and pedagogical models as well as their transformation in technologies
of educational incorporation (models of teaching, school, and curriculum) within the
frame of networks of knowledge.

The Educational Rhetoric and the Construction
of the Empire: Portugal and France
Portugal
The system of Portuguese colonization in Africa, based, from a doctrinaire point of
view, on the basic principles of international liberalism, whose general characteristics
entered Portugal via the double French and English influences, was set essentially
on the historical mission and on the colonial vocation which justified the historical,
geographic and political imperative of our stay in the continent. Emphatic and somehow messianic, this discourse went through the political cycles and the transitions of

--- [PDF Page 202 / Book Page 185] ---

An Essay on Hybridization 185

the regime, with few changes, from the end of the monarchy up to the implementation
of the ‘Estado Novo’. Centred on the civilizing mission, on the nationalization of the
empire and, later, on its ‘portugalization’, the Portuguese colonial idea aimed at
the construction of a link between the colonial unity and the national identity, to justify
the national grandeur, relatively to the internal public opinion as well as externally in
relation to other potential European colonies. In this aspect the Portuguese colonial
policy was clearly inscribed in the dynamics of international agreements which regulated the association of the ‘right to exploitation’ to the ‘right of civilization’, an argument
which presupposed the sharing of a set of principles, transversal to several colonizing
powers.4 Based on this doctrine, the Portuguese colonial endeavour in terms of education
by the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century was
oriented mainly by the principle of the ‘assimilation to the national culture’, although
it distinguished, in practice, the ‘civilized’ population (the white colonial population,
Portuguese or from European origin and mestizos who came from the urban areas of
the coast) from the ‘non-civilized’ population (Black Africans, mainly from the rural
areas). The teaching in the colonies was being built, from the early days, within the
framework of this duplicity of public, implying a set of modalities of teaching, content
and strategies of differentiated school incorporation. However, the type of primary
education offered was based on a type of school inspired on the European metropolitan
model, with a uniform basic curriculum, academic and, in the case of the schools
aimed at teaching the Africans (rudimentary primary schooling) simplified.
Similar to other areas of the imperial dominance, Portugal was late, relative to
France and England, in the definition of a colonial educational policy, at least until
the mid-1930s in the twentieth century. This lack of definition was considered responsible for the inefficiency of the colonial administration along with the coexistence of
opposite opinions about the project of colonization and, consequently, of education.
As a result, education governance tended to evidence a centralized tendency, mainly
‘direct’ in outlook: anticlerical internally, but multi-confessional in the external propaganda; hesitating, at the level of strategies of incorporation of the African masses, and
ambiguous in relation to the status that these could adopt in the cadre of the Portuguese
colonial administration. In administrative terms, and in practice, the decentralization
attempts which gave more manoeuvre to the intervention of the governors and high
commissioners in the colonies until the mid-1920s were not able to compensate, from
a legal point of view, the tendency of the colonial assimilation to the metropolis. What
did change, instead, were the arguments used to justify their new powers. Bear in mind,
for example, the discourse about the characteristics of the Portuguese colonialism of
exception, that of the ‘undefined people between Europe and Africa’ (Madeira, 2003:
44–47) turned towards the ‘singular predisposition of a hybrid colonization of the tropics’, according to Gilberto Freyre, a thesis already divulged in the international circles,
through the work of Sir Harry Johnston The Negro in the New World (1910), a book
referred to by a whole generation of Portuguese-Africans to confirm the thesis of the
‘kindness of the Portuguese’ in the African colonization.5
Different from the paternalistic image that Portugal tried to show in the international
circles, and in spite of successive governments (monarchic and republican) claiming for themselves the mission of civilizing as a right of tutelage over people they

--- [PDF Page 203 / Book Page 186] ---

186 Madeira

considered to be under their political jurisdiction and moral protection, the mission
of ‘educating the bodies’ and ‘save the souls’ ended up to be given to the Portuguese
Catholic Church. In this respect, the unity of action of the Catholic Church, disputed
and controlled regularly at least up to the 1930s, succeeded in moving across the different positions which, in the metropolis and in the colonies, became aligned by divergent
conceptions, even contradictory, up to the beginning of the Second World War. In
simple words, for the Portuguese Catholic Church ‘to civilize’ meant ‘to Christianize’,
a mission for which the regular priests claimed for themselves historical rights. The
anticlerical conceptions which attempted to annihilate or control their action in education were of different kinds. The perspectives which were claimed to be of French
influence, represented by the liberalism of the eighteenth century, defended a civilizing
action Illuminist in its origin based on the respect for equality among men – an argument strongly supported by an essentially legal conception of equality among people.
On the other hand, the utilitarian perspectives, relating the education effort to the
exploitation of the colonial resources, considered the ‘education through the inculcation of working habits’ the most viable option, arguments which tended to call forth
the efficacy of the association between the ‘civilizing duty’ and the ‘right to explore’.
Lastly, a third path – one which ended up by imposing itself in the arguments and
practices of the colonial government until the independencies – defended a Portuguese
type of ‘assimilation’, crafted in the image of ‘Greater France’, and extending the
grandiosity of the Portuguese spirit to the overseas provinces. This thesis suggested
that the economic and social advancement of the indigenous population depended on
a set of principles moral and spiritual in character. Paradoxically, it was during this
phase, coincident with the rise of ‘Estado Novo’ regime that the role of the Catholic
Church began to be officially recognized as determinant for the colonization process,
that is to say, instrumental to the ‘nationalization’ of the Portuguese Africa.
By implicitly associating Church evangelization with the State action in the ‘assimilation’ of the African peoples, this policy approached the British incorporating strategy
which clearly associated for a long time ‘civilizing colonialism’ with ‘State colonialism’. The presuppositions of this association were, nevertheless, very different from
the British imperialism ones. The ‘right to explore’ arguments, in juridical terms based
on historical accounts, and the ‘civilizing duty’ supported by a moral imperative, articulated to produce a ‘lusophone bread’. This variant was liberal (since it was funded on
the idea of economic resource exploitation) and, at the same time humanist, based on
the idea of the assimilation of the dark races plunged in the ‘secular night’ to the spirit
of the national culture.

The French Civilizing Mission: To ‘Cultivate’ the African Mind
As with the British case, the French presence in West Africa went through different
phases. In Gifford and Weiskel’s work, a pivotal comparative study of the colonial
systems in Africa, two particularly important periods in the history of French colonization are considered (Gifford & Louis, 1978: 663–711). A first ‘pre-colonial’ period
(1815–1890) and a second moment, characterized by the consolidation of the ‘colonial
rule’ (1894–1945). During the first phase the French colonizers where faced with two

--- [PDF Page 204 / Book Page 187] ---

An Essay on Hybridization 187

major problems. In Senegal, due to deficiencies in the colonizing process, the French
were having problems both in controlling the rise of the trade communities that were
establishing themselves in the coastal areas at a rising rate and of expanding their influence to the interior territories. As such the administration policy began by authorizing
teaching in the local languages at the public schools (1816), by tolerating the missionary activity (1820–1830) and it ended up by handing out education to the Catholic
Church.6 This laissez-faire attitude was justified by the argument that schooling was a
means whereby the French influence could be extended and preserved among the traditional authorities, in particular in the mainland territories, ruled by Islamic leaders.
In most Haute-Volta schools, in the Ivory Coast and in the northern Islamic territories
of Senegal, the French school system task was to educate the individuals who could
eventually assume the role of traditional authorities. In these schools, some of them
destined for the sons of tribal chiefs and gentilic authorities, the curriculum was centred
on teaching the French language and some subsidiary subjects related to local aspects
of everyday life (Gifford & Weiskel, 1978; Gann & Duignam, 1971). The remaining
schools were targeted at the training of interpreters and administrative functionaries
aiming at consolidating the commercial relationships and at minimizing antagonisms
between the local populations and the French colonial administration.
As a philosophy, the discourse on ‘assimilation’ progressively transformed into
a cultural imperialist doctrine, reflecting the wish of forging the political and cultural uniformity of a ‘Greater France’. Education represented a means by which the
overseas territories could be integrated in an increasingly expanding empire and a
strategy for the transformation of Africans into black Frenchmen. French assimilationist objectives manifested themselves in the type of administrative organization, highly
centralized, by which the colonies where considered as extensions of the metropolitan
territory. However, it would be misleading to think that the assimilation policy was
to be the norm in every colonial situation or even that the assimilation policies translated into effective control of the educational matters in all colonies. In spite of the
creation of the Colonial Ministry, in 1894, the French were far from ensuring a tight
control over the colonial education systems, of providing enough well-prepared teachers, of financing the schooling functioning, a set of factors that cumulated with an
ill-defined educational political strategy (Gifford & Weiskel, 1978; Kiwanuka, 1993).
In fact, up to the first decades of the twentieth century, the educational provisions were
made by the local administration, attempting to respond to the educational needs of
each territory whether in quantitative or qualitative terms (Clignet, 1968). At the end
of the nineteenth century at the peak of the metropolitan assimilationist rhetoric, the
development of the educational structures in North and West French Africa was very
much dependent on the funding arising out of private initiative such as the Alliance
Française or in the hands of Catholic missionary societies.
On the other hand, the French educational policy was very much influenced by
the British educational experience, in such a way that the principles of ‘indirect rule’
inspired several colonial governor strategies as with the case of Lyautey, Gallieni or
Van Vollenhoven. Appointed High Commissioner to the Marroc in 1907, Louis-Hubert
Lyautey administrated the protectorate (1912–1916) by granting his support to the
local Islamic chieftaincies and by seeking cooperation with the sultanate regime. His

--- [PDF Page 205 / Book Page 188] ---

188 Madeira

administration was marked by respect for local habits, both in religious and cultural
terms. Joseph Simon Gallièni, on his turn, governed Madagascar (1896–1905) on the
basis of the ‘oil spill’ principle considering that education was essential to the development of the local populations. Gallièni interested himself in the local cultures, favouring
the local languages protection themes about which he produced extended works and
remarks (Dimier, 1998; Clignet & Foster, 1964). Lastly, Joost Van Vollenhoven,
appointed Governor General of French West Africa in 1916, endowed the traditional
authorities with unprecedented powers and responsibilities in the colonial administration, paying particular attention to the ‘evolués’ natives. No doubt Van Vollenhoven was
trying to develop the state strengths by using the traditional authorities as counterparts
and not as opponents, and certainly this could be considered a device of colonial control
devise. Nevertheless, this was much closer to the British ‘indirect rule’ style than it was
to the French ‘assimilationist’ or even ‘associationist’ native policies.
The acts approved in parliament, in 1902, calling for the secularization of all schools
run by the Catholic Church in West Africa and the climate caused by the Dreyfus affair
gave way to a new phase in the organization of the school system in the colonies.
The expansion of a European school system and the need to control the missionary
supply on education produced a reorganization of the public sector. The two decrees
passed by Governor General Ernest Roume in 1903 fitted neatly in the anticlerical
feelings that were becoming evident since 1880, when Jules Ferry (Ministry of the
Public Education) had promoted a compulsory, laic and free educational school system. Under Roume’s new administration the universalization of education turned out
to be one of the central objectives of the French civilizing mission in Africa. Clearly
influenced by the thinking of Gallièni and Lyautey, and pedagogically supported by
Gustave le Bon and Léopold Saussure theories, Roume considered that assimilation
was not a policy attuned to a vast and diverse province such as French West Africa
(Le Bon, 1894; Saussure, 1899). By contesting the frenchifying metropolitan policies, Roume thought that the Africans should evolve according to their own lines,
and under this conception, the curriculum should be ‘adapted to the colonial needs’.
Henceforth a free, secular system of education was created granting particular emphasis to the French language as a medium of teaching. The educational structures were
set up in order to respond to the colonial pragmatic needs and were divided in écoles
de villages, designated to the training of interpreters, the écoles régionales, aimed at
the training of administration functionaries, and the écoles urbaines for the training
of Africans who were to fill posts in the French colonial administration. The urban
schools directed to the European and to the ‘assimilated’ individuals were designed to
work along metropolitan lines whether in terms of the teaching staff or with regard to
the curriculum. Rural or regional schools were destined to the native population and,
as such, the curriculum was adapted to the local populations’ special needs. These two
apparently opposed principles (assimilation/adaptation) were used in twofold ways:
one directed at the expansion of school opportunities (at the elementary level), crafted
for the majority of Africans; and the other directed at limiting their access of assimilated natives (to the secondary-level school opportunities).
In 1907 Ernest Roume retired and was replaced by William Merlaud-Ponty in the
government of French West Africa. Merlaud-Ponty’s perception of native educational

--- [PDF Page 206 / Book Page 189] ---

An Essay on Hybridization 189

policy could not be more dissimilar than that of his predecessor as was shown by his
circular published in 1909 under the theme of Politique des Races. In this document the
new Governor General clearly demonstrated his preference for the principle of ‘direct
rule’, thus implying a reduction of the intermediaries between the local administration
and the traditional authorities in the villages. In this way a new native policy orientation emerged, downplaying the role that had been previously accorded to the traditional
authorities in the French colonial administration. In educational terms Merlaud-Ponty
was very well aware of the French civilizing mission towards the Africans, and as a
result the ‘adapted education’ path was the object of serious revisions. In 1914 on
the eve of the First World War, Merlaud-Ponty appointed Georges Hardy as the new
General Inspector for Education in French West Africa. Though they were never promulgated, Hardy’s directives reinforced the laws and decrees passed by Ernest Roume
from 1903, marking the return to an ambiguous educational policy midway between
the consolidation of a metropolitan school model and the construction of a school system ‘adapted to the needs of Africans’ (Gifford & Weiskel, 1978; Gann & Duignam,
1971). However, Hardy’s efforts apparently concentrated on the separation of those
fit to receive a European type of education drawn from the image of the metropolitan
school system and, at the other end, a mass schooling model destined to incorporate
the vast majority of the African natives.
In any case, the superposition of different strategies and discourses about the colonial education policy allows us to question the idea, much celebrated by traditional
historiography, of a homogeneous and universal type of school curriculum aimed at the
transformation of Africans into ‘black Frenchmen’. On the contrary, we may perceive
that perhaps until the 1930s the policies pursued in the French West Africa territories
tried, precisely, to avoid the excessive frenchification of the native population. For that
purpose the continuous prevalence of a dual educational system – one for Europeans
and assimilated natives and the other aimed at the mass of native population, regardless of the more or less importance given to the traditional authorities – was always a
strategic means of controlling the eligibility for cooperation with the colonial administration.7 That does not imply, however, the workings of a straightforward imperial
ideology of assimilation. As I have tried to show, the building of a school curriculum
in French West Africa was very much conditioned by individual strategies and governing styles predicated on the Governor General’s interpretations emanated from Paris.
Likewise, the discourse on ‘adapted education’, although inspired by the British colonial south-Saharan Africa experiences, worked more often as a constraint than as a
possibility for the majority of natives. It meant, generally speaking, an emphasis on a
practical and moral education while downplaying a more scientific curriculum.

Concluding Remarks
Lord Lugard, Governor General of Nigeria (1914–1919) and the great colonial doctrinaire
between the two wars, was a forerunner in the comparison of the British and French
colonial systems. Lugard knew well the French colonizing doctrines and he maintained
close contact with Maurice Delafosse at the head of École coloniale (1909–1926) as well

--- [PDF Page 207 / Book Page 190] ---

190 Madeira

as with his successor, Henri Labouret, with whom he created and directed the Institut
international des langues et civilisations africaines (London). Lord Lugard cherished
the opinion that, by the end of the nineteenth century, the French colonial doctrines had
evolved from assimilation to association and that they were approaching the ‘indirect
rule’ British policy. On the other hand, Maurice Delafosse had, more than once, contested
the idea that ‘indirect rule’ was a prerogative exclusive to the British colonial system:
Il serait plus sage d’observer ce que font les Anglais dans celles de leurs possessions qui sont analogues aux colonies françaises voisines, Gambie, Sierra Leone,
Nigeria, Goald Coast où la proportion de l’élément européen et de l’élément
indigène, de même que le stade d’évolution de ce dernier, se présente approximativement sous le même aspect qu’au Sénégal, en Guinée, en Côte-d’Ivoire
et au Soudan. Nous constaterions alors que cette centralisation que d’aucun
reproche si fort à la France dans son administration coloniale est aussi accentuée
chez nos voisins que chez nous.8
The lack of continuity between the idealized discourses and the local practices was,
more frequently than one thinks, a fact transversal to any of the colonial empires which
have been studied. I should add that, in my opinion, such discrepancies were mainly
associated with local or interstate contingencies and constraints (related to historical
conditions, geographical locations and concrete political rivalries) rather than to divergences or even ideological antagonisms related to programmes of action (or scripts of
government) of a national–metropolitan nature. In fact, when we focus on discourses
which circulate in the interior of the different colonial contexts, the contingencies of
the colonial administration and the ambivalence of the European policies concerning
education reveal themselves even more clearly. This suggests that the colonial exercise
was ruled by, not rarely, a set of commitments, arrangements and bricolages, scaffoldings, tending to articulate orientations very often abstract and general, making use of
schemes, techniques and informal arrangements of discourse regulation, specifically
in the field of education and in the teaching of the natives.9
Needless to say, at least until the eve of the First World War, the definition of an education policy in the African colonies was more dependent on the native policies of the
colonial powers and on the prevalent views about the natives’ role (and the Europeans)
in the colonization process than anything else. As such the educational debates were
subordinated to the doctrines that originated in different fields of production (native
policy, colonization doctrines, economic exploitation, work force formation, etc.) than
the strictly pedagogical or educational fields (theories and philosophies of education,
models of schooling, types of curriculum).
Notwithstanding, when we compare the Portuguese and French colonial doctrines we
come across the same type of hybridizations which also show at the level of the educational discourses. The construction of a dual educational system, one for the masses and
the other for the Europeans and assimilated (or evolués), was a feature characteristic
both of the Portuguese and French colonial educational structures. The appropriation
of the concept of ‘adapted education’ by the Portuguese and French colonial administration also bears some resemblances since it implied a particular strategy, somehow
ambiguous, on the educational system supply-side. For the Portuguese colonial

--- [PDF Page 208 / Book Page 191] ---

An Essay on Hybridization 191

administration, the concept of ‘adapted education’ was tied to a restrictive type of
curriculum aimed at the masses, with emphasis on agriculture, manual skills and domestic
sciences, implying a strong moral character. In this respect, French and Portuguese
doctrines converged into an understanding of the type of moral teaching that should be
given at the primary school: it involved a secular moral education, based on the principles of
the Enlightenment, as opposed to the British understanding of a truly religious social
gospel committed to the formation of character which was strongly embedded in the
evangelic Protestantism. These two conflicting ways of envisaging the human development through education also had consequences at the colonial level. For the Portuguese
and French administration education was a right that should be guaranteed to each
citizen, a right that committed the State to the provision of an educational free, compulsory and secular school system. To the British colonial administration education
was a privilege to be privately acquired, making possible to any group, association or
institution to come forward with a particular type of educational offer. In the English
tradition education was not a given fact; it was a market for individual and collective
advancement closely tied with economic and social development.
Therefore, the assimilation in the Portuguese and French civilizing educational doctrine implied an increase in cultural homogeneity and huge standardization, a fact that
called forth centralized mechanisms of diffusion and appropriation of school models
and pedagogical theories (with clear implications on system organization, curricula,
teacher training, funding and administration). Somehow paradoxically, language issues
were pivotal in changing the politics of education since the Portuguese and French colonies were taught in the imperial language downplaying the vernaculars as a medium
of teaching. The British, on the contrary, were more concerned with the formation of
habits, of skills and of a conduct attuned to the formation of a workforce prepared to
accept the concepts of individual and collective progress and modernization. As long
as the masses could master this understanding, the language of apprenticeship was
secondary for that matter. Due to the difficulties of ‘governing at a distance’ the costs
involved in assimilating the Africans to the European metropolitan mores were much
higher than in the British colonies where the civilizing task was supervised but had
been handed out to the private initiative.
To analyse the field of utilization of these ideas, concepts and theories is not the
same as to analyse the set of strategies which are implied in the defence of a particular kind of Education for the African people. It is not a question of perceiving
which meanings are linked by each colonial nation to the notion of ‘direct government’
or ‘indirect’, ‘colonization’ or ‘nationalization’ (and, the same way: ‘civilization’,
‘instruction’, ‘education’, ‘assimilation’, ‘association’, ‘adapted education’, ‘teaching
of adaptation’). The procedures which support the doctrinaire building that constitutes the school system, in articulation with the attempts to maintain or modify the
appropriation of the discourses with the knowledge and the power they carry with
themselves, are difficult to separate one from the other (Foucault, 1977 [1971]).
It becomes, therefore, indispensable to identify and organize the reading of facts which
compound these discourses: to locate the debates and to analyse the controversies, to
identify the themes and arguments; to describe the structure of the intrigue; and finally,
to perceive the constitution of the ‘societies of discourses’ through ideas, theories and
concepts which are used in the colonial government, in a general sense, and their

--- [PDF Page 209 / Book Page 192] ---

192 Madeira

effects upon the government of the colonized subjects, in particular (Foucault, 1966
and 1969). Nikolas Rose once wrote that the concepts ‘are more important for what
they do than for what they mean’ (Rose, 1999: 9). I would like to add, quoting António
Nóvoa (1998), that we cannot understand the colonial discourse without being able,
‘to think about the other in time of our own thinking’, asking questions about how
discursive events about this other are produced, and how these statements are related to
each other in order to constitute a ‘discursive practice’ (Foucault, 2005 [1969]: 38–39,
68 and 159].

Notes
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.
7.

8.
9.

About that we can show some paradigmatic examples, either in France or in Portugal: Jules Ferry,
a most bitter assimilator in the metropolis, reviews his position after an inquest which took place in
Senegal; Antonio Enes was very critical in relation to the role of the Church in the education, at the
end, whilst General Governor of Moçambique goes in defence of an important role for the missionaries in the colonial context; Lopo Vaz de Sampaio e Melo, who defended the persecution of religious
orders in the metropolis considered, at the end, their destruction in the colonies appalling, etc.
While strategies of power, the principles of government imply in complex and variable relations
between the calculations and actions of those who look for exercising the domination over a territory, a
population, a nation and a microphysics of power acting at a capillary level among the varied practices
of control which develop at the level of a given territory. “To govern at a distance” involves processes
of translating different kinds through which associations between the objectives of the authorities
which wish to govern and the individual projects of organization, groups and individuals which are
subjects to the government are forged. Cf. N. Rose (1999). Powers of freedom: Reframing political
thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 19 and 48.
Foucault, M. (1991). Governmentality. In G. Burchel & P. Miller (Eds.), The Foucault effect: Studies
in governmentality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 103.
I recall for the purpose the three African conferences: the Conference of Berlin, 1884; the Conference
of Brussels, 1891; the Treaty of Versailles, 1919, and later on the Convention of Saint-Germainen-Laye, 1919.
Cf. Sir Harry H. Johnston (1910). The Negro in the new world. New York: Macmillan; in spite of Sir
Johnston’s words of praise for the Portuguese about the procedures of colonization used in the African
colonization, we shall not forget his position as Vice-President of the Royal Geographical Society of
London and his diplomatic post as Consul of England in Moçambique (1890), when the British Crown
fought with Portugal for the limits of the frontier in the South. In fact, in publications at a later date,
Harry Johnston abandoned the diplomatic register even inverting the sense of the praise. See Johnston,
H. H. (1924). Race problems in the new Africa. African Affairs, 2(4).
Cf. Joseph Gaucher (1968). Les Débuts de l’Enseignement en Afrique Francophone: Jean Dart et
l’École Mutuelle de Saint-Louis du Sénegal, Paris.
As Ruth Ginio attempted to show in an article published in Cahiers d’études africaines, most of the
chiefs who were integrated in the French administrative system were not ‘traditional’ rulers, but were
appointed and trained by the French. In fact, only on rare occasions, African chiefs who had ruled
before French colonization received the titles of Chef supérieur or Roi, and were allowed to continue
to rule over their territories. Cf. Ginio, R. (2002). French colonial reading of ethnographic research:
The case of the “desertion” of the Abron King and its aftermath. **Cahiers d’études africaines,
166(XLII-2), 337–357.
Delafosse, M. (1923). “Politique coloniale. Pour ou contre la décentralisation. L’excès en tout est un
défaut”. Dépêche coloniale, 1er Août.
I refer to the concepts of “bricolage” and “scaffolding” in the semantic area attributed respectively
by Tomaz Tadeu da Silva and Thomas Popkewitz. Cf. Tomaz Tadeu da Silva (2000). Teoria Cultural
e Educação. Um vocabulário crítico. Belo Horizonte: Autêntica, pp. 21–22; Thomas S. Popkewitz
(1998). Struggling for the soul. The politics of schooling and the construction of the teacher. New York
& London: Teachers College/Columbia University, pp. 30–31.

--- [PDF Page 210 / Book Page 193] ---

An Essay on Hybridization 193

References
Bets, R. (1961). Assimilation and association in French colonial theory, 1890–1914. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Bhabha, H. (1997). Of Mimicry and man: The ambivalence of colonial discourse. In F. Cooper & A. L.
Stoler (Eds.), Tensions of empire: Colonial cultures in a bourgeois world. Berkeley/Los Angeles/
London: University of California Press, pp. 152–160.
Clignet, R. (1968). The legacy of assimilation in West African educational systems: Its meaning and ambiguities. Comparative Education Review, 12, 57–67.
Clignet, R. & Foster, P. (1964). French and British colonial education in Africa. Comparative Education
Review, 8, 191–198.
Cooper, F. (1994). Conflict and connection: Rethinking colonial African history. American Historical
Review, 99(5), 1516–1545.
Cooper, F. & Stoler, A. L. (Eds.) (1999). Tensions of empire: Colonial cultures in a bourgeois world.
Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: University of California Press.
Crowder, M. (1964). Indirect rule: French and British style. Africa, 34(3), 197–204.
Delafosse, M. (1923). Politique coloniale. Pour ou contre la décentralisation. L’excès en tout est un défaut.
Dépêche coloniale. 1er Août.
Deschamps, H. (1963). Et maintenaint Lord Lugard? Africa, XXXIII(4), 294–305.
Dimier, V. (1998). Le discours idéologique de la méthode coloniale chez les Français et les Britanniques
de l’entre-deux guerres à la décolonisation (1920–1960). Bordeaux: Centre d’Étude d’Afrique Noire,
Institut d’Études Politiques de Bordeaux.
Foucault, M. (1966). Les mots et les choses: Une archéologie des sciences humaines. Paris: Gallimard.
Foucault, M. (1969). L’archéologie du savoir. Bibliothèque des Sciences Humaines. Paris: Gallimard.
Foucault, M. (1977). A Ordem do Discurso. Lisboa: Relógio d’Água [Trad. da Leçon inaugurale au Collège
de France prononcée le 2 décembre 1970. Paris: Gallimard, 1971], pp. 22–23.
Foucault, M. (1991). Governmentality. In G. Burchell & P. Miller (Eds.), The Foucault effect: Studies in
governmentality. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, pp. 87–104.
Foucault, M. (1998) [1966]. As Palavras e as Coisas. Lisboa: Edições 70.
Foucault, M. (2005) [1969]. A Arqueologia do Saber. Coimbra: Almedina.
Gann, L. & Duignam, P. (Eds.) (1971). Burden of empire: An appraisal of western colonialism in Africa
south of the Sahara. Stanford: Hoover Institution Press.
Gaucher, J. (1968). Les débuts de l’enseignement en Afrique francophone: Jean Dard et l’école mutuelle de
Saint-Louis du Sénégal. Paris.
Gifford, P. & Louis, W. R. (Eds.) (1978). France and Britain in Africa: Imperial rivalry and colonial rule.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Gifford, P. & Weiskel, T. (1978). African education in a colonial context: French and British styles. In
P. Gifford & W. R. Louis (Eds.), France and Britain in Africa: imperial rivalry and colonial rule. New
Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 663–711.
Ginio, R. (2002). French colonial reading of ethnographic research: The case of the “desertion” of the Abron
King and its aftermath. Cahiers d’études africaines, 166(XLII-2), 337–357.
Ipaye, B. (1969). Philosophies of education in colonial West Africa: A comparative study of the British and
French systems. West Africa Journal of Education, 13, 93–97.
Johnston, H. H. (1910). The Negro in the new world. New York: Macmillan.
Johnston, H. H. (1924). Race problems in the new Africa. Foreign Affairs, 6/15/24, Vol.2, Issue 4, p 598–612.
Kiwanuka, M. S. (1993). Colonial policies and administration in Africa: The myths of the contrasts. In
G. Maddox & T. Welliver (Eds.), The colonial epoch in Africa, vol 2. New York: Garland, pp. 295–315.
Kumar, K. (1991). Political agenda of education: A study of colonialist ideas. London: Sage.
Le Bon, G. (1894). Les lois psychologiques de l’évolution des peuples. Paris.
Madeira, A. I. (2003). Sons, Sentidos e Silêncios da Lusofonia: Uma reflexão sobre os espaços-tempos da
língua portuguesa. Cadernos Prestige (18). Lisboa: Educa.
Madeira, Ana Isabel (2005). Portuguese, French and British discourses on colonial education: Church-state
relations, school expansion and missionary competition in Africa, 1890–1930. Paedagogica Historica,
41(1/2), 31–60.

--- [PDF Page 211 / Book Page 194] ---

194 Madeira
Madeira, Ana Isabel (2006). Framing concepts in colonial education: A comparative analysis of educational
discourses at the turn of the nineteenth to the twentieth century. In J. Sprogøe & T. Winther-Jensen
(Eds.), Identity, education and citizenship – multiple interrelations. Frankfurt am Main/Berlin/Bern/
Bruxelles/New York/Oxford/Wien: Peter Lang, pp. 225–238.
Meyer, J., Boli, J., Thomas, G. & Ramírez, F. (1997). World society and the nation-state. American Journal
of Sociology, 103(1), 144–181.
Murray, T. R. & Postlethwaite, T. N. (1983). Describing change and estimating its causes. In T. Murray &
T. N. Postlethwaite (Eds.), Schooling in East Asia: Forces of change. Oxford: Pergamon.
Nóvoa, A. (1998). Histoire & comparaison (Essais sur l’Éducation). Lisbonne: Educa.
Nóvoa, A., Carvalho, L. M., Correia, A. C., Madeira, A. I. & Jorge, O. (2002). Flows of educational knowledge: The space-time of Portuguese-speaking countries. In M. Caruso (Ed.), Internationalisation,
comparing educational systems and semantics. Frankfurt am Main /Berlin/Bern/New York/Oxford/
Wien: Peter Lang.
Popkewitz, T. S. (1998). Struggling for the soul. The politics of schooling and the construction of the teacher.
New York & London: Teachers College/Columbia University, pp. 30–31.
Popkewitz, T. S. (ed.) (2005). Inventing the modern self and John Dewey: Modernities and the traveling of
pragmatism in education. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ramírez, F. & Boli, J. (1987). The political construction of mass schooling: European origins and worldwide
institutionalization. Sociology of Education, 60, 2–17.
Ramirez, F. & Rubinson, R. (1979). Creating members: The political incorporation and expansion of public
education. In J. Meyer & M. Hannan (Eds.), National development and the world system Chicago/
London: The University of Chicago Press.
Rose, N. (1999). Powers of freedom: Reframing political thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Said, E. W. (1993). Culture and imperialism. New York: Vintage.
Saussure, L. (1899) La psychologie de la colonisation française dans ses rapports avec les sociétés
indigènes. Paris.
Schriewer, J. (1993). El Método Comparativo y la Necesidad de Externalización: criterios metodológicos y conceptos sociológicos. In J. Schriewer & F. Pedró (Eds.), Manual de Educación Comparada.
Barcelona: PPU, pp. 189–251.
Schriewer, J. (2006). Les mondes multiples de l’éducation: rhétoriques educatives mondialisées et cadres
socio-culturels de la réflexion. In J. Sprogøe & T. Winther-Jensen (Eds.), Identity, education and
citizenship – multiple interrelations. Frankfurt am Main/Berlin/Bern/Bruxelles/New York/Oxford/
Wien: Peter Lang, pp. 139–163.
Schriewer, J. & Keiner, E. (1992). Communication patterns and intellectual traditions in educational sciences: France and Germany. Comparative Education Review, 36(1), 25–51.
Silva, T. T. (2000). Teoria Cultural e Educação: Um vocabulário crítico. Belo Horizonte: Autêntica, pp. 21–22.
Slemon, S. & Tiffin, H. (1989). After Europe: Critical theory and post-colonial writing. Sydney: Dangaroo
Press
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (Ed.) (2004). The global politics of educational borrowing and lending. New York/
London: Teachers College Press, Columbia University.
Stoler, A. L. & Cooper, F. (1997). Between metropole and colony: Rethinking a research agenda. In
F. Cooper & A. L. Stoler(Eds.), Tensions of empire, colonial cultures in a bourgeois world. Berkeley/
Los Angeles/London: University of California Press, pp. 1–56.
Thomas, N. (1994). Colonialism’s culture: Anthropology, travel and government. Oxford/Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Wesseling, H. (1991). História além-mar. In P. Burke (Ed.), A Escrita da História. São Paulo: UNESP.
Wolf, E. R. (1982). Europe and the people without history. Los Angeles/Berkeley: University of California
Press.

