================================================================================
Chapter 14: Education and State Formation in Italy
Author(s): Donatella Palomba
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 195–216
PDF Pages: pp. 212–233 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 212 / Book Page 195] ---

14
EDUCATION AND STATE FORMATION IN ITALY
Donatella Palomba

Introduction
In many respects, the evolution of the Italian education system since the Unity of Italy
(1861) can be investigated according to an interpretation that is not too far from the
one usually adopted in international literature about education and state formation.
At a deeper level, however, failing to take adequately into account the distinctive features of Italy’s socio-political situation might prevent an understanding of the process
itself.
This chapter is intended to make the following point: from its origin in 1861 to
very recent years, the Italian State has constantly suffered from a lack of legitimation
and full sovereignty, which has strongly affected all its political events and has had
a particular influence on the raising of national awareness and the possible role of
education therein. Although the reasons for this phenomenon have not always been
the same during the time span considered, the full acknowledgement of the legitimacy
and sovereignty of the Italian State has been limited for a much longer time (and more
severely) than is emphasised, especially in the literature on Italy’s education system.
This has brought about a somehow paradoxical situation, marked by a long-standing
national feeling on the one hand (suffice it to remember Dante’s invettive in the Comedy
or Petrarch’s Canzone all’Italia in the fourteenth century), and a relatively belated and
troubled process of state formation on the other hand, with sovereignty being continuously challenged and apparently never fully achieved. In turn, this has negatively
affected the development of a sense of belonging to the new nation state – the weakness of this sense of belonging having often been denounced from the Unity of Italy
up until today.
In order to understand the roots of this situation, issues of international policy and
international balances need to be considered in the first instance. Upon the unification
of Italy, these balances were seriously challenged by the deterioration in the relations
with the Pope and the Vatican State. Later on, they played a key role for different
reasons, both early in the twentieth century and after the Second World War, to an
extent that has probably not been investigated enough yet, especially in terms of
education.
During the period from the Unity of Italy to the Second World War, the legitimacy of
the Italian State was first challenged by the Pope not recognising the State itself, with
all the implications this had both domestically and internationally in the relations with
195
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 195–216.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 213 / Book Page 196] ---

196 Palomba

European Catholic powers. Later on, the Concordat signed by Mussolini’s Government
and the Holy See (1929) somehow settled this vulnus. Very soon, however, the authoritarian nature of the Fascist regime questioned in turn the full recognition of the Italian
State’s democratic legitimacy vis-à-vis many other countries.
In the years after the end of the Second World War, the newborn Italian Republic had
to prove its bona fide democratic nature and break with its authoritarian past, on the one
hand; on the other hand, its sovereignty – meant as the real possibility of Italy’s choosing
its own government – was conditional on the geopolitical situation resulting from the
Yalta Agreement reached by the victorious powers to set out post-war world balances.
This conditioning had a profound effect on the ways in which democracy evolved in
Italy, which needed to re-establish its institutions and, in particular, try and define the
features of an education system that was supposed to shape the ‘new’ democratic citizen,
according to guidelines that were particularly complicated by a tangle of domestic and
international factors in which both Catholic and communist forces played a crucial role.
Therefore, the deep change in international balances from 1989 onwards had a very
strong impact on both the politics and institutions of the Italian State, by restoring
greater autonomy while upsetting a reference framework that had lasted for almost
five decades. That was the so-called transition to the Second Republic. This transition
period is actually still in place and, once again, has profoundly affected the education
system too.
This chapter intends therefore to follow two directions: on the one hand, analysing
the evolution, structure, and features of Italy’s education system according to an interpretation that is similar to that applicable to most other European nation states; on the
other hand, constantly refocusing on the distinctiveness of the Italian situation as the
key interpretation of this analysis.

The Problematic Framework
The Unity of Italy was achieved – as in other countries – through a process of reunification of areas that had been previously governed by rulers of different dynasties or
had been under the direct rule of a foreign government (as was the case with Lombardy
and Veneto under the Austrian Empire). In addition, a significant part of the country
was under the Vatican State, headed by the Pope.
As a consequence, the Italian State was founded in opposition to the Papal State,
by first (1860) annexing most territories that had once belonged to the Pope, except
Latium and Rome. About ten years later (in 1870), with the well-known ‘Breach of
Porta Pia’, Italian troops marched into Rome and proclaimed it the capital of the new
State, while the Pope retreated into the Vatican enclave. As the years went by, the conflict became less fierce, although it was not until 1929 that the Lateran Pacts signed by
the Fascist Government led to mutual recognition, with the birth of the Vatican City
State. Nevertheless, this recognition did not completely settle the dispute.
There is a very extensive bibliography of historical and juridical texts on Church–
State relations and the ‘laicity’ of the State (Veneruso, 1972, 2003; Lariccia, 1971)
which cannot be dwelt upon here. There is no doubt, however, that education – namely

--- [PDF Page 214 / Book Page 197] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 197

the school system – was one of the major battlefields in the Church–State conflict,
for quite understandable reasons. The notion of the national education system as the
primary institution of citizens’ education – consequently involving public responsibility – clashed with the Church’s view of education as natural right of families which,
however, must be enlightened and guided by straight faith: this implies that education
institutions to which families must/can entrust their children cannot but be inspired by,
and accountable to, the guardian of faith itself, i.e. the Catholic Church.
This conflict was not something peculiar to Italy. The specificity of the situation in
Italy was that the very legitimacy of the Italian State – and, consequently, of its educational action – had not been acknowledged by the Church for a long time, because
the State had been established by an act of ‘aggression’ against the Papal State and
the Pope himself was both a Head of State and universal religious authority; hence the
contrast over education was of major significance.
This aspect, while not being the only criterion to be taken into account for the interpretation of the history of united Italy and of its education system, should however be
considered as the background and framework within which events took place, in order
to realise the distinctiveness of the situation in Italy, as compared to other countries, at
the time of the state formation.

The Birth of the Italian Kingdom and the Casati Law
In the first semester of 1859 a highly surprising event took place in the frame of the
European political evolution: Cavour, Prime Minister of a small Italian State, the
Kingdom of Sardinia, skilfully took advantage of Paris’s mistakes in the evaluation of
the Italian situation and of the even greater diplomatic mistakes by Vienna. He thus succeeded in channelling the centuries-old conflict between the two mightiest European
states, France and Austria, into a war which would lay the foundations of an Italian
Nation State (Ugolini, 2001).
When the two great empires, the Napoleonic and the Asburgic, realised that the only
state to take advantage of the war was the Kingdom of Sardinia, they tried – without effect –
to stop the fight (Villafranca’s armistice), to engage an impossible reverse motion.
In fact Great Britain, trying to prevent at all costs the war from overflowing the
Italian theatre and trespassing on European and worldwide territory, adopted Cavour’s
policy, that is the thesis according to which the establishment of the Italian Kingdom
was the price to pay to recover the international equilibrium and thus make up for
Paris’s and Vienna’s incautious and deleterious policy.
So in just two years, in this international context, the unification of Italy was accomplished,
bringing about the quick establishment of a 21-million inhabitant new national state.
By February 1861, in Turin, the Italian Parliament started its sessions, in a somewhat gloomy atmosphere for the new State that had to face several serious problems
big enough to justify the lack of international confidence in its life expectancy.
The first problem was related to the completion of national unity: still outside the
kingdom’s boundaries were Veneto and Latium, and above all Rome, considered by
acclamation as the new State’s capital. But Rome was already the capital of a state, the

--- [PDF Page 215 / Book Page 198] ---

198 Palomba

Papal State, whose sovereign, Pius IX, also held religious powers of divine origin and
with universal jurisdiction.
Thus the second problem was to persuade the Pope-King to split his two powers, temporal and religious, and give up the first one. That problem had already been
debated for many years by the international secular and catholic circles. Pius IX’s ultimate answer came – unequivocally – when, in the spring of 1860, some former papal
territories expressed their will to recognize Vittorio Emanuele II as their own king. The
Pope excommunicated the Piedmontese king and all those who made an attempt on his
territories; he did not recognize the new State and consequently ordered the Catholics
not to take part to the institutional life of the Italian kingdom. This created a deep inner
cleavage in the new Nation and, on the international side, made it hard for Catholic
States to recognize the Italian State.
This international isolation made it even harder to solve another problem, maybe
the gravest for the new ruling class: the financial crisis due to the sum of the seven
pre-unitary states’ budget deficits. It was evident that Italy had to increase its
income internally and cut expenditure: failing to do that would mean losing the
newly gained independence.
And then the issue which was perhaps the most important: one State was made out
of seven, but there was the need to create those unifying norms (such as laws, weights,
and measures) and those infrastructures (such as streets, railways, and postal services)
necessary to make the unification real and to make people perceive it as an effective
reality. To echo a famous motto, ‘once Italy had been created, Italians had to be made’,
through many complex actions in which education (discussed below) had a role. For a
few months, at the beginning of 1861, it was thought to have its politics managed by
an administratively decentralized State, but the risks connected to such a hypothesis
(catholic opposition, international isolation) forced the ruling class to take a decision
to centralise – in an effort to reduce internal strife.
For the preservation of the unity a basic consensus was achieved by all the political
forces of the Italian peninsula, the liberal and conservative right wing as well as the
democratic and revolutionary left wing. In the first 15 years of its institutional life,
owing to such consensus, the Italian State could complete its unification. (In 1866
Veneto was annexed, followed by Rome and Latium in 1870.) It could also achieve
the legal, administrative, financial, and transport unification of the country and be
recognized by the other states. Notwithstanding such positive outcomes, the problems
related to the Catholic opposition and to the structural financial weakness intensified.
After 1870, the Pope was far from acknowledging the loss of his temporal power: he
declared himself ‘prisoner’ in the Vatican, and systematically incited the Catholics not
to support the new State’s institutions (Non expedit),1 in expectation of a providential
restoration of the status quo ante. The new State, with its structural weaknesses, just
about had the economic strength to support the unity already achieved, but it was not
capable of investing enough to create the hoped-for transformation from a rural to an
industrial economy.
Any reform in nineteenth-century Italy had to satisfy two main conditions: it had to
cost the bare minimum needed, and it had to be able to survive the inevitable Catholic
opposition.

--- [PDF Page 216 / Book Page 199] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 199

Education laws were the first to have to fulfil such conditions. So did the Casati law,
enacted by the Piedmontese Government with plenipotentiary powers in November
1859 – at the very beginning of the unification process. The law, comprising 380
articles, fully regulated all parts of the educational system. When it was approved, it
was neither enthusiastically welcomed nor explicitly rejected: it was considered as a
temporary law for a temporary political situation. Its main purpose was to show the
willingness of the Kingdom of Sardinia to meet the requirements of Lombardy, which
was then the only new region annexed. Gabrio Casati was the first Milanese in the
government and his law was intended, at the moment in which it was passed, only for
the Piedmontese and Lombard territories.
Actually, the Casati Law ruled Italian education up to 1923, when, under the Fascist
Government, it was replaced by the Gentile Reform. This juridical longevity was due
to the fact that after the unification of Italy it was quickly realised that such a law
– outlined and brought into force in only four months – responded perfectly to the
delicate social and financial equilibriums maturing in the new State after 1861. Gabrio
Casati was a conservative Catholic, and he had intended the law to be non-ideological,
not too directive of families and communes, and not very expensive for the Treasury.
Moreover, his law had the merit of having been accepted by Piedmontese and Lombard
Catholics without too many reservations.
Relying on such qualities, the Casati Law was progressively enforced in the whole
Italian Kingdom as unification was being achieved. Right from its first enforcement,
many scholars and experts of education highlighted its faults and contradictions, but
such claims faded whenever it came to suggesting an alternative text, for fear of having
to face insurmountable ideological, political, and financial problems.
The law provided for a four-year elementary school, divided into two periods of
two years each. Attendance of the first two years was compulsory for all pupils aged
between six and eight. After elementary school, different branches of secondary education were established: classical secondary education, divided into a five-year lower
cycle (ginnasio) and a three-year upper cycle (liceo); lower and upper technical education (a three-year technical school followed by a three-year technical institute); and
two- or three-year ‘normal’ schools for the training of elementary teachers.
This law – and relevant enforcement regulation, passed in 1860 – set its mark on
the very concept of Italy’s education system and established its foundation for many
decades. It is therefore proper to dwell upon it in order to highlight the features that are
strongly linked to state formation.
The Casati Law was traditionally criticised by Italian education historiography in
the second half of the twentieth century for being selective, for providing different
branches of education with a clear hierarchy, and for being ‘centralistic’, as it imposed
the same system on the whole country, leaving little autonomy to local authorities.
Despite the fact that this criticism, among others, was raised right upon the passing
of the law (Semeraro, 1996; Talamo, 1960), one might argue that the emphasis placed
on it in the twentieth century suffered from an a posteriori interpretation given on the
basis of the hottest issues of that period, rather than based on a careful consideration of
the context in the mid-nineteenth century.

--- [PDF Page 217 / Book Page 200] ---

200 Palomba

As regards centralisation, in the situation outlined above, while the country was
getting unified with so much resistance and there remained the unsolved problem of
the relations with the Pope, it is no wonder that the ruling class, which had bound its
destiny to unification, chose to keep a firm central grasp, especially considering that in
many regions the Church exerted a strong influence on schools and that a significant
part of the teaching staff was made up of clerics, even in public schools.
However, the ‘centralist’ policy preference met with some hesitation and opposition,
not least because the liberal ruling class was in turn quite opposed to a statist view of
education (Soldani & Turi, 1993: 18), and, as stated above, had seriously considered
a more decentralised approach. Therefore, efforts were made to try and reconcile the
different demands. In the covering report of the law itself, the choice was discussed
also on a comparative basis. With respect to some European models – the British one,
with a very limited state role; the Belgian one, with private and public schools competing; the German one, with the highest degree of state authority over education – Italy
chose a ‘system of medium liberty, supported by those cautions that keep it into its
boundaries and by those guarantees that defend it from manifest and hidden enemies
that might spoil it and its fruit’ (Relazione, 1859, in Talamo, 1960: 73). The reference
to the opponents of the new State could not have been clearer.
As to the criticism about the school system structure – with particular regard to the
mutual positions of classical and technical education – the (few) views that interpret
the Casati Law without forgetting to set it in both a historical and comparative context
seem much more convincing.
According to Barbagli:
The most interesting thing – which has instead been neglected by many scholars,
all intent to prove the reactionary nature of the Casati Law – is that the education
system resulting from that law – if compared to those existing in Europe at that
time and those that followed in Italy from 1923 onwards – was relatively open, in
that its internal structure was such as to foster relatively high university attendance rates. (Barbagli, 1974: 81)
Barbagli continues the analysis by stressing that there was no internal differentiation in elementary education in terms of schools for pupils willing to pursue their
studies and schools for those who did not mean to. Furthermore ‘more than at the
elementary school level, however, the relative openness of Italy’s education system
was to be found at the lower or upper secondary education level’ (Barbagli, 1974:
82). The opportunities of entering higher education were not exclusively restricted to
students coming from academic secondary schools: access to the Faculties of Science
and Engineering was possible for pupils coming from the physics and mathematics
branch of the Istituto Tecnico Superiore (upper secondary technical school) (Barbagli,
1974: 82–83).
In short, one of the distinctive traits of the Casati Law was that no school in the
whole education system was conceived as a ‘blind alley’. This feature can be understood in relation to the education policy undertaken by the Italian ruling class, which
was supposed to ensure the growth of the new State, also from a political standpoint.

--- [PDF Page 218 / Book Page 201] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 201

If this growth was to be founded on education, it needed to find a practicable way
between the need for selection and that for socialization. That meant not restricting
participation in the school system too much, in a situation in which schooling was
already hindered by socio-economic backwardness, especially in some areas of the
country. The main target was therefore the education of the middle classes, through
relatively ‘open’ channels at secondary level, with a view to possibly fostering some
social mobility. If the focus on technical education might have been considered inadequate by some of the most advanced productive forces – especially in some regions of
northern Italy (Semeraro, 1996) – it was however probably even more than the global
economic situation of the country required and allowed for. The model of social control
through education adopted by the ruling class clashed with resistance from reactionary
groups, while, on the other hand, the social demand for education – especially at the
elementary level– was still low, even in the North.
‘Our school system resulted, as it were, from the convergence of the education policy undertaken by the Italian ruling class and the difficulties in creating an adequate
demand for education among people’ (Barbagli, 1974: 99). The relative openness of
the education system stemmed from the fact that in a situation of poor attendance,
greater selection would have been counterproductive.
The law was quite successful in promoting the education of middle classes: enrolments grew considerably – especially from 1870 onwards – in technical institutes
above all. Gradually, during the following 15 years, the concern became that lower
classes too be reached in a more direct way, by promoting elementary schooling and, in
particular, by enforcing compulsory education, also in order to bridge the gap between
school levels.2
In 1874, the new Italian State balanced its budget for the first time. In 1876, when
the first left-wing government came to power, one of the first measures adopted was
a law (Legge Coppino) that aimed to make compulsory schooling as real as possible,
providing sanctions for offenders and regulations to facilitate the establishment and
maintenance of schools in communes.
The Coppino Law also began to better define the ‘formation of citizens’ in elementary school syllabi. Rather than a true subject, the Casati Law had envisaged ‘readings’
on national history – though mainly on the Savoia dynasty’s – national geography,
and citizens’ duties to God, their families, and the country (Santerini, 2001: 19). The
Coppino Law, instead, included the First Notions on the Duties of Men and Citizens
among the subjects taught in elementary school syllabi – this was particularly meaningful, considering that the law equally abolished the compulsory teaching of religion
in elementary schools.
Then, the last two decades of the nineteenth century were marked by a much greater
emphasis on the formation of citizens in elementary school. This topic was included in
the 1888 curricula – inspired by educational and pedagogical positivism – which had
been developed by Aristide Gabelli, a renowned educationalist (Santerini, 2001). The
need for education as ‘national pedagogy’ was even further emphasised in the curricula
designed in 1894 by Baccelli, which criticised those of 1888 in that they had focused
too much on knowledge content and not enough on general education (Ascenzi, 2004:
98 onwards). The strengthening of ‘national pedagogy’ certainly responded to the need

--- [PDF Page 219 / Book Page 202] ---

202 Palomba

to ‘provide new and greater legitimation to the political class that had achieved unification’, at a time when socialist and Catholic opposition was growing; elementary
education was thought to be the best channel for this legitimation, as emphasised by
Minister Baccelli himself (Ascenzi, 2004: 113).
In that context, the call to ‘make Italians’, usually credited to Massimo d’Azeglio,
was revived. The famous sentence ‘We have made Italy, now we must make Italians’
was not proclaimed as such by d’Azeglio; instead, it was pronounced in 1896 by
Ferdinando Martini, former Minister of Education, who recalled and emphasised
a different expression by Massimo d’Azeglio himself3 (Soldani & Turi, 1993: 17).
Regardless of the philological dispute, this episode confirms that the issue of the role
of education in the formation of citizens had become crucial.
Under Giolitti’s governments (1903–1914), the State budget was more under control, and opposition became less fierce between most liberal forces and a significant
portion of Catholic ones; this allowed major changes to be introduced in school structures. In 1904, the Orlando Law raised the compulsory age to 12 years, among a set of
measures intended to widen social participation in education.
In 1911, the Daneo-Credaro Law shifted responsibility for elementary education
from communes – where Catholic influence had been very strong in many cases – to
the State. Due to Catholic opposition, the measure was only enforced in those communes that were not provincial capitals. The law also included further measures for
popular education.
Therefore, on the eve of the First World War, the relative easing of tension with
Catholics (the non expedit, in particular, had become less strict) and the better economic situation led to greater emphasis being placed on the development of the
education system at the lower levels. The opportunity of introducing a more comprehensive structure at lower secondary level began to be considered. On the other hand,
in the same decades, the rapid growth in secondary-school-attendance rates caused
problems in terms of jobs available for school-leavers and also in terms of education
quality – as argued by many contemporary politicians and intellectuals. As a consequence, the introduction of measures to restrict the number of secondary school
pupils began to be discussed and was supported by non-conservatives as well (Canestri
& Ricuperati, 1976; Semeraro, 1996). Idealist philosopher Giovanni Gentile recalled
this controversy and these positions when he was called to serve as the Minister of
Education after the rise of Fascism and worked out provisions to reform the education
system.

The Riforma Gentile
The so-called Gentile Reform revised the education system as a whole, reorganising
its central and local administration with a significant reduction of the number of bodies
involved, and introduced several provisions covering virtually all key aspects of Italy’s
education system.4
With regard to the school system structure, the reform designed a system whereby,
after a five-year elementary school cycle, a differentiated structure was provided.

--- [PDF Page 220 / Book Page 203] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 203

Compulsory education was raised to 14 years of age, and a dead-end channel was
created: the so-called complementary school (scuola complementare), lasting three
years, for pupils who did not mean to pursue their studies. Classical education kept
its structure: a five-year lower cycle (ginnasio) and a three-year upper cycle (liceo). In
addition, a science branch was created: the liceo scientifico.5 Technical education was
supplied by technical institutes, while ‘normal schools’ were changed into elementary
teacher-training schools (istituti magistrali). A liceo femminile (girls’ upper secondary
school) was also created: it did not make pupils eligible for higher education and was
meant (among other things) to divert a significant number of girls’ enrolments from
teacher-training schools, thus depleting the supply of female teachers.
Consistently with Gentile’s philosophical approach, the school system was founded
on the pre-eminence of philosophical and classical studies, namely philosophy.
Nevertheless, at lower levels, where the ‘light’ of philosophy could not shine, religion recovered its educational role; hence, in elementary schools, ‘the teaching of
Christian doctrine according to the catholic tradition was considered as the foundation
and crowning of all degrees of elementary education’ (Royal Decree 1923, Article 3).
Therefore, the Gentile Reform changed the school system – and the socialisation
and selection approach adopted until then – not least in connection with the concerns
voiced by many politicians and intellectuals in previous years. Secondary school enrolment was to be reduced, in order to safeguard the quality of education and to better
match the labour market demand. On the other hand, however, driving too many pupils
out of the school system prematurely would have caused a problem of lack of socialisation – a big risk, indeed, at a time when the new regime was just starting to establish
itself. The matter, therefore, was not so much reducing the global number of pupils as
reducing it in ‘open’ channels. That was the aim of creating a dead-end school after
the elementary cycle – a solution that the Casati Law had never envisaged. Three-year
complementary schools were supposed to be the backbone of education for the people:
designed for the ‘humble citizen’ (il modesto cittadino) (Canestri & Recuperati, 1976:
141) and ideally meant to provide ‘education for all’, if compulsory schooling until the
age of 14 had been complied with.
If this aspect can be interpreted in the light of the openness/closeness issue described
above, the reform action as a whole is a complex interpretation problem (Canestri,
1983) which cannot be addressed here as it should. The complexity of interpretation
stems from a tangle of elements. On the one hand, the historical context referred to – i.e.
the early years of Fascism (before the notorious murder of Matteotti, in 1925, marked its
transformation into a ‘regime’) – was a transition period with elements of continuity as
well as of rupture, with the previous situation having an influence on the government’s
action. On the other hand, Gentile was a philosopher and intellectual with a complex
personality (Coli, 2004) holding an ideal and conceptual view of Fascism and of the role
of education, which was not necessarily in tune with practical policymaking needs.
Therefore, the Riforma Gentile, defined by Mussolini as ‘the most fascist of
reforms’, was actually an object of appreciation and criticism that cannot be identified
and linked with any clear-cut political groups.
It was certainly an elitist selective reform and, as such, was criticised by socially
committed groups. In Gentile’s philosophical and intellectual view, however, the elite

--- [PDF Page 221 / Book Page 204] ---

204 Palomba

had to be strictly selected according to its merits: this was something that disappointed
bourgeois middle classes, whose approval was instead sought after by Fascism. On the
other hand, the idea of an essentially humanistic elite culture was a cause of concern to
emerging industrialists, while Catholics – who were satisfied with some aspects of the
reform, like the compulsory teaching of Catholic religion in elementary schools – could
not agree to the idealistic secular framework of Gentile’s Reform as a whole. One should
be reminded that the reform had been designed in cooperation with first-class intellectuals, representatives of a culture that was far from reactionary (including Giuseppe
Lombardo Radice, who had drawn up the 1923 elementary school curricula6).
The discontent coming also from sectors of public opinion that the Government
wished instead to please led to the so-called policy of readjustments carried on by the
successors of Gentile (who left his post as a minister in the middle of 1924). Gentile
himself referred to this policy as a form of ‘betrayal’, especially with regard to some
provisions aimed at lessening the selectivity and strictness of education.
Measures were adopted to reform ‘dead-end’ schools, which had been completely
unsuccessful in attracting enrolments. As a result, between 1929 and 1931, the lower
secondary education cycle was reorganised by creating the so-called scuole di avviamento al lavoro (schools preparing for work) to replace complementary schools, thus
reintroducing at least the opportunity for pupils to be made eligible for technical institutes and teacher-training schools.

The Fascist ‘Regeneration’
In Gentile’s vision, linked to the Ethical State and to an education conceived as a
philosophy of spirit, the connection between the educational system and the State, is
undoubtedly very strong, as having an authoritarian impact on all aspects of school
life. In this light, Mussolini’s definition as ‘the most Fascist of reforms’ is perhaps well
grounded. On the other hand, however, the development of the system as it had been
conceived by Gentile clashed with the political need to maintain the consensus of the
different social strata (Canestri & Ricuperati, 1976: 142), and was, in some respects,
inadequate to bring about an in-depth educational ‘Fascistisation’, which was subsequently achieved through different routes, not limited to school.
Numerous measures were adopted to this end by the various ministers who followed Gentile. Suffice it to mention the establishment of Opera Nazionale Balilla,
a youth organization aimed at controlling physical education in schools, which, in
1929, came directly under the authority of the National Education Ministry (Ministero
dell’Educazione Nazionale); the adoption, again in 1929, of the State Common Text
(Testo Unico di Stato) for elementary schools, followed, in the 1930s, by deep changes
in curricula and in many aspects of school life, for the purpose of a ‘Fascist regeneration of schools’ (Pazzaglia & Sani, 2001).
In 1929 the signing of the Lateran Pacts brought about the recognition of the Italian
State by the Holy See with a 70 years’ delay, and the establishment of the Vatican City
State. The Pacts mark a crucial phase in Italian history, their importance going beyond
the Fascist era. Despite strong opposition, they would in fact be subsequently included

--- [PDF Page 222 / Book Page 205] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 205

in the Constitution of the new Italian Republic which came into force in 1948, and be
replaced by a new treaty as recently as 1984.
The delicate quid pro quo at the basis of the Pacts has been made the object of
several studies and has been differently interpreted, especially with reference to the
new balance of powers established between the State and the Church (Spadolini, 1967;
Margiotta Broglio, 1969). Undoubtedly, the State did make several concessions: with
reference to education, Catholic religion was recognised to be the ‘foundation and
crowning’ no longer of elementary school alone, but of the entire school system. On
the other hand, at the same time the State was forcibly indoctrinating pupils (to the
point of speaking of ‘Fascist Mystics’ in education). Hence, education of the young
came to be once again the setting for a confrontation for control over citizen formation,
including outside the school, as, for instance, in the field of youth association movements (Jemolo, 1955).
Considerable concessions had therefore been made to obtain the recognition of the
State by the Holy See, which also meant getting rid of that delegitimization which
had had such a strong impact on Italian political life. Paradoxically, a guarantee of the
fact that these concessions would not imply that the State would entirely surrender its
prerogatives came precisely from its authoritarian character – although this very nature
would impact on the democratic legitimisation of the State itself.
A deeper analysis than the one that can be done here would look at the Carta della
Scuola, presented by Giuseppe Bottai, who had become Minister of Education in
1936. As it was intended to be ‘the document of the full Fascist maturity in the political/programmatic approach to the relationship between economy, work, society and
education’ (Bertoni Jovine, 1958: 364), a careful examination would allow to better
understand the general concept of the relation of education and society in the last
period of the Fascist regime. However, it remained mostly unimplemented, owing to
wartime and then to the fall of Fascism itself, except for a measure which was relevant
in itself and for its future developments, i.e. the law, passed in 1940, that unified the
lower courses of the secondary schools (ginnasio, technical schools and teacher-training schools), leaving out vocational and artisan courses (the latter not leading to any
further study).

After the Second World War
Following the end of the Second World War, the reconstruction of the defeated Italian
nation had to go well beyond merely making good the material devastation: it had to
face once again, in a sense, the issue of state formation.
As a result of the referendum of 2 June 1946 Italy abolished monarchy in favour
of the Republic. The years which immediately followed the Second World War were
marked by a unitary approach to reconstruction, with a government that saw the participation of all the anti-Fascist forces which, together, after long and complex discussions,
drafted the new Republic’s Constitution, which came into force on 1 January 1948. The
Constitution fully took into account the need to counterbalance forces that could cause
the country to revert to the past, both recent and distant. On that need for ‘countering’,

--- [PDF Page 223 / Book Page 206] ---

206 Palomba

the necessary agreement had been reached among forces which were deeply different
and even opposed owing to their ideological background, political structure, and social
representativeness, i.e. Catholic forces, liberal ones, and those influenced by Marxism.
Soon enough, though, a number of factors, the most important being the worsening
of the international scenario, led to the break-up of this unity. This was replaced by
a situation whereby more than the endorsement of the national spirit, what prevailed
were those which have been defined as ‘separate belongings’ (Scoppola, 1993: 32),
i.e. allegiances to the political and ideological forces mentioned above, which in turn
referred to different supranational forces, in a world which was about to split.
A decisive event was the first general elections, which were held in 1948. The victory
of left-wing forces would have strongly unbalanced international equilibria as they had
come out of the agreements negotiated by the victorious powers. However, even after
the moderate block dominated by the Christian Democrats prevailed, the revolutionary
perspective was still the main scenario for the left-wing forces influenced by Marxism,
preventing them from fully endorsing ‘normal’ reformist policies.
On the other hand, the Catholics were for the first time fully taking part in Italian
political life and, while recognising the State, they could not but be influenced by their
past history, both in their relations within Italy and with the Vatican State. The difficulties encountered in building up a national identity were compounded by the ‘very
high price paid for the Questione Romana’ and the non expedit (Scoppola, 1993: 27;
Rusconi, 1993).
The majority of Italian citizens’ ideal allegiance to one or the other of the forces that
presented themselves as two largely universal ‘churches’ made it even more difficult
to build an ethically grounded, albeit non-nationalistic, sense of nation. The prospect
of an agreement between the two, if any, existed on a different plane. As recently as
the 1970s, when precisely such an agreement appeared to be feasible, the scenario
envisaged by at least some of its major protagonists ‘was not to obtain a physiological
dialectic in Italian democracy, between forces homologated within the system, but, on
the contrary, that of building a new society resulting from the encounter between two
worlds, the Catholic and the Communist ones’ (Scoppola, 1997: 393).
However, what weighed more heavily in the development of Italian democracy, nailing some way or another citizens to their separate allegiances, was the impossibility of
alternate government, which has made Italian democracy a ‘stalled democracy’.
In fact, with the Yalta agreements in 1945, Italy found itself belonging to the Western
bloc, while having at the same time a powerful Communist party – the strongest in the
West – which, however, had no real chances to come to power and create a turnover in
the government.
Hence, while the country strived to resume its position on the international scene
(Italy joined the United Nations in 1955), its sovereignty was hampered by the impossibility of an alternative government, which affected the very nature of democracy.
With the passing of the years, at the beginning of the 1960s, the governing majority
was expanded to include the Socialist party; but this did not extend to the entire left.
In the mid-1970s the so-called historic compromise between Catholic and left-wing
forces was explored, and went as far as granting ‘external support’ by the Communist
Party (PCI) to the government, but the hypothesis of a more direct involvement of

--- [PDF Page 224 / Book Page 207] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 207

the Communists was not realized. Notwithstanding the consolidated presence of PCI
in local governments, the further step of full participation in the government of the
country seemed to be still impossible. As, however, a partly cooperative dynamic
existed, there came to be a peculiar situation of ‘consociate democracy’ as it has been
sometimes called, in which many agreements could be found, but with no realistic
perspective of an alternation in government.
This allowed the country to be governed without forcing those international equilibriums that had proved themselves inviolable, but was obviously negative for democratic
dialectic. The majority forces did not fear to be unsaddled and be passed on to the
opposition; the opposition, in turn, was not actually asked to elaborate a realistic and
organic alternative policy at national level. A possibility of alternation was only envisageable when the post-war equilibria changed, as late as the end of the 1980s. Amongst
the many consequences of this manifestly distorted situation, many important ones
concerned education.

The Role of Education
Immediately after the armistice (1943), the crucial role to be played by education in the
reconstruction of the country called the attention and the action of the Allied Control
Commission, which, however, never pushed its action too far. Namely, Carleton
Washburne committed himself, involving Italian educationalists as well, to the elaboration of curricula for primary school (adopted in 1945) which were based on the
notion of a democratic formation of citizens. Later on, at the time of the drafting of
the Constitution, the school was assigned a relevant role, but debate in the Constituent
Assembly mainly focused on the space that the new Republic should grant to private
schools, which in Italy were almost exclusively Catholic. Once again the educational
issue revolved around the relations between the State and the Church. After a complex debate (Palomba, 1985; Ambrosoli, 1982) an agreement was reached whereby
private citizens and bodies were free to establish schools, but with no right to State
aid. ‘Organizations and private citizens are entitled to found schools and educational
institutions, with no charges for the State’ (Article 33 of the Italian Constitution).
After the task of the Constituent Assembly was completed, for almost a decade
left-wing opposition parties did not include education among their political priorities
(Canestri & Ricuperati, 1976; Semeraro, 1996; Ventura, 1998). In the 1950s in Italy
schools were under the control of the majority party, the Christian Democrats, whose
ministers managed them without introducing significant reforms, but rather through
constant administrative actions (so-called leggine, i.e. by-laws) which aimed at maintaining a certain balance, ensuring control over state schools while granting private
ones all the space that could be allowed in compliance with the Constitution.
In that period, the school system developed rapidly. In the decade 1951–1961, the
number of students and the rate of participation in lower and upper secondary schools
doubled. The growth, notwithstanding all its imbalances, corresponded to a moment of
intense and quick development, where the quantitative extension itself brought about
an enlargement of the social participation to education, thus showing also a qualitative

--- [PDF Page 225 / Book Page 208] ---

208 Palomba

improvement. After a period of 15 years, however, the need to plan the development
according to a socially more adequate model raised the problem of a more advanced
reformism, following the international trend at the beginning of the 1960s.
It was the moment of the so-called left turn, which brought about, in December
1963, the first government including the Socialist Party. The entry of the Socialists in
the institutions softened the contrast between the representativeness of the institutions
themselves and social reality, while still fully respecting the basic features of the system, that is of a State of liberal structure dealing with the social ethics of a large part
of the Catholic forces, and without any direct participation of the Communist party to
the government.
This shift from a static situation to a more dynamic period of discussion and debate
involved many fields – including education – in a ‘reformist’ perspective. This project,
however, never quite succeeded in coming into being (CENSIS, 1970).
One of the greater obstacles to the development of authentic reformist action was
undoubtedly the difficulty in interpreting univocally the concept of reform itself. In the
1960s and 1970s the ‘meliorist’ hypothesis intertwined with structural reform ones,
which were aimed at radical transformations of the system, in order to overcome the
bourgeois nature of the State and of its social provisions. So, even if the ‘revolutionary’ perspective as such was no longer on the agenda of the left-wing forces, it was
replaced by the call for ‘structural reforms’, which were often burdened ideologically
with revolutionary meanings and intentions.
In terms of the political proposals and the cultural orientation of left-wing parties,
this translated into a framework of reference in which on the one hand the importance of education for greater social justice emerged, and on the other hand the forms
in which education presented itself were rejected. In this perspective, the education
reform was seen as a ‘tool to put an end to the class organisation of the existing school’
(Ventura, 1998: 193), and school itself as ‘the major battlefield for a different social
and economic development’, as it was stated in an article published in 1972 by L’Unità,
the official newspaper of the Italian Communist Party (quoted in Chiosso, 1977: 75).
The refusal to recognise the democratic legitimacy of any differentiation – seen as
the cause and effect of class-based discrimination – was one of the main reasons for
the emergence of the myth of a ‘unified school’, the ‘Holy Grail of the left’ (Polesel,
2006: 550), which affected not only the far left, but also many intellectuals and educationalists, who came to share, for different reasons, the ‘comprehensive approach’,
intended, in most cases, as a total lack of diversification.
As is known, the role of education in society was one of the key topics in the sociological debate of those years. As pointed out by Benadusi (1984), a positive image
of the social role of education – shared by some sociologists who may be labelled
as liberal-functionalist, even if from different (progressive or conservative) perspectives – confronted the image of education upheld by those who emphasised that it was
an ideological State apparatus (Althusser) and a tool to reproduce the structures and
values of capitalist society (Bourdieu), thus denying the meaningfulness and effectiveness of any reform ‘within the system’. However, amongst those who shared a positive
view of education from a ‘progressive’ point of view, the positive attitude was not so
much towards the present role of the school, but rather on the ‘school-that-could-be’

--- [PDF Page 226 / Book Page 209] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 209

(Benadusi, 1984: XI). The debate was very lively in Italy, and was not without influence in the actual policy adopted. In a context in which gradual reformism had very
few champions, it ended up merging in the demand for global or ‘structural’ reforms
of most non-conservative intellectuals and scholars.
With regard to lower secondary education, a political agreement was reached, which
led in December 19627 to the passing of a law that, while confirming the constitutional obligation of an eight-year compulsory school, unified the old academically
oriented lower secondary schools with the vocationally oriented scuole di avviamento
al lavoro.
Scuola media unica (unified lower secondary school) was a fully comprehensive
structure, whose purpose was to deliver the common basic education required for
every citizen, whether willing to continue studying or not. Throughout the years, this
‘comprehensiveness’ was further improved by doing away with some residual optional
elements which could suggest the possibility of a choice or selection: namely, Latin
courses in the third year, upon which admission to liceo classico8 was conditional.
Once the reform passed, it seemed natural to start reorganising upper secondary
education as well. However, despite the significant number of bills submitted, several
decades were not enough to implement a consistent policy at upper secondary level.
These difficulties show the weakening of social consensus when moving up from
basic education. The consensus on some basic elements of ‘education for all’ had
developed in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, almost as a ‘social pact’ on what
the basic formation of citizens needed to be. In a way, it could be said, that it was the
educational implication of the recognition of human, social, and political rights. As
discussed above, the appropriateness of a less differentiated lower secondary education
system had been debated in Italy since the early twentieth century. Later on, in 1940, a
provision – although a partial one – to unify the system was passed by Giuseppe Bottai.
Hence, the ground had already been prepared. Unification at the compulsory level had
gained a large and solid social consensus, and the change suggested responded to the
actual political and cultural level as well as to the socio-economic development of the
country, while also meeting the solidaristic approach shared by the major forces.
A further proof that it was possible to find some agreement in order to implement
measures concerning the basic levels of education, even on sensitive points, was the
creation of a pre-primary State school in 1968, after memorable fights in Parliament.9
In fact, until that moment the presence of the State was missing at that educational
level, while private religious institutions were largely present, together with a less widespread presence of local authorities. The growth of the public presence was gradual but
not slow, promoting a significant improvement and in the end a generalisation of the
participation rate (CENSIS). These data concerning childhood education – a subject so
rich in cultural and emotional significance – reveal the transformation of Italian habits,
attitudes, and behaviours that went together with the social and economic transformations in the second half of the twentieth century.
Conflict arises when dealing with the ways of differentiation within society, the
articulation of social classes and types of work, and therefore the corresponding education articulation at the secondary level. In the 1960s and 1970s, the correspondence
of the school structure to a social stratification was questioned. There were criticisms

--- [PDF Page 227 / Book Page 210] ---

210 Palomba

of the sharp differentiations between licei, technical institutes, vocational institutes,
and teacher-training schools, that were still, basically, the same of the Gentile reform
(the ‘organ-pipes chart’). However, notwithstanding the great number of bills proposed, the attempt of putting in place a different structure of the secondary school did
not succeed.
Agreement was found in the fact that the situation was unsatisfactory, but the only
shared answer to the rising criticism was to abolish some of the existing bonds, virtually without adopting ‘positive’ measures other than experimental ones. This policy was
intended to be temporary, but, as the lack of agreement persisted, it was actually longlasting and brought about profound changes in the secondary school and the university.
In 1969, three separate measures were adopted, which, taken together, caused the
abolition of the regulatory framework that previously conditioned the students’ educational future according to the choices made after the years of compulsory school. Such
measures included: (a) the so-called liberalisation of access to university, according to
which it was possible to enrol at all university faculties, for those who had completed
a five-year secondary school, irrespective of the kind of school they had followed10;
(b) the law modifying the procedure for the secondary-school-leaving-examination,
extending the qualification of ‘maturità’ to all the secondary school final examinations11; and (c) the law introducing in vocational institutes – until then not considered
as proper secondary schools – some experimental courses intended to allow students to
get a five-year diploma, called ‘maturità’ as well,12 therefore allowing them university
access.
All this brought a profound transformation of secondary education. The three measures taken together led to a substantial equivalence between the different study courses,
in terms of further educational opportunities, duration of the course and value of the
final diploma, thus transforming the prospects resulting from the attendance of a given
school, even without a reform of its articulation and contents. It can be observed that,
in a way, these measures brought to the highest point the trend towards the abolition of
dead-end courses in the school system – with the ensuing effect of de-professionalisation of the system itself – that had periodically been adopted in the history of Italian
education policy. As was the case before, it was possible to detect in this action the
double intent to meet the aspirations for sociocultural mobility of middle and working
classes and to provide ways to absorb jobless secondary-school-leavers.
Admittedly, these were intended to be temporary choices, a ‘breach’ in the old
school system, not meant to last. However, the egalitarian frame was desired, and was
intended to indicate the direction to be followed to build a new school: but a positive
consensus on this issue was not found – and is still hard to find.
However, even if an ‘organic’ reform of the upper secondary school was not achieved,
innovation, sometimes relevant, was introduced through several partial measures. To
quote a perceptive comment by a non-Italian author, ‘the political landscape of Italy
is such that developments at the margin are often the only kind which can be effected,
and, therefore, such changes are often of a significance which may surprise the foreign
observer’ (Polesel, 2006: 552).
A relevant role has been played by experimental courses that the schools were
allowed to create following a law passed in 1974. At the upper secondary level, these

--- [PDF Page 228 / Book Page 211] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 211

courses offered an opportunity to concretely test many of the emerging reform hypotheses. Actually they have represented permanent innovative features adopted by the
schools rather than ‘experimentations’.
In the ensuing years their number had grown, also due to rules that were passed in favour
of school autonomy. Consequently, in an essentially unaltered structural framework, many
initiatives have been blossoming from individual schools (OCSE-MPI, 1983).
In a later period, there was an attempt at the central level to ‘promote a systemic
innovation in a whole cycle of post-compulsory education, even without a legislative
framework of reference’ (Niceforo, 1990: 47). An ad hoc committee (Commissione
Brocca, after the name of its President) was established in 1989, with the task of
elaborating and proposing new curricula for the first two years of post-compulsory
education, aimed at the creation of more flexible learning paths in classical as well as
in technical schools. It was once again the administrative way of promoting and managing innovation – and it ended up, if not in a ‘systemic’ change, in more innovative
‘experimental’ courses being permanently included in the system.
Besides the thorny question of upper secondary school, however, in the decades here
considered several provisions were adopted about different aspects of the school system. One of the main principles inspiring the action was still the egalitarian principle,
together with a strong trend towards participation at all levels. To this overall inspiring motif corresponded several measures, from the integration of the handicapped in
ordinary schooling to the adoption of new evaluation procedures,13 from the liberalization of the university entrance to the enlargement of social participation in the school
government.14
Most of the measures did meet highly sensitive problems. Their main limit lay in
the fact that, if on the one hand they addressed concrete questions, on the other, very
often they were once again implicitly referring to a school-that-could-be, in a society
still-to-be-built, thereby implying a global reform of the educational system which by
then was clearly not very realistic. No wonder then if in the end they turned out to be
disappointing and fragmentary, being the result of a combination of radical spurs from
the bottom and a lack of clear political decisions (Benadusi, 1989).
Still, it has to be considered that, in the Italian context of the 1970s, the illusion – the
utopia – of ‘another possible world’ lingered on, sometimes influencing the institutional
policies and generating, in some dramatic moments, subversive hypotheses, which fortunately in the end were always belied by facts. Education has to be seen against this
background.

Italy After 1989
In more recent times, the egalitarian approach, tied to a radical idea of education and oriented to ‘another-possible-world’, was deeply affected by the changes that took place in
the 1980s and most of all in the last two decades. During this period, in Italy as elsewhere
the keywords have been quality in education and a need for an external evaluation of the
effectiveness of education and training, in the context of a European and an international
setting which was very demanding in terms of efficiency and competitiveness.

--- [PDF Page 229 / Book Page 212] ---

212 Palomba

To fully understand the nature and the meaning of the change the Italian society
and education had to face, we need once more to go back to consider certain Italian
peculiarities in the rapidly evolving international context, particularly regarding the
consequences of the fall of communism.
Italy was much more affected by the fall of the Berlin Wall than most of the other
western countries; the end of bipolarism shattered its delicate equilibrium of ‘frontier’
country, which was heavily conditioned in its democratic dialectic. As Lepre noted,
‘Italy had been a borderland between the two systems, and at the same time it had been
internally cut across by the border itself’ (Lepre, 1993: 21).
The fall of the Berlin Wall and the disintegration of the Soviet Union put an end to this
situation; it was said that the post-war period was definitively over. Thus Italy had to rearrange its political-institutional dynamics according to a radically changed context, where
the composition of the governments did not necessarily have to be predetermined.
The first part of the 1990s saw a great turmoil in political life. On the one hand, there
was the redefinition of the name and programmes of the Communist Party (PCI): it
became Partito Democratico della Sinistra (PDS) in 1990 and then Democratici di Sinistra
(DS), paying for these shifts with a split on its left, which gave birth to Rifondazione
Comunista – Communist Refounding Party. On the other hand, there was a fall of those
parties that had governed Italy for almost 50 years, above all Christian Democracy and
the Socialist Party. The ruling elite of these latter parties was overwhelmed by the corruption scandals linked to political financing but the deep roots of the turmoil are to be
found in the crisis of the equilibrium that had run Europe and the world from Yalta on,
where Italy, borderland between two blocs, was one of the keystones.
It was necessary to redefine almost everything. Amongst other things, the electoral
system was changed, giving way to the so-called second republic. Also, the proportional system was abandoned, to adopt a mechanism close to the majority system,
based on two main coalitions, even though it allows the presence of different parties
within each alliance.
The fall of the former leading parties seemed to open the way to the left-wing ones,
legitimated at last. Actually, the period of waiting was longer than it was expected, as
a newly founded moderate party, Forza Italia, came unexpectedly to fill the gap left
by the recent changes, and won the general elections of 1994, in alliance with other
forces. Yet in a short time the coalition split up, giving way to a ‘technical government’, and the left-wing coalition assumed power with the elections of 1996.
This coalition completed its five years of government, despite the many difficulties
and the changing of several prime ministers. In 2001 the right-wing coalition won
again; in 2006 the Left came back into power. Italy seemed to have eventually found
its way to alternation in government.
However, the transformation of the political forces is still going on. New aggregations and new coalition parties, both Left and Right, are constantly being formed.
Concerning school policies, some relevant points can be pinpointed. The most important one is the renewed need for a wide action of reform, maybe not to build a new society
as before, but because it is felt that such a changed society needs to reorganise many of
its aspects, including education. Therefore, some reformist features can be discerned, not
aiming to bring about a less violent revolution, but trying to fulfil the need to reorganise
the educational system to face a changed and continuously evolving society.

--- [PDF Page 230 / Book Page 213] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 213

The need for major changes in the education system has been invoked virtually
everywhere in the last years. The point about Italy is that the country is once again at a
crucial moment of state formation. From this perspective, the question of the ‘formation of the citizen’ comes up again, with all the difficulties stemming from the previous
and the recent history.
In this dynamic, the European unification plays a most relevant role. ‘Conforming
to Europe’ becomes a sort of password. The reference to Europe is used as a strong
argument to support reformist measures that are felt to be necessary but which jeopardised well-established equilibriums. ‘Europe’ therefore can help to find a common
framework of reference, inside which the ‘new’ Italian identity can take shape.

The Italian School System in the Last Decade
In 1996, for the first time a left-wing coalition come to power that included the
Democratic Left Party (Partito democratico della Sinistra, born from the transformation of the Communist Party) and with the external support of the Communist
Refounding Party. The Minister of Education, Luigi Berlinguer, symbolised this
change. He is the cousin of Enrico, who was the Secretary of the Communist Party in
the crucial 1970s.
Luigi Berlinguer undertook great interventions in every aspect of the educational system, from school to university, from teachers’ training to the Ministry’s structure, from
the relations between public and private schools—which came at last to a legislative
regulation after more than 50 years from the Constitution—to ‘maturità’ examination,
from school autonomy to the territorial reorganisation, and the reform of regional institutes for educational research (Niceforo, 2001; Berlinguer, 2001). Most measures were
implemented; some of them remained in force, even, if with some modifications, during
the years in which the political Right governed, while others were abrogated.
What the left-wing did not succeed to implement was a real reform of the school
structure. The law for school reform (Law n.30, February 2000) was approved on the
eve of the termination of the legislature’s terms of office. During the electoral campaign
the opposition explicitly promised that in case of victory they would first abrogate that
law and propose a new and different reform. And so it happened. In spring 2001 the
right-wing won the elections, the law’s application was immediately suspended and two
years later (April 2003) the new government approved a delega-law15 to rearrange the
whole school and training system, whose first decrees, concerning compulsory school,
were approved in the first months of 2004, while the decrees concerning secondary
school were passed in 2005. But these measures in turn did not enjoy a long life, being
suspended by a Ministerial Decree of the new left-wing government in May 2006.
The present situation is therefore complex, and not easy to describe, as the concrete school reality is an inextricable interlacing and overlapping of measures kept but
modified, cancelled reforms, new reforms, some already approved and gradually coming into force, others still to be defined in detail – all this of course interacting with the
pre-existing general features of the system.16 Irrespective of any judgement about the
content of the proposed measures, this process clashes with the typical difficulties of a

--- [PDF Page 231 / Book Page 214] ---

214 Palomba

substantial reformist action, having to deal with many previous situations, overlapping
sets of rules and well-established interests, all problems that, to be overcome, need at
the same time decision, consensus-building, political will, and competence.
But above all, the dynamics that have been described show how, in the alternation,
the ‘separate belongings’ are still strong, or, to be more accurate, are felt and perceived
as such. Especially the first leftist government was tempted to use structural reforms
in such a harsh way that it recalled the revolutionary spirit of the previous decades,
in method if not in content, reforming at the same time all the sectors of the educational system with what has been called a sort of Jacobin approach. Then, as described
just above, each further change in government produced an allegedly global upheaval.
Actually, the contents of the different measures are far less distant than declared (once
again the most difficult issue being upper secondary school) – but still the idea that
the alternation is not so much between two ‘homologated forces within the system’ as
between different – perhaps even mutually exclusive – conceptions of society is still
alive. At least it still cannot be denied altogether even by the most realistic of politic
forces, which cannot disregard the lingering of attitudes shaped in so many years of
‘stalled democracy’.
More than anything else, this shows the determining influence that Italy’s peculiar
position between the two blocs has had over the Italian political and institutional life,
and it is curious to see how the awareness of this influence is lacking in most international and comparative studies on education. Yet one of the last walls between ‘east’
and ‘west’ fell 15 years after the Berlin Wall; it was the wall that until recently divided
Gorizia, in Italy, from Nova Goriça, in Slovenia. Only the entry of Slovenia in the EU
allowed this wall to fall, while still keeping the division of the city in two different
states. This can symbolically represent the particular relevance for our country – not
always fully perceived – of the transformation of the international set-up.

Notes
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Decree by which the Holy See on 10 September 1874 gave a negative answer about the possible
participation of Italian Catholics in the elections and in general in the political life of the State. The
prohibition was attenuated in 1905, and abolished in 1919.
The gap was such that in 1866, Cesare Correnti denounced Italy’s ‘unusual record’ in terms of number
of secondary schools and students compared to other countries, while it ranked last in terms of number
of popular and primary schools, despite its highest rate of increase in the demand for these schools
(Barbagli, 1974: 69).
The original text of I Miei Ricordi by Massimo d’Azeglio was only brought back to light in the years
after the Second World War. That historical and philological episode cannot be dwelt upon herein, but
see Soldani and Turi (1993: 17) with particular reference to the sentence quoted above.
Rather than one text, it was actually a set of provisions – passed between the end of 1922 and the middle of 1924 – which, however, responded to a consistent design and are usually considered as a whole
as the ‘Gentile’s Reform’. The reform is normally dated 1923, the year when most of its provisions
were passed.
Upper secondary school with an emphasis on science subjects.
When the Fascist regime showed its nature more clearly, however, many intellectuals who had first
supported it moved away from it – like Lombardo Radice himself.
Law 31.XII.1962, n.1859.
Law 16.VI.1977, n.348. ‘Liceo classico’: upper secondary school with an emphasis on humanities.
Law 18.IV.1968, n.444.

--- [PDF Page 232 / Book Page 215] ---

Education and State Formation in Italy 215
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16

Law 11.XII.1969, n.910.
Law 5.IV.1969, n.119.
Law 27.X.1969, n.754.
Law 4.X.1977, n.517.
DPR 31.V.1974, n.416.
A delega-law is a law that defines the general criteria, delegating the government to emanate specific
measures for their practical application.
In this situation, it does not seem worthwhile to try giving a description of the system at the moment of
writing, which would certainly be more than obsolete when the text will be published. The best reference is to Eurydice data, especially the accurate and frequently updated National Summary sheets.

References
Ambrosoli, L. (1982). La scuola in Italia dal dopoguerra ad oggi. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Ascenzi, A. (2004). Tra educazione etico-civile e costruzione dell’identità nazionale. L’insegnamento della
storia nelle scuole italiane dell’Ottocento. Milano: Vita e Pensiero.
Autori Vari, (1978). La scuola secondaria in Italia (1859–1977). Firenze: Vallecchi.
Balduzzi, G. & Telmon, V. (1998). Storia della scuola e delle istituzioni educative. Milano: Guerini studio.
Barbagli, M. (1974). Disoccupazione e sistema scolastico in Italia (1859–1973). Bologna: Il Mulino.
Benadusi, L. (1984). Scuola, riproduzione, mutamento. Sociologie dell’educazione a confronto. Firenze:
La Nuova Italia.
Benadusi, L. (Ed.). (1989). La non decisione politica. La scuola italiana fra riforma e non riforma. Firenze:
La Nuova Italia.
Berlinguer, L. (2001). La scuola nuova. Bari: Editori Laterza.
Bertoni Jovine, D. (1958). La scuola italiana dal 1870 ai giorni nostri. Roma: Editori Riuniti.
Canestri, G. (1983). Centovent’anni di storia della scuola, 1861/1983. Torino: Loescher.
Canestri, G. & Ricuperati, G. (1976). La scuola in Italia dalla Legge Casati a oggi. Torino: Loescher.
CENSIS (Centro Studi Investimenti Sociali) (1970). Rapporto sulla situazione sociale del paese, Rome.
Chiosso, G. (1977). Scuola e partiti tra contestazione e decreti delegati. Brescia: Editrice La Scuola.
Coli, D. (2004). Giovanni Gentile. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Jemolo, A. C. (1955). Chiesa e Stato in Italia. Dalla unificazione ai giorni nostri. Torino: Einaudi.
Lariccia, S. (1971). I rapporti fra Stato e Chiesa in Italia. Saggio bibliografico (1° gennaio 1948–30 settembre 1971). Il diritto ecclesiastico. LXXXII: 348–500.
Lepre, A. (1993). Storia della prima Repubblica. L’Italia dal 1945 al 1998. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Mammarella, G. (2000). L’Italia contemporanea 1943–1998. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Margiotta Broglio, F. (1969). Il tramonto dello Stato liberale e la conciliazione: riflessioni su alcune costanti
della politica ecclesiastica italiana. Chiesa e politica, 8, 103–145.
Niceforo, O. (1990). L’innovazione difficile. Da Falcucci a Brocca: la scuola italiana tra nuovi programmi
e vecchi ordinamenti. Pisa: Tacci Editore.
Niceforo, O. (2001). La scuola dell’Ulivo. Cinque anni di speranze e delusioni. Roma: Casa Editrice
Ruggero Risa.
OCSE Ministero della Pubblica Istruzione (1983). Rapporto sulla politica educativa italiana. Roma.
Palomba, D. (1985). The non-state sector in the Italian Education System. European Journal of Education,
20 (4), 361–370.
Palomba, D. (1988). Scuola e società in Italia nel secondo dopoguerra. Analisi di una progressiva convergenza. Roma: Edizioni dell’Ateneo.
Pazzaglia, L. & Sani, R. (Eds.). (2001). Scuola e società nell’Italia unita. Dalla Legge Casati al CentroSinistra. Brescia: Editrice La Scuola.
Polesel, J. (2006). Reform and reaction: creating new education and training structures in Italy. Comparative
Education, 42 (4), 549–562.
Romeo, R. (1984). Cavour e il suo tempo (1854 –1861). Bari: Editori Laterza.
Rusconi, G. E. (Ed.). (1993). Nazione etnia cittadinanza in Italia e in Europa. Brescia: Editrice La Scuola.
Santerini, M. (2001). Educare alla cittadinanza. La pedagogia e le sfide della globalizzazione. Roma: Carocci.
Scoppola, P. (1993). ‘Nazione e storiografia’. In G. E. Rusconi (Ed.), Nazione etnia cittadinanza in Italia e
in Europa. Brescia: Editrice La Scuola.

--- [PDF Page 233 / Book Page 216] ---

216 Palomba
Scoppola, P. (1997). La repubblica dei partiti. Evoluzione e crisi di un sistema politico 1945–1996. Bologna:
il Mulino.
Semeraro, A. (1996). Il sistema scolastico italiano. Profilo storico. Roma: La Nuova Italia Scientifica.
Soldani, S. & Turi, G. (Eds.). (1993). Fare gli Italiani. Scuola e cultura nell’Italia contemporanea. I. La
nascita dello Stato nazionale. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Spadolini, G. (1967). Il Tevere più largo. Chiesa e Stato in Italia dal Sillabo a Paolo VI. Napoli: Morano.
Talamo, G. (1960). La scuola dalla Legge Casati alla Inchiesta del 1864. Milano: Giuffrè.
Ugolini, R. (2001). ‘Equilibri e squilibri nella realtà internazionale’. In M. Millozzi (Ed.). Giano Bifronte.
L’eredità storica del Novecento. Firenze: Centro Editoriale Toscano.
Veneruso, D. (1972), ‘Stato e Chiesa’ in Bibliografia dell’Età del Risorgimento in onore di Alberto M.
Ghisalberti, vol II. Firenze: Leo S. Olschki Editore, 585–648.
Veneruso, D. (2003), ‘Stato e Chiesa’ in Bibliografia dell’Età del Risorgimento 1970–2001, vol III. Firenze:
Leo S. Olschki Editore, 1391–1434.
Ventura, S. (1998). La politica scolastica. Bologna: Il Mulino.
Vertecchi, B. (Ed.). (2001). La scuola italiana da Casati a Berlinguer. Milano: Franco Angeli.

