================================================================================
Chapter 15: Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric: Schooling and Social Exclusion–inclusion in Educational Reform in Contemporary Spain
Author(s): Miguel A. Pereyra, J. Carlos González Faraco, Antonio Luzón, and Mónica Torres
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 217–238
PDF Pages: pp. 234–255 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 234 / Book Page 217] ---

15
SOCIAL CHANGE AND CONFIGURATIONS
OF RHETORIC: SCHOOLING AND SOCIAL
EXCLUSION–INCLUSION IN EDUCATIONAL
REFORM IN CONTEMPORARY SPAIN
Miguel A. Pereyra, J. Carlos González Faraco,
Antonio Luzón, and Mónica Torres

History and Politics in the Educational Policy
Formation of Contemporary Spain
In the last quarter of the twentieth century, Spanish education experienced a full historical
cycle closely related to the profound political change that the country experienced during
that period of time. The 1970s witnessed the decline and definitive disappearance of the
General Franco dictatorship. Immediately after his death in 1975 a process of political
transition commenced that was complete but peaceful and based on the accord of the
most relevant political parties and social groups. The first fruit of this process was a new
Constitution, which was approved by universal suffrage in 1978. This Constitution established a new political regime that is a parliamentary monarchy, similar to those of some
other European countries. Accordingly, in 1986 Spain was admitted as a full member of
the European Union. For the first time in the history of the country, an ambitious project
was undertaken to decentralize the national territory, which resulted in its division into
autonomous communities with a significant degree of self-governance (see Judt, 2006,
516–523, for a brief but effective historical narrative of the events of this period).
To these and other political changes, one must also factor in a process of rapid and
relatively successful modernization that had just begun in the late 1950s, after the
most authoritarian years of the regime, in which Spain began a new era with its “economic stabilization plan” of 1959 supervised by the World Bank, and during the 1960s
through the so-called Economic and Social Development Plans (created following the
French model of “indicative” economic planning of the postwar era, and technocratically accomplished by a leading elite of high-level civil servants linked to the Opus
Dei) (Balfour, 2000). With the advent of democracy after General Franco’s death, the
modernization processes accelerated, after the signing of the so-called Social Pact of
La Moncloa by the political parties and trade unions of workers and entrepreneurs, with
significant consequences for all aspects of the social life of the country. During the
1990s Spain succeeded in situating itself among the most developed countries of the
world, experiencing excellent economic indicators and a significant transformation of
217
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 217–238.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 235 / Book Page 218] ---

218 Pereyra et al.

social structures and lifestyles (see Puelles, 2000). In the field of education, a number
of major reforms were promoted by a succession of governments of distinct ideological
orientations. Obviously, much of this phenomenon is similar to what occurred in other
Western countries. What distinguishes the Spanish case is the historic acceleration of
these processes in that country (see McNair, 1984; Boyd-Barrett & O’Malley, 1995;
Bonal, 1998; Escolano, 2002; Cuesta, 2005).
Our objective in this chapter is to analyze the politics of education during this crucial period, but we will focus attention particularly on what was the last great reform
of the twentieth century, that which was proffered in 1990 by the Socialist Party during
its first phase of governance (1982–1996). The effects of this reform persist to this
day, the socialists having returned to power following the Madrid terrorist bombings
of March 2004. In this sense, our “historical” remarks are really quite contemporary.
Our intention is not so much to describe accomplished deeds, but to analyze the interpretations, the images, and the assessments that distinct social actors have applied to
the consequences of this socialist reform. Principally, we will analyze their discourse
about the impact that these changes in the governance of education have had on processes of social integration and exclusion. It must be remembered that from the start
this reform was grounded in a powerful social rhetoric dominated by such expressions
as “equality,” “democracy,” “participation,” and “innovation” (see Gramigna, 2006 for
a discussion of “the myth of innovation” in contemporary educational reforms).
But let us briefly return to the beginning of this historical cycle, to the final phase of
the regime of General Franco. From the 1960s the rejection of the dictatorship gradually
grew as it came to be regarded as absolutely illegitimate and anachronistic in the contemporary European context (and Spain soon applied for a preferential relationship or
agreement with the European Economic Community after its creation in 1957 – a complicated issue because of the authoritarian status of the regime – which was only granted
after 1970). This attitude of rejection extended throughout the university and the labour
communities, both of which were clearly conscious of the fact that Spaniards did not
have access to the most elementary political rights. Yet, together with them, there were
other elements of society that had accommodated to life under the Franco regime, a
situation that contributed to a certain relaxation of political repression, and, above all
the manifest economic development of the country in those years, which ended with
the transformation of a predominantly rural into a modern industrialized state and
whose standards of living approached that of most advanced European countries (the
annual economic growth of Spain during the 1960s was one of the highest among all
OECD countries). On the other hand, the same government of General Franco, in this
final stage of the dictatorship, was aware of the waning relevance of many institutions
in the face of the changes being experienced by Spanish society. Among these were the
educational institutions. As a result, the regime promoted a grand educational reform
in 1970 by means of a General Law of Education (Ley General de Educación), the
greatest transformation imposed on the Spanish educational system since the middle of the nineteenth century and opportunistically presented as the next step of the
implementation of the previously quoted Economic and Social Development Plans.
Likewise, the new reform led by the Opus Dei shown an almost thaumaturgic modernization of Spain sought to link a seamless, reactionary, and Catholic antiliberalist

--- [PDF Page 236 / Book Page 219] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 219

sources of the regime to a modern “Europeanized” Spain (Saz Campos, 2004, and
for the analysis of the role played by the Opus Dei, Casanova, 1982, 1983). From this
strategic decision of one of the last Franco administrations was born the fundamental
features of the present Spanish educational system.
Through a technocratic reform conceived under the premises of the human capital theory of the 1960s spread out by previous reports conducted by the UNESCO,
OECD, and the World Bank (by which education began to be considered in Spain as
investment and consumption, and not only skilled workers, middle- and high-level
technicians were necessary for developing the country but an overall better cultural
level of Spanish people), the Franco regime attempted to adopt a progressive rhetoric
of social change in order to sustain and extend as much as possible its increasingly
precarious national and international credibility and its real deficit of political legitimacy at a time when the regime was seeking to be admitted to the European Common
Market. In this sense, the reform enacted in the General Law of Education (Ley
General de Educación), promoted by a pioneering program of mass-media publicity,
aptly characterized as a “political spectacle” (Edelman, 1988), sought to diffuse a new
language of social change by means of a mystified articulation of social modernization (Ortega, 1994). This process can be understood as an example of the process that
Weiler (1983) called compensatory legitimation in his analyses of educational reforms
(see Morgenstern de Finkel, 1991, 1993). As one of the leading ministers of Franco’s
regime indicated in his very important memoirs, referring to a memo passed to him
by a colleague while the ministers were discussing the problematic situation arisen by
the revolts held in the Spanish universities just when 1969 was beginning, more than
a year and half before the General Law of Education was enacted: “this is sinking by
the hour. Let us think what to be done . . . [because] we do not have to be an augur for
viewing the failure of repression” (López Rodó, 1991, 386).
Ironically, this feature of the political strategy of the 1970 reform has not received
adequate analytical attention in Spain. However, this reform ended up profoundly
altering a traditionally elitist system, institutionalized a distinctive and effective comprehensive school system inspired by the Scandinavian model through the emerging
processes of educational globalization undertook by OECD and UNESCO recommendations, and brought about wide-ranging curriculum reform.
After the death of Franco and in the context of the so-called Transition to Democracy
(Transición a la Democracia), numerous educational reforms took place that exposed
the fundamental disagreements underlying the diverse political, social, and professional
constituencies affected. The parliamentary debates concerning the new Constitution
were particularly acrimonious when addressing educational issues. Generally speaking, the political right supported the position of the Catholic Church, which had
traditionally exercised an extraordinary influence on public instruction in Spain and
still controlled a great part of private education. Leftists sought to increase the control
of the state over schools. They also favoured encouraging the participation of parents
in the governance of educational institutions and they sought to enhance the equality
of the system through programs of social integration. For the left it was essential that
political democracy translate into educational democracy. As had already occurred in
the nineteenth century and during the Second Republic of Spain (1931–1936), people

--- [PDF Page 237 / Book Page 220] ---

220 Pereyra et al.

began to speak of a “school war.” This tense educational climate persisted throughout
the following political stage and, in reality, continues to this very day.
In 1982 the Socialist Party overwhelmingly won the general elections. It was a historical milestone given that this party, which had such a decisive role during the Second
Republic in the 1930s, reemerged in the 1970s after a long period of clandestinity
during the Franco regime. A new generation of young socialists, headed by Felipe
González, was to maintain control over the Spanish government until 1996. Soon after
assuming power, they established the Ley Orgánica del Derecho a la Educación, or the
Organic Law of the Right to Education (LODE, 1985), that developed some essential
points of the Constitution of 1978. This extraordinarily polemical law explicitly consecrated “the principle of participation of the members of the educational community”
as a key factor of educational policy and the State established controls to prevent
discriminatory practices that even applied to private schools. As could be expected,
the new regulation of educational institutions was harshly criticized by the proprietors of schools and by some parents’ associations in the private sector. Protests were
frequently articulated in the streets and in the media and parliamentary procedures for
the approval of the law were slow and tortuous. The defenders of private education,
among them the Catholic Church, argued that this law represented an unacceptable
interference of the State with the rights of families and the liberty of instruction that
were also recognized in the new Constitution.
In 1990 the Socialist Party undertook a new modernization of the Spanish educational system – the first since the reform of 1970 – that would put an even greater
emphasis on the comprehensive nature of the school by avoiding defined tracking policies (Bonal, 1998; Puelles, 2000; Fernández, 1999, 2003). This new reform was legally
formalized as the Law of General Planning of the Education System (LOGSE, 1990).
Obligatory schooling was extended to the age of 16 and wide-ranging changes in the
curriculum were undertaken. Among the most important of these changes were the
introduction of the so-called cross-curriculum areas of study and new fields of social
learning concerning gender, multiculturalism, and the environment (see an overview
in English in Boyd-Barrett & O’Malley, 1995).
The curriculum designed by the Socialist reform was theoretically based in cognitive constructivism and defended the creation of a new type of school culture and
a new educational community through the development of appropriate moral values
and attitudes (in fact the reform was designed by leading professors of psychology of
education – and not from pedagogy as it is frequently thought – at the level of a total
psychologization where language was consciously saturated “with constructivism,
aptitude, psychological diversification . . . but not social classes, racism, cultural bias,
school failure.” See Torres (2007, 121) and Varela (1991) for a provocative understanding of this reform as a reform designed for the middle classes, by which we arrive
at a real triumph of psychological pedagogies focused on the learner and the psychological significance of the content and procedures administered by teachers being
converted to animators, counsellors, or coachers basically). With the increase in conflict in schools, “living together” gradually became a priority focus of interest, as would
also occur with “multiculturalism” attendant with the growing influx of immigrants,
mainly from Africa, Latin America, and Eastern Europe. In the second half of the

--- [PDF Page 238 / Book Page 221] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 221

1990s, the number of Latin American immigrants in Spain doubled, while the African
immigrants tripled. In these circumstances, “educating for values” and “intercultural
education” came to be well known and frequently discussed subjects in a curricular
context that the Socialist reform attempted to “flexibilize.”
Nevertheless, after an initial phase of intense pushing for reform during the 1980s,
during which the rhetoric of the old ideological traditions of the left dominated, the
Socialist Party gradually diminished its enthusiasm for some of the reforms initially
championed. Pragmatically, the governing socialists began to take into account that the
emphasis that they had placed, for example, on social participation was much closer to
the utopian ideas of the 1970s than to the responsible realism that, they thought, ought
to characterize the action of a governing political party. These types of arguments were
deployed at times to justify what came to be regarded as a necessary pragmatism and
some socialist leaders came to reconsider some of their earliest proposed reforms.
Not a few social critics lambasted the socialists for their evident abandonment of the
socially advanced and pedagogically reformist politics that had characterized their first
years in government. For the most severe but sound critics this shift represented a
surrender of principles in the face of the neoliberal currents that were beginning to
inundate the educational arena or “market” in the rest of the world (see Rozada, 2002,
for the case of the Spanish educational reforms introduced in the last decades).
In 1996, after their victory in general elections, the conservative Popular Party
formed a new government that immediately began to redirect the main aims of the
Socialist education policy (a national evaluation of the educational system was conducted for the first time in history; see García Garrido et al., 1998). After obtaining
another majority in the 2000 elections, the Popular Party pushed through Parliament
the Law of Educational Quality (Ley de Calidad de la Educación, LOCE, 2002), which
openly questioned the overall foundations of the previous reform, introducing some
substantial changes in the obligatory period of education that have for the most part
not been implemented (see a recent analysis of this period and about the debate of this
law in Rambla, 2006).1 In an atmosphere in which the predominant impression was
one of chaos in the classroom, with insistent calls for recovery of lost authority and
order, some measures began to be taken to improve the situation.
As noted above, the analysis which follows centres exclusively on the application
and development of the socialist reform under the various governments of Felipe
González (1982–1996), although the LOGSE also remained legally in force under
the first government of the Popular Party (1996–2000). During the González era, the
Socialist Party attempted to build a comprehensive, integrative system to combat the
social inequalities in Spain at that time. In these circumstances, the development of a
comprehensive school was seriously hampered, as shown by many diverse studies that
focused on the lasting consequences of the rhetoric of “social redemption” that accompanied the Socialist reform of the 1990s (Peruga & Torres, 1997; San Segundo, 1998;
Carabaña, 1999; Echevarría, 1999; Rambla & Bonal, 2000; Sevilla, 2003).
In this context, the result was not so much a weakening of a dual educational system, but, indeed, its reinforcement, thus adding another indisputable source of social
exclusion to factors such as race, gender, or social marginalization. We are, of course,
referring to the progressive devaluation of the public network of schools in favor of

--- [PDF Page 239 / Book Page 222] ---

222 Pereyra et al.
The Franco Dictatorship (1939–1975)

The Transition to Democracy (1975–1982)
1976–1977: The first transformations of the
Franco regime
1977: The first general elections and the
Constituent Parliament
1978: Approval of the new Constitution and
the restoration of democracy
1979–1982: Centrist governments
1982: The electoral victory of the
Socialist Party
1982–1996: Socialist governments

1996–2004: Conservative governments

1996: Electoral victory of the conservative
Popular Party

2004: The new electoral victory of the
Socialists

Figure 1.

1970: Ley General de Educación (The General Law of
Education)
The first general reform of the Spanish school
system in the twentieth century. Modernization of
the system in accordance with a general principle of
comprehensiveness.
Diverse reforms of the General Law of Education of
1970
Instruction in the Catholic religion ceases to be
obligatory in public schools.
A new system of governance is established in the
schools with a certain level of participation by the
educational community.
A certain level of autonomy is established for
universities.
Processes of experimentation and pedagogical
renovation
1983: Ley de Reforma Universitaria (The Law of
University Reform)
The autonomy of the universities is enhanced.
1985: Ley del Derecho a la Educación (The Law of
Educational Rights)
Conflicts between the Church and State and between
public and private education
1990: Ley de Ordenación General del Sistema
Educativo
(The Law of the General Organization of the
Educational System)
The second great reform of the school system of the
twentieth century.
Key principles: comprehensiveness, equality, and
innovation. A system is established for the permanent
training of teachers.
2002: Ley de Calidad de la Educación (The Law of
Educational Quality)
Conservative reform of the Socialist law. The level of
comprehensiveness of the system is reduced. Measures
favourable to private education and the instruction of
religion in schools are introduced.
2006: A new general reform: the Ley Orgánica de
Educación (The Organic Law of Education)
A return to the law of 1990.
Conflicts between the Church and State worsen.

History, politics, and educational reforms in contemporary Spain

the private sector. At present more than 35% of the school population (in gross figures
closer to 50% in the more developed regions such as Catalonia or the Basque Country)
attends grant-maintained private schools, many of which depend on the Catholic
Church and its religious orders. Public schools are becoming the schools of the
least socially and economically privileged children, while grant-maintained schools
monopolize the middle classes. This parallel system, traditional in Spanish education

--- [PDF Page 240 / Book Page 223] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 223

(a general historical account in Boyd, 1997), is being reproduced in the public system
itself, as a possibly spurious consequence of the principle of autonomy. Particularly in
urban areas, the public educational network is gradually breaking up in a manner that
reflects the geographical location of the center, the pupils’ social origins, and the duration of the school day. There are clearly marginal public schools used only by families
living in the vicinity. On the other hand, there are prestigious public schools in extraordinary demand by both teachers and families, even though they may live some distance
away. In practice, the two represent utterly different institutional strands. In general
terms, the immigrant population living in suburban or poor areas makes use of the
lower-quality centers, thus adding to their already complex problems (see Fundación
Encuentro, 1997, for one of the first empirical analyses carried out about this problematic situation, and Rambla, 1998; Olmedo Reinoso, 2008 & Abrantes, 2008, for most
recent debates and data). This ongoing process in the Spanish educational system is
one of the major sources of social exclusion (see McAll, 1995, and Green, Preston &
Janmaat, 2006, ch.5, for the conclusion that new choice-base reforms introduced in
the last decades may undermine educational equality, and thus social cohesion), as it
is also embedded in the context of a too weak Spanish educational equity policy (see
Calero, 2007).
Taking into account the ever-increasing complexity of these processes (see Figure 1
for a chronological synthesis), we can say that social exclusion is the result of the interactions (with all their deficiencies and distortions) among different classes of social
actors, rather than an end state or condition attributable to a particular population or
group. In this sense, social exclusion can be understood in an increasingly diverse
manner, as a processual, accumulative, multidimensional social reality operating in
different social spheres, most particularly in education (Littlewood & Herkommer,
1999; Moreno, 2000, ch. 1; Goguel d’Allondans, 2003). In this text, we analyze the
presence of this and other key concepts in the discourse of various educational actors2
on the construction of the Spanish school of today – how they imagine it and its problems – taking the reforms mentioned above as our point of reference. We focus on an
analysis restricted to the educational actors’ images of education, of the school and of
the pupils in an educational climate marked by the Socialist reform of the 1990s.

School in the Discourse of Educational Actors
In the context of the neoliberal restructuring of global capitalism, a succession of
changes took place in European educational systems in the last decades of the twentieth century. In many cases, such as Spain, more or less far-reaching educational
reforms were carried out under “modernizing left-wing” governments. These reforms
attempted to explore the possibilities of the post-fordist economic model by reactivating the debate on education in terms of equity versus efficiency. In other cases, the
precepts of what is commonly known as the “New Right” could be detected in the
“creation of a quasi-market within which schools would compete” (Brown & Lauder,
1997, 176; Calero & Bonal, 1999; Barlett et al., 2002).
Without a doubt, behind every educational reform there lies a more or less rhetorically defined political project framed as an effort to construct a new type of citizen

--- [PDF Page 241 / Book Page 224] ---

224 Pereyra et al.

that is only relatively defined, as well as models or images of infancy and the pupil,
of the teacher, of the school, and of education. These models and images are also
only relatively precise and are subjected to a complex and intense verbal process that
brings out the contrasting viewpoints characterizing the various educational actors.
Although reforms attempt to present solid models and clear-cut orientations for
decision-making, they are often a source of (sometimes hidden) division, dispute,
and confusion. Their effects are therefore contradictory and paradoxical. Together
with the optimistic projection of the future, nostalgia grows for apparently safer
times past. Discourse becomes increasingly fragmented against the apparent unity
of the theory.
Particularly in the Spanish case – and in the context of a country coming from a fasciststyle dictatorship which constantly and systematically used propaganda and rhetoric for
opportunistically conveying its economic and social reforms mentioned before – the use
of rhetoric for legitimizing discourses in educational reforms has had a consistent traditional role on the formation of social subjectivity (see Bolívar & Rodríguez Diéguez,
2002). Keeping in mind that a common function of communication is to persuade, and
conceiving that “rhetoric, like other modes of discursive organization, is not simply the
organization of speech [but] the organization of persuasive discourse is simultaneously
the organization of social ‘things’ and social practices” (Valverde, 1990, 67), the whole
educational reform process during the Socialist government ended up as so much “flowery rhetoric” making use of constructivist psychological language that overstates the
protagonist role played by teachers. The reform process began in the early 1980s with
a rhetoric that only developed consistency with the ascension to power at the ministry
of some leading educational psychology scholars (when the conservatives eventually
replaced the socialists, the Popular Party at first continued making use of progressive,
albeit less “flowery”, rhetoric for concealing their reforms which favoured a more selective educational system, and increasing private education).
One of Spain’s most influential educators, an executive adviser to the Minister of
Education during the first Socialist government and a frequent consultant in successive
Socialist governments, eloquently expressed this development:
The leftist discourse of the Socialist governments diluted quite quickly into a
gallinaceous politics of low-level flight. . . . The serious politics of the medium
and the long-term was replaced by schooling renewal jargon that did little to
reform the system, serving more as a placebo than anything else. Instead of
tackling reform issues of great import (improving teacher education, developing the teaching profession, enlarging school facilities, combating inequalities,
etc.), they spent dozens of thousands of millions in taking meetings and in filling
the administrations with “liberated” teachers [i.e., faculty who took leaves of
absence from school work to assume official posts at the Administration] who
wrote scripts and curricular material intended to translate the language of reform
for other teachers. . . . A psychological discourse became policy and orthodoxy
effectively expelling any other approach. A real political shift was replaced by
a clever waffle that gave teachers the illusion of movement that was, in fact, a
device for maintaining the status quo.” (Gimeno Sacristán, 1999, 32–33)

--- [PDF Page 242 / Book Page 225] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 225

The LOGSE (Law of General Planning of the Education System, 1990) appeared in the
narratives of most of the actors as a turning point in the history of education, both for
those who considered themselves its ideological framers and for those charged with its
practical execution. For the latter, however, this was a reform imposed on them from
above, in the context of a hierarchical, vertical organization in which their voices had
scarcely been taken into account. Even considering their differences of viewpoint, many
educational actors shared the idea that the school, or rather, education, represents the
future of any nation, despite the continuous fractures and disjunctions occurring between
the design of educational policy and its effective implementation. They continue to place
their confidence and hopes in the school as a means to achieve a more just and plural society and a better world. We can observe the construction of “narratives of salvation,” that
is, narratives that link the self-actualization of individuals in the schools with the capacity
of the nation to accomplish its “natural” destiny in the areas of economics, politics, and
culture (Meyer et al., 1997; Popkewitz, 1998). This “generalization” from the individual is
explained in a historical context of an existing “world culture” dominated by broad processes of rationalization that have finished by generating guidelines for the universalistic
interpretations of a scientific-rational order and, as a result, symbolic standards of behaviour (Meyer et al., 1987; Meyer & Jefferson, 2000; Meyer & Ramirez, 2000).

School and Social Change: Between Confidence and Scepticism
The school has changed, just as all of society, of which it is the reflection, has changed.
In this sense, the school is seen as part of a structural entity – the social system – strictly
conditioned by an economic and political hegemonic model. The school is, thus, an
extremely dependent social agency, whose obvious changes are not homogeneously
evaluated by the different educational actors, some of whom question if it really has
changed, i.e., if the reforms are ultimately no more than an illusion.
However, the social importance of the school, as a powerful agent of socialization
is persistently highlighted and approved. Just like the family, the school provides the
necessary resources for establishing a degree of rationality and progress in the life
of individuals and the social community. This image of the school in close association with society and its development is not new, but seems to have become more
relevant. Even the traditional social leadership of the family in children’s education
is now shared with the school, in which are placed desires and hopes as fundamental
spaces for the construction of the social identity of the children.
Together with this predominantly social discourse, we may also consider other narratives linked to it, such as the creation of individuality, the loss of social capital, or
interpersonal trust. As some authors have already pointed out (e.g., Putnam, 1995;
Torcal & Montero, 2000), today’s democratic societies all suffer from both increasing
individualism and a lack of social trust, which is a feature that should be typical of this
type of society. So, beyond the view of the school as a socializing or social institution, there emerges this other discourse of the “rebirth of individuality” that is very
widespread in the European Union (Lindblad & Popkewitz, 2001). Indeed, although
globality, understood from a social viewpoint, and individuality are inexorably linked
as two sides of the same coin, we noted a striking silence on such a major question in

--- [PDF Page 243 / Book Page 226] ---

226 Pereyra et al.

the entirety of the discourse of the actors. None of them make the slightest reference
to global processes, which, together with local identities, could be shaping key aspects
of contemporary school and society, such as the type of citizen we want and what is
required of the school. Despite being omnipresent in the media, globalization is here
surprisingly absent.

Combating Inequality: The Reform as Social Imperative
The Socialist educational reform of the 1990s was a historic necessity in order to transform and modernize the Spanish school and thus respond to important social demands,
such as equality of opportunity, attention to diversity, integration of differences, and
the reduction of exclusion. The vast majority of actors coincided in their affirmation
that the school had changed in these respects as a result of the reform.
The educational model is now ruled by an integrating concept following principles such as the defence of equality and respect for diversity. These principles extend
to connotations of “transcendental sign,” as Derrida would say, i.e., ideas blessed by
success and not questioned or problematized by anyone, at least until their implementation is analyzed. For many, the school is even seen as a social avant-garde, driving
and protagonizing changes that go beyond the strict space traditionally assigned to
it. This rejuvenates it as an institution and provides optimism through the confidence
placed in it by society, despite the inertias and resistance attributed to the teaching staff
and educational administration. Naturally, these promising images contrast with the
more nostalgic and sceptical images of the teachers and some sectors of civil society.
On the basis of the differences of opinion transmitted by the various narratives, we
can, however, conclude that they all corroborate the need for the reform as a means of
adapting the school to social change and as a means, as well, of constructing a new,
competent, and competitive citizen ready for the times in which we are living. Once
again, the main actors present the school, and more precisely the education reform as
the image of a history of progress or salvation incarnate in the representation of this
new citizen. It is curious, and paradoxical, that these “stories of salvation,”3 as commonly occurs in mythical projections, tend to be linked with myths of origin, with
former and better times that are ultimately remembered with nostalgia. We shall return
to this question.

The School, Compensator of Inequalities or Creator of Subjectivities
There is a general insistence that the school should pursue the personal development of
individuals in order to enable them to respond independently to the challenges which the
complexity of today’s society might present them with. Schools should produce students
who, above all, have their own minds, are critical, and are able to search for and manage
information. At the same time, the school must propose the integration into the system
of those pupils who were previously forced to leave it without finishing their studies for
whatever reason (accumulated failure, the need to work, etc.) or were forced to opt for
devalued vocational training in a dual system in which social and academic prestige were
only found in the studies leading to the university. The educational reform of the 1990s

--- [PDF Page 244 / Book Page 227] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 227

thus represented a new horizon of democratization for a system that was opening up to
diversity, reevaluating vocational training and encouraging new style of learning.
However, the school is not a panacea. The high degree of hope aroused by the reform
weakens when it is observed that the school cannot solve all the problems created
by society, nor attend to all of its demands, which in many cases are exaggerated
or unattainable. This “realism” contrasts with the optimism implicit in the legislative
texts and discourses of the same political actors at the inception of the reform process ten years previously. It is extremely difficult to generalize the educational changes
originally set out in the norms to culturally and economically deficient groups and
communities. The actors, even when displaying their faith in the equalizing power of
the educational system, seem to express more the desire than the conviction that the
school will satisfactorily solve the educational consequences of human diversity and
social inequality.
The discourses built up by educational actors are rather more than the expression of
personal beliefs and experiences – they establish categories and classify and normalize
the functions attributed to the school. Behind the words of praise for its function as
an institution, there may lay hidden interpretations that one way or another dampen
these initial, complacent images. To defend a compensatory school means, at bottom,
benevolently to legitimize differences, even though it is a commonly accepted opinion, almost a stereotype, that the school, especially when it is public, is a hospitable
space and that only society marginalizes and excludes. There is a clear conception
of social inclusion–exclusion expressed in the discourses of most of the educational
actors which suggests that their reason systems do not realize that the school also creates barriers through which it distributes its subjects.
Indeed, we can see how the discourses examined here implicitly and explicitly suggest norms and resort to categories associated with a number of resources designed
to improve the school. However, at the same time, they establish normalizing mechanisms steeped in the ambiguous, fluctuating rhetoric of “quality,” designed to inoculate
the pupils with the idea of success or failure. Some categorical images, to which we
shall return later, sharply confirm that, in spite of egalitarian rhetoric, the school continues to represent a classification space aimed at producing the citizen of the future.
Proof of this are the persistent attempts to fit the student into an established social
order whose characteristics are reflected in certain nostalgias pervading educational
thinking that prevent the school from forging an imagery capable of reformulating
itself into something new.

Order and Discipline, Myths for a School of Nostalgia
Nostalgia, of course, is the clearest sign of a process of cultural acceleration, which
comes full circle in a short time and, therefore, implies a certain sentimental return
to origins. There has been a truly spectacular generation and expansion of changes in
the European school since the 1960s (somewhat later in Spain than elsewhere). These
changes, based on a generalized reforming rhetoric, have produced a feeling that we
were entering a new historic stage, have reshaped the identities of the educational
actors and have introduced disorder into the system while waiting for the changes to

--- [PDF Page 245 / Book Page 228] ---

228 Pereyra et al.

gradually be assimilated. However, it is well known that, for example, an appreciable
sector of secondary school teachers has embraced an attitude of regret for lost “quality”
as a form of resistance to the changes that have occurred in this stage of schooling.
This nostalgia has reproduced discourses well established in the educational tradition,
such as the question of personal effort and other similar values that the Popular Party’s
Law of Quality (2002) foregrounds. The fixation with so-called tradition (even the
invention of traditions as a cultural strategy) is a relevant characteristic of late modernism and a symptom of confusion in the face of change (see Giddens, 2000). In their
statements, teachers even recall the rites and ceremonies of the school of old when
the distribution of roles and rules of behavior were set out and clearly defined for the
different groups present in the school community (González Faraco, 2002). When traditions fade or are questioned, as in contemporary education, our perception of the ego
is disturbed and, when its identity is unstable, one usually resorts to resistance, escapism, or fixation with tradition to make a present of the past. The widespread theories
of teachers’ discontent help to provide “scientific” arguments for these “retrospective”
attitudes. Whatever the case, it is true that in this as in many other cultural processes,
nostalgia acts as a mechanism to domesticate the new (Sahlins, 2000).
According to a large number of educational actors, discipline, order, and organization are held to be intrinsic values of the school, whose devaluation today may be due
to several related causes: the crisis of values suffered by today’s society, the transfer
of all of society’s evils to the school, the teacher’s loss of authority and social prestige,
scant participation of the family, etc. Behind these imputations we can detect memories and cultural representations that could play a central part in the construction of a
system of inclusion and exclusion (Meyer et al., 1997). The school is still a fundamental brick in the edifice of society, but it must also be acknowledged that the problems
of living together in schools have increased, and with them lack of discipline and
even violence. The management problems of some secondary schools are increasingly
evident. For many actors the extension of obligatory schooling to the age of 16 was a
source of many of these problems, particularly in the areas of high social risk.
Much of the actors’ attention is concentrated on the obligatory stage of secondary
education because it presents most of the problems. The educational actors’ narratives
divide the pupils into two opposing categories: “those motivated to study and learn”
and “those without motivation who are bored” and “would like to leave school, but are
forced to stay.” This dialectic causes disagreement and tension among the teachers, who
claim not to know how to deal with these pupils in a differentiated fashion and therefore
criticize or reject the supposed advantages of the integrating model of the reform. Once
again, we find an ambivalent, paradoxical, and, to a large extent, broken discourse. On
the one hand, we are presented with the vision of an open, comprehensive, egalitarian
school that compensates for inequality – a welcoming school with room for all. On the
other hand, we hear the discourse of the lamented, peaceful, well-ordered school, built
on the model of the ideal pupil, the cosmopolitan citizen prepared to face and resolve
problems, the citizen competent in the knowledge and learning society (see Popkewitz,
2007, for exploring today’s historical turn of the changing principles of cosmopolitanism in educational reforms and research designed to produce greater involvement and
participation in contemporary societies). In this situation, a central role is played by

--- [PDF Page 246 / Book Page 229] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 229

the teacher’s loss of authority and social prestige, by the disappearance or decline of
the teaching profession’s vocational character, and by the weakening of the family’s
educational capacity as a result of changes in family roles, especially that of the mother,
mainly because of the increasing number of working women.
In such extremely common discourses, education is seen as a strategy by which to
acquire a set of “rules” designed to create a model citizen appropriate to the demands
of today’s society – what we have called the “cosmopolitan citizen.” We have already
argued that these narratives incorporate systems of reason that speak of individuals as
reasonable, adapted, enterprising people. In other words, they organize a social cartography that rewards some and punishes or excludes others.
Living together is only possible with rules. The increasing weakness of family
socialization has made the school the main social institution responsible for setting up
a social order governed by rules that inspire confidence because of the reliability of
their results. Teachers are given the role of “guide” in the new models of organization,
based on efficiency and control in any educational sphere including policy and curriculum. It is not surprising that evaluation is exalted and old concepts such as “conduct”
and “behavior” returns to the forefront of educational culture and their decisive influence on the failure or success of the pupils is underscored.
Although some actors recall, in a negative light, the image of that disciplineoriented, hierarchical, authoritarian, and class-conscious school that legitimized
profound social inequalities, their discourse continues to be implicitly dominated by
the need to recover lost order, symbolic discipline, and their role as director of learning. In other words, a return to the past disguised at times by a veneer of modernity.

Enterprise as a Model for an Efficient School
It has been very attractive for theoreticians of education and the social sciences in
general to draw parallels, correspondences, and comparisons between the world of
education and the world of business. Many have proposed the application of business
principles in the school. No one, in fact, wanted to give the impression of turning back
to old product-oriented models, but many of the actors connected with school administration and management, and even Socialist Party members or sympathizers, think
that the firm should be the mirror in which the school views itself – as looking to the
business practices to bolster its public legitimacy – if it wants to improve its competitiveness and efficiency and not be replaced by other educational agencies.
Some actors apply the idea of “corporative efficiency” to the school because, from
their point of view, it would optimize management, increase its members’ degree of
responsibility, and have a favorable effect on the pupils’ learning. Albeit not explicitly,
it is a conception that seeks a more efficient school, dedicated to the improvement of
results through control and more efficient organization of human and financial resources,
independently of, but not contradicting the adoption of managerial models based on
decentralization and the autonomy of schools. These principles are usually found in the
rhetoric of the reforms we have analyzed, which shifted toward diverse forms of decentralization, devolution, and deregulation as key mechanisms of restructuring. These
principles are particularly evident in the school-based management system launched in

--- [PDF Page 247 / Book Page 230] ---

230 Pereyra et al.

the Socialist governments in Spain and continued by the Popular Party after 1996 (for a
contextual analysis see Whitty et al., 1998, and Lindblad & Popkewitz, 2004).
The essential function of the school is the formation of citizens, which should be
understood as their “integration into the socioeconomic world.” Being a good citizen
therefore means being a good worker and a good professional and, in order to become
one, the school must provide its pupils with knowledge and skills that are useful in the
labour market. However, it cannot be said that this managerial vision of the school is
widely shared explicitly by educational actors. Proposals that lead us to think of desirable
isomorphisms between school and firm are not frequent either. However, the idea is more
commonly held that the pupils are learners in a system that should be aware of, and even
at the service of, the labour market. In these circumstances, it does not seem accidental
that the so-called technological paradigm (“the official pedagogy” as Basil Bernstein
would put it) should predominate in the Spanish pedagogical arena since, at bottom, it
helps to legitimize through science these types of efficiency-based postulates.
The discourse of the actors reflects the innovations introduced by the Socialist
reform and, through them, the characteristics of the new legitimizing framework of
Spanish education. But, as we have seen above, they also speak to the inadequacies,
weaknesses, or perversions of the reform process, as experienced in their professional
work. These critical discourses diverge, cross, and, at times, coalesce around certain
subjects – excessive bureaucracy; the imbalances between public schools and private
grant-supported schools; the lack of material and human resources; and other issues
concerning teachers, such as work overload, lack of social recognition, and broad
discontent with a reformist rhetoric that does not result in action. The never-ending
argument about theory and practice is well represented here.
School actors call for more participation in educational decisions, but do not see any
structural alternatives on the horizon to facilitate this participation, nor do they provide
specific measures that might give back their lost protagonism. Meanwhile, the political actors pass on to the educational administration the responsibility of interpreting
and implementing the texts resulting from the reform. They claim that to carry out the
changes in organization and operation of the school it is absolutely necessary to have
a professionalized head teacher and team to execute the policy of the administration.
This does not prevent them from accepting the ideas of community representation and
participation in school governance, or even proposing more decentralized models of
educational management.
In this context of frank disagreement between school and political actors, paradoxical
situations can arise, such as the rapid application of the new school day in Andalusia,
which moved from an “all-day” school (with morning and afternoon sessions) to a “half
day” (jornada continuada from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m.). In this case, the independent criteria
of the schools were upheld against the differences between the school community (in
favor of a half-day school) and the educational administration (opposed to the idea, as it
might prove harmful for pupils from less favoured social layers, with the attendant risk of
exclusion) (Pereyra, 2002). The Andalusian administration finally had to accept a decision advocated by the majority of the participants in the governance of each school.
Once again we find a poorly articulated process of normalization, constructed with
inadequate criteria, some infelicitous improvisation, and a minimum of equanimity. The

--- [PDF Page 248 / Book Page 231] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 231

identity spaces of the various educational actors are restricted to their own particular
field of view, without attempting to analyze, discuss, or reflect on the broad consequences that the adoption of a specific measure could entail. The decisions are upheld
and the arguments justified because they say they are invariably directed toward the
improvement of quality in the educational process. But an avalanche of reformative categories, such as decentralization, autonomy, efficiency, progress, and quality colors all
of their discourses, which become tautological exercises, with no attempt made either
to go further into theoretical questions or to reflect on their own practice.
Inclusion–Exclusion as an Effect of Educational Governance: Hopes,
Doubts, and Contradictions
When speaking of governance we are not referring descriptively to the rules imposed
by particular administrative measures or social imperatives, but to the rational construction of mechanisms, patterns, and decisions that make up the conscience and thought
of individuals. In other words, we understand governance not just as a set of processes of production and distribution of social goods through institutions and personal
interaction, but governance is considered here as systems of knowledge that propose
“solutions to problems” in social policy and practice. From this point of view, and leaving aside the rhetoric most commonly used in this sphere, the key question is whether
and to what extent the school, so often described confusingly by educational actors,
constructs or sustains individual and collective criteria of division, marginalization, and
exclusion. To speak of exclusion also implies inclusion, for conceptually they are two
terms in the same semantic field (although at opposite extremes), but it is also to speak
of two different things, as they rarely present a similar level of normalization.
Bearing in mind this link between the two concepts, we shall now try to observe and
analyze through the discourse of the educational actors themselves how the process
of inclusion–exclusion manifests itself and operates in the school. For the majority,
the question of exclusion is foreign to the school environment, where, on the contrary,
“attention to diversity,” integration, and equity are promoted.
This integrating image, in which failure is merely a “natural” process or the effect
of a cause outside the system, is widely shared as a premise, but takes on very different tones when the analysis probes practice in specific contexts. Indeed, to understand
education is to understand its context. As a result, the question of inclusion–exclusion
takes on differentiating characteristics and produces divergent discourses. The actors
tended to talk of two types of exclusion: “school failure” and “self-exclusion.” The first
is associated with pupils with special educational needs and “self-exclusion” refers to
students with problems of social origin, such as drugs, alcoholism, delinquency, etc. In
any case, it is not the school but society that marginalizes and excludes them. Behind
these arguments lies an eminently individualistic discourse that makes the differences
seem natural and frees the system of all guilt. The system only has to apply the principles of reason (distinctions, differentiations, and categories of knowledge) that will or
will not qualify the individual for action or participation. In other cases, there is some
recognition that the school system can exclude, but then exclusion is understood conventionally, i.e., according to the degree of participation in society of the individuals
and groups according to certain social standards.

--- [PDF Page 249 / Book Page 232] ---

232 Pereyra et al.

This discourse on the capacity of the school for inclusion or exclusion breaks down
around the problem of the duality of the system. A dialectical spiral occurs between those
who accuse the private school of selective practices and those who defend the right to establish independently their own educational model. The two interpret the relations between
educational governance and social inclusion–exclusion in significantly different ways,
i.e., they apply antagonistic systems of reason in an attempt to legitimize their respective
attitudes. The result is an involved, fragmented, belligerent discursive scenario.
For some the fight against exclusion should mainly be based on an ethical and pedagogical program centered on an education in human and Christian values and on a
dialogue between parents and tutors taking joint decisions about the personal treatment
of the pupils. For others, there is no point in limiting oneself to the school if we want to
deal with the problem of exclusion, because its origin is above all social, especially social
marginality, although we must not forget the excluding effects of educational failure and
other personal circumstances. From this point of view, the most suitable ways to combat
exclusion should be dialogue between pupil, family, and teacher, the development of
attitudes inclined to accept the other, improvement in the family’s education, and a cooperative approach with other administrative institutions and social organizations.
Although they are not lacking in scepticism, most of the actors seem to be confident
that the school can reduce inequality: schools are, after all, open, plural institutions
that receive all types of pupils. In this sense, the school has an important role to play in
the consolidation of a more just and democratic society, in which those now excluded
would have the chance to participate more fully in all social spheres. This participation
could be tried out in schools, but the ultimate responsibility for making it a reality lies
with the family. However, for the moment the family’s involvement is insufficient, as
shown by the low indices of family voting in the elections for school councils.
One of the most persistent arguments found in the educational actors’ discourses is
the increasing confidence deposited in the school, which runs parallel to the call for the
family to again take more responsibility for its children’s education. However, among
those who state such faith in the democratizing power of the school, there are hardly any
with viable proposals for introducing changes in the governance of education in order to
tackle problems such as low family involvement in their children’s school life, premature
abandonment of school, or other situations with potential to cause exclusion. Discursive
strategies such as silence, blaming others, or resorting to politically correct statements
lead us to think that, behind the expressions of confidence in the democratizing power of
the school, there is an implicit understanding that such confidence is merely an illusion.
Light and Shade without Rhetoric: By Way of Conclusion
In the context of a country contemporarily come into being from a long fascistized
dictatorship which systematically maneuvered with rhetorical and symbolical illusions
of social change without introducing and implementing deep political and socioeconomical transformations, the Socialist reform of the 1990s through the analysis of its
actors’ discourse appears as an indistinct, ambivalent narration arising out of the gap
between a few illuminating intellectual discoveries and darker practical implications.
The optimism they express about the social changes occurring during this decade turns
to scepticism regarding the changes experienced by the school, which, they understand
not to be exclusively due to the educational reforms.

--- [PDF Page 250 / Book Page 233] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 233

These contrasts can probably best be seen among the teaching staff. In-service
teacher training, for example, has improved substantially. However, the social prestige
of teaching has declined, the practice of the profession has deteriorated (excessive
workloads, hard to accept social expectations, etc.), and relations with the political administration have become increasingly strained. Democratization, autonomy,
and bureaucratization have become typical factors in the imagery and narratives of
school actors. Despite the fact that the educational reform should have meant greater
democratization and autonomy of management, the teachers continuously complain of
bureaucratization and the deficient administrative organization of education.
On the other hand, the one essential change in the structure of the system brought
about by the LOGSE was the extending of obligatory education to the age of 16, with
the subsequent creation of a new stage of secondary education, i.e., a strong drive
toward a comprehensive school. However, this decision has led to numerous problems
related to the desire of some pupils to leave the system before that age (school objectors) or to the excessive diversification of the pupils caused by different programs of
integration or compensation. Many school actors believe that this increase in the comprehensive period of instruction is only of benefit to, and actually was invented for, the
most disadvantaged pupils, with no regard for those who are characterized as “above
average.” These discourses make very clear the tension between comprehensiveness
– the typical option of education policies in the welfare state – and efficiency, the preferential aim of neoliberal policies (Simola et al., 2002).
The same constants apply to the relationship between the family and its relation
with the school. The family naturally continues to be considered key as a socializing
agent and, therefore, essential for the development of the new educational system.
Yet its participation in school life – highly valued by the reform – has fallen short of
expectations. If the family does not participate, the system begins to break down – this
is one of the most repeated conclusions in the interviews analyzed, especially when the
object of consideration is inclusion and exclusion. For many, the cause of exclusion
resides not in the school but in the family, in society, and in the very individuals who
suffer it. As registered in our “cognitive unconscious” (or the realm of thought that is
completely and irrevocably inaccessible to direct conscious introspection: see Lakoff
& Johnson, 1999), school, by itself, rarely excludes.
This rhetorical exoneration of the school is predictably present in narratives that
give this institution a sort of “magic aura” inscribed in a “story of salvation” to which
all individuals are summoned regardless of their origin or condition. However, as we
all know, this is a strategy of deception, proved by the preeminence of nostalgia among
many teachers or the hard-line defence of that ideal pupil, the highly competitive “cosmopolitan” student mentioned earlier.
But let us firstly admit that the effect of including the excluded is not necessarily
inclusion. As Goodwin (1996) suggested, the frontiers or limits of marginalization are
mobile and constantly shifting. The solution proposed by educational actors for these
“readjustments” is an amalgam of ambiguous measures such as dialogue or education
in values or other supposedly integrating and equally imprecise formulae meant to
encourage the egalitarian dimension of education. What really happens, then, is that
what is in fact a sociopolitical problem is denaturalized and turned into an individual
question of moral or ethical conscience. The narrative effect of this transformation is a

--- [PDF Page 251 / Book Page 234] ---

234 Pereyra et al.

host of weak, diffuse images (a “humanitarian soup” as the Spanish leading sociologist
Manuel Castells would say) that do not reward reflection or lead to the invention of
new creative formulae of governance that could be useful in overcoming the spaces of
classification and normalization so firmly embedded in the school system.
In a more general view, we could say that social inclusion–exclusion in the educational sphere causes the emergence of different, socially distorted school cultures. The
prevailing models (discourses and images) are those that opt for a school based on success and results, where there are no insurmountable barriers for individual effort and
perseverance in study, as against the other models and traditions that put emphasis on
social and economic factors (Silver, 1994). The question of equity is translated into a
system of reason that labels, differentiates, and divides the subjectivity of educational
actors and agents according to certain normalization procedures.
School educates, that is, it qualifies and capacitates students, but at the same time it
normalizes them depending on their comprehension of, and proximity to, this new and
all embracing, but likewise contradictory, legitimacy. This “new legitimacy” has been
queried in various ways by educational actors, whose image of the school is distinct
from that optimistically presented by the Socialist reform of the 1990s. Many of them
felt tired and disappointed upon seeing how, behind all the modernizing rhetoric of efficiency and quality, there remains an insufficiently creative school guided by traditionalist
models and values. The future is uncertain. Freedom and autonomy are a mirage and
the level of student achievement continues to drop alarmingly (in particular in secondary education). Teachers are trapped by the demands of the educational authorities, the
families, and society, but above all they feel they are undervalued and alone in the face
of a task that is beyond them. The “ideal” student imagined and desired by the educational reform, society, and teachers bears little resemblance to the “real,” unmotivated,
and even aggressive student who is actually present in the classroom (González Faraco,
2003). School has changed but its future is the murkiest image of all.
Such scepticism and uncertainty contrast with the extraordinary confidence shared
by the vast majority of the educational community in the egalitarian condition of
today’s school. The same is not true when deciding on the reasons for failure and
exclusion. For the students, it is a fundamentally personal process, whereas for the
other educational actors its origin is essentially social. The latter admit self-exclusion,
but consider that exclusion is a socially produced artifact (Jamrozik & Nocella, 1998)
and that only society is capable of setting it right, so that the initial confidence in
the school’s integrating capacity now becomes doubtful. However, no one doubts that
public and private schools (a decisive duality in the Spanish educational system) differ
in their perception of social inclusion and exclusion and other closely linked concepts
such as “equal opportunity,” “attention to diversity,” and “school autonomy.”
Taking these differences into account, the most widespread impression is still that
the school cannot solve problems that society has not been able to solve heretofore,
that it is not ready to accept all sorts of pupils, and that it has little to offer pupils with
difficulties, who end up excluding themselves. Therefore, it merely confirms the marginalization of those that society has already marginalized. Consequently, for many
educational actors progress toward cultural plurality, which should not be a plurality

--- [PDF Page 252 / Book Page 235] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 235

of cultures but a plurality of culturally defined communities (Bauman, 2000, 86), is no
more than a beautiful dream.
This confused panorama presents many interrogatives, but there is one above all,
directly related to education and its relations with social inclusion and exclusion,
that we find especially worrying: what is to become of the school system and those
involved in it if it is not openly recognized that its capacity for exclusion, differentiation, and segregation remains intact, even though it is masked and hidden beneath
flowery rhetoric?

Notes
1.

2.

3.

In March 2004, the Socialist Party returned to power. One of the priorities of its program was to halt
the application of the Law of Quality (LOCE) and reform it along the basic premises of the LOGSE.
In April 2006, the Spanish Parliament approved the new Organic Law of Education (Ley Orgánica de
la Educación, 2006). The Conservative Party voted against the new reform. One of the few important
innovations introduced by the new law is referred to the development of schooling for children from 3
to 6 years old which is becoming free.
To this end, we used a large number of interviews based on the theoretical categories of the EGSIE,
an international project of comparative research carried out between 1998 and 2002. Education
Governance and Social Integration and Exclusion in Europe (EGSIE) was a Targeted Socio-Economic
Research (TSER) project of the XII Directorate General Research of the European Commission
coordinated by Sverker Lindbad and having Thomas S. Popkewitz as an international expert. We
conducted 82 interviews, mostly from the regions of Andalusia and the Canary Islands, which may
be characterized by their peripheral geographical location within the European Union and by their
modest economic development by Spanish standards (see: Lindblad & Popkewitz, 1999, 2000, 2001;
Popkewitz, Lindblad & Strandberg, 1999). (See also other publications arisen from this project:
Pereyra, 2001; Johannesson et al., 2002; Lindblad et al., 2002; Lundhal, 2002; Rinne et al., 2003;
Alves & Canário, 2002 and 2004). The Spanish version of the final report of the Spanish case appears
in Luengo (2005, ch. 7 & 8).
The political discourse of school reform is dominated by the “millenarian” idea of the beginning of
a new age (Popkewitz et al., 1986). In this sense, one teacher’s mention of “evangelism” in the 1990s
Socialist reform is not accidental.

References
Abrantes, P. (2008). On the strange habit of reading adversity instead of diversity: Madrid’s middle-schools
and their Latin-American students. In M. A. Pereyra (ed.), Changing knowledge and education.
Communities, mobilities and new policies in global societes. Frankfurt a. Main: Peter Lang Verlag.
Alves, N. & Cánario, R. (2002). The new magistracy of influence: changing governance of education in
Portugal, European Educational Research Journal, 1(4), 656–666.
Alves, N. & Canário, R. (2004). Escola e exclusão social: das promessas às incertezas. Análise Social,
169, 981–1010.
Balfour, S. (2000). The desarrollo years, 1955–1975. In J. Alvarez Junco & A. Shubert (Eds.), Spanish
history since 1808, London: Arnold.
Bartlett, L. et al. (2002). The marketization of education: Public schools for private ends. Anthropology &
Education Quarterly, 33(1), 5–29.
Bauman, Z. (2000). What it means ‘to be excluded’: Living to stay apart – or together. In P. Askonas & A.
Stewart (Eds.), Social inclusion: Possibilities and tensions, London: Macmillan.
Bolívar, A. & Rodríguez Diéguez, J. L. (2002). Reformas y retóricas: La reforma educativa de la LOGSE,
Archidona: Aljibe.

--- [PDF Page 253 / Book Page 236] ---

236 Pereyra et al.
Bonal, X. (1998). La política educativa: Dimensiones de un proceso de transformación (1976–1996). In:
R. Gomá & J. Subirats (Eds.), Políticas públicas en España. Contenidos, redes de actores y niveles de
gobierno, Barcelona: Ariel.
Boyd, C. P. (1997). Historia Patria: Politics, history and national identity in Spain, 1875–1975. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Boyd-Barrett, O. & O’Malley, P. (Eds.) (1995). Education reform in democratic Spain, London: Routledge.
Brown, P. & Lauder, H. (1997). Education, globalization and economic development. In A. H. Halsey, H.
Lauder, P. Brown, & A. S. Wells (Eds.), Education: Culture, economy and society, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Calero, J. & Bonal, X. (1999). Política educativa y gasto público en educación. Barcelona-México:
Ediciones Pomares.
Calero, J. (2007). An assessment of educational equity and policy in Spain. In R. Teese, S. Lamb & M. Duru-Bellat
(Eds.), The influence of genetics in contemporary thinking. International studies in educational inequality.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Carabaña, J. (1999). Dos estudios sobre movilidad intergeneracional. Madrid: Argentaria-Visor.
Casanova, J. (1982). The Opus Dei ethic and the modernization of Spain, PhD dissertation of the New
School for Social Research, Ann Arbor: University Microfilms International.
Casanova, J. (1983). The Opus Dei ethic, the technocrats and the modernization of Spain. Social Science
Information, 22, 27–50.
Cuesta, R. (2005). Felices y escolarizados: Crítica de la escuela en la era del capitalismo. Barcelona:
Octaedro.
Echevarría, J. (1999). La movilidad social en España. Madrid: Istmo.
Edelman, M. (1988). Constructing the political spectacle, Chicago: University of Chicago.
Escolano, A. (2002). La educación en la España contemporánea. Políticas educativas, escolarización y
culturas pedagógicas. Madrid: Biblioteca Nueva.
Fernández, M. (1999). Política educativa e igualdad en España: Una perspectiva comparada. In: Políticas de
bienestar y desempleo, Madrid: Visor.
Fernández, M. (2003). Igualdad de oportunidades educativas: la experiencia socialdemócrata española y
francesa. Barcelona-México: Ediciones Pomares.
Fundación Encuentro (2001). Informe España 2001: una interpretación de su realidad social, Madrid:
Fundación Encuentro.
García Garrido, J. L. et al. (1998). Elementos para un diagnóstico del Sistema Educativo Español. Informe
Global. Madrid: Instituto Nacional de Calidad y Evaluación.
Giddens, A. (2000). Runaway world: How globalisation is reshaping our lives. London: Routledge.
Gimeno Sacristán, J. (1999). En defensa de la escuela pública. Archipiélago, 38, 30–39.
Goguel d’Allondans, A. (2003). L’exclusion sociale: Les métamorphoses d’un concept (1960–2000), Paris:
L’Esprit Économique.
González Faraco, J. C. (2002). Entre modernization et nostalgie: La fonction enseignante et les réformes
scolaires en Espagne. Revue Internationale d’Education, 30, 69–83.
González Faraco, J. C. (2003). Paradoxical images of the student in Spanish educational reforms (1990–
2002). Mediterranean Journal of Educational Studies, 7(2), 37–60.
Goodwin, R. (1996). Inclusion and exclusion. Archives Européennes de Sociologie, 37(2), 343–371.
Gramigna, A. (2006). Innovazione e formazione nel mondo del mercato globale. In: A. Gramigna et al.
(Eds.), La scienze dell’innovazione: Nuove frontiere educative nel sociale, Milano: FrancoAngeli.
Green, A. Preston, J. & Germ Janmaat, J. (2006). Education, equality and social cohesion: a comparative
analysis. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan.
Jamrozik, A. & Nocella, L. (1998). The sociology of social problems: Theoretical perspectives and methods
of intervention. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Johannesson, I. A., Lindblad, S. & Simola, H. (2002). An inevitable progress? Educational restructuring
in Finland, Iceland and Sweden at the turn of the millennium. Scandinavian Journal of Educational
Research, 46(3), 325–339.
Judt, T. (2006). Postwar: A history of Europe since 1945. New York: Penguin.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge to western
thought. New York: HarperCollins.

--- [PDF Page 254 / Book Page 237] ---

Social Change and Configurations of Rhetoric 237
Lindblad, S. & Popkewitz, T. S. (Eds.) (1999). Education governance and social integration and exclusion:
National cases of educational systems and recent reforms. Uppsala University, Uppsala Reports on
Education, 34.
Lindblad, S. & Popkewitz, T. S. (Eds.) (2000). Public discourses on education governance and social integration and exclusion. Analyses of policy texts in European contexts. Uppsala University, Uppsala
Reports on Education, 36.
Lindblad, S. & Popkewitz, T. S. (Eds.) (2001). Education governance and social integration and exclusion:
Studies in the powers of reason and the reasons of power, Uppsala Reports on Education, 39.
Lindblad, S. & Popkewitz, T. S. (2004). Educational restructuring: (Re)thinking the problematic of reform.
In S. Lindblad & T. S. Popkewitz (Eds.), Educational restructuring. International perspectives on travelling policies. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Lindblad, S., Popkewitz, T. S. & Strandberg, J. (1999). Review of Research on Education Governance and
Social Integration and Exclusion. Uppsala University, Uppsala Reports on Education, 35.
Lindblad, S. et al. (2002). Educating for the New Sweden? Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research,
46(3), 283–303.
Littlewood, P. & Herkommer, S. (1999). Identifying social exclusion. In P. Littlewood et al. (Eds.), Social
exclusion in Europe: Problems and paradigms, Aldershot: Ashgate.
López Rodó, L. (1991). Memorias: II Años decisivos, Esplugas de Llobregat: Plaza y Janés.
Lundhal, L. (2002). From centralisation and decentralisation: Governance of education in Sweden. European
Educational Research Journal, 1(4), 625–636.
Luengo, J. (2005). Paradigmas de gobernación y de exclusión social en la educación. Fundamentos para el
análisis de la discriminación escolar contemporánea, Barcelona-México: Ediciones Pomares.
McAll, Ch. (1995). Les murs de la cite: Territoires d’exclusion et espaces de citoyenneté. Revue internationale d’action communautaire/International Review of Community Development, 34(74), 81–92.
McNair, J. M. (1984). Education for a changing Spain. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Manzano, J. (1996). El sistema educativo y las salidas profesionales. Madrid: Aguilar.
Meyer, J. & Jefferson, R.L. (2000). The “Actors” of Modern Society: The Cultural Construction of Social
Agency, Sociological Theory; 18(1), 100–120.
Meyer, J. & Ramirez, F. O. (2000). The world institutionalisation of education. In J. Schriewer (Ed.),
Discourse formation in comparative education. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Meyer, J., Boli, J. & Thomas, G. M. (1987). Ontology and rationalization in the western cultural account.
In G. M. Thomas et al. (Eds.), Institutional structure: Constituting state, society, and the individual,
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Meyer, J. W. et al. (1997). World society and the nation state. American Journal of Sociology, 103(1), 144–181.
Moreno, L. (2000). Ciudadanos precarious: La “última red” de protección social. Barcelona: Ariel.
Morgenstern de Finkel, S. (1991). The scenario of Spanish educational reform. In M. Ginsburg (Ed.),
Understanding educational reform in global context. New York: Garland.
Morgenstern de Finkel, S. (1993). Teacher education in Spain: A postponed reform. In T. S. Popkewitz
(Ed.), Changing patterns of power: Social regulation and teacher education reform. New York:
SUNY Press.
Olmedo Reinoso, A. (2008). Middle-class families and school choice: freedom versus equity in the context
of a ‘local education market’, European Educational Research Journal, 7(2), 176–194.
Ortega, F. (1994). El mito de la modernización: Las paradojas del cambio social en España. Barcelona:
Anthropos.
Pereyra, M. A. (2001). Changing educational governance in Spain: Decentralisation and control in the
autonomous communities. European Educational Research Journal, 1(4), 667–675.
Pereyra, M. A. (2002). La jornada escolar y su reforma en España. In M. A. Pereyra, J. C. González Faraco
& J. M. Coronel (Eds.), Infancia y escolarización en la modernidad tardía Madrid: Akal.
Peruga, R. & Torres, J. A. (1997). Desigualdad educativa en la España del siglo XX: un estudio
empírico. In J. Calero Martínez et al., Educación, vivienda e igualdad de oportunidades. Madrid:
Argentaria-Visor.
Popkewitz, T. S. (1998). Struggling for the soul: The politics of schooling and the construction of the teacher.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Popkewitz, T. S. (2007). Cosmopolitanism and the age of school reform. New York: Routledge.

--- [PDF Page 255 / Book Page 238] ---

238 Pereyra et al.
Popkewitz, T. S. & Lindblad, S. (2000). Educational governance and social inclusion and exclusion: A conceptual review of equality and post-modern traditions. Discourse, 21(1), 1–44.
Popkewitz, T. S., Pitman, A. & Barry, A. (1986). Educational reform and its millennial quality: the 1980s.
Journal of Curriculum Studies, 18(3), 267–283.
Putnam, R. (1995). Bowling alone: America’s declining social capital. Journal of Democracy 6(1), 65–78.
Puelles, M. (2000). La LOGSE en el contexto de las reformas escolares. In: Fundación Hogar del Empleado,
Informe Educativo 2000. Evaluación de la LOGSE, Madrid, Santillana.
Rambla, X. (1998). Social relations and school choice in Spain. Mediterranean Journal of Educational
Studies, 3(2), 1–17.
Rambla, X. (2006). Marketing academic issues. To what extent does education policy steer education research
in Spain. In J. Ozga, T. Seddon, & T. S. Popkewitz (Eds.), World yearbook of education 2006: Education
research and policy. Steering the knowledge-based economy, London & New York: Routledge.
Rambla, X. & Bonal, X. (2000). La política educativa y la estructura social. In J. Adelantado (Ed.), Cambios
en el Estado del Bienestar. Políticas sociales y desigualdades en España, Madrid: Icaria.
Rinne, R., Aro, M., Kivirauma, J. & Simola, H. (Eds.) (2003). Adolescents facing The Educational Politics
of The 21st Century: Comparative Survey of Five National Cases and Three Welfare Models, Turku,
Finnish Educational Research Association.
Rozada, J. M. (2002). Las reformas y lo que está pasando (De cómo en la educación la democracia encontró
su pareja: el mercado). ConCiencia Social, 6, 15–57.
San Segundo, M. J. (1998). Igualdad de oportunidades educativas. Economías, 40, 82–103.
Sahlins, M. (2000). Culture in practice: Selected essays. New York: Zone Books.
Saz Campos, I. (2004). Fascism, fascistization and developmentalism in Franco’s dictatorship. Social
History, 29(3), 342–357.
Sevilla, D. (2003). La educación comprensiva en España: paradoja, retórica y limitaciones. Revista de
Educación, 330, 35–57.
Silver, H. (1994). Social exclusion and social solidarity: Three paradigms. International Labour Review,
133(5–6), 531–578.
Simola, H., Rinne, R., & Kirivauma, J. (2002). Abdication of the education state or just shifting responsibilities? The appearance of a new system of reason in constructing educational governance and social
exclusion/inclusion in Finland. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 46(3), 247–264.
Torcal, M. & Montero, J. R. (2000). La formación y las consecuencias del capital social en España. Revista
Española de Ciencia Política, 1(2), 79–121.
Torres, J. (2007). Las reformas contribuyeron a la desprofesionalización del profesorado. In J. Varela (Ed.),
Las reformas educativas a debate (1982–2006), Madrid: Morata.
Valverde, M. (1990). The rhetoric of reform: Tropes and the moral subject. International Journal of
Sociology of Law, 18, 61–73.
Varela, J. (1991). Una reforma educativa para las nuevas clases medias. Archipiélago, 6, 65–71.
Weiler, H. N. (1983). West Germany: Educational policy as compensatory legitimation. In M. Thomas (Ed.),
Politics and education. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Whitty, G., Power, S., & Halpin, D. (1998). Devolution and choice in education: The school, the state and
the market. Buckingham: Open University Press.

