================================================================================
Chapter 16: Modernity, State-formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece
Author(s): Andreas M. Kazamias
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 239–256
PDF Pages: pp. 256–273 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 256 / Book Page 239] ---

16
MODERNITY, STATE-FORMATION, NATION
BUILDING, AND EDUCATION IN GREECE
Andreas M. Kazamias

In Europe, North America, Asia, and certain countries of the Middle East, e.g., Turkey,
Lebanon, Israel, and Cyprus, institutionalized education in schools and universities
and more broadly paideia/culture, have been considered to be important mechanisms
in the formation of modern states and the building of nations since the period of the
Enlightenment in the closing decades of the eighteenth century and the beginning of
the nineteenth. From this perspective, education has been examined both as a factor
contributing to nation/state-building and as a function of it (Green, 1990). By the
role of education in the process of state-formation and nation-building in modern
democratic polities one understands its (education’s) role in cultivating social cohesion, citizenship, national culture, and national identity as well as in the education
and training of personnel for the civil bureaucracy and the national and local state
government apparatuses.
This chapter investigates the formation of the modern nation-state of Greece and
the role of education, both in the narrow sense of schooling and in the broader sense
of paideia, in this nation-building process. The case of Greece represents an empireto-nation-state transformation, namely, the emergence and construction of a modern
national state from the Ottoman Empire after a War of Independence in the 1820s.
The afflatus for the political formation of the Greek nation-state and the concomitant
formation of a national system of education was the Western European mixture of
institutions and magma of significations known as the Enlightenment, which, inter
alia, included constitutionalism, republicanism, democracy, the notion of the ‘citizen’ (citoyen), progress, rationalism, liberty/freedom, secularism, nationalism, the
nation-state, the separation of Church and State, and a national public/state system of
education (Harvey, 1990).
The method of approach of this study may be called ‘comparative historical analysis.’ Following an overview of the premodern traditional Ottoman Empire setting,
the Greek nation-building historical trajectory will be examined, paying particular
attention to the role of education in the modernization and concomitant nation-state
building process. The key concepts in this historical analysis are empire, state, nation,
modernity, modernization, westernization, Europeanization, secularism, education,
democracy, education, and paideia.

239
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 239–256.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 257 / Book Page 240] ---

240 Kazamias

The Premodern Ottoman Empire Setting: An Overview
In its pre-nineteenth century ideal-typical form the Ottoman Empire could be described
as a multiethnic, multireligious, and polyglot sociopolitical formation, in which power
and authority, centering in Constantinople (later Istanbul), were vested in, and emanated from, a dynastic, divinely sanctioned Sultan-Caliph, and wielded by him and
his palace clique through a hierarchically organized administrative, military, and religious (Muslim) bureaucracy. The Sultan’s authority and supervision over his multiple
ethno-religious “subjects” (Muslims, Christians, and Jews) were carried out through the
system of millets (religious ‘nations’). The Orthodox Greeks, together with the other
orthodox ethnic groups, scattered all over the Empire (the Serbs, the Romanians, the
Bulgarians, the Vlachs, and the Orthodox Albanians and Arabs), constituted the Milleti Rum (Greek Orthodox millet) which until well into the nineteenth century was the
largest and most prominent. This institutional arrangement, according to an authority
on the subject, “provided on the one hand, a degree of religious, cultural and ethnic
continuity within these (the non-Muslim) communities, while on the other it permitted
their incorporation into the Ottoman administrative, economic and political system”
(Karpat, 1982: 141–142).
Ottoman society was differentiated, vertically and horizontally, along social, cultural, religious, and political lines. More specifically, it was divided into a privileged,
politically and religiously Muslim-dominant Ottoman, and mainly Turkish ruling
class, and a nondominant, religiously heterogeneous and politically disenfranchised
“subject class,” the rayas. Each of these classes had clearly defined legal rights, duties/
obligations, and functions: the rulers—predominantly Moslems—were responsible for
governing, exploiting, and defending the imperial wealth, and the subject class for
providing the imperial wealth, as well as for catering to their own religious, social,
cultural, and educational needs (Vryonis, 1976: 46, 54–55).
The subject class was, in turn, bifurcated into Muslims and Dimmis (non-Muslims)
and into urban and rural dwellers (peasants), again with differentiated status and power
attached to each category. The non-Muslim groups were separated from their Muslim
counterpart and from each other culturally, politically, legally, and economically. Added
to such divisions and bifurcations one must note the urban–rural dichotomies as well
as the geographic dispersal of the members of each millet, which was especially the
case with the Greek Orthodox millet.
As was the case with all the millets, many members of the Greek Orthodox millet
lived in isolated rural and self-sustaining small villages. Another characteristic was that
religion exerted an important influence in the society in general, and in education in
particular. And, although those who were educated were accorded a favored position in
the society, the majority of the Greeks, as well as the Turks and the other ethno-religious
groups were illiterate or semi-educated. Lastly, the identity of all groups in the Ottoman
Empire was quintessentially religious than “ethnic.” The Greeks, during the period of
the Tourkokratia (the Ottoman period from 1453 to 1821) were known as Romioi, an
appellation that signified their Greek Orthodox “religious” rather than “ethnic” identity.
It was not until the period of the Neo-Hellenic Enlightenment, in the latter half of the

--- [PDF Page 258 / Book Page 241] ---

Modernity, State-Formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece 241

eighteenth century and the opening decades of the nineteenth century, that the Greeks
began to identify themselves as both Orthodox Christians and ethnic Greeks.
Compared to the other ethno-religious groups of the Ottoman Empire, and unlike
the Ottoman ruling Turks, the urban Greeks cultivated their entrepreneurial and commercial interests. In some parts of the Empire, notably in Constantinople/Istanbul,
the Greeks virtually controlled banking, commerce, and small business. Most
importantly: while the Ottoman Turks, for religious, political, and historic reasons,
considered European ideas, culture, and education alien and threatening, the more
enlightened Greeks, with some qualifications, identified themselves with Western
ideas and civilization, particularly during the post-European Enlightenment period.
Numerous Greek communities existed in all the major European capitals and cities (e.g., Paris and Vienna), maintaining lines of communication with the Greeks
of Anatolia, Constantinople and the Greek chersonese/peninsula. Contacts with the
Western world on the part of the Greeks during the Tourkokratia, especially during
the century or so preceding the War of Independence in the 1820s and the establishment of the modern Greek state in 1830, were further strengthened by the so-called
Phanariotes, Greek Ottoman subjects who, because of their education and socioeconomic status, had attained high administrative positions—dragomans of the Porte,
diplomatic emissaries in foreign countries, rulers of principalities under Ottoman
suzerainty—in the Ottoman political hierarchy. Furthermore, the Christian character
of Europe facilitated cultural links between the Europeans and the Greeks, which
were reinforced by a common anti-Muslim Ottoman Turkish attitude. The Orthodox
Russians, for example, in the guise of Orthodox Christian redeemers, constantly
harassed the Sultans, aroused the coreligionist Greeks, and sprinkled the Empire
with imperial agents.
Education in the Greek Orthodox millet was the responsibility of the Greek
Orthodox Church headed by the Patriarch of Constantinople. Local communities or
parishes in greater Constantinople and in most cities and towns of Anatolia and the
Greek peninsula maintained “common” (koina) and/or “Hellenic” (hellinika) schools
from church contributions and private donations. In the villages the local priest was
also the teacher. Certain schools, attached to the Patriarchate in the Phanar section
of Istanbul, notably the Great National School (He Megali tou Genous Scholi), were
regarded as the training grounds of the intellectual and religious leaders as well as
many of the schoolteachers of the Greek Orthodox millet.
The parish schools and the higher schools in Istanbul sought to develop in the
Greek youth primarily a religious not an ethnic identity through catechism in the
principles, dogmas, and precepts of the Greek Orthodox faith. With an important differentiating qualification: within the framework of the relative autonomy
of the millet system of Ottoman government in education, what we have elsewhere
called “controlled toleration” (Kazamias, 1991), Greek schools in certain areas
also taught the Greek language, Greek philosophy, and Greek literature. Given
this distinguishing factor, one could say that education in the schools of the Greek
Orthodox millet opened up wide intellectual and cultural horizons for the Greek
children (Kazamias, 1966; Kazamias, 1968).

--- [PDF Page 259 / Book Page 242] ---

242 Kazamias

The Advent/Challenge of Euro-Western Modernity
and Nation- /State-Building
Social, political, and intellectual historians have maintained/argued that the European
Enlightenment and the concomitant political and economic changes towards the latter
decades of the eighteenth century and the ensuing decades of the nineteenth century
ushered in the modern era and the associated modernization/modernity dynamic in
Euro-American history. The Euro-Western Enlightenment ideas of freedom, national
independence, and nation-state building had a strong and decisive influence on the
Greeks of the Ottoman Empire much earlier than they did on the other Ottoman subjects. By 1830, the Greeks had attained independence and soon after established what
the historian K. P. Kostis has appropriately called a “proto-modern state” (Kostis,
2006: 57). The Ottoman Sultans, on the other hand, introduced some western/modern
techniques, institutions, and ideas into the Empire in the nineteenth century, mainly
in order to consolidate the dissipating authority and efficiency of the government, and
thus strengthen a reformed Islamic Empire-State. It was not until the opening decades
of the twentieth century that efforts were made to restructure rather than reform the
Empire, and not until 1923 and after, that a radical break, similar to that of the Greeks
a hundred years earlier was made with the dismantling of the Ottoman Empire-State,
after an internal “revolution,” and the establishment in its place of the modern Turkish
Republic.

Euro-Western Modernity and the “Proto-Modern”
Greek Nation-State
In the last three decades of the eighteenth and the first two decades of the nineteenth
centuries, there was a noticeable intellectual and cultural “neo-Hellenic” national
awakening among the Greeks stemming largely from Greek émigrés and from Greek
mercantile paroikies or communities, mainly outside the boundaries of the Empire,
in central Europe, the Balkans, southern Russia, and throughout the Mediterranean
(Clogg, 1992: 23–25). Nurtured in the Euro-Western Enlightenment ideas of freedom
and national independence, and French Jacobinism, Greek intellectuals and political
activists (e.g., Adamantios Koraes and Rhigas Velestinlis/Pheraios), through word
and deed, exhorted the Greeks of the Ottoman Empire to recapture the spirit of their
illustrious ancestors, to rise against the Ottoman rulers, and to “resurrect” the Greek
“nation.” In the face of Ottoman decay and the weakening of the Sultan’s power over
the provincial governors, in the Peloponnese and Epirus in particular, the Greek insurrectionists, with outside help, were able to overthrow Ottoman rule and thus opened
the way for the establishment of an independent state (Kitromilides, 2000).
In the first decade of independence (1833–1843) the form of the newly established
state or system of government was an absolute monarchy imposed by the European
powers—England, France, and Russia. Absolute power was wielded by the imported
Prince Otto of Bavaria, who was enthroned as king and who, in turn, was aided by a
coterie of Bavarian “ministers” and officials (Svoronos, 1976: 77ff). “In form,” Keith

--- [PDF Page 260 / Book Page 243] ---

Modernity, State-Formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece 243

Legg, a student of comparative politics, has written, “the Greek kingdom was similar
to a colonial administration … all appointments and revenue remained the prerogative
of the king; there was no constitution or representative assembly, and the participation
of Greeks in the formal decision-making structures of the kingdom was negligible”
(Legg, 1969: 55).
By 1864, the new Greek state developed into a western form of constitutional
monarchy, “equipped with the trappings of liberal parliamentary democracy” (Clogg,
1992: 51). In 1862, King Otto was dethroned and a new Assembly (Voule) was elected,
represented disproportionately by a rising wealthy bourgeoisie who were supported by
the large landowners (Svoronos, 1976: 96). In 1863, another European prince—Prince
George of the Danish House of the Glucksburgs—was enthroned as King George I of
the Hellenes and in 1864, a new Constitution was promulgated (Clogg, 1992: 55–56).
The Greek state/polity, as constructed by the Constitution of 1864, has been characterized as Constitutional Monarchy, Crowned Democracy (Svoronos, 1976), and even
as Parliamentary Democracy (Dertilis, 2005). The Constitution of 1864, continued to
grant the King considerable power: he was declared “irresponsible”; he could appoint
and dismiss his ministers and all officers and officials; and he could suspend or prorogue the Voule (Clogg, 1992: 51; Bickford-Smith, 1893: 263). Furthermore, while the
press was declared “free” and “censorship” was prohibited, publications could be seized
“in case of insult to the Christian religion, or to the person of the King.” And while all
Greeks were declared “equal before the law,” only Greek citizens could be admitted
into the public service (Kazamias, 1974: 20). At the same time, the Constitution of
1864 contained distinct democratic elements, viz., “all authority emanated from the
Nation, certain royal privileges were limited, legislative authority was the responsibility of the popularly elected Voule and executive power belonged to the King, which he
exercised through his responsible ministers” (Svoronos, 1976: 76).
In more recent historical studies (Dertilis, 2005; Kostis, 2006) the Greek political
system that was established during the postindependence early period (1833–1864)
has been characterized as a “proto-modern” liberal democratic state. According to
Dertilis (2005: 764–765):
Greece is one of the first counties in the world that adopted the right of universal
male suffrage, and established a form of democratic parliamentary regime, however incomplete, problematic, intermittently unstable and with varying degrees
of democratization and authoritarianism it may be characterized … [this system]
was implanted into an entrenched older system of patronage which linked the
patrons of the upper classes with the farmers/the agricultural population. This
implantation created a special/unique and equalizing mixture of democracy and
patronage/clientism.
In addition to such democratic deficits as “patronage” and “authoritarianism,” the
appellation “proto-modern” rather than “modern” to characterize the newly formed
Greek state, is appropriate because, as the historian Kostis quite rightly points out,
the Greek polity was not entirely “secularist” in that there was no clear Church–State
separation, as is commonly the case with “modern nation states” (Kostis, 2006: 51).

--- [PDF Page 261 / Book Page 244] ---

244 Kazamias

It should be noted here that by a royal decree in 1833, the Orthodox Church, hitherto
under the Patriarchate of Constantinople, was proclaimed to be independent from the
Patriarchate, and be known as the “autocephalous” national Church of Greece with
its own independent Head and Holy Synod. By the same token, however, although
Orthodoxy was recognized as the established religion of the new state and was granted
“a privileged position in relation to other religious establishments,” by the royal decree
of 1833 the Church recognized the King as its head, thus making it “subservient to
the state” and essentially turning it “into a state agency under the supervision of a
ministry, called the Ministry of Education and Religions” (Koliopoulos & Veremis,
2002/2004: 141–42).
The restrictions on the power of the Church over political, social, and cultural
activity—including education—notwithstanding, religion as a body of doctrines and
beliefs, and as an organized institution—the Church—continued to be an important element in the constitution and the functioning of the independent nation-state.
Religion and the Church were particularly important in the field of education and the
general cultural orientation of the people. Religious instruction and other religious
exercises (e.g., church attendance on Sundays and holidays) were compulsory for all
schoolchildren. In the formation of the “proto-modern” and later “modern” state, the
Greek Orthodox Church did not relinquish its traditional function/role of articulating and guarding the ethos of the Greek nation or the ideals, values, and aspirations
of the common Greek. It was the Bishop of Patras that signaled the uprising in the
Morea in 1821; and priests had fought in the War of Independence literally with
guns and figuratively with icons and prayers. The ideology of an expanded Greek
State—the Megali Idea (Grand Idea)—which pervaded Greek national life down to
the first decades of the twentieth century, was in part fanned by many clergymen who
continued to look toward Russian help to reestablish the older Christian Byzantine
Empire. In short, to the Church, faith (pistis), nationalism (ethnikismos), Hellenism
(ellinismos), and education (paideia) were inextricably intertwined (Kokosalakis,
2004: 26–39).

Education and the Proto-Modern Hellenocentric Nation-State
Education/schooling, the historian Hobsbaum has written, in the nineteenth century
“was the most powerful weapon … for forming nations” (quoted by Green, 1990: 35).
The importance of education in the building of the Greek nation-state was emphasized by the Greek intellectuals mentioned above, who lived in Europe in the years
prior to the outbreak of the War of Independence in 1821 and who were nurtured
in the European Enlightenment ideas of individual liberty, constitutionalism, republicanism liberalism, equality before the law, the nation-state, popular sovereignty,
citizenship, and national consciousness.(Petropoulos, 1968:140). A leading figure
in the Neo-Hellenic Enlightenment, as noted above, was Adamantios Koraes (1748–
1833). A classical scholar living in Paris, Koraes, according to John Campbell and
Philip Sherrard, two Oxford scholars, “envisaged the “emancipation” of Greece in

--- [PDF Page 262 / Book Page 245] ---

Modernity, State-Formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece 245

terms of the secular liberalism and humanist enlightenment of the contemporary West”
(Campbell & Sherrard, 1968: 41). Koraes believed that to attain true freedom, the
largely uneducated Greek Christian Orthodox Ottoman subjects—the rayas—must
be enlightened and educated by being imbued with the ideas and values of western
liberalism and classical Greek paideia (culture) and by developing “a formal [Greek]
language for scholars and the state” (Koliopoulos & Veremis, 2002: 8). And, in line
with the political ideology of the Enlightenment, Count John Kapodistrias, who in
1828 was elected as the first “Governor” or President of Greece by the revolutionary
Assembly of Troezene, also placed high value on education as an instrument of political development, state-formation, and nation-building. “The spread of education and
the acquisition of freedom,” according to his biographer, “constitute for Kapodistrias
two coextensive meanings (Koukou, 1958: 32). Kapodistrias was also impressed by the
modern pedagogical ideas of Pestalozzi, as developed by de Fellenberg in Switzerland,
which he introduced into the Ionian Islands and later into free Greece. At the same
time, Kapodistrias believed that good education must be based on the ethical principles and spiritual values of the Christian religion (Kazamias, 1974: II-5).
Kapodistrias’ aim insofar as education was concerned, was to establish elementary
schools in every village and province; as to more advanced instruction, his avowed
policy was “to institute central schools in the different provinces of the nation”
(Kaldis, 1959: 173). But, following Kapodistrias’ assassination, the construction of a
“national system of education” as a basic desideratum of state-formation and Greek
nation-building was left to King Otto and his Bavarian bureaucracy. This was done in
the 1830s with the enactment of three decrees which laid down the statutory basis for
the construction of such a system: one decree in 1834 on the organization of elementary education; another in 1836, regulating secondary education; and a third in 1837,
establishing a university. Briefly, the so-called Bavarian Plan for a national system
of education provided for a centralized, graded, and selective system of education
consisting of compulsory elementary schooling for all children between the ages of
5 to 12, first level secondary education in middle schools known as Hellenic schools
(grades 5–7), selective upper secondary schools known as Gymnasia (grades 8–11),
and a selective university called the Othonian University. As with the new state, the
newly constructed system of education was centralized, authoritarian, and bureaucratized. The respective decrees/laws specified in detail the curriculum of the elementary
schools, the Hellenic schools, and the Gymnasia, as well as the qualifications, the
classification, and the salaries of teachers. Authority and responsibility for all educational matters (appointment, transfer, and dismissal of teachers, curricula/programs
of study, supervision of schools) were vested in the central organs of government
(Dimaras, 1973; Bouzakis, 1999/2002).
In its institutional structure and governance, the educational system of the
“proto-modern” Greek state, as established in the postrevolutionary years, reflected
post-Enlightenment continental European modernist patterns, viz., centralization
and bureaucratization; compulsory public and essentially secular elementary/popular
education; selective secondary and university education; curricula/programs of study
that emphasized the nonpractical, nonscientific “humanistic canon” (the classics and

--- [PDF Page 263 / Book Page 246] ---

246 Kazamias

languages). In structure and ideology, the elementary education law of 1834 bore a
strong resemblance to the French Guizot Law of 1833; the Hellenic school and the
Gymnasion were virtual replicas of the German Lateinische Schule and Gymnasium; and
in its mission, organization, faculties, and programs of study, the Othonian University
(named after King Otto) reflected the nineteenth century German neo-humanist “idea
of the university” associated with Wilhelm von Humbodt (Bouzakis, 1999/2002: 40–45;
Phirippis, 2007).
From the above, it can be seen that several features of the newly constructed Greek
national system of education were “transferred” to the fledgling proto-modern Greek
state from post-Enlightenment Europe, mainly from France and Germany. Such an
educational transfer has been criticized by Greek leftist historians as involving the
uncritical transplantation and imposition of a Western, centralized, elitist, and classicist
educational system that was foreign to the Greeks of the Ottoman Empire and had no
relation to the Greek contemporary realities (Bouzakis, 2002; Katsikas & Therianos,
2004). Such an interpretation, however, oversimplifies a complex historical phenomenon and is at best misleading. For one thing, the contemporary Greek intellectuals
and commercial elites, as indicated above, were themselves favorably disposed to the
introduction of Western European educational ideas and institutional patterns, e.g.,
centralized state education and classical humanistic curricula, from what they considered to be an Enlightened Europe (see Dimaras, 1973). Another factor that must be
considered is that “classicism” did not only occupy a central position in the curriculum
of the European secondary schools—the lycees in France, the Gymnasien in Germany,
and the Grammar and Public School in England—and the European universities (Butts,
1947: 429–435); it was also not alien to the schools of the Greek Orthodox millet of
the Ottoman Empire. Furthermore, classical Greek education was very prestigious in
post-Enlightenment Europe and America (Winterer, 2002). And when the Greek War
of Independence broke out, Europe was swept by Philhellenism and classical humanism. In the case of the German neo-humanism and the so-called Hellenomania of the
nineteenth century as advocated by, among others, Wilhelm von Humbodt, Friedrich
Wolf, Gottfried Fichte, Friedrich von Schiller, and Friedrich Schleirmacher, it was
believed that the study of the ancients and Greek antiquity (Altertumswissenschaft)
would regenerate morally and politically the German people after the defeats they had
by Napoleon, it would unify them and create a modern German nation (Bernal, 1987:
283–295). Considering these endogenous and exogenous circumstances, it would not
be unreasonable to postulate that in the Greek case, the transferred educational cultural
forms, notably Classicism, were quite understandable. Indeed, “classical education” in
the minds of the Greek intellectuals, especially the influential classical scholar Koraes,
was necessary for the liberation and “resurrection” of the Hellenic/Greek nation and
culture which were traced to ancient Hellas and medieval Byzantium, and whose
continuity was interrupted by the Ottoman conquerors. Modernity in the new state,
therefore, meant to a large degree the revival of older/ancient Hellenic and Byzantine
Christian values, attitudes, and states of mind. Stated in another way, modernity in
the Greek state meant the creation of a modern Greek national identity by reinventing
the classical Hellenic and the Byzantine Christian traditions (Koliopoulos & Veremis,
2002: 242–243).

--- [PDF Page 264 / Book Page 247] ---

Modernity, State-Formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece 247

Education, the Greek State, and Nation-Building:
Transforming the Rayas—the Ottoman Greek
Subjects—into Hellenes/Citizens of Hellas
“The nation is not the cause but the result, of the State,” the savant Lord Acton has once
said, and further “it is the State which creates the nation, not the nation the State” (Quoted
by Emerson, 1962: 114). The mechanisms for forging national identity and building the
modern Greek nation-state included: (a) a centralized national educational system—elementary, middle, and secondary schools, and postsecondary higher institutions; (b) a
“constructed” common national language; and (c) a “constructed” historical cultural tradition. Modernity and nation-building in the new state meant to a large degree the revival
of ancient Hellenic ideas and values, hence in the schools there was a strong emphasis
on classical Greek paideia coupled with the reinvention of the Byzantine Christian tradition (Koliopoulos & Veremis, 2002: 242–243). The cultivation and promotion of Greek
national identity, of being “Greek” and Orthodox Christian, was carried out through the
manifest curriculum—especially through the emphasis placed on the classical Greek
language and culture and the teaching of the Greek Orthodox religion—and through the
“hidden” curriculum, e.g., the celebration of national holidays, compulsory churchgoing, and though other Helleno-Christian rituals (Dimaras, 1973; Katsikas & Therianos,
2004). Additionally, the Othonian University, later in the century renamed National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, was conceived to be a national institution and an
important mechanism in Greek state-formation and nation-building. Its mission, among
other things, was (a) to construct and cultivate a Hellenic ethno-cultural identity through
the cultivation of classical Greek paideia, and (b) to educate and train echelons for the
civil bureaucracy in the national and local state apparatuses (Phirippis, 2007).

Building the Modern Liberal Democratic
State—1909/1910–1935—A Paternalist
Democratic State?
The 60-year period, following the enactment of the new constitution in 1864, was a
period of irredentist Hellenocentric nationalism, territorial expansion, internal upheavals, intermittent wars, the rise of a “bourgeois middle class,” political liberalism, and
the adumbration of an interventionist Welfare State. It was also a period of neo-Hellenic
cultural revival, of educational reform and “non-reform.” A hegemonic element in the
Greek nation-building ideology until 1923 was the so-called Great Idea (Megali Idea),
the irredentist ideology and policy of creating a greater Helleno-Christian state with
the reinstatement of Constantinople, the fallen Byzantine metropolis, as its capital.
Modernization and nation-building during this period signified an invented nationalist tradition that combined classical Hellas, Orthodox Byzantium, and Enlightened
Europe, and the development of a national system of education with the same constituent elements. Notable among the state-formation developments during this period
was the Revolution of Goudi in 1909 by the Military League and the emergence of the

--- [PDF Page 265 / Book Page 248] ---

248 Kazamias

Liberal Party under Eleftherios Venizelos, a rising political star from Crete, representing
the rise of the bourgeois middle class as a modernizing liberal political force.
The 1909 Revolution of Goudi marked the end of an era in state-formation and nationbuilding and the beginning of another, namely, the construction of a modern liberal
democratic state. Venizelos and the Liberals, who were voted to power in 1910, envisioned the construction of a modern right-of-center liberal democratic state modeled
after the contemporary Western European prototypes. The revision of the Constitution
in 1911 was a step in that direction. According to the revised Constitution, individual
liberties were guaranteed and the foundations were laid for a Welfare State. Within
this constitutional framework, and in line with developments in contemporary Western
Europe, the Venizelos liberal state was to be an “interventionist, rather than a laissezfaire liberal state” (Tsoucalas, 1981; Tassopoulos, 2006). By 1920, as Eric Hobsbawm
has written, Greece was among the many states of Europe west of the Soviet borders
that had liberal constitutional governments (Hobsbawm, 1995: 146–147).
Essential tools in the building of the Greek liberal state and concomitantly, in the development of national identity were education, language, and history. During the period of
1863/4–1923 developments in national education were uneven, marked by actions and
reactions and the interplay of tradition al conservatism and liberal modernity (Dimaras,
2006). In 1899, 1913, and 1917, state-initiated efforts were made to modernize the structure and orientation of the educational system and the school curriculum by bringing it
more in line with developments in Western Europe, and adjusting it to the developing
capitalist economy and a bourgeois class society (Bouzakis, 2006). Actually, most of the
recommended reforms were not enacted and remained on paper only.
Nevertheless, some aspects of the state-initiated reform movement as well as some
non-state-initiated modernizing cultural and educational developments during this
period are noteworthy. First and foremost, was the state-initiated “language educational
reform” (glosso-ekpaideutiki metarrythmisi) that centered in the use of the demotiki—
the spoken form of the Greek language—in the schools. In this connection, it should be
noted that since the establishment of the national system of education in the 1830s, the
language taught in the schools and the official language of the state was the katharevousa,
a pure form of modern Greek that was different from the spoken “demotic” form, which
also was the language used by the new generation of Greek literati.
The language reform effort and some other notable contemporary non-state educational initiatives such as the establishment in 1908 of the Girls’ Higher Elementary
School of Volos by A. Delmouzos, a progressive demoticist, and the organization of the
Ekpaideutikos Omilos (Educational Association) by contemporary leading educational
demoticists in Athens in 1910, were integral parts of the neo-Hellenic sociocultural
movement known as demoticism or demotikismos. Demoticism was a social and cultural modernization movement, in that it extended beyond the confines of pedagogy
and the use of the spoken Greek language, i.e., the demotiki, in the schools. As such, it
was envisaged as the medium for social integration and nation-building. According to
Psycharis, a leading personality of the neo-Hellenic cultural revival and demoticism:
Two things are required for a nation to become a nation: extension of its territorial
boundaries, and the creation of its own literature. When it demonstrates that it

--- [PDF Page 266 / Book Page 249] ---

Modernity, State-Formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece 249

knows what the value of the popular language is and when it is not ashamed of this
linguistic form, then we shall see that it has become a nation. (Kordatos, 1943)
Related to language and Greek nation-building was history. After the formation
of the Greek state, it was necessary to transform the Greek rayas, known as graekoi or romaioi/romioi (Romans) into Hellines polites (Hellenic/Greek citizens), an
appellation that signified the formation of modern ethno-national Greek citizens by
returning to the Hellenes (Greeks) of classical Hellas (Greece). In this process, history as constructed by the nationalist historian Constantine Paparrigopoulos argued
that there was an unbroken continuum in the history of the Greek nation or ethnos
that was divided into three phases—the Classical Hellenic, the Byzantine Christian,
and the Modern European. In this manner, as Gallant notes, Paparrigopoulos “created a unity out of the Greek past and, of equal importance, a unity of all the Greek
people” (Gallant, 2001: 72–73. Also see Koliopoulos & Veremis, 2004: 231–235;
Clogg, 1992: 2–3).
Other educational mechanisms used to “Hellenise” a regenerated Hellenic national
state, in addition to language and history, were geography, architecture, literature, folklore, and archaeology. According to Gallant:
Thus through architecture, education, art and literature, in public festivals and
celebrations, came to internalize the new national Hellenic identity that incorporated both the Hellenic and Romeic, both the heritage of the classical world
and the Orthodox Christian one. So successful was the process that, as Just,
Herzfeld, and others have noted, all sense of it being an “invention” was lost.
Instead an identity grounded in “history” became timeless and primordial. As
a popular expression has it, “we have always been Greeks.” (Gallant, 2001: 74;
Koliopoulos & Veremis, 2004: 243)
Venizelos’ liberal project, that included educational reform, what Tassopoulos has
called “inclusive (liberal) constitutionalism” (Tassopoulos, 2006: 252), which was
charted during the period 1911–1916, was not to be. Wars—the Balkan wars, World
War I, and the disastrous Asia Minor campaign; coups and countercoups; and political crises, most significantly the constitutional crisis known as Ethnikos Dihasmos
or National Schism, eroded the foundations of the Venizelist modernizing liberal
constitutionalism. After an unstable interregnum, Venizelos and the Liberals, who
returned to power in 1928, renewed their efforts to modernize the Greek state and
strengthen the republican regime during Venizelos’ premiership in 1928–1932.
Among these modernizing endeavors were certain institutional changes in the system of democratic governance, e.g., the establishment of the senate and the council
of state (as the supreme administrative court), and reform in education and in the
Welfare State by enacting a comprehensive scheme of social insurance. According
to I. D. Stefanidis:
Social insurance was understood as part and parcel of a fairly paternalist conception of the modern state. The latter ought to care for the welfare and “peace of

--- [PDF Page 267 / Book Page 250] ---

250 Kazamias

mind” of the working class and provide mechanisms that could serve as “a safety
valve against violent overthrow and revolution.” Although it did not come into
full effect until 1937, law 5377 was a stepping stone to the Greek “welfare state.”
(Stefanidis, 2006: 200–201)
In the new elections of 1933, under the plurality electoral system, the anti-Venizelist
conservative political forces won a majority and they attained power. But political
turmoil continued: two attempted coups, the short-lived Kondylis dictatorship, the restoration of the monarchy, and on August 4, 1936, the Metaxas fascist dictatorship.
In the same year, Venizelos died in exile. Summing up the fortunes of the Venizelist
liberal project, the historian Tassopoulos wrote:
Under these circumstances, Eleftherios Venizelos’ original project for an inclusive political system, bolstered with the safeguards and guarantees of the rule of
law was abandoned and the institutional achievements of his first term in office
were reversed and annulled. As a consequence, Greece’s constitutional institutions entered a long period of instability and crisis, which ended only in 1975.
(Tassopoulos, 2006: 265)
The erosion of the Venizelist inclusive [liberal] constitutional project notwithstanding,
one should not underestimate the historical significance of the already mentioned nonstate modernizing educational initiatives, even though they were not entirely successful,
or the equally unsuccessful state initiatives during the first Venizelist administration in
1913 and 1917 and the second in 1929. In both “episodes,” an attempt was made to
reform and reorient the educational system by making changes in its organizational
structure and in the content/curriculum and the pedagogy of schooling (Bouzakis, 2006:
75–78, 96–99). In the second episode (in 1929), Venizelos, the prime minister, declared
himself in favor of restricting classical education to the “selected few” and strengthening vocational education, while George Papandreou, under whose Premiership later,
in the 1960s, the famous liberal reforms of 1964–1965 were enacted, unequivocally
declared that “since education belongs to the State … the ideals of education are also
the ideals of the State … the ideals of our national education are the ideals of Greek
democracy” (Quoted in Kazamias, 1974: 61 also see Kitromilides, 2006).

The Post-World War II Liberal Democratic State: The Political
Dominance of the Conservative Right, 1952–1963
Following World War II and the Civil War of the late 1940s, there were significant
changes in the Greek political landscape. From the perspective of this chapter, such
changes can be interpreted as indicative of Greece’s continued process of developing
and consolidating a stable Western European form of liberal democratic polity, or
to put it differently, of “democratizing democracy.” One such change was the reconstitution of the multiparty system in the 1950s and 1960s. In addition to a strong
ethnocentric and reactionary Right that attained and held power until 1963, there was

--- [PDF Page 268 / Book Page 251] ---

Modernity, State-Formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece 251

a resurgence of the Liberal Center, which, although fragmented, under the leadership
of the veteran liberal George Papandreou managed to assume the reins of a shortlived government in 1963. Equally significant was the countable rise of the political
Left. With the dismantling of the military dictatorship of 1967–1974, and the restoration of democratic rule in 1974, these reconstituted political forces—Conservative
Right, Liberal Center, and Left (Socialist and Communist)—vied for political power
in the restored and transformed democratic polity. In the elections that were held
in 1974, a reformed rightist Conservative Party—the New Democracy—under K.
Karamanlis, won the elections and formed a government. But seven years later, in
1981, the newly formed Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK), under Andreas
Papandreou, won the elections and formed Greece’s first socialist government. In
the ensuing years, the two major parties—PASOK and the New Democrach—succeeded each other in the control of the state government. Today, the neoconservative
right-of-center New Democracy is in power, with the left-of-center PASOK and the
Communist Party of Greece (Kommounistikó Kómma Elládas, KKE) as the major
opposition parties. The Liberal Center as an organized political force all but disappeared, but the contemporary Greek state can legitimately be characterized as a
stable Liberal Democratic State.
In the meantime, there was a concurrent change in the Greek polity (politeuma),
i.e., the constitutional structure of the state. In 1952, a new Constitution was ratified,
which reaffirmed the previous principle/provision that the Greek polity was “crowned
democracy” or a “constitutional monarchy” with the King retaining the same extensive powers as before. But with the restoration of democracy in the 1970s, the new
Constitution of 1975 provided that the form of the Greek polity/state was changed
to a Presidential Constitutional Republic/Democracy with all the rights—individual
and social—and responsibilities of modern liberal democracies and democratic citizenship. The revised Constitution of 2001, in force today basically reaffirmed the
principles and provisions of the 1975 Constitution. The contemporary Greek polity has
been characterized as a modern liberal democracy, that is congruent with European
and international developments, but with no qualification, namely, the relationship
between the Church and the State.
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, the constructed postindependence “protomodern” Greek state was not, strictly speaking, “secular” in that there was no clear
separation between the state and the Orthodox Church. Orthodoxy was recognized as
the established religion of the new state and was granted a privileged position in relation to other religious establishments. It was further noted that, despite restrictions on
the power of the Church, religion continued to be an important factor in Greek nationbuilding. This rather ambiguous Church–State relationship and the role of religion in
nation-state formation were reiterated in subsequent constitutions, including the one
in force today. Article 3 of the 2001 Constitution states that the “dominant/established
religion of Greece is the religion of the Eastern Orthodox Church of Christ.” At the
same time, Article 13 provides of “freedom of religious conscience” which is protected
by law. Related to this issue, however, is Article 16 which refers to education/paideia,
and which states that “paideia constitutes a basic mission of the State and aims at the
ethical, intellectual, spiritual, vocational and physical agoge (education/training) of

--- [PDF Page 269 / Book Page 252] ---

252 Kazamias

the Greeks, the development of ethnic-national and religious consciousness and the
formation of free and responsible citizens” (http://www.parliament.gr/politeuma.asp).
As in the previous periods examined above, an integral part of the postwar modernization/westernization process of state-formation and nation-building, was the
reform of the national system of education. The reconstruction and reorientation of
the educational system were deemed all the more necessary in view of Greece’s initial
association in the 1960s with the newly created European Economic Community, and
after 1975, Greece’s quest to become a full member of the supranational European
Union, under the famous motto “We Belong to Europe,” a goal which was accomplished in 1981.
The movement for comprehensive educational reform began in earnest in the 1950s
and continued in the ensuing decades. Important reform “episodes” in this trajectory
were those of 1964 by the Center Union liberal government of George Papandreou,
of 1976–1977 by the New Democracy neoconservative government of Constantine
Karamanlis, of 1982–1985 by the PASOK socialist government of Andreas Papandreou
and of 1997–1998 by the PASOK “social democratic” government of Costas Simitis.
In all these “episodes” the reform discourse revolved around the politico-social and
sociocultural principles of “modernization” and “democratization”.
With socialist PASOK’S ascension/accession to power in 1981, the educational reform
discourse began to take a more radical ideological trajectory. The educational discourse
on PASOK’s political slogan of “change” (allagi) was framed mainly around the “policy
talk” and “policy practice” of democratization, egalitarianism, “deconcentration and
decentralization” in the administration/governance of the state system, “democratic planning in education,” public participation and self-government at the provincial and local
levels, restructuring of universities (abolition of the authoritarian system of “chair,” and
greater student participation in the decision-making organs of university governance),
strengthening and upgrading of technical and vocational education, and restructuring
of elementary and secondary education that included, inter alia, the establishment, on
an experimental basis, of “comprehensive multilateral” lyceums (EPLs) (Kazamias &
Kassotakis, 1995; Ministry of National Education and Religions, 1985; Kazamias &
Roussakis, 2003).
PASOK’s educational reform orientation was consonant with the broader socialist
reform ideology, called the “third way,” which aimed at a broader politico-socioeconomic transformation. It is patently clear that the reform discourses during the
first PASOK administration (1981–1985) had socialist leftist overtones and ideas
drawn from contemporary ideologies that derived from a revived neo-Marxist tradition. But as A. Papandreou, the prime minister, declared, the vision was “a third-way
socialism,” a participatory and democratic socialism, based on popular sovereignty
(Papandreou, 1982).
The reforms of the PASOK governments of the 1980s did not measure up to the
reformers’ high expectations in paving the way for the declared “third-way” socialist
transformation of the modern Greek state and society. After 1985, the “third-way”
socialist ideology was all but abandoned. By then, PASOK, still in power, had shifted
its negative position regarding Greece’s European orientation (in 1981 Greece became
a full member of the European Economic Community, later the European Union), and

--- [PDF Page 270 / Book Page 253] ---

Modernity, State-Formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece 253

had become unequivocally pro-European. Concurrently, its orientation veered towards
the developing “neo-European” modernization trajectory, a path more towards a modern “social-liberal democracy” than the earlier “third-way” socialist democracy. This
orientation became more evident after PASOK’s return to power in 1993, and especially after the death of A. Papandreou and the election of Costas Simitis as prime
minister in 1996.
The PASOK new social-liberal democratic government embarked upon another
ambitious program of educational reform that encompassed virtually all aspects of the
educational system: governance, control, institutional organization, curricula, pedagogy, teachers, intercultural education, and the education of minorities. The reform
discourse—policy talk and policy practice—of the Simitis government continued to
revolve around the twin politico-socio-economic concepts/ideologies of “democratization” and “modernization,” with perhaps more emphasis on the latter, hence the
characterization of Simitis and the PASOK reformers, e.g., G. Arsenis, the minister
of education, as “modernizers.” The Greek educational “crisis” was perceived to be
one of the persistence of chronic system pathologies and the “asynchronization” of
the educational system with the European Union and the global cosmos that was being
constructed and in which Greece chose to place itself. The persistent pathologies of
Greek education included: (a) a centralized, bureaucratic, hierarchical, and cumbersome system of governance; (b) a double undemocratic educational network (general
and vocational) that functioned differentially for social groups and “asynchronically”
in relation to society and the world of work; (c) a type of schooling that was characterized by formalism, authoritarian pedagogy, and anachronistic educational knowledge;
(d) high dropout rates; (e) inequalities of opportunity between urban and rural areas
and among different occupational groups; and (f) social exclusion of ethnic and religious minorities.
The reforms needed to get out of the educational crisis, to correct the deficiencies
of the system, and to modernize and democratize it, were spelled out in the government policy document Education 2000—Toward a paideia of open horizons (1997).
A noticeable new note in the modernizers’ reformist discourse was that education must
be functionally related to the economic and social developments in the international
world, especially the European Union modernity cosmos. At the same time, the reform
discourse emphasized such democratic principles and policy goals as: democratic
education; participation of school principals, regional administrative officers, and
school counselors in the evaluation of schools; teacher participation in the evaluation
of students; a degree of decentralization in the planning of education (from the center
to the regions; the institutionalization of a “unified lyceum” (eniaio lykeio), a “comprehensive” type of upper secondary school; abolition of the numerous clauses for a
more open access to tertiary institutions; the modernization of the curricula and the
“redefinition” of Greek paideia by making it less ethnocentric and more Eurocentric;
and special programs for religious and ethno-cultural minorities and for children with
learning disabilities (Ministry of National Education and Religions, 1997).
In connection with this chapter, it would be relevant here to refer to another reform
discourse in the context of the recent Greek modernization and democratization
trajectory. This is Law 2413/1996 that referred to intercultural education. It was the

--- [PDF Page 271 / Book Page 254] ---

254 Kazamias

first time that the modern Greek state officially recognized that Greek society was
culturally diverse. The recognition of this phenomenon, which was in line with the
contemporary European modernization discourse, has raised questions about the traditional ethnocentric character of the Greek educational system. The public discourses in
this area have been of two kinds. The first has been called the “democratic humanitarian
discourse,” which adopted a philanthropic and egalitarian point of view; it emphasized
equal opportunity, nondiscrimination, and general welfare. The second type of discourse has been labeled “the discourse of xenophobia.” In this connection, it should be
noted that “ethnocentricity” and the reproduction of national identity traditionally have
been characteristic of Greek education. Nowadays, according to E. Zambeta, although
these aspects of education are being criticized, many of the education political actors
often lapse into ethnocentrism (Zambeta, 2001).

A Stronger “Guardian” or “Headquarter” State
The recent “modernization” and “democratization” reform discourse as presented
above, could be interpreted to mean that the intention of the policymakers was to
restructure the state steering and control mechanisms in Greek education in the direction of “decentralization” or “deconcentration” in decision-making and the governance
of the system. However, on closer examination of all pertinent provisions in the relevant
reform texts, a different picture emerges: that of a “stronger” and more “controlling”
state. Contrary to the professed principle of the modernization cum democratization of
the post-1974 Greek polity, what actually has emerged has been a “stronger” and more
regulatory state. Indeed, in “modernizing” the state and its mechanisms of governance
that included education, Costas Simitis when prime minister, and his political-ideological confreres in the government used the terms “strategic” and “headquarter state”
(Kazamias & Roussakis, 2003: 22).

References
Bernal, M. (1987). Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization, Vol.1, The Fabrication of
Ancient Greece. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Bickford-Smith, R.A.H. (1983). Greece under King George. London. Richard Bentley.
Bouzakis, S. (2006). Neohelliniki Ekpaideusi, 1821–1928 (Modern Greek Education, 1821–1928). Fifth
Edition. Athens: Gutenberg (in Greek).
Bouzakis, S. (1999/2002). Neohelliniki Expaideusi, 1821–1928 (Modern Greek Education, 1821–1928).
Athens: Gutenberg (in Greek).
Butts, R. F. (1947). A Cultural History of Education: Reassessing Our Educational Traditions. New York
and London: McGraw-Hill.
Campbell, J., & Sherrard, P. (1968). Modern Greece. London: Ernest-Benn.
Clogg, R. (1992). A Concise History of Greece. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dertilis, G. (2005). Historia tou Ellinikou Kratous, 1830–1920 (History of the Greek State, 1830–1920),
Vols. A and B. Athens: Estia, I. D., & Kollarou & Co. (in Greek).
Dimaras, A. (Ed.) (1973). He Metarrythmisi pou den Egine (The Reform That Never Was). Athens: Hermes
(in Greek).
Dimaras, A. (2006). Modernization and reaction in Greek education during the Venizelist era. In P. M.
Kitromilides (Ed.), Eleftherios venizelos: The Trials of Statesmanship (pp. 319–345). Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.

--- [PDF Page 272 / Book Page 255] ---

Modernity, State-Formation, Nation Building, and Education in Greece 255
Emerson, R. (1962). From Empire to Nation: The Rise to Self-Assertion of Asian and African Peoples.
Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Gallant, T. W. (2001). Modern Greece. London: Hodder Arnold.
Green, A. (1990). Education and State Formation: The Rise of Education Systems in England, France and
the USA. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Harvey, D. (1990). The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Hobsbawm, E. J. (1995). Nations and Nationalism Since 1780. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaldis, W. (1959). John Kapodistrias and the Modern Greek State. Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Wisconsin, Madison.
Katsikas, C., & Therianos, C. N. (2004). Istoria tis Neoellinikis Ekpaideusis—Apo tin Idrisi tou Ellinikou
Kratous Mehri to 2004 (History of the Neohellenic/Modern Greek Education—From the Establishment
of the Greek State Until 2004). Athens: Savvalas (in Greek).
Kazamias, A. M. (1966). Education and the Quest for Modernity in Turkey. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Kazamias, A. M. (1968). Transfer and modernity in Greek and Turkish education. In A. M. Kazamias & E.
H. Epstein (Eds.), Schools in Transition: Essays in Comparative Education (pp. 7–31). Boston: Allyn
& Bacon.
Kazamias, A. M. (1974). Education and Modernization in Greece. U.S. Department of Health, Education
and Welfare, Office of Education, Bureau of Research No. 7–1111, Washington, DC.
Kazamias, A. M., & Kassotakis, M. (Eds.) (1995). Elliniki ekpaideusi: Prooptikes anasyngrotisis kai eksynchronismou (Greek Education: Perspectives on Reconstruction and Modernization). Athens: Serios (in Greek).
Kazamias, A. M., & Roussakis, Y. (2003). Crisis and reform in Greek education. European Education,
35(3), 7–30.
Kitromilides, P. M. (2000). Neohellinikos Diafotismos: Oi Politikes kai Koinonikes Idees (Neohellenic
Enlightenment: The Political and Social Ideas). Athens: Morfotiko Idrima Ethnikis Trapezas
(in Greek).
Kitromilides, P. M. (Ed.) (2006). Eleftherios Venizelos: The Trials of Statesmanship. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Kokosalakis, N. (2004). He elliniki tautotita kai Evropi: Mia idiomorphic istoriki schesi (Greek identity
and Europe: A particular historical relation). In Ethniki kai Evropaiki Tautotita (National and European
Identity) (pp. 21–56). Athens: KEKROKOP (in Greek).
Kordatos, J. K. (1943). Historia tou glossikou mas zitimatos (History of our language question. Athens:
G. Loukatos (in Greek).
Koliopoulos, J. S., & Veremis, T. M. (2002/2004). Greece: The Modern Sequel from 1821 to the Present.
London: Hurst.
Kostis, K. P. (2006). He Sigrotisi tou Kratous stin Ellada, 1830–1914 (The formation of the state in Greece,
1830–1914). In T. Dragona & F. Birtek (Eds.), Ellada kai Tourkia: Politis kai Ethnos-Kratos (Greece
and Turkey: Citizen and Nation-State). Athens: Alexandreia.
Koukou, H. E. (1958). Ho Kapodistrias kai he Paideia, 1803–1822 (Kapodistrias and Education). Athens:
H. Koukou (in Greek).
Legg, K. R. (1969). Politics in Modern Greece. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Ministry of National Education and Religions. (1985). Law Framework, No. 1566/85. Athens: Organisation
of Textbook Publications.
Ministry of National Education and Religions. (1997). Education 2000—Toward a Paideia of Open
Horizons. Athens: Government Printing Office.
Papandreou, A. (1982). On the way to social change. Exormisi, Athens newspaper.
Petropoulos, J. A. (1968). Politics and Statecraft in the Kingdom of Greece, 1833–1843. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Phirippis, E. K. (2007). To Athinisi Ellinikon Pandidaktirion: Othoneio Panepisiemio (The Athenian Greek
Pan-Instructional Institution: The Othonian University). Athens: Bibliotechnia (in Greek).
Stefanidis, I. D. (2006). Reconstructing Greece as a European state: Venizelos’ last premiership. In P. M.
Kitromilides (Ed.), Eleftherios Venizelos: The Trials of Statesmanship. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.

--- [PDF Page 273 / Book Page 256] ---

256 Kazamias
Svoronos, N. G. (1976). Episkopisi tis Neohellinikis Istorias (Review of Modern Greek History). Athens:
Themelio (in Greek).
Tassopoulos, I. (2006). The experiment of inclusive constitutionalism, 1909–12. In P. M. Kitromilides (Ed.),
Eleftherios Venizelos: The Trials of Statesmanship (pp. 251–272). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Tsoucalas, C. (1981). He Elliniki Tragodia (The Greek Tragedy). Athens: Ekdoseis Livanis (in Greek).
Winterer, C. (2002). The Culture of Classicism: Ancient Greece and Rome in American Intellectual Life:
1780–1910. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Zambeta, E. (2001). Public discourses on educational governance, social inclusion and exclusion: Political
actors in Greek education. In. S. Lindblad & T. Popkewitz (Eds.), Listening to Education Actors on
Governance and Social Integration and Exclusion. Uppsala: Uppsala University.

