================================================================================
Chapter 17: The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education
Author(s): Wing-W ah Law
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 257–275
PDF Pages: pp. 274–292 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 274 / Book Page 257] ---

17
THE DEVELOPMENTAL STATE, SOCIAL CHANGE,
AND EDUCATION
Wing-Wah Law

Since the modern state’s emergence in the sixteenth century, theorists have
articulated various approaches to understanding the development of different countries, the relative importance of the role of the state and markets in development,
and the models and strategies of development that countries should follow. Of these
approaches, the developmental-state thesis (and world systems theory) has been more
useful in explaining the state’s important role in economic growth and industrialization, particularly in East Asia and Latin America after World War II. Developmental
states refer to countries that, compared to Western industrial countries, achieved “late
development” (White & Wade, 1988b: 1). They include capitalist countries, such as
Germany, Japan, Russia, South Korea, and Taiwan, and socialist countries, such as
China, the former Soviet Union, and North Korea. Despite the severe challenges posed
by the financial globalization crisis that took place in Asia in 1997, this statist approach
is still useful in explaining the intertwined interactions of the state and markets for
development and competition within and between national borders.
This chapter first introduces major theoretical frameworks for understanding
development, the state, and markets. They include the theories of modernization,
dependency, the world system, and the developmental state. The discussion focuses on
the latter and the role of education in skills formation in developmental states. Second,
the chapter examines challenges to the developmental-state thesis, both theoretically,
in the literature of globalization, and practically, as exemplified by the 1997 economic
crisis in Asia. Third, the chapter uses the cases of Japan as a capitalist developmental
state and China as a socialist counterpart to illustrate the continuing significance of
the state, markets, and education in nation-building and rebuilding and how states
have used the economic and sociopolitical tasks of education for the cause of development. Finally, the chapter discusses the complex relationship between globalization
and nationalism in development.

Major Theoretical Frameworks for Development,
States, and Markets
Issues related to development, states, and markets have arisen at different times
in the literature of development, particularly in the disciplines of development
257
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 257–275.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 275 / Book Page 258] ---

258 Law

economics and international political relations. Major development approaches
include modernization theory in the 1940s and 1950s; dependency theory, world
systems theory, and the developmental-state thesis from the 1960s to the 1980s;
and the discourse about the globalization of world economies in the 1990s.

Theories of Modernization, Dependency, and the World System
Modernization theory and dependency theory both assume that the world is
dichotomized, respectively, into modern and traditional sectors in the processes of
differentiating social institutions and economic growth (Parsons, 1951; Rostow,
1985), and core and peripheral parts that engage in unequal economic exchange
(Frank, 1971). According to both schools, industrialized countries in the West represent modern and core parts of the world, and the Third World countries represent
traditional and peripheral ones. However, both schools have been criticized for their
dualistic notions of the world, predicting in different ways a deterministically unilinear and pessimistic picture of economic development in Third World countries,
undermining the state’s role in their developments, and undervaluing their cultures
(Martinussen, 1997; Worsley, 1985). These two schools also fail to explain the
growth paths of a minority of latecomers in Latin America and Asia between the
1960s and 1980s, which differed from those of advanced developed countries in the
West (Haggard, 1990).
The economic performance of these latecomers can be better explained by
world systems theory and the developmental-state thesis. In contrast with dependency theorists, world systems theorists argue that the reliance on core countries
by noncore ones does not necessarily lead to their economic underdevelopment.
According to Wallerstein (1974, 1979), the world system consists of the capitalist
world economy and the interstate system. The single, capitalist world economy
comprises three tiers: core, semiperiphery, and periphery. All countries engage
in the capitalist relation of unequal exchange in an endless pursuit of capital and
labor. The “political superstructure of the capitalist world-economy,” as further
suggested by Wallerstein and Phillips (1991: 141), is the interstate system. Member
states possess different capacities to intervene in the operation of the world market and can adjust their economic strategies to regulate the inflow and outflow
of capital. They therefore may be able to change their status, for instance, from
periphery to semiperiphery, or from semiperiphery to core, if they can achieve
“development,” or if they end up in “regression” (Wallerstein, 1975). However,
Wallerstein’s (1974, 1979) world systems theory has been criticized for advocating
an over-deterministic domination of the world by capitalism and for undermining
the qualitative differences between capitalist and the former socialist countries;
paying too much attention to the system level while lacking specificity in understanding social relationships and institutions; and overemphasizing the ruling
class’s capacity to manipulate the system, but undermining the contribution of the
ruled and social agencies to development through various efforts, including resistance to domination (Worsley, 1985).

--- [PDF Page 276 / Book Page 259] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 259

The Developmental-State Thesis: The State’s Role in Markets,
Development, and Education
In a different way, the developmental-state thesis has provided an alternative line of
thinking by bringing the state back in. Unlike dependency theory, which is based mainly
on selected cases in Latin America, the development-state thesis was derived mainly
from investigations on the rapid industrialization of capitalist economies in East Asia,
including Japan, which was seen as a rising global economic power in the 1960s,
and the four Asian Dragons (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan) in the
1970s and 1980s (Amsden, 1989; Castells, 1992; Johnson, 1982; Wu, 1994). Unlike
dependency theory, which holds a pessimistic view of development, researchers often
use this statist approach to explain the economic growth of the second generation of
Asia’s newly industrialized economies, such as China, Malaysia, and Thailand, that
emerged in the 1980s. Compared with world systems theory, the developmental-state
thesis pays more attention to the state’s relationships with the market and domestic
institutions, and how they work together in the process of nation formation.
Developmental-state theorists also differ from neoliberal scholars in how they explain
these late or late-latecomers. Neoliberal scholars and the World Bank attributed the late
development of East Asian economies to the emergence of free markets within their territories and regions, and the economic failure of Latin American countries to excessive
intervention (Kay, 2002). However, proponents of the developmental-state thesis challenged neoliberal beliefs in minimalist state and free-market-driven development and
argued for the state’s critical role, and its economic and social functions in development
and economic progress. With reference to Japan, Johnson (1982) developed an institutionalist approach to understanding the developmental state. He argued that economic
development can be successful without a totally free market when it is supported by guidance from the state and favorable political conditions (see more discussion about Japan
later). Leftwich (2000) went even further by arguing for the primacy of politics over
economics. In a milder version, Wade (1990) proposed a “guided market” approach and
argued that in the case of Taiwan, the state’s intervention in the market is not unimportant
and both state’s policies and market’s dynamics can contribute to economic growth.
In such developmental economies, the respective states established development
as the top priority in their long-term national interests; created a favorable environment with low economic risk and low cost to attract investors at home or from abroad;
intensively intervened in market and development processes by controlling the composition of what is profitable, guiding and taming domestic and international market
forces, and harnessing them for national economic interests; and cultivated a collective
consciousness and urgency for development in policymaking and social mobilization
(such as the use of external threats by the nation’s foes) to achieve this development
task (Evans, 1987; Gereffi, 1990; Johnson, 1982; White & Wade, 1988a). The developmental economies in East Asia, as Castells (1992) noted, have five commonalities: the
existence of emergent situations that demand urgency for development and survival,
the adoption of an outward economic orientation, the lack of a rural landowning class,
an ability to govern the labor force and re-skill it for development, and high ability

--- [PDF Page 277 / Book Page 260] ---

260 Law

and flexibility to adapt to rapid changes in the global economy. Many factors can
account for differences in developmental states’ economic performances: differences
in the state’s capacity and relations with the economy; the state’s choice of appropriate
development strategies; domestic preconditions, such as national histories, cultures,
and social class structure; and international factors, like international relations (Evans,
1987; Gereffi, 1990; Kay, 2002; Vartiainen, 1999).
In addition to these factors, numerous theorists have cited education and training as
an important engine for economic growth during postwar period, particularly in East
Asian developmental states. In developmental states, the state is a principal shaper of
education for nation-building. There are strong reasons for the state to be involved.
First, market failure in education can be rectified by the state’s intervention. Although
neoliberal and the World Bank have advocated the state’s nonintervention in markets,
they also have recognized the necessity of the state’s intervention when the market fails
in education, particularly universal primary or secondary education (Ashton et al.,
1999). Second, the state can use education to serve state formation and development.
Buchert (1998) argued that the purpose of education is to fulfill the broader social
development goals stipulated by the state, predominantly those related to economic,
political, social, and cultural developments that are determined by local, national,
regional, and international contexts.
To be more specific, education in developmental states, as in other societies, addresses
two major themes related to state formation: economic and sociopolitical. Human capital theorists see education and training as important means to acquire, accumulate,
and enhance a society’s resources. Schultz (1961, 1971) argued that people can invest
in human capital through education and training to acquire knowledge and skills and
that enhancing human capital can increase human performance and earnings, and, in
turn, strengthen the economy and raise living standards. Becker (1998) used two Asian
developmental states, Taiwan and South Korea, to illustrate that investment in human
capital is a major way to encourage development and alleviate poverty. However, Blaug
(1987) criticized human capital theory for overestimating education’s contribution to
economic growth; and, according to Livingstone (1997), the theory fails to recognize the multifaceted character of learning, particularly in knowledge-based societies.
Despite these criticisms, Castells (1992) argued that the developmental state’s ability
to redefine its manpower needs and re-skill its citizens is key to achieving economic
success. The World Bank (1993) has considered the increase in state’s investment in
education as an important impetus to East Asia’s miraculous economic growth.
Based on the cases of the Four Dragons in East Asia, Ashton et al. (1999) proposed
a skill formation model to explain how developmental states influence both education
and the economy for development. First, the state can use trade and industrial policies
to influence the markets in which companies compete and the economy’s overall direction, thus influencing employers’ demands for skills during specific times. Second, to
ensure an appropriate match between the demand for, and supply of, skills, the state
can use existing and future human resources requirements to guide its education and
training systems. Third, to achieve this task, the state also has a strong control over
educational and training institutions so that it can respond quickly to meet the labor
market’s changing demands.

--- [PDF Page 278 / Book Page 261] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 261

Besides fulfilling economic tasks, education in developmental states is entrusted with
sociopolitical and cultural tasks for state formation. In East Asia, values education has
been seen to contribute to economic growth and to establish and sustain the state’s political
legitimacy and independence (Castells, 1992). Green (1997) pointed out that one major
role of the education system is to spread the dominant cultures, foster a sense of nationhood or statehood (e.g., by generalizing the use of the dominant language or dialect), and
develop and maintain social cohesion and political and cultural unity. In some developmental economies in East Asia (such as Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan), one major
impetus to emphasizing values education as a strategic component of development was
external threats resulting from their “antagonistic or at least strained relationship” with a
neighboring power (Morris, 1996: 96). To survive external threats, these developmental
states used education to cultivate a collective urgency for rapid economic development
and a strong and distinctive sense of national solidarity and identity.

Re-questioning the State’s Role in Education
and the Globalized Market
The developmental-state thesis can explain the upward mobility of developmental
economies, such as Taiwan, from peripheral to semiperipheral status in the international economic hierarchy (Gold, 1986, 1988) and the stagnancy of developmental
economies in Latin America (Gereffi, 1990). However, since the late-twentieth century, the developmental-state thesis, particularly its emphasis on the state’s significant
role in development and education in Asian economies, has been severely challenged
by globalization, particularly after the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
The 1990s witnessed the development of a huge academic literature on globalization in various disciplines (Held et al., 1998; Marsh et al., 2006). The postwar
period witnessed the conspicuous intensification and acceleration of the movement of
people, capital, goods and services, information, and images across national borders.
According to Giddens (1999), this spatial-temporal compression has affected various
dimensions of human activities and even created new economic, social, and cultural
areas that may transcend borders. This, in turn, has increased the interconnectivity and
interdependence of states, economies, societies, and peoples.
There are multiple views on the relation between the state and globalization in development (Held et al., 1998; Sorensen, 2006). Skeptics such as Hirst and Thompson
(1996) have argued that the world is far from global and considered globalization as
nothing but a myth. Radical scholars have contended that globalization challenges and
undermines the states’ power and autonomy and predicted some convergent effects
of globalization on human activities, such as the “end of history” (Fukuyama, 1992),
the “end of geography” (O’Brien, 1992), a “borderless world,” the “end of the nation
state” (Ohmae, 1990, 1995), and the death of the “national citizen” (Urry, 1998).
Common to these predictions are emphases on the de-differentiation and even erosion of traditional borders, and the diminishing role of the nation-state and national
governance. In particular, the state’s power is doubly squeezed by shifting upward to
regional institutions (such as the European Union in the case of its member countries)

--- [PDF Page 279 / Book Page 262] ---

262 Law

or transnational or supranational agencies (such as the World Trade Organization), and
downward to subnational, nongovernmental entities (such as large, private companies)
(Delanty, 2000). Between the two extremes of skeptics and radical scholars are those
theorists who both recognize the world’s increasing interconnectivity and interdependence and argue for the nation-states’ continuing key role, as well as their divergent
responses to globalization on various dimensions, including economy, culture, and
education (Currie & Subotzky, 2000; Green, 1999; Sassen, 2000, 2002).
Education scholars also have addressed the tension between convergence and divergence in response to globalization. Radicalists such as Usher and Edwards (1994)
predicted the state’s loss of control over education and the increasing convergence of
education systems on global or regional norms. However, more scholars have argued
for the coexistence of convergence and divergence. On the one hand, the changing
global economy requires a redefinition of manpower needs and new skills formation, and therefore new imperatives for education. As Green (1999) observed, there
is considerable convergence in policy rhetoric and objectives in education in many
countries, including developmental states. Education also is regarded as a primary
means of promoting “skills of globalization” for competing and living together in
an increasingly interconnected and interdependent world (Marginson, 1999). On the
other hand, nation-states, as Green (1999) argued, still control their education systems,
and they differ in policy details, structures, and processes because of different national
conditions (including political traditions and institutions, economic structures, and
manpower planning) and different paces of development.

Developmental States, Globalization, and Nationalism:
Japan and China
Japan and China illustrate the continuing significant role of the state in development
and education and how education can be used for nation-building. In East Asia, Japan
is a capitalist developmental state that belongs to the first generation of developmental
states in East Asia right after World War II, whereas China is a socialist development
state and belongs to the second generation. This section argues that both societies
have dual phobias: the phobia of lagging behind other countries and/or being unable
to sustain their development in the pursuit of global capital, and the phobia of losing
their collective political identity while competing in an increasingly interconnected
world. As a result, education in these two developmental states is caught in a dilemma
between globalization and nationalism, specifically, between the economic task of
education for equipping manpower for competition in the global economy and the
sociopolitical task of education to preserve the collective political identity.

Japan and China as Developmental States
After opening its ports to Western powers in the 1850s, Japan began to industrialize
and modernize. In early twentieth century, it became a regional military and economic
power. Despite its military defeat in World War II, Japan achieved unprecedented economic growth between the 1960s and 1980s and became a world economic power.

--- [PDF Page 280 / Book Page 263] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 263

Johnson (1982) identified four major factors that contributed to Japan’s success as
the first developmental state in East Asia. They included: a small and efficient state
bureaucracy managed by the best talents available in the system; a political system that
enabled state institutions to be autonomous, take initiative, and operate effectively; the
state–private sector cooperation with the coexistence of market-conforming and stateintervention chemistry; and a state-related agency that shared the state’s management
responsibility in leading and implementing the state’s development agenda, such as the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI). However, in the 1990s, Japan’s
economy began to experience a considerable slowdown, which was further complicated by unemployment issues, the rapid advancement of an aging society together
with low birthrates, and the challenges of the rise of the information society and internationalization (MEXT, 2001c). The Japanese state also worried about two related
social trends: an overemphasis on respect for individual rights and an underemphasis on social duties and responsibilities, and young people’s social disengagement by
drawing away from society to their own worlds (MEXT, 2001a).
China started its development later than Japan. After assuming power in 1949, the
Communist Party of China (CPC) officially transplanted the former Soviet model of a
central, planned economy and socialism in the Chinese soil. Market forces were banned,
and private ownership and the private sector were prohibited. However, in the late 1970s,
China gradually began to shift its development strategy, in Martinussen’s (1997) terminology, from a noncapitalist path to socialism (by dissociating from world economy and
relying on a state-controlled planned economy) to a capitalist path to socialism (by adopting capitalist principles and a market economy) to create the necessary material conditions
for socialist development. Liew (2005) argued that since the introduction of market forces
into its socialist economy in the 1980s, China’s pathway to rapid economic development
has tended to fit the developmental-state type, rather than the liberalization models of
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. China’s state under the leadership
of the CPC has actively mediated market reform and controlled the process of transformation from a centrally planned economy to a socialist market economy. In particular,
China’s state has adopted four major development strategies: using capitalist principles
and market forces to revitalize its declining socialist economy; engaging in a deliberate
and gradual shift of economic structure from the primary to secondary and tertiary sectors; letting some areas and people prosper ahead of others; and diversifying economic
activity to pursue global capital and reduce economic protectionism (Law, 2006b).
In these two East Asian developmental states, education is used as a vital means
to enhance the quality of their human capital and to serve as an important development tool for industrialization. In Japan, education has been regarded as an important
engine, particularly for the postwar economic miracle. In the 1860s, Japanese national
leaders began establishing public education with a view to using it to modernize Japan
and catch up with Western industrial countries. Since then, prewar educational development has been designated as a most important national policy area (Kida, 1986). In
the early twentieth century, Japan achieved universal primary education, established a
selective multitracked secondary education system, and developed a highly selective,
elitist higher education system. This educational investment enabled Japan to maximize its human resources by producing a massive educated and trainable workforce

--- [PDF Page 281 / Book Page 264] ---

264 Law

and elite for catching up with Western countries (Schoppa, 1991). After its defeat in
World War II, the Japan’s state obtained its people’s support for the nation’s reconstruction through education (Kida, 1986). It extended universal education from six to
nine years, and later expanded senior education and higher education. This became
an important source of skilled labor force for postwar nation-rebuilding. However,
Japan’s education system has been criticized for high centralization because the state
can exert considerable influence on local governments through the pressure of the
peoples’ strong demand for equal opportunity for education and the provision of
standardized services to all citizens. The Japanese state uses three major measures to
influence local school education: the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology’s (MEXT) prescription of criteria and standards in curriculum through
the Courses of Study; the disbursement of general educational grants to local governments and the granting of special national aid for various items; and the national
contribution to half of salary expenditures of educational personnel, particularly in
public schools of compulsory education (Kida, 1986).
Unlike Japan, China began using education to develop its human capital at a rather
late stage. Despite Chinese civilization’s long history, education in imperial China was
limited to the elite and associated with officialdom. In 1949 (the founding year of the
People’s Republic of China), it was estimated that 80% of its population was illiterate.
Despite an emphasis on vocational competence in nation-building, Mao Zedong held
a low view of human capital and used the class struggle of the masses to fight against
intellectuals and professionals, particularly during the Cultural Revolution (1966–1976).
When Deng Xiaoping resumed power in late 1970s, he shifted from Mao’s ideological
approach to a pragmatic one. Deng (1977, 1978, 1985) saw education and science and
technology as key to the nation’s prosperity, advocated respecting knowledge and talents, and suggested that China’s national strength depended on the Chinese workforce’s
qualifications and the quantity and quality of intellectuals. China also has a strong wish
to use education to turn its huge population (1.3 billion in 2005) from a national liability to national asset (China’s Education and Human Resource Development Project
Team, 2003). To achieve this end, China’s state adopted a series of strategies, including
the speeding up of the campaign for eliminating illiteracy among people over age 15,
and the introduction of universal basic education of nine years in 1986 to improve the
basic literacy and skills for the labor force at the lowest, but largest stratum; the rapid
expansion in the 1980s of the vocational track (and the corresponding reduction of the
academic track) in senior secondary education to provide subprofessionals at the middle stratum; and the drastic expansion of higher education in the late 1990s to increase
the quantity and enhance the quality of talents at the high stratum (Law, 2000).

The Economic Phobia of Lagging Behind, and Education Reform
for Economic Globalization
Despite an emphasis on skills formation, some have questioned whether the education
systems of Japan and China are capable of equipping students with the necessary abilities to face the challenges of economic globalization in the twenty-first century. Since
the 1960s, many have wondered whether the Japanese education system could help

--- [PDF Page 282 / Book Page 265] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 265

Japan become an economic power in the region and the world. In the late 1960s and
mid-1980s, respectively, the Japanese state initiated two major education reforms to
increase students’ choices, reduce examination pressure, and deal with school violence
and students’ misbehavior (Schoppa, 1991). Despite the two reform initiatives, these
long-standing issues remained unresolved and the general public was dissatisfied with
the education system and school curriculum (Peter & Curtis, 2002).
During the third reform at the turn of the millennium, Japan admitted that its education was “deteriorating” (National Commission on Educational Reform, 2000). First,
the Japanese education system was criticized for failing to prepare students to cope
with social change, meet the new manpower needs and demands, and rise to the challenges arising from globalization and the rapid progress of science and technology
(MEXT, 2001a). Second, Japan’s students suffer from high examination pressure and
information cramming (Bossy, 2000). Because of this, the Japanese school curriculum, as admitted by the Curriculum Council (1998), had not satisfactorily equipped
Japanese children with an ability to study, make judgments, express opinions, and
use different perspectives. Third, Japanese education faces some serious educational
issues, including bullying and violence on campus, disruptive behaviors in class, truancy, and juvenile delinquency (MEXT, 2001c).
Similar to Japan, China admitted that its education system lagged behind changing social needs in the twenty-first century. First, the overall quality of the Chinese
labor force is still low and has difficulty competing in the global knowledge economy.
The average length of schooling for people over age 15 is about eight years and is
three to six years shorter than that of developed countries and newly industrialized
economies (Ministry of Education, 2004a). The population’s average level of popular
science and technology is far below that of Japan, the European Union, and the United
States (China’s Education and Human Resource Development Project Team, 2003).
Second, many schools emphasize rote learning and drilling and focus on outdated book
knowledge that is difficult for students to learn (Ministry of Education, 2001b). Third,
on average Chinese students are “relatively weak in creativity, practical dimension,
employability, and founding their own business” (Ministry of Education, 2004a: 46).
Despite the inadequacy of their respective education systems, the states of Japan
and China continue to believe that education can prevent them from lagging behind
others and help them sustain their development. In Japan, this strong belief is explicitly
reflected in various education reform proposals and particularly the title of the 2004
education reform plan, Japan! Rise Again! (MEXT, 2005). In China, the 2003–2007
Action Plan for Invigorating Education reiterated that education “is the very basis of
the long-term development of the nation” (Ministry of Education, 2005: 1). To deal
with external challenges from globalization and long-standing domestic educational
problems, in the early 2000s, both developmental states began to reform their school
curricula and shift from a skill-formation model to a model that emphasizes developing students’ abilities to meet changing social needs.
Earlier in the education reform in the 1980s, Japan began to use education as a
means to cope with internationalization, and tried to use globalization to justify the
urgent need for education reform. The ad hoc National Council on Educational Reform
(1985: 18) (which was established by Premier Nakasone) even warned that if Japan

--- [PDF Page 283 / Book Page 266] ---

266 Law

wanted “to survive and develop in the age of internationalization, it is essential . . . [to]
design [Japan’s] education reform from the standpoint of internationalization.” As
observed by Lincicome (1993), this Council advocated the concept of “cosmopolitan
Japanese” who can communicate in at least one foreign language, have a thorough
knowledge of foreign countries and cultures, appreciate the cultures of other peoples,
and have an international consciousness. A similar urgency to equip Japanese students
to face economic globalization can be found in the 2001 Education Reform Plan for
the 21st Century (also called the Rainbow Plan) (MEXT, 2001b). Parallel to this plan
is the introduction of a new school curriculum reform in 2002. The Japanese state
advocated a shift in pedagogy from a teacher-centric and textbook-centric approach
to student-focused and self-directed learning, and it emphasized the development of
students’ willingness to learn independently and their independence in thinking, making judgments, engaging in self-expression, and acting for themselves (Yoshikawa, c.
2000). In particular, students from grade three to grade nine are now required to take
Integrated Studies, in which they can undertake their own research, go on field trips,
and tackle real-life problems with hand-on activities.
In China, the curricular reforms of primary and secondary education are intended to
strengthen the relevance of students’ study to their daily lives and modern social and
technological developments; to help enhance students’ motivation to learn actively
and their willingness to explore and develop various abilities (including the collection
and processing of information, acquisition of new knowledge, problem analysis and
solving, and collaboration and exchange); to equip them with the basic knowledge and
skills of lifelong learning; and to help them develop a proper worldview and global
outlook, in addition to developing a love for China, the ruling party, and Chinese cultures (Ministry of Education, 2001b, 2003).
Japan and China selected Information Technology (IT) and English as important transnational skills to be fostered among students for living in an increasingly
connected world. The Japanese state is attempting to make Japan an internationally
competitive nation built on IT (i.e., e-Japan) within the first decade of the third millennium (Information Technology Strategic Headquarters, 2001). The Curriculum
Council (1998) encourages the implementation of consistent and systematic information education and the use of computers in class-learning activities at all stages of
school education. In 2002, the Japanese state changed IT and Computers (including
basic computer skills) from an elective to a compulsory subject in the junior secondary
curriculum, and in 2003, it introduced a compulsory course in IT for all students in
senior secondary schools. Unlike Japan, China has no plan to make itself an e-nation.
Despite this, in 2001 the China started an effort to popularize IT education in school
education within 10 years (Ministry of Education, 2000). By 2005, IT courses were
offered in secondary schools across the nation and in primary schools in relatively
developed areas.
In these two non-English-speaking developmental states, English is seen as a means
to increase interconnectivity with the rest of the world and to enhance human capital in
the pursuit of global capital. In the early 2000s, Japan wanted to equip “Japanese with
English abilities”: speaking, listening, reading, and writing. The MEXT (2002) admitted that Japan’s development in the global economy had been hindered by a lack of

--- [PDF Page 284 / Book Page 267] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 267

sufficient English proficiency. To rectify this, the MEXT (2003) issued the Action Plan
to Cultivate Japanese with English Abilities. Japan has selected English as the major
common foreign language for its children to master and expects that English-capable
Japanese can help Japan link to the rest of the world, gain the world’s understanding
and trust, enhance Japan’s presence in the international community, and improve its
national development. Primary students are now provided with conversational activities. In the new Courses of Study that were implemented in 2002, English became a
compulsory subject in junior and senior secondary education.
China recognized the significance of English much earlier than Japan. After reconnecting with Western countries in the late 1970s, China replaced Russian with English
as one of the most important foreign languages, and students began to receive English
lessons in junior secondary education. Because of the intensification of economic
globalization and informatization, the Ministry of Education (2001a) recognized the
increasing importance of foreign languages, particularly English, and set the learning
and mastery of at least one foreign language as the “basic requirement of citizens in
the twenty-first century.” However, the Ministry of Education (2001d) deemed that
the average English proficiency of the Chinese people has lagged behind the needs of
national economic and social developments. Consequently, from 2001 English instruction began to be officially extended from junior secondary education to primary three
across the nation (Ministry of Education, 2001a). Schools are required to provide
at least four learning activities per week, cutting one lesson on Chinese language if
necessary. Some urban areas, such as Shanghai and Beijing, have extended the provision of English lessons to primary one students. Three years later, the Ministry of
Education (2004b) asked colleges and universities to reform the curricula of university
foundation English for students whose major is not English language, with a view to
enhancing overall English proficiency, particularly in listening and speaking.

The Sociopolitical Phobia of Losing National Identity and Revitalizing
Nationalism in the Curriculum
In addition to an economic phobia, both Japan and China fear losing their collective
political identities in the process of modernization and economic globalization. In
response, they have reasserted the importance of preserving their collective political and
cultural identity, in particular, by reviving nationalism in their school curricula. Despite
the struggles for modernization since World War II, Japan had been proud of its national
spirit and cultural traditions. However, whilst preparing its people for globalization, the
Japanese state has feared losing its national characteristics and cultural identity. In the
1980s the Japanese state began to be aware of the increasing tension between being
a “Japanese citizen” and being a “world citizen” (National Council on Educational
Reform, 1985: 18). The Central Council for Education (1997) even expressed its fear
that in the future, Japanese people may lack a sufficient understanding of traditional
culture and the culture may be lost because of a lack of successors to perpetuate it.
Similar to, but more complicated than Japan, at the turn of the millennium, China,
as a late developmental state, fears the loss of its socialist collective political identity.
The rapid downfall of the former socialist block in the late 1980s and 1990s leaves

--- [PDF Page 285 / Book Page 268] ---

268 Law

China as one of very few remaining socialist countries, and since then, this has created
a national identity crisis for its people and the nation in the international community (Law, 2006a), which has been exacerbated by the ruling party’s identity crisis.
The change of development strategy (as described earlier) brought forth a series of
domestic problems, such as widening gaps between urban and rural areas and between
the rich and poor; intensified social unrest and conflicts; widespread materialistic values; and the widespread power abuse of party cadres and officials (including very
top-ranked CPC members, such as Beijing’s Mayor in 1995 and Shanghai’s municipal
party secretary in 2006, who were sacked for corruption). The massive student demonstration in Tiananmen Square in Beijing in 1989 represented the popular challenge
to the legitimacy of the CPC’s leadership and led to military suppression with the
use of state force (Fewsmith, 2002). All these negative consequences of economic
reform were deemed a serious threat to China’s social stability and the CPC’s political
leadership.
To deal with their sociopolitical phobias, China and Japan revitalized their citizenship education. Since the 1980s, the Japanese state has attempted to deal with the
global–national–local tension by reconstructing Japan as a culturally oriented nation
in the globalizing world with a two-pronged approach. On the one hand, the Japanese
state encourages schools to foster values related to global citizenship, such as a rich
sense of humanity, respect for life and human rights, an appreciation of different cultures, a spirit of international cooperation, and living together in harmony. On the other
hand, the Japanese state repeatedly promotes the concept of being Japanese more than
global citizenship. In his address at a meeting on educational reform, Prime Minister
Nakasone (1984) expressed that the education reform in the mid-1980s could help
“preserve and further develop the traditional Japanese culture,” improve children’s
moral and behavioral standards, and also prepare Japanese citizens “to contribute to
the international community with a Japanese consciousness.” Whilst promoting the
digitization of education, the Japanese government attempts to reform its education
system with a view to making a “culturally oriented nation” through helping students
foster self-discipline, consideration for others, and a deep respect for traditional culture and social norms (MEXT, 2001c).
In particular, the Japanese state used two major means to reinforce and consolidate the sociopolitical function of education for preserving Japan’s traditions and
cultures. The first means to maintain the national identity of Japanese living in a globalizing world is to legalize this function of schools by amending the Fundamental
Law of Education under the leadership of Prime Minister Koizumi (Akito, 2002). Per
Koizumi’s request, the Central Council for Education (2003) proposed to amend the
law to emphasize the school’s importance in fostering among students a sense of civic
responsibility, a respect for tradition and culture, and love of the nation and home. In
2006, the Japanese parliament enacted a patriotic bill calling on schools to inculcate in
students respect for tradition and culture and love for the nation and homeland.
The MEXT (2001a) used the curriculum as the second means to inculcate Japanese
people with Japan’s traditions and culture. Students are exhorted to deepen their understanding of, and pride in, national and local histories, cultures, and traditions (MEXT,
2000). To sustain Japan’s traditional cultures, schools are urged to provide students with

--- [PDF Page 286 / Book Page 269] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 269

hands-on activities in traditional arts and crafts and teach them traditional performing
arts and traditional manufacturing techniques (Central Council for Education, 1997).
To foster a sense of social collectivity and deal with the children’s moral degeneracy,
Japan’s Education Reform Plan for the 21st Century (MEXT, 2001a) requires schools
to teach children social rules and basic morals at every stage of their development.
In contrast with Japan, China used laws to enforce the sociopolitical function of education much earlier. Chinese laws stipulate that schools train and equip successors of
socialist construction and pass on to them CPC-prescribed values, including the “five
loves” (love of home country, people, labor, science, and socialism), and the “fiveisms” (patriotism, collectivism, internationalism, communism, and dialectical and
historical materialism) to combat feudal, capitalist decadent ideas (National People’s
Congress, 1995, 1999). Unlike Japan, which does not have drastic social transformation, in the 1980s China began to make a paradigm shift to a more accommodative
framework for socialist citizenship by opening up to the world; recognizing the market
as a lever of diversification and pluralization; reinstating law as an external regulating
force; revitalizing virtues as an internal, self-impelling force of social conformity; and
repackaging the ruling party as a political vanguard of all classes (Law, 2006a). As a
result, China’s state redefined its citizenship education curriculum and reasserted the
importance of citizenship education in nation-rebuilding. It has a strong urge to make
use of citizenship education to help students identify with the present socialist system
and political system across the nation regardless of regional, ethnic, and cultural differences (Wan, 2004).
The paradigm shift of socialist citizenship in China is also reflected in the change
of its citizenship curriculum by incorporating a multileveled framework with elements
of citizenship from global, national, and subnational levels (Ministry of Education,
2001c, 2002). Despite having a more accommodative framework, more emphasis
is placed on the national than global or local level. This is reflected in the textbook
revisions for citizenship education in primary and secondary schools after the CPC
National Congress drew conclusions about these sociopolitical changes in China in the
mid-1990s and early 2000s. As compared with previous versions, these two revisions,
as shown by Law (2006a), carry both continuities and changes. On the one hand, these
political textbooks continue to help students recognize the CPC’s paramount leadership in and the working class’s contribution to socialist modernization; understand the
meaning of national symbols (such as national flag and anthem); and learn about the
self-sacrificing spirit of role models, such as Lei Feng and the Chinese people’s courage in their fight against foreign aggressors. On the other hand, the revised political
textbooks changed in ways that reflect the inadequacy of socialism in modernizing
China. For example, they replaced the party line on class struggle with cooperation
among people and the peaceful coexistence of different ethnic groups. The textbooks
also shifted from totally rejecting Western modernization, cultures, and characters
to accommodating them; changed from playing down Chinese culture to including
Chinese classical stories and characters and designating some Chinese values as good,
traditional ones (such as hard work, filial obedience to parents, and willingness to help
others); and placed a new emphasis on the importance of personal efforts and continuous improvement and discouraged unhealthy materialistic competition. These changes

--- [PDF Page 287 / Book Page 270] ---

270 Law

in political textbooks reflect socialist China’s significant readjustment in rebuilding the
relative positions of socialism, capitalism, endogenous traditional Chinese cultures,
and contemporary values.

Conclusion
The various models of development share two common concerns: the relative role of
the state and markets in development and the relevance of the development models
of developed countries to their less-developed counterparts. The developmental-state
thesis recognizes the contributions of both the state and markets to development,
particularly their supplementary and complementary roles. The various interactions
between the state and market forces and the strategies they use can yield different
results, such as different forms of and paths to development, and different extents of
development ranging from regression to progression. In this sense, the developmental
state is dynamic rather than static. It is a “diachronic phenomenon” occurring in different forms over a long period of time, adapting itself to new forms in new epochs
(Woo-Cumings, 1999: 15).
Despite the challenges posed by the discourse of globalization and the 1997 crisis
of financial globalization in Asia, the developmental-state thesis is still a useful framework for explaining the dual (economic and sociopolitical) phobias of countries like
Japan and China in the pursuit of global capital and the sustenance of their national
identities, and how their states use the economic and sociopolitical functions of education to address the dilemma between globalization and nationalism. The cases of Japan
and China support Krasner’s (1999) view that although globalization has challenged
the effectiveness of state control, it has not fundamentally transformed the state’s
sovereignty, nor has it qualitatively changed the state’s authority. Increased internationalization and deregulation has not replaced nation-states with global actors or local
states. On the contrary, like other East Asian developmental economies (Weiss, 1998),
the states of Japan and China continue to be powerful actors in the international polity
and economy. Instead of being maneuvered by globalization, states can actively use
it as both a common hegemonic justification for, and an external impetus to, urgent
reform of their education systems.
The cases of these two East Asian developmental states also support Sassen’s (1999)
argument that the global is embedded in the national. Global processes need to take
place and be materialized within national borders. In the world economy, the new division of labor has not changed the fact that labor markets are still embedded mainly in
national contexts (Abrahamson, 2004). States are still the ultimate guarantors of the
rights of global capital and the protectors of contracts and property rights. In education, the state can redefine policies to shift the orientation of education from skills
formation to the fostering and enhancement of students’ basic abilities for living and
coping with a changing society and market at domestic and global levels. The state
continues to be a principal selector and translator of global imperatives for education,
including proficiencies in the transnational skills of IT and English. Thus the selection
and translation of global educational imperatives are mainly local processes that are
subject to the constraints of local players and conditions.

--- [PDF Page 288 / Book Page 271] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 271

Moreover, despite the adoption of a multileveled framework for citizenship
curriculum, states can promote and emphasize nationalism more than globalism
for their domestic purposes and needs. The intensification of interconnectivity and
interdependence between economies and between societies does not necessarily
marginalize the state’s role in nation-building or rebuilding, nor must it bring forth an
overwhelming homogenization of human activities into a limited number of patterns.
On the contrary, in countries like Japan and China, the temporal-spatial compression of human activities can induce an intense fear about the possibility of losing
collective political and cultural identity. This, in turn, can create an opportunity
for states to reassert in their citizenship curricula the distinction of nation-specific
political and cultural traditions from those of other states and peoples in a globalizing world. Highlighting the importance of recognizing and respecting other cultures
and peoples can be seen as another way to reinforce the sociopolitical and cultural
distinctions between “we” and “they.”
In a changing world, states are arguably transitional and developmental. They face
changing domestic needs and conditions, changing external challenges from other
member states, or both. They can respond by proactively or reactively revising their
strategies of development; modifying their social structures and institutions; adjusting
the interrelationships among the state, markets, and society; and/or enhancing their
competitiveness for international competition while maintaining cooperation with
other countries. In an increasingly interconnected and interdependent world, societal
politics and economies are increasingly intertwined, rather than separated, as are the
state and market forces. Globalization can stimulate and reinforce both the convergence and diversity of human activities at the local, national, and global levels. On
behalf of its people, economy, and society, the state plays a significant role in both
negotiating globalization for domestic development and promoting nationalism for
domestic social cohesion by establishing its distinctions from its counterparts in international competition.

References
Abrahamson, M. (2004). Global cities. New York: Oxford University Press.
Akito, O. (2002). Education of whom, for whom, by whom: Revising the fundamental law of education in
Japan. Japan Forum, 14(3), 425–441.
Amsden, A. H. (1989). Asia’s next giant: South Korea and late industrialization. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Ashton, D., Green, F., James, D., & Sung, J. (1999). Education and training for development in East Asia: The
political economy of skill formation in East Asian newly industrialised economies. London: Routledge.
Becker, G. S. (1998). Human capital and poverty. Religion and Liberty, 8(1), 5–7, 11.
Blaug, M. (1987). Economics of education and the education of an economist. New York: New York
University Press.
Bossy, S. (2000). Academic pressure and impact on Japanese students. McGill Journal of Education, 35(1),
71–89.
Buchert, L. (1998). Introduction. In L. Buchert (Ed.), Education reform in the south in the 1990s
(pp. 11–25). Paris: UNESCO.
Castells, M. (1992). Four Asian tigers with a dragon head: A comparative analysis of the state, economy, and
society in the Asian Pacific Rim. In R. P. Appelbaum & J. Henderson (Eds.), States and development in
the Asian Pacific Rim. London: Sage.

--- [PDF Page 289 / Book Page 272] ---

272 Law
Central Council for Education. (1997). The model for Japanese education in the perspective of the 21st
century (2nd Report). Tokyo: Central Council for Education.
Central Council for Education. (2003). Fundamental law of education and basic promotional plan for
education. Tokyo: Central Council for Education.
China’s Education and Human Resource Development Project Team (Ed.). (2003). Zongrenkou Daguo
Maixiang Renli Ziyuan Qiangguo [Stride from a country of tremendous population to a country of
profound human resources]. Beijing: Higher Education Press.
Curriculum Council. (1998). General outline of the principle of national curriculum standards reform.
Tokyo: Curriculum Council.
Currie, J., & Subotzky, G. (2000). Alternative responses to globalization from European and South African
universities. In N. P. Stromquist & K. Monkman (Eds.), Globalization and education: Integration and
contestation across cultures (pp. 123–148). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Delanty, G. (2000). Citizenship in a global age: Society, culture, politics. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Deng, X. P. (1977). Zunzhong Zhizhi Zhuzhong Rencai [Respect knowledge, respect trained personnel]. In Central Committee of Communist Party of China Document Editorial Commission (Ed.),
Deng Xiaoping Wenxuan, 1975–1982 [Selected work of Deng Xiaoping, 1975–1982] (pp. 37–38).
Beijing: Renmin.
Deng, X. P. (1978). Zaiquanguo Kexue Dahui Kaimushi Shang De Jianghua [Speech at the opening ceremony of the National Conference on Science]. In Central Committee of Communist Party of China
Document Editorial Commission (Ed.), Deng Xiaoping Wenxuan, 1975–1982 [Selected work of Deng
Xiaoping, 1975–1982] (pp. 82–97). Beijing: Renmin.
Deng, X. P. (1985). Ba Jiaoyu Gongzuo Renzhen Zhuaqilai [Devote special efforts to education]. In Central
Committee of Communist Party of China Document Editorial Commission (Ed.), Deng Xiaoping
Wenxuan, 1983–1992 [Selected work of Deng Xiaoping, 1983–1992] (pp. 120–122). Beijing: Renmin.
Evans, P. (1987). Class, state, and dependence in East Asia: Lessons for Latin Americanists. In F. C. Deyo (Ed.),
The political economy of the New Asian industrialism (pp. 203–226). Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Fewsmith, J. (2002). China since Tiananmen: The politics of transition. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Frank, A. G. (1971). Capitalism and underdevelopment in Latin America: Historical studies of Chile and
Brazil. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Fukuyama, F. (1992). The end of history and the last man. New York: Free Press.
Gereffi, G. (1990). Paths of industrialization: An overview. In G. Gereffi and D. L. Wyman (Eds.),
Manufacturing miracles: Paths of industrialization in Latin America and East Asia (pp. 3–31). Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Giddens, A. (1999). Runaway word: The Reith lectures revisited, globalization. Retrieved 9 November,
2000, from http://www.lse.ac.uk/Giddens/pdf/10-Nov-99.PDF
Gold, T. B. (1986). State and society in the Taiwan miracle. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Gold, T. B. (1988). Entrepreneurs, multinationals, and the state. In E. A. Winckler & S. Greenhalgh (Eds.),
Contending approaches to the political economy of Taiwan (pp. 175–205). New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Green, A. (1997). Education, globalization and the nation state. London: Macmillan.
Green, A. (1999). Education and globalization in Europe and East Asia: Convergent and divergent trends.
Journal of Education Policy, 14(1), 55–71.
Haggard, S. (1990). Pathways from the periphery: The politics of growth in the newly industrializing countries. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Held, D., McGrew, A., Goldblatt, D., & Perraton, J. (1998). Global transformations: Politics, economics and
culture. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hirst, P., & Thompson, G. (1996). Globalization in question: The international economy and the possibilities of governance. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Information Technology Strategic Headquarters. (2001). e-Japan 2002 program: Basic guidelines concerning the IT priority policies. Tokyo.
Johnson, C. (1982). MITI and the Japanese miracle: The growth of industrial policy, 1925–1975. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Kay, C. (2002). Why East Asia overtook Latin America: Agrarian reform, industrialisation and development.
Third World Quarterly, 23(6), 1073–1102.

--- [PDF Page 290 / Book Page 273] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 273
Kida, H. (1986). Educational administration in Japan. Comparative Education, 22(1), 7–12.
Krasner, S. (1999). Globalization and sovereignty. In D. A. Smith, D. J. Solinger, & S. C. Topik (Eds.), States
and sovereignty in the global economy (pp. 34–52). London: Routledge.
Law, W. W. (2000). Schooling and society in the people’s republic of China. In K. Mazurek, M. Winzer, &
C. Majorek (Eds.), Education in a global society: A comparative perspective (pp. 355–370). Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Law, W. W. (2006a). Citizenship, citizenship education and the state in China in a global age. Cambridge
Journal of Education, 36(4), 597–628.
Law, W. W. (2006b). Education reform for national competitiveness in a global age: The experience and
struggle of China. In K. Mazurek & M. Winzer (Eds.), Schooling around the world: Debates, challenges, and practices (pp. 68–103). Boston, MA: Pearson Allyn & Bacon.
Leftwich, A. (2000). States of development: On the primacy of politics in development. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Liew, L. H. (2005). China’s engagement with Neo-liberalism: Path dependency, geography and party selfreinvention. Journal of Development Studies, 41(2), 331–352.
Lincicome, M. (1993). Nationalism, internationalization, and the dilemma of educational reform in Japan.
Comparative Education Review, 37(2), 123–151.
Livingstone, D. W. (1997). The limits of human capital theory: Expanding knowledge, informal learning and
underemployment. Policy Options, 18(6), 9–13.
Marginson, S. (1999). After globalization: Emerging politics of education. Journal of Education Policy,
14(1), 19–31.
Marsh, D., Smith, N. J., & Hothi, N. (2006). Globalization and the state. In C. Hay, M. Lister, & D. Marsh
(Eds.), The state: Theories and issues (pp. 172–189). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Martinussen, J. (1997). Society, state and market: A guide to competing theories of development. Atlantic
Highlands, NJ: Zed Books.
Ministry of Education. (2000). Zai Zhongxioaxue Puji Xinxi Jishu Jiaoyu De Tongzhi [A circular concerning the popularization of information technology education in primary and secondary schools] (No.
Jiaoji 2000–33). Beijing: Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2001a). Jiaoyubao Guanyu Jiji Tuijin Xiaoxue Kaishe Yingyu Kecheng De Zhidao
Yijian [Guidelines on the provision of English language subject in primary schools]. Beijing: Ministry
of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2001b). Jichu Jiaoyu Kecheng Gaige Gangyao Shixing [Guidelines on the curriculum reform of basic education]. Beijing: Beijing Normal University Press.
Ministry of Education. (2001c). Xiaoxue Sixiang Pinde He Chuzhong Sixiang Zhengzhike Kecheng Biaozhun
De Tongzhi [A notice concerning the revision of the curriculum standards of ideology and moral character in primary schools and ideology and politics in junior middle schools]. Beijing: Ministry of
Education.
Ministry of Education. (2001d). Yingyu Kecheng Biaozhun [Curriculum standards for English language
in primary education, junior secondary education and senior secondary education]. Beijing: Beijing
Normal University Press.
Ministry of Education. (2002). Pinde Yu Shenghuo Kecheng Biaozhun [Curriculum standards for moral and
life education]. Beijing: Peking Normal University Press.
Ministry of Education. (2003). Putong Gaozhong Kecheng Fangan (Shiyan) [Guidelines on the curriculum
standards for general senior secondary education, experimental version]. Beijing: People’s Education
Press.
Ministry of Education. (2004a). 2003–2007 Nian Jiaoyu Zhenxing Xingdong Jihua: Xuexi Fudao Duben
[2003–2007 action plan for invigorating education: Study guide]. Beijing: Educational Science Press.
Ministry of Education. (2004b). Guanyu Yinfa Daxue Yingyu Kecheng Jiaoxue Yaoqiu De Tongzhi, Shixing
[A circular concerning the demand on the provisional curriculum of English language in higher education]. Beijing: Ministry of Education.
Ministry of Education. (2005). 2003–2007 Nian Jiaoyu Zhenxing Xingdong Jihua [2003–2007 action plan
for invigorating education]. Beijing: People’s Education Press.
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology. (2000). Japanese Government Policies in
Education, Science, Sports and Culture 2000: Toward a Culturally-Oriented Nation. Retrieved 1 March,
2002, from http://wwwwp.mext.go.jp/hakusyo/book/hpae200001/hpae200001_2_072.html

--- [PDF Page 291 / Book Page 274] ---

274 Law
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology. (2001a). Education reform plan for the
21st century. Tokyo: Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology. (2001b). The education reform plan
for the 21st century: The rainbow plan. Tokyo: Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology.
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology. (2001c). Japanese government policies
in education, science, sports and culture 2000. Tokyo: Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology.
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology. (2002). Developing a strategic plan to
cultivate ‘Japanese with English abilities’. Tokyo: Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology.
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology. (2003). Action plan to cultivate ‘Japanese
with English abilities’. Tokyo: Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology. (2005). Japan’s education at a glance
2005. Tokyo: Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.
Morris, P. (1996). Asia’s four little tigers: A comparison of the role of education in their development.
Comparative Education, 32(1), 95–110.
Nakasone, Y. (1984). Speech made by the prime minister Mr. Yasuhiro Nakasone at the first meeting of
the national council on educational reform (September 5, 1984). In National Council on Educational
Reform (Ed.), Reports on education reform (pp. 560–561). Tokyo: Government of Japan.
National Commission on Educational Reform. (2000). Report by the national commission on educational
reform: 17 proposals for changing education. Tokyo.
National Council on Educational Reform. (1985). First report on educational reform (June 26, 1985).
In National Council on Educational Reform (Ed.), Reports on education reform (pp. 1–47). Tokyo:
Government of Japan.
National People’s Congress. (1995). Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo Jiaoyufa [The Education Law of the
People’s Republic of China]. In Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo Jiaoyufa, Yiwu Jiaoyufa, Jiaoshifa [The
education law, basic education law and teachers law of the People’s Republic of China] (pp. 1–13).
Beijing: China Law Publishing House.
National People’s Congress. (1999). Zhonghua Renimin Gongheguo Xianfa [The Constitution of the People’s
Republic of China]. Beijing: China Law Publishing House.
O’Brien, R. (1992). Global financial integration: The end of geography. New York: Council on Foreign
Relations Press.
Ohmae, K. (1990). The borderless world: Power and strategy in the interlinked economy. New York:
HarperPerennial.
Ohmae, K. (1995). The end of the nation state: The rise of regional economics. New York: Free Press.
Parsons, T. (1951). The social system. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Peter, G., & Curtis, A. (2002). The Japanese education system: Globalisation and international education.
Japanese Studies, 22(2), 153–167.
Rostow, W. W. (1985). The stages of economic growth: A non-communist manifesto. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sassen, S. (1999). Embedding the global in the national: Implications for the role of the state. In
D. A. Smith, D. J. Solinger, & S. C. Topik (Eds.), States and sovereignty in the global economy
(pp. 159–171). London: Routledge.
Sassen, S. (2000). Cities in the world economy (Second ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA and London: Pine Forge
Press.
Sassen, S. (2002). Introduction: Locating cities on global circuits. In S. Sassen (Ed.), Global networks,
linked cities (pp. 1–36). London: Routledge.
Schoppa, L. J. (1991). Education reform in Japan: A case of immobilist politics. London: Routledge.
Schultz, T. W. (1961). Investment in human capital. American Economic Review, 51(1), 1–17.
Schultz, T. W. (1971). Investment in human capital: The role of education and of research. New York: Free
Press.
Sorensen, G. (2006). The transformation of the state. In C. Hay, M. Lister, & D. Marsh (Eds.), The state:
Theories and issues (pp. 190–208). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

--- [PDF Page 292 / Book Page 275] ---

The Developmental State, Social Change, and Education 275
Urry, J. (1998). Globalisation and citizenship. Retrieved 23 January, 2002, from http://www.comp.lancs.
ac.uk/sociology/soc009ju.html
Usher, R., & Edwards, R. (1994). Postmodernism and education. London: Routledge.
Vartiainen, J. (1999). The economics of successful state intervention in industrial transformation. In M. WooCumings (Ed.), The developmental state (pp. 200–234). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Wade, R. (1990). Governing the market: Economic theory and the role of government in East Asian industrialization. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wallerstein, I. M. (1974). The modern world-system. New York: Academic Press.
Wallerstein, I. M. (1975). The present state of the debate on world inequality. In I. M. Wallerstein (Ed.),
World inequality: Origins and perspectives on the world system (pp. 12–28). Montreal: Black Rose
Books.
Wallerstein, I. M. (1979). The capitalist world-economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wallerstein, I. M. & Phillips, D. (1991). National and world identities and the interstate system. In
I. M. Wallerstein (Ed.), Geopolitics and geoculture: Essays on the changing world-system. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wan, M. G. (2004). Ethnic diversity and citizenship education in the People’s Republic of China. In
J. A. Banks (Ed.), Diversity and citizenship education: Global perspectives (pp. 355–371). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Weiss, L. (1998). The myth of the powerless state: Governing the economy in a global era. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
White, G., & Wade, R. (1988a). Developmental states and markets in East Asia. In G. White (Ed.),
Developmental states in East Asia (pp. 1–29). Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan.
White, G., & Wade, R. (1988b). Developmental states and markets in East Asia: An introduction. In G. White
& J. Gray (Eds.), Developmental states in East Asia (pp. 1–29). Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire:
Macmillan.
Woo-Cumings, M. (1999). Introduction: Chalmers Johnson and the politics of nationalism and development.
In M. Woo-Cumings (Ed.), The developmental state (pp. 1–31). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
World Bank. (1993). The East Asian miracle: Economic growth and public policy. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Worsley, P. (1985). One world or three? A critique of the world-system theory of Immanuel Wallerstein. In
D. Held, J. Anderson, B. Gieben, S. Hall, L. Harris, P. Lewis, N. Parker, & B. Turok (Eds.), States and
societies (pp. 504–525). Oxford: Basil Blackwell in association with The Open University.
Wu, Y. S. (1994). Comparative economic transformations: Mainland China, Hungary, the Soviet Union, and
Taiwan. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Yoshikawa, S. (c. 2000). Japan. Retrieved 20 November, 2006, from http://www.ibe.unesco.org/curriculum/
Asia%20Networkpdf/JAPAN.pdf

