================================================================================
Chapter 18: The Developing States and Education: Africa
Author(s): John Metzler
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 277–294
PDF Pages: pp. 293–310 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 293 / Book Page 277] ---

18
THE DEVELOPING STATES AND
EDUCATION: AFRICA
John Metzler

Introduction
In March 2007 the world joined Africa in celebrating the 50th anniversary of the
independence of Ghana, the first sub-Saharan African country to gain independence
from colonial rule. Recognizing this seminal event in modern African history along
with the subsequent ushering in of the postcolonial era across Africa that began in earnest in the early 1960s, it is an opportune time for a critical retrospective on the place
and role of schooling (formal education) in postcolonial African nation-states. This
critical review will be undertaken without adopting either an Afro-pessimism or an
Afro-optimism perspective that dominates contemporary discourse on Africa (Ayittey,
2002; Bayart, 1993; Chabal & Daloz, 1999; Hyden, 2006); Rather an attempt will be
made to couch this critical review in a broadly Afro-realism perspective.
In the early 1960s at the beginning of the postcolonial era in Africa there was consensus regarding the role of formal education in Africa’s political, economic, and social
development and the achievement of human “progress.” Importantly, this consensus
was shared by external actors such as the former European colonial powers, and the
US through their bilateral aid programs, and the UN (UNDP, UNESCO, and UNICEF),
the World Bank, and Western academic “experts,” on the one hand, and leaders of the
nascent (postcolonial) nation-states, on the other hand. This consensus asserted that
formal education was an essential, and to some policy actors the most powerful/effective instrument in the struggle for economic and social development, political unity
and the capacitation of the nascent postcolonial states, generating modernity, creating
the “new man,” broken of his primordial, traditional, worldview, interpreting the world
and acting in the postcolonial era as modern men (a recognition of the importance
of women and gender was delayed until the 1990s). (Almond & Powell, 1966) This
perspective, albeit from a utilitarian as opposed to a theoretical perspective, was not a
monopoly of the international and governing elite, but was fully embraced by the vast
majority of postcolonial citizens who aspired for formal education for themselves and
their progeny, perceiving schooling functionally, as the most important instrument in
their struggle for economic advancement, prosperity, and socioeconomic security.
A consequence of the education consensus in the past 45–50 years, postcolonial African political regimes across Africa allocated more money to support the
educational sector than any other sector with the exception of defense and security
277
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 277–294.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 294 / Book Page 278] ---

278 Metzler

(and in many states more than to defense and security). In 2007, what do African citizens and African nation-states have to show for this endeavor? The results in a number
of Africa countries are impressive in terms of increased access to all levels of formal
education, but are not as impressive when examined against the promise held out for
schooling 50 years ago at the dawn of the postcolonial era in Africa. In the political arena in spite of an impressive movement toward democratization and political
renewal, Africa is also plagued by decayed and failed states, authoritarian rule, ethnic
strife, civil wars, and corruption.
In the economic arena Africa continues to be the poorest continent in the world, in
spite of impressive growth rates at the national/macro level, upwards of 70 per cent of
the population in subcontinent exist on less than $2 per day. Socially, Africa today is
the most unhealthy region in the world with the highest infant and maternal mortality
rates, malnutrition, chronic malaria, in addition to being the epicenter of the global
HIV/AIDS pandemic (Barnett & Whiteside, 2006; Poku & Whiteside, 2004).
In spite of this record, the faith placed in schooling by ordinary citizens and state
regimes and international actors has not diminished or wavered. This can be demonstrated in the Millennium Development Goals that target universal primary education
in Africa as a primary goal, and in the pride of place given education and training in
targets set by the New Economic Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) and
the African Union (AU). However, there is a growing realization on the part of both
external (international) and internal (domestic) stakeholders that while formal education plays an essential supporting role in promoting development, the efficacy of
schooling is not what was purported five decades ago.
How are we to make sense of the “failure” of schooling to realize its developmental
rationality in Africa? The “answer” to this query is not easy or simple, reflecting the
complexity of Africa’s colonial and postcolonial social, economic, and political realities. However, the first essential step is recognition of historical legacy of colonialism.

The Colonial Legacy: Ambiguities of Colonialism
and Schooling
In order to understand postcolonial education processes and practice in Africa, it is
essential to examine the legacy of colonialism (a) politically, economically, socially,
and culturally, and (b) in the colonial education systems.
African societies varied in terms of precolonial education practice. However,
it is important to recognize that all societies had sophisticated systems of informal education that allowed for the intergenerational transmission of knowledge,
skills, values, and system of beliefs, all of which facilitated the reproduction society across time and space. Some African societies had sophisticated systems of
apprenticeships, and others systems of religious schools which taught literacy and
numeracy as exemplified by Quranic schools throughout Islamic Africa and church
schools in Ethiopia.
Formal education and schooling in most of Africa was a consequence of Europe’s
engagement in the subcontinent, most particularly during the era of colonial rule (1880s-

--- [PDF Page 295 / Book Page 279] ---

The Developing States And Education:Africa 279

1960s). However, it should be noted that as early as the sixteenth century that Portugal
had established a presence in coastal West Africa, that included the establishment of
Christian missions and schools, most significantly in the Kongo Kingdom. This early era
of European contact with sub-Saharan Africa that was characterized by active engagement by both Africans and Europeans (Thornton, 1992) was superseded by the onset
of the trans-Atlantic slave trade initiated in the sixteenth century that resulted in great
devastation of African societies in addition to immeasurable personal suffering among
those directly affected by slave wars, capture, the “Middle Passage,” and enslavement in
the Americas before slavery was effectively ended in the early nineteenth century.

Reasons for Colonialism
As I will argue, to understand the lasting legacy of the colonial experience on the processes, practice, and efficacy of schooling in postcolonial Africa, it is important to take
brief cognizance of the rationale and subsequent practice of colonialism in Africa.

Economic Rationale for Colonialism
Industrial capitalism in Western Europe by late nineteenth century had become
increasingly dependent on non-European markets for its industrial goods. Secure
(noncompetitive) new markets for industrial goods were perceived to be essential to
the survival and continued profitability of industrial companies that were for the most
part located in European countries. Relatedly, for industrializing European countries
which were resource-poor, or whose natural resources were rapidly depleting, secure
(noncompetitive) sources of raw materials to supply the continued industrial/capitalist
expansion was an imperative.
An additional economic rationale is associated with the averred crisis of over-accumulation.
This Marxist perspective, associated most closely with Luxemburg and Lenin, asserted
that contradictions within industrial capitalism resulted in an accumulation in profits
that could not be absorbed in Europe, requiring colonial expansion (imperialism) to
ensure safe locations for investing accumulated profits.

Political Rationale for Colonialism
Colonialism in Africa is closely related to rise of the nation-states in Europe and subsequent nationalism in the nineteenth century. More specifically, the unification of Germany
and Italy, Republicanism in France, and associated European wars exemplified political
tensions in Europe. The colonial endeavor in Africa (and Asia) was directly related to
the political environment in Europe and to competitive nationalism. National prestige
played directly to the competition for and rapid colonization of Africa—the Scramble for
Africa—between 1885 and 1910. Political historians, such as Robinson and Gallagher
(1968), argue that the colonial enterprise allowed for “peaceful” competition between
European nation-states that actually delayed the onset of World War I until 1914. The
national prestige afforded by colonial empire was enormous; European colonial powers
could boast empires in Africa and Asia that spatially and demographically multiplied their
size many times over.

--- [PDF Page 296 / Book Page 280] ---

280 Metzler

Social and Cultural Rationale for Colonialism
The colonial endeavor in Africa was actively facilitated by social and cultural variables.
Western Europe and the US experienced a revival or a renewal of Christianity in the
nineteenth century popularly referred to as the Great Awakening that resulted in active
Christian mission engagement in Africa and Asia. The imperative of the “great commission” to convert non-Christian populations in distant lands inspired “mission societies” to
establish mission outposts throughout Africa. Mission societies were generally strongly
supportive of the colonial endeavor, believing that the establishment of colonial authority
would create an environment necessary for the realization of the mission agenda.
There were also secular perspectives that lent important ideological support for the
colonial endeavor. Social Darwinism provided a “scientific” mandate for imperialism:
Europeans as the superior race had a natural right to conquer and govern the lesser
races of Africa. Moreover, this right was seen as an obligation—“the white man’s burden”—to “civilize” African societies and individuals.
These economic, political, and sociocultural factors, while potentially contradictory, converged to provide the structural impetus that resulted in the Scramble for
Africa—the colonization of Africa between 1885 (Treaty of Berlin) and 1910. During
this 25-year period, the entire continent of Africa was Balkanized into 51 European
colonies; only Liberia and Ethiopia escaped direct European colonization. But, how
do these variables relate to formal education and schooling in Africa? Is there anything
within the rationale for colonialization, other than the Christian mission imperative,
that lends itself to the initiation and expansion of schooling in Africa? To address this
question systematically, it is essential to analyze the actual practice and structures of
colonialism in Africa. However, the structures and practices put in place by the colonial endeavor were informed by the rationale for colonialism.

The Structure and Legacy of Colonialism
and the Colonial State
To understand European colonialism in Africa it is essential to keep in mind that while
burgeoning European nation-states were among the most powerful in the world at the
end of the nineteenth century, they did not have limitless, political, economic, and military resources. National treasuries were depleted by chronic warfare, and as European
states responded to the growing welfare needs of their own citizens caused by rapid
industrialization and urbanization. These financial and political realities impacted on
and limited the structure of colonial practice in Africa resulting in two cardinal agendas of European colonialism in Africa (with the exception of settler colonies such as
Kenya, Rhodesia, and South Africa.
Firstly, revenue generation, where each colony was responsible to pay for itself—all
expenditures by the colonial state had to be generated locally via taxation of colonial
subjects, commercial concerns, and primary extractive industries—mining and agricultural. Yet, this latter source of revenue was curtailed by the symbiotic relationship
between the colonial state and colonial capital. This imperative is central in understanding
the nature of the support—or lack thereof—by colonial regimes for schooling.

--- [PDF Page 297 / Book Page 281] ---

The Developing States And Education:Africa 281

Secondly, the establishment and maintenance of sovereignty and security were the
primary, some historians would argue the sole, political imperatives of colonial regimes.
Absent from the colonial state agenda was any concern for state legitimacy within the
colonies, such as addressing human welfare concerns and the development of social
and communication infrastructures, including support for schooling, so important to
the modernizing European state. However, these concerns or obligations were clearly
outside of the purview of the colonial state.
As a consequence of these limiting imperatives, the colonial state in Africa was
imbued with contradictions, the state was maximalist in terms of security (developed
police and armed force relative to other state apparatuses) and revenue collection, but
minimalist in all other areas of state function with a very underdeveloped bureaucracy
particularly in areas of human and social services: health care, education, housing,
water, sanitation, developing transportation and communication infrastructure, and
support for the development and diversification of the economy, all of which are central behavioral characteristics of modern states (including capitalist states). Moreover,
the lack of revenue and state capacity, combined with the imperatives of hegemony
and security led to employing strategies to weaken potential internal opposition
(divide and rule) and to govern through ethnically and regionally based “traditional
authorities” (indirect rule). These well-established colonial practices have had a long
term, and often devastating, impact on postcolonial nation-states (Mamdani, 1996;
Cooper, 2005).
The modern state as exemplified by the geopolitical north regardless of political ideology or orientation, views formal education, in the form of state-supported schooling,
as an essential political instrument (Allthuser, 1971; Bowles & Gintis, 1976; Carnoy,
1984; Gutman, 1987; Katz, 1975; Spring, 1985). The skills and knowledge necessary
to administer the state in all its permutations are dependent on an effective educational
system. Moreover, the state is committed to supporting and facilitating economic productivity and growth, which in turn is dependent, inter alia, on a skilled, flexible, and
creative workforce—a product of an efficient and flexible educational system. And,
finally, the state through political socialization intended by schools enhances state and
political system legitimacy.
For the most part the colonial state did not share the attributes of the modern European
state that fostered state support for education. The underdeveloped nature and scope
of the colonial state resulted in a limited demand for skilled bureaucrats, except in the
area of state security and to provide the very basic functions. Moreover, the realities
of the colonial mode of production (articulated below) made minimal demands for an
educated and skilled workforce. And, finally, until late in its tenure, legitimacy was not
a priority of the colonial state (Cooper, 2005; Mamdani, 1996; Young, 1994).
Given these factors, there was only a limited political imperative for supporting formal education/schooling in most African colonies. Consequently, until the
late colonial period there was very limited colonial state support for schooling. In
the case of settler colonies, where the settler state apparatuses supported the settler
hegemonic imperative, state support of education was even more parsimonious, and it
severely restricted schooling provided by nongovernmental agencies, most specifically
Christian missions.

--- [PDF Page 298 / Book Page 282] ---

282 Metzler

Legacy of the Colonial State
At independence the postcolonial state inherited a long-lasting legacy from the colonial state which necessitated active state engagement (largely absent in the colonial
era) in promoting social, economic, and political development while, concurrently,
severely limiting the options available to the nascent regimes. This political legacy can
be briefly summarized in the following manner.
First, the postcolonial regimes inherited states that were often devoid of nation.
The lack of political capacity and the need to weaken internal opposition to colonial rule had forced the colonial state to govern through various schemes of “divide
and rule” that resulted in ethnically defined and divided colonial states. Consequently,
postcolonial leaders were confronted with the gargantuan task of developing national
identity—a task not easily accomplished given the states’ limited political and economic capacity. Consequently, ethnicity has been a major issue in most postcolonial
states in Africa.
Second, postcolonial regimes inherited state structures that lacked democratic political
culture and institutions. Indeed, colonialism by definition and practice was antidemocratic. Other than formalized structures of elections, infused at independence, there
was no established legacy of a culture supporting democratic values. In the absence
of a democratic political culture that, inter alia, valued basic human rights and tolerated political opposition, it was almost natural for under-capacitated postcolonial state
regimes to resort to colonial-like authoritarianism in dealing with internal opposition.
Third, the underdeveloped state capacity greatly limited the ability of the new postcolonial regimes to meet the legitimate aspirations of their citizenry. In most African
nations the state lacked the bureaucratic and financial capacity to develop, initiate,
and administer programs to enhance social well-being of citizens (health, education,
housing, sanitation, etc.) and to stimulate economic productivity and development.
Because of underdeveloped colonial education systems, postcolonial states inherited
a very limited supply of educated, skilled, and experienced bureaucrats, who would be
essential to realizing the development imperative of the new nation-states.
Fourth, the postcolonial states inherited an overdeveloped, relative to the rest of the
state apparatus, security capacity in the form of the national police and armed forces.
Consequently, it is not surprising that, early on, some postcolonial state regimes
turned to these apparatuses when they faced crises of legitimacy; nor, is it surprising
(although very unfortunate) that the armed forces, privileged in the colonial era, are
in the position to stage successful coups when inaugural state regimes are unable to
govern effectively, or meet the legitimate aspirations and needs of the citizenry.

Legacy of the Colonial Mode of Production
As indicated above, the colonial imperative not to spend more than it could raise
through local taxes greatly restricted revenues available to the colonial state for the
development of social and economic infrastructure, while concurrently facilitating and
enabling colonial capital (i) to extract raw materials and profits from the colony with
little or no horizontal reinvestment in the colony and (ii) to guarantee market monopolies for manufactured goods through deliberate disincentives to local industries.

--- [PDF Page 299 / Book Page 283] ---

The Developing States And Education:Africa 283

More specifically, colonial economic policy led to the identification of a single
(usually only one) source of revenue/expropriation resulting in the creation of what
economists have termed mono-economies that are extractive in nature, such as mining,
agricultural (large-scale commercial farms in some colonies and forced peasant production of export crops in other colonies). These export-oriented raw material-extractive
industries most often made no attempt to process the minerals or agricultural products
in the colonies before exportation. Consequently there was little or no horizontal multiplying effect from the extractive industries. There was also no diversification of the
domestic colonial economy.
As a consequence of the distorted nature of the colonial economy, there was little or no
development of infrastructures for communication, transportation, and financial services,
other than what was needed to facilitate the expropriation of primary product(s). Road and
rail systems ran from location of raw materials (e.g., where the mines were) to the coast,
with limited development within the country. Moreover, until the late colonial period there
was no state support for developing local African entrepreneurs with little or no access to
credit and other vital financial services. Indeed, in settler states African entrepreneurship
was actively discouraged for fear of competing with European settlers.

Economic Legacy
The economic legacy of colonialism has been, if anything, more severe than the political legacy. The export-oriented extractive mono-economies of the vast majority of
colonies in Africa resulted in the institutionalization of distorted capitalist systems
which structurally hindered the development of market-driven (or centrally planned)
diversified productive economies able to take advantage of Africa’s rich potential and
opportunities afforded by the increasing globalized world economy. Consequently the
majority of postcolonial African governments were revenue-poor, with insufficient
funds to expand woefully underdeveloped infrastructures, or to meet the legitimate
demands for expanded social services on the part of their citizenry.
This economic legacy has had a direct impact on the schooling in postcolonial
Africa. Most obviously, the lack of revenue precluded the rapid expansion of formal
education, muting the popularly held assumption that schooling was essential for productivity and economic development. Less obvious, but just as detrimental, I would
argue, has been the expansion and institutionalization of a system of schooling that is
orientated to the realities of the distorted colonial mode of production. Jobs in postcolonial Africa, as in colonial Africa, have primarily been in the public service sector,
informing and rewarding a system of schooling that eschews creativity, problem-solving,
and entrepreneurship.

Social and Cultural Legacy of Colonialism
The social and cultural legacies of colonialism were not uniform throughout Africa.
In a number of colonies urbanization was rapid in the late colonial period. This is
particularly true of mineral-based economies such as Congo and Northern Rhodesia
(Zambia). However, a number of Africa colonies remained overwhelmingly rural.
Social and cultural dislocation was not as severe in these colonies as it was in more

--- [PDF Page 300 / Book Page 284] ---

284 Metzler

urbanized colonies. But, there were rural-based colonies, such as Malawi in southcentral Africa and Burkina Faso in West Africa, which suffered significant social
dislocation as they served as sources of cheap labor (labor migration) for the mining
and plantation economies in neighboring colonies.
The colonial endeavor, as I argued above, above, was cultural as well as economic
and political. Colonialism depended on an ideology of racial and cultural superiority
that legitimized the practice of gross discrimination and oppressive regimes, not just
to the colonizers (and citizens of the metropole), but also to the colonized. Colonial
cultural apparatuses—including schools—were engaged in a dual cultural strategy of
glorifying European culture while concomitantly denigrating African culture, values,
and worldviews. The success of this strategy in terms of what Franz Fanon, among others, has termed the colonization of the African mind, is, many would argue, an ongoing
legacy of colonialism and the colonial education system (Fanon, 1963; Carnoy, 1974;
wa Thiong’o, 1986, 1993).

Schooling and Formal Education in Colonial
and Postcolonial Africa
Colonial Educational Policy and Practice
There is a large, albeit uneven, scholarship on colonial education and schooling in
Africa. Much of this scholarship has focused on the role of European and North
American mission societies in the establishment and expansion of formal schooling
throughout Africa. Sybille Kuster (1998, 330–369), among other scholars, provides
a comprehensive bibliography of academic work on colonial education in Africa.
However, it is beyond the scope of this chapter to critique or to even attempt to summarize this literature. Instead, I will attempt to provide a critical overview of colonial
schooling as it was articulated differentially throughout diverse colonial milieux and
its consequential institutionalized legacy for postcolonial African states.
Critics of colonial education policy and practice in Africa highlight two major, and
potentially contradictory, shortcomings: a sin of omission—parsimonious resources
allocated to schooling in most Africa countries; and a sin of commission—the deliberate use of schooling (curriculum, school structure, cocurricular activities) to colonize
the minds of and mis-educate African pupils. Indeed, with a few notable exceptions, at
independence African colonies inherited school systems that catered for a small percentage of the school-age population, putting into question the efficacy of schools as
colonial ideological apparatuses beyond the creation of a small educated elite who were
destined by, inter alia, their educational credentials, to be leaders in postcolonial African
states. While the long-term negative impact of inherited and internalized ideology on
African education is important to recognize, of more lasting negative legacy is the institutionalization and structuration of a colonial education system. This system reflected
the realities of colonial political systems that were undemocratic to the core and that
were structurally antithetic to state intervention in social and economic development.
Hybrid colonial capitalism precluded meaningful state intervention in the economy, the
“freeing” of market forces, and the unleashing of an entrepreneurial spirit.

--- [PDF Page 301 / Book Page 285] ---

The Developing States And Education:Africa 285

The political and economic realities of African colonialism produced an ecology
that shaped and restricted educational practice in the colonies in ways that challenged
the goals and agenda that various stakeholders set for schools. However, the actual
development and institutionalization of colonial education practice was shaped by the
interplay or dialectic between the central stakeholders, as they sought to realize their
goals for education, and the restrictions imposed by the realities of the colonial political economy. Therefore, to understand the structuration of a potentially dysfunctional
education system it is important to understand how the major colonial stakeholders
engaged educational policy and practice. By necessity this summary is a generalized overview that cannot take into account the diversity of educational experience in
colonial Africa.

Colonial State
The perspective of the colonial state toward schooling for Africans was shaped by
two imperatives: revenue and state efficacy. Given severe revenue restraints (outlined
above), schooling, which was a drain on state treasury, was not perceived to be a priority until late in the colonial era. This tendency might have been challenged if revenue
generation had been dependent on a diversifying economy that needed a permanent
skilled workforce. But, as outlined above, the predominant colonial mode of production was primitive and extractive, depending on cheap, unskilled, and often migratory
labor. Consequently, significant expenditure on schools for the development of a
skilled or disciplined workforce was not a necessity for the realization of the colonial
agenda. However, the colonial state apparatus—aimed at effective and efficient government—was dependent on a small, but growing over the course of the colonial era,
supportive cast of African state functionaries or lower-level bureaucrats: clerks, translators, teachers, health assistants, and most importantly for state security, police and
soldiers. This need was limited by the narrow capacity of the colonial state—hence,
need for schooling was not great. Settler colonial states, such as South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia were even more stingy with allocations to education. Importantly,
at the eve of independence, the colonial state in all colonies was by far the largest
employer. Colonial education systems reflected this reality, orienting curriculum and
practice to meet the needs of a state-centric employment economy.

Colonial Capital
The colonial mode of production made very limited demands prior to the late 1940s
for skilled labor. Extractive mineral and agriculture activities did not demand a literate
and numerate workforce. Hence, unlike the situation in late-nineteenth-century industrializing North America and Europe, colonial capital did not advocate for mass-based
public education in the African colonies in the absence of the need for a stable, skilled,
and disciplined workforce. This would change in many African colonies in the postWorld War II era, as development in the economy demanded a more rationalized, stable
workforce. However, even in colonies that underwent this change, employment opportunities continued to be centered in the state apparatus, thus school curricula were not
significantly reformed to meet demands of a potentially diversifying economy.

--- [PDF Page 302 / Book Page 286] ---

286 Metzler

Missionaries
In most African colonies, schooling (other than Quranic schools) was the domain of
missionaries and mission societies. Colonization of Africa coincided with the religious Great Awakening in Protestant circles in North America and Western Europe.
The Christian missionary endeavor was informed by a duty to convert “native pagan”
populations. The mission agenda has been summarized by the three “Cs”—Christianity,
commerce, and civilization which were perceived by Protestants (and Catholics) as
essential to Africa’s “escape” from “depths of paganism.” Unlike the colonial regime
and colonial capital, missionaries viewed basic schooling as essential to realizing the
three Cs. To realize this agenda missionaries adopted a basic curriculum centered on
the four “Rs”—reading, ‘riting, ‘rithmatic, and religion (Metzler, 1988).
However, in spite of their intentions, given severe financial constraints, mission
education only reached a small minority of the school age populations in the African
colonies. While mission societies administered the vast majority of schools in subSaharan Africa, they were dependent on the goodwill and largesse of financially
hamstrung colonial states.

African Responses
The response of Africans to the colonial education agenda was not uniform; it varied
across space and time. But generally, Africans were suspicious, viewing and accepting
mission schooling as it was perceived to be of instrumental/functional value to Africans,
individually or as a specific group. In the mid-colonial era, as they were pulled into
the colonial economy, Africans perceived the value of certain types of schooling as
instrumental in achieving economic security and relative prosperity. Acting rationally,
they advocated for book learning (as opposed to adaptive education promoted by the
missionaries) that would provide the credentials necessary for employment in a job
market dominated by the state apparatus. In this way Africans actively engaged and
participated in the structuration of educational practice in colonial Africa.
Educational policy and practice that evolved dialectically out of the interaction of
these interests were not uniform across colonial powers (French, British, Portuguese,
and Belgians had different perspectives on schooling/education in colonies), or by type
of colonialism (settler colonies, protectorates, and traditional colonies approached the
issue of schooling differently).

Dialectics of Colonial Educational Practice
From the beginning of the educational endeavor in colonial Africa, a central question
and area of debate focused on the curriculum—that is, what is to be taught? There
was no neat and simple solution to this question. The French tended to take an elitist
position—only a few selected colonial subjects would receive schooling that mirrored French policy of assimilation. The Portuguese followed a similar pattern, but
were less generous than the French. The British, at first were supportive of a more
broad-based education with a curriculum that was based on actual realities (as they
perceived them) of African societies. The Belgians in the Congo (and in Rwanda and

--- [PDF Page 303 / Book Page 287] ---

The Developing States And Education:Africa 287

Burundi) supported mission societies in providing primary education for as many
children as financially possible, but their policy of Paternalism did not view Africans
as needing, or being capable of, secondary or higher education. Consequently, at
independence in 1960, Congo, a country the size of Western Europe, had less than 50
university/college graduates.
Settler colonies (South Africa, the Rhodesia, Kenya, Angola, and Mozambique)
had a considerably different orientation. Generally suspicious of schooling for
Africans, settlers perceived the potential for educated Africans to mount a political
challenge and to compete with whites for skilled and professional jobs. Consequently,
education for Africans in settler colonies was generally more restricted than it was
in other colonies.

Case Study: Adaptive Education (British Colonies)
A brief case study of the thwarted Adaptive Education initiative undertaken by the
British in the 1920s and 1930s will illustrate the difficulties in developing an alien education system that was in basic contradiction to the realities of the colonial regime.
Missionaries (primarily Protestant) had a vision of providing an education that was
adaptive to the realities/needs (as they perceived them, of course) of the African societies. Consequently they promoted curricula that would promote social and economic
development within rural communities. Adaptive education was itself an adaptation of
educational policy and practice for freed slaves in the south US immediately after the
Civil War, as exemplified by the work of Booker T. Washington.
In response to missionary encouragement, the British Colonial Office endorsed the
Phelps-Stokes Commissions to British colonies in Africa (three in the 1920s). These
reports were the most developed articulation of adaptive education as envisioned in
Africa. The commission reports advocated the development and implementation of
curricula that would promote:
• Character development—reflected missionary perception that African cultures
were defective, and proper schooling would help overcome the influence of traditional African culture and promote character traits necessary to realize the three
Cs in African communities (Jones, 1925: 265)
• Health and hygiene—promote preventive behaviors
• Productive skills related to the environmental realities of local communities—
agricultural skills for scientific farming and “industrial” skills, such as carpentry,
masonry, metal-smithing, furniture making, tailoring (for males), and needlework,
nutrition, and mothering-skills (for females) (Jones, 1925: 265)
• Improved family life—care and discipline of children, establishment of “Christian
Homes”—change in gender roles and relations, architecture, and spatial organization of living and sleeping arrangements—“the Christian home is the most
essential organized unit of civilization” (Jones, 1925: 266)
• “Healthy recreation”—great suspicion of African entertainment—music and
dancing as being hindering character development at best, and promoting paganism at worst—to be replaced by organized sport—this ties into the Victorian view
of school sport as essential tool in character development (Jones, 1925: 267)

--- [PDF Page 304 / Book Page 288] ---

288 Metzler

Reality of Practice
In spite of strong rhetorical support from mission societies and the British Colonial
Office, adaptive education (like other mission initiatives elsewhere in Africa) was not
implemented. Schooling throughout colonial Africa did not easily follow policy due to
structural/systemic contradictions and ambiguities both within the political economy
and educational practice.
The realities of the colonial treasury insured that funding was not available to realize
even the most modest of educational goals. In spite of rhetoric that colonialism would
bring development and “civilization” to Africa, economic realities of lack of revenues
available to colonial states and to mission societies made schooling a luxury in even
the most well-off colonies such as Ghana and Nigeria.
Just as importantly, educational initiatives, such as adaptive education, faced
sustained resistance by African populations. This opposition was not to the idea of
schooling; in fact by the 1930s schooling was perceived to be instrumentally necessary to personal advancement. Rather, opposition was focused on the lack of access,
but also on the curriculum. Colonial subjects realized that adaptive education would
not result in opportunity given the realities of the colonial political economy. There
were only very limited opportunities for rural entrepreneurship (the focus of adaptive
education). Only the expansion of “book learning” or academic education would result
in economic advancement and security within the colonial political economy. Secure
jobs, such as they were, were located almost exclusively in the government sector, not
in the private sector, particularly, not in the agricultural or rural sectors.
To summarize, the colonial education systems that developed in Africa were alien.
This was not the case in late-nineteenth-century Europe and North America where
mass-based public education systems developed organically, but with significant
contestation, out of the social, economic, and political milieu of these national communities. However, in colonial Africa schooling was an alien import, absent of any
organic connective tissue with the host societies. Schooling was viewed by the colonial state and missionaries as an important instrument of the imperial enterprise.
Consequently, they formulated educational policy, envisioning very specific roles for
schools in realizing the larger colonial endeavor. However, the realities of colonial
practice, and importantly, the active engagement of African people in the articulation
of actual educational practice, helped shape and structure hybrid education systems
that were reflective of the realities of African colonialism, but systems that would
potentially have difficulties responding to the economic and political imperatives of
postcolonial societies.

Postcolonial State, Nation-Building, and the Imperative
of Schooling
In spite of the dismal colonial record there was a great deal of optimism 50 years
ago as the first wave of formal African countries achieved political independence.
Within Africa formally subject peoples and their nascent governments anticipated
that the end of formal colonial rule would usher in an era of real political power that in

--- [PDF Page 305 / Book Page 289] ---

The Developing States And Education:Africa 289

turn would facilitate socioeconomic development, opportunity, and prosperity. This
sanguinity was shared by world leaders and by an incipient cadre of international
development experts.
This early optimism was fueled in part by a strong faith in the functional power and
efficacy of formal education. International development and education experts, from
across the ideological spectrum and representing multiple disciplinary and theoretical
perspectives shared a consensual orthodoxy that held that formal education was an
essential (some averred, determining), if not sufficient, ingredient for political, social,
and economic development in Africa.
This orthodoxy was based on two central assertions: (1) that schooling is an inalienable human right of all human beings; and (2) that an educated citizenry is sine
qua non for political, social, and economic development. This consensus was fully
endorsed by all the newly independent state regimes which viewed schooling as producing economically productive citizens, who in addition to providing the human
capital essential to economic development, would assist a severely underdeveloped
state structure by providing an adequately skilled bureaucracy with the expertise necessary to creatively address the gargantuan development project of the postcolonial
state. Very importantly, this education orthodoxy was universally shared by the highly
politicized citizens of the newly postcolonial nation-states who were convinced that
improved access to all levels of education was essential to improving their own, and
their progeny’s, living standards (Fagerlind & Saha, 1989).
A definite causal link between schooling, human capital, and economic development
was strongly asserted by Nobel Economic Laureate Theodore Schultz (1961, 1963),
among many eminent international economists. Other social scientists avouched a
similar relationship between the expansion of formal education in postcolonial African
nation-states and the development of efficient political systems that were democratic
and that were capable of responding to the legitimate demands of an engaged citizenry
and in developing and implementing effective social and economic policies and programs. More specifically, scholars like Almond and Powell (1966), Coleman (1965),
Rostow (1960), and Zolberg (1966) argued that schooling was essential to the creation
of citizens free of primordial ties and values and who have a primary identification, not
with “tribe” or ethnic group, but with the nation-state; a citizenry ready to be actively
engaged in the agenda of the incipient postcolonial nation-state. Schools—which by
their definition were modern—were the only institution with the potential to create
modern men willing to break their ties to stifling traditions. Interestingly, it was only
in the late 1980s that the education of girls and women was given priority by Western
experts and donors.
The nascent postcolonial African regimes also had definite political rationales for
expanding formal education. First, there was the imperative of national unity. The vast
majority of postcolonial African nation-states are multiethnic, multilingual, and multireligious. Colonial regimes had purposefully accentuated difference through policies
of divide and rule and indirect rule. Consequently, with a few exceptions (such as
Botswana, Lesotho, and Swaziland) African nation-states came into existence with no
organic sense of identity with a Nation. Nationalism had to be created and fostered if
political development was to be achieved and if political chaos or disintegration was to

--- [PDF Page 306 / Book Page 290] ---

290 Metzler

be avoided. There were no natural institutions within civil society available to generate
national identity and loyalty. Hence, schools (along with mass communication, particularly radio and local-language newspapers) were considered to be vital instruments
in realizing the imperative of national identity and loyalty. Consequently, civic education became a core component of postcolonial school curricula throughout Africa. To
further the political functionality of schools, in many African countries schools were
mandated to host overtly partisan (pro-regime) political clubs that promoted identification with, and loyalty to, the extant regime.
Secondly, the new governments recognized that schools were essential to the expansion of state capacity. The inherited colonial state structure severely lacked capacity,
particularly relative to the huge social and economic tasks it faced. The development
and maintenance of “modern” social, economic, and communication infrastructure
was dependent on an educated and appropriately skilled bureaucracy. Consequently
the rapid expansion of formal education was essential to meet the demand for skilled
state functionaries.
Thirdly, postcolonial regimes came to power with considerable popular support.
These regimes were interested in maintaining this legitimacy. Support for regimes—
regime legitimacy—however, was dependent on their ability to address the significant
aspirations held by the nascent citizenry. Among the most popular of these aspirations
was the expansion of formal education opportunities (for reasons given above). Failure
to deliver on education (along with other social infrastructure like health care, housing,
sanitation) would be disastrous to the legitimacy of new regimes.
Finally, on the political front, not unlike Western social scientists who were convinced of the importance of modernity, many first-generation postcolonial African
leaders also believed that realization of economic and political goals was dependent
on the creation of a “new man” among the citizenry. Interestingly, this was most true
in countries that attempted to follow a quasi-socialist model of development such as
Guinea, Mozambique, and Tanzania. Schools were the primary institution for the creation of the “new man” whose worldview, values, and perceptions were consonant with
the regimes’ modernizing agenda.

Cultural Development
Postcolonial regimes also viewed schools as cultural instruments. Nationalist leaders
perceived a necessity for developing icons of national culture—e.g., music, dance,
performance, and art. The “rediscovery,” rehabilitation, and active celebration of traditional culture practices were seen as important in this endeavor particularly since
“traditional” culture practices were often denigrated by colonial regimes. Schools,
again, were seen as playing a central role in this enterprise.

Expansion of Schooling
As a consequence of the faith in the ameliorative powers of formal education, many
African countries recorded significant and unparalleled (relative to the governments’ allocation to other social welfare and infrastructural commitments) expansion
of expenditure to formal education. Indeed, by the mid-1980s (prior to the severe

--- [PDF Page 307 / Book Page 291] ---

The Developing States And Education:Africa 291

economic downturn in most of Africa) a number of African countries were approaching the goal of universal primary education as well as recording significant gains in
secondary and tertiary education.
In developing goals for schools the nascent postcolonial African regimes were
generally guided by a tripartite goal: a commitment to Universal Primary Education
(UPE)—with quality considerations; expansion of secondary education to meet the
human resource needs of nation-state and to respond to the aspirations of citizens
(but no country attempted universal secondary education); and expansion of tertiary education: at least one national university, specialized colleges—technical, allied
health, teacher-training. Yet, even before the onset of economic stagnation and the
implementation of structural adjustment programs in the late 1980s, both of which
negatively impacted access to schooling, it had become clear that the expansion of
formal education had neither paid the anticipated dividends in terms of economic
development and security, political system capacity, democratization, or stability; nor
had the educational expansion resulted in significant improved life chances for many
African citizens. However, the growing recognition that formal education while essential was not sufficient for realizing development goals, did not significantly lessen
postcolonial state commitment to education, or deter citizen demand for increased
access to schooling. But, these realities resulted in the critical re-visitation of policy
questions that were part of policy discussions in the immediate postindependence era.
Four such questions were central to the discourse on postcolonial education policy and
practice. Samoff et al. (1992) provide a more detailed analysis of these issues along
with a comprehensive bibliography.
First is the question of the relevance of curricula. Colonial curricula following
the rejection of adaptive education, was for the most part “academic” (book learning) aimed at producing lower-level state bureaucrats. Consequently, there was little
emphasis on technical and professional skills (particularly true of higher education,
where humanities were dominant). Given this tradition, in the postcolonial era there
was considerable public opposition to changes in curriculum (except to Africanize history, geography, and literature). In the postcolonial era the curriculum focus continued
to have a strong academic orientation. Parents and students, based on the realities
of the colonial political economy, perceived “academic” education (book learning)
with a traditional emphasis on the humanities and non-applied social and natural sciences, as essential to securing employment in the government sector. This perspective
was reinforced by the realities of postcolonial economies that, restricted by the legacy
and continued dominance of the colonial modes of production, were generally not
diversified and as such did not provide opportunities for employment (including selfemployment) outside of the “traditional” government/public sector.
By the 1980s there were, however, educational policy experts, domestically and
external, who believe that a significant, if not radical, reform of the curricula was
essential in order to provide young adults with the skills, attitudes, and experience
necessary to be entrepreneurs and/or to diversify the economy.
A second central question focused on school fees. Most Africa countries after independence heavily subsidized education at all levels and adhered to a commitment to
equal opportunity for all citizens. However, given the real costs of schooling most

--- [PDF Page 308 / Book Page 292] ---

292 Metzler

postcolonial states could not hope to achieve their educational goals (including UPE)
without parents/students sharing some of the actual cost of schooling. This position
was pushed by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) beginning in the mid-1980s with the externally imposed economic structural adjustment
programs (ESAPs). In many countries that implemented ESAP-recommended educational finance reforms there was a decline in the number of students participating
in all levels of education—with no African country realizing UPE, one of the eight
Millennia Challenge Goals (Birdsall et al., 2005).
A third question relates to the privileging of one level of education above others.
For the past two decades the World Bank and other bilaterals (based on their research)
pushed for educational policies that privileged primary education—arguing that their
research clearly demonstrated that the expansion of primary education had the highest rate of return, socially and personally. However, African regimes and citizens were
unhappy with this policy direction. They perceived secondary and higher education as
being essential for development. Moreover, African experts argued that without university-trained specialists African nation-states would be (and continue to be) dependent
on exogenously produced skills and knowledge. They assert that African universities
are necessary, not just to provide skilled human resources to tackle Africa’s problems,
but to develop endogenous and relevant approaches to these problems—approaches
that are not dependent on, or restricted by, Western or global epistemologies or paradigms of knowledge production.
The fourth central question that has dominated the discourse on post-colonial educational policy and practice focuses on gender. Beginning in the 1980s there has been
an increased recognition of the importance of gender in addressing all issues related to
socioeconomic and political development in postcolonial Africa. Women have always
played a central economic role in African societies, even though, as in West, women
were often excluded from political positions that would give them access to power and
a voice in decision-making. This systemic reality resulted in gender bias in access to
all levels of education in Africa. Consequently, there is now a near universal recognition that girls and women must be given equal access to at all levels of the formal
education system. In addition to being an important human rights and equity issue,
social, economic, and political development and the well-being of local communities
and the nation-state are dependent on the active involvement of educated women. As a
result of this understanding, over the past decade almost all multilateral (World Bank,
UNESCO, UNICEF) and bilateral (USAID, British Council, SEDA, etc.) funded educational projects privilege gender equity. (For a detailed analysis and comprehensive
bibliography on gender schooling in Africa, see UNESCO, 2003.)

Conclusion: Globalization and African Education
The new millennium has witnessed a surge of optimism in Africa. Beginning in the
1990s Africa has undergone a significant wave of democratization—what some academic commentators have dubbed Africa’s Second Independence. Similarly, the past
decade has seen sustained economic growth rates across the continent. The creation

--- [PDF Page 309 / Book Page 293] ---

The Developing States And Education:Africa 293

of the African Union in 2002 and its adoption of the realistic, if ambitious, NEPAD
reinforces this sense of optimism in Africa.
Yet, in spite of these important advances, Africa in places is still plagued with internal and regional political strife, long-lasting legacies of colonialism and the cold war.
On the economic front, regardless of the gains, Africa remains a continent of endemic
poverty where more than two thirds of the continent’s population subsists on less than
$2 a day.
It is too early to offer a comprehensive assessment of the impact of globalization
on Africa. While the “flattening” of the world will undoubtedly provide some African
countries with increased economic opportunities, there is a real concern that given
Africa’s legacy of severe economic and political underdevelopment, African states are
not in a position to be competitive in the global system resulting in the further peripheralization of significant parts of Africa.
The general economic recovery of the past decade and the support from the international community has resulted in a recovery and expansion of school attendance in
most African countries. Indeed, countries like Botswana, Mauritius, and South Africa
are poised to realize the Millennium Challenge Goal of universal primary education
by 2015. Yet these gains are dependent on external funding to support educational systems at all levels restricting the autonomy of African policymakers. The World Bank
and bilateral lenders make loans and grants contingent on the implementation of policies set by experts located for the most part outside of Africa. As a consequence there
is a real concern that (a) what counts as good educational practice will be increasingly exogenously determined, allowing for little local autonomy; and (b) what counts
as knowledge—how it is generated, created, constructed, distributed, and used will
be determined outside of Africa, with limited local input. Active engagement in the
processes of knowledge construction, valuation, and distribution is based on power
within the global community—of which Africa has little, hence Africa’s voice has
been muted within the global education discourse, even as it impacts approaches to
Africa’s development.
Formal education systems and knowledge production that foster active local engagement while capitalizing on global connections, is not as history has demonstrated
sufficient to overcome the social, economic, and political structural impediments
for development in Africa, but it is nonetheless essential and a sine qua non to its
realization.

References
Almond, G., & G. B. Powell Jr. (1966). Comparative Politics: A Development Approach. Boston: Little
Brown.
Althusser, L. (1971). Lenin, Philosophy and Other Essays. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Ayittey, G. (2002). Africa Betrayed. New York: St. Martins Press
Barnett, T., & A. Whiteside (2006). AIDS in the Twenty-First Century: Disease of Globalization (Second
edition). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bayart, J. -F. (1993). The State in Africa: The Politics of the Belly. London: Longman.
Birdsall, N., R. Levine, & A. Ibrahim (2005). Toward Universal Primary Education: Investments, and
Institutions. London: EarthScan and the Millennium Project.
Bowles, S., & H. Gints (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America. New York: Basic Books.

--- [PDF Page 310 / Book Page 294] ---

294 Metzler
Carnoy, M. (1974). Education as Cultural Imperialism. New York and London: Longman.
Carnoy, M. (1984). The State and Political Theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Chabal, P., & J. -F. Daloz. (1999). Africa Works: Disorder as a Political Instrument. Oxford: James Curry.
Coleman, J. S. (ed). (1965). Education and Political Development. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cooper, F. (2005). Colonialism in Question: Theory, Knowledge, History. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Fagerlind, I., & L. Saha (1989). Education and National Development (Second edition). Oxford: Pergamon.
Fanon, F. (1963). The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove Press.
Gutman, A. (1987). Democratic Education. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hyden, G. (2006). African Politics in Comparative Perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, T. J. (1925). Education in Africa: A Study of East, Central and South Africa by the Second Educational
Commission Under the Auspices of the Phelps-Stokes Fund in Cooperation with the International
Education Board. New York: Phelps-Stokes Fund.
Katz, M. B. (1975). Class, Bureaucracy, and Schools: The Illusion of Educational Change in America. New
York: Praeger.
Kuster, S. (1998). African Education in Colonial Zimbabwe, Zambia and Malawi: Government Control,
Settler Antagonism and African Agency, 1890–1964. Hamburg: Lit Verlag.
Mamdani, M. (1996). Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of Late Colonialism.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Metzler, J. (1988). State, Settlers, Missionaries and Rural Dwellers: A Comparative Historical Analysis
of the Politics, Economics and Sociology of Educational Policy in Colonial Northern and Southern
Rhodesia. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Poku, N., & A. Whiteside (Eds.) (2004). The Political Economy of AIDS in Africa. Burlington: Ashgate.
Robinson, R., & J. Gallagher (1968). Africa and the Victorians: The Climax of Imperialism. New York:
Anchor Books.
Rostow, W. (1960). The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Samoff, J., J. Metzler, & T. Salie (1992). Education and Development: Deconstructing a Myth to Construct
Reality. In A. Seidman & F. Anang (Eds.), 21st Century Africa: Towards a New Vision of Sustainable
Development. Trenton: Africa World Press.
Schultz, T. (1961). Investment in Human Capital. American Economic Review 51(1): 1–17.
Schultz, T. (1963). The Economic Value of Education. New York: Columbia University Press.
Spring, J. (1985). American Education: An Introduction to Social and Political Aspects (Third edition). New
York: Longman.
Thornton, J. (1992). Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
UNESCO (2003). Gender and Education for All: The Leap to Equality (2003). Paris: UNESCO.
Wa Thiong’o, N. (1986). Decolonizing the Mind: The Politics of Language in African Literature. London:
John Currey.
Wa Thiong’o, N. (1993). Moving the Centre: The Struggle for Cultural Freedoms. London: John Currey.
Young, C. (1994). The African Colonial State in Comparative Perspective. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Zolberg, A. (1966). Creating Political Order: The Party States of West Africa. New York: Rand McNally.

