================================================================================
Chapter 20: The European Union and Education in Spain
Author(s): José Luis García Garrido
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 2: Political Formations and Educational Systems
Book Pages: pp. 321–334
PDF Pages: pp. 337–350 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 337 / Book Page 321] ---

20
THE EUROPEAN UNION AND EDUCATION IN SPAIN
José Luis García Garrido

The title at the head of this article could give rise to many diverse interpretations. One
of these is the study of to what degree the Spanish education system relates to the
education policy which the European Economic Community first and the European
Union later have drawn up since their creation. Without doubting the interest of this
line of exploration, I prefer one that seems to me more realistic and revealing in the
present circumstances. In my opinion, the European Union, in educational matters,
is none other than the sum of all its parts. In other words, I am not convinced that its
member states have given the Union the possibility of implementing a real community
education policy or that they are going to do so in the near future. The States which
compose the European Union jealously keep exclusive control over their respective
education systems and it seems they wish to continue that way while accepting, not
without resistance, that Brussels may collaborate in establishing certain common
lines of action.
The aim of the following pages is, therefore, to place the present Spanish education
system in its natural framework which is without doubt that of the European Union.
However, I will consider more the different States that compose it and their respective
policies rather than the education policy of the Union itself, a policy which is, I feel,
doubtful. I would like to examine, ultimately, in what sense the Spanish education system is homologous to that of the principle States of the European Union. An ambitious
aim, without doubt, which contrasts the lack of space available and the complexity of
the topic. Given these limitations, I am forced to choose a few points that I consider
of major importance regarding the presence of the Spanish education system within
the European Union. In particular, I will refer only to three. The first, of a historical
nature, hopes to illustrate many of the present-day differences. The second point refers
to what many Spanish academics and I consider the macro-problem facing the Spanish
education system: its own nature as an education system. Finally, I will try to list,
briefly, some of the main deficiencies which affect the Spanish education system with
the European framework.
The reader might be surprised by the strongly critical, perhaps autocritical, character
of the following pages. As will be noted, it seems as if I have tried to show only the
negative aspects of the education system which I myself serve and have served for
many years, thus succumbing to the typically Spanish tendency that I will analyse
later: a plaintive and even pessimistic tone in my reflections. This does not comply
with my usual vision as the reader can confirm in my other writings.1
321
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 321–334.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 338 / Book Page 322] ---

322 García Garrido

Europeanism and Isolationism in the Spanish
Education Policy: An Old Topic
The large historiographic material produced in Spain in the last decades referring to
education in its diverse aspects expresses tacitly or openly that from the Enlightenment
onwards, Spain did not maintain the pace followed by developed nations in Europe either
because the country was not able to, did not know how to, or did not want to (frequently
all three). This had not occurred before (it is enough to remember the important ecclesiastical developments and the influential pedagogical movements already rising in Spain
in the Middle Ages and at the beginning of the Modern Age). From the Enlightenment
onwards, things changed. From the moment the authorities in the majority of European
countries decided to steer a course in the then rising education systems, Spain started
to react with apathy, lack of interest and even, sometimes, with the firm objective of not
embarking on a course which stirred open suspicions. The Spanish intellectuals warned
of this, but they were not paid due attention. Manuel de Puelles describes in his last
book the system outlined in the first decades of the eighteenth century as a ‘frustrated
national system’.2 It is true that there were reactions, but untimely, late and almost
always timid. The Quintana Report in 1813 was one such and, in the middle of the nineteenth century, the Moyano Act another that lasted a hundred years before a complete
new legislation replaced it (the laws that came to light in that period were of more or
less importance but always partial and referring to a certain level or particular aspect).
There were always, in different periods, considerable efforts and ambitious plans. But
either they did not reach a satisfactory conclusion or, in some cases, they had to be
withdrawn being considered too daring by quite a number of Spanish people.
The reasoning that Spain should reach the same level as the most advanced countries
was common but on many occasions was counteracted by the isolationist mentality
prevalent for a long time in the country. As Menéndez Pidal emphasised, the resistance
of many Spaniards to listen to those from abroad, or to try to relate to them, goes back
a long time. After the evidence that the Venetian Tiépolo had already given in the sixteenth century, Menéndez Pidal acknowledges in this resistance as a kind of historical
constant, enduring forever, and he concludes
[I]solationism prevails in Spain … considers that the Spanish have little to learn
from other peoples and that it is essential to preserve intact all traditional forms
of life and thought free from any foreign influence which only serves to weaken
and endanger them. Feijoo’s many arguments against these two prejudices are
just as important today as they were then.3
That ‘today’ referred to by Menéndez Pidal was Spain in the middle of the twentieth century. Things have certainly changed a lot since then. Not long afterwards,
Spain set out on a decidedly European journey. The General Act of Education of
1970, promulgated in the latter stages of Franco’s time, without doubt opened the
boundaries of the education system to outside currents and it was, for this reason,
severely judged by many political and social authorities of the time, including
many intellectuals.

--- [PDF Page 339 / Book Page 323] ---

The European Union and Education In Spain 323

However, and in spite of all its qualities, this law was not able to make up for lost
time. It had to conform with eight years of compulsory schooling, as it had been
before, due to the high number of young people absent from the secondary classrooms
from the age of 14. By this time, many European countries had already increased
the number to nine or ten years. This law, however, dared to apply the ‘principle of
comprehensive education’ or integration of primary and early secondary levels even
before other countries such as France, Italy or, indeed, some northern countries. But
what constituted an irrefutable advance in 1970 was, 20 years later, reiterated, at
an inopportune moment, and exaggerated by the new Act (known in Spain by the
LOGSE) which raised to ten years both compulsory education (which was a good
decision) and comprehensive education. By then, the majority of our neighbouring
countries were already revising the application of this last principle (comprehensive
education). I will return to this point. What interests me at the moment is to highlight
this tendency to delay which Spanish people cannot overcome in educational matters.
Delay as much at the time of carrying out measures as in revising their effects, is not
always positive.
Despite the isolationist temptations and the huge lack of attention given to the experiences of others, there have always been people convinced of the need to go abroad,
particularly to Europe to look for those things worthy of admiration and, if possible,
incorporate them into their own educational habits. It is not possible for me to cite
here the many quotations which confirm this tendency. It is enough to acknowledge
the statement that, even at the start of the twentieth century, the minister Romanones
included in his preface to the important education Decree of 1901:
Nobody can deny that all essential reforms implemented in our national education
come from people who have lived in communication with scientific European
thought, who have travelled abroad to later sow within their own homeland, a
land as fertile in its talent as it is abandoned in its growth. This is demonstrated,
in the history of Spanish education, by the pedagogical current which flows from
the humanism of Luis Vives to the nursery schools of Montesinos.4
In the first decades of the twentieth century, references to abroad had become proverbial in Spanish political circles. The Board of Widening Studies (‘Junta para la
Ampliación de Estudios’) was decisive in this respect, an institution itself motivated
by European ideals (especially German) which for the most part involved sending
Spanish scholars to European centres in order to collect educational experience. The
Second Republic marked another key moment in this internationalist thirst, looking
outside – from western countries to the Soviet Union – for legislative realities and
experiences relevant to the country. During the first times of Franco’s rule, a period
of distrust was experienced which inclined to blame the evils on foreign influences.
But even in Franco’s dictatorship a substantial change took place in this regard. As
mentioned above, one of the arguments which certain sectors brandished against the
General Act of Education of 1970 was that of succumbing to the splendour of the
foreign and bowing down to the international criteria of UNESCO. Since then, the
references to Europe and the developed world in general have been constant in all

--- [PDF Page 340 / Book Page 324] ---

324 García Garrido

the education laws, including the four laws implemented during the socialist period,
1982–1995, the two elaborated by the conservative government between 1996 and
2004 and, finally, that implemented at the end of 2005 by the socialist government
elected a year before.
But precaution in the face of the foreign has never totally disappeared. The accusations of ‘foreignism’ abounded throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and
still abound today. Certain travellers from other times, when presenting their reports,
seemed to beg pardon.5 Some of them, as with the following, expressed their opinions
particularly sensitively and prudently:
All imitation of the foreign, be it German, French or English is inappropriate in
Spain where we are not French, English or German: on the contrary, it is best to
understand and study what is next to us, to study what is ours and compare it to
what is beside us and notice those things that the differences make us see and all
that resemblance or equality can be of use to us.6
This leads us to another interesting aspect: the Spanish propensity to look for confirmation abroad of their own theories. The ‘partisan’ vision of foreign experiences is
something which has been denounced for a long time. History continues, in this case as
in all cases. The fundamental novelties of our time are the erratic comparisons between
Spain and abroad made by the mass media, especially the newspapers. The majority of
Spanish newspapers from time to time dedicate their pages to writing about reforms,
innovations or simply ‘events’ related to education in other countries, particularly
European. In general, those who write these articles or commentaries are journalists
residing for a short time in these countries who intend to give general information
and who treat education as lightly as they treat political elections, health problems,
etc. Characteristic of these articles is their decontextualisation and oversimplification.
But because they are considered useful to the reader, the newspapers call on them.
I will also refer to another trait which I consider important when contextualising
ideas existing in Spain about its own education system. This old trait, still present, is
based on what many Spanish people have defined as the ‘age-old backwardness’ of
Spanish education as regards the European setting and, more in general, the developed
world. The principle thesis is to explain this backwardness as a result of the political
difficulties of the country (past and present). To put it another way: in Spain, the
underdeveloped education was and is the result of an underdeveloped politics.
This affirmation is latent in many of the criticisms made of the education system, as
much in academic and political circles as in trade unions and guilds, etc. On the one
hand, these critics consider in detail everything related to the economy and investments
in education (the lack of adequate funding being constant every time an education law
is planned or developed). However, on the other hand, the legislation itself insists that
Spain be on the same educational level as the nations around it. The vast majority of
laws implemented or bills passed dedicate at least a number of paragraphs to declaring the need for Spain to ‘homologise’ with the rest of the European countries or the
developed world. It is a pious way of admitting that Spain is beneath these countries in
legal norms or in implementation, efficiency or human resources or materials. In Spain
educational comparisons are of a highly plaintive nature.

--- [PDF Page 341 / Book Page 325] ---

The European Union and Education In Spain 325

Does the same apply to other countries? I sincerely think not. If we examine, for
example, the main laws and legislative measures of other countries of a similar or
superior development, we do not find in them the lamentable comparisons to which
I refer. On the contrary, the necessity for legislative change is seen in virtue of the
countries’ evolution or indeed in virtue of the deficiencies observed in the former
legislation, but not in virtue of feeling ‘inferior’ to the others. It seems to me we are
faced with something particularly Spanish also shared by some other peoples (perhaps
in some Latin American countries).
I would like to refer to another characteristic of recent Spanish education history: the
continual making and remaking of material in education policy. Since the restoration
of democracy in 1978, every time the governments change in Spain, Spanish people witness the same repetitive, tiresome scenario. The government which comes into
power insists that the former government has made a mess of educational matters, and
that it is the former heads’ of state and their laws’ fault that the children’s education is
in a pitiful state. They try to show this in different ways (to prove it is more difficult …)
and all in a hurry so that they would not be reproached for what others have done.
Furthermore, they act with the infantile belief that their government will benefit these
educational matters immensely. If they can, they change the former government’s laws,
intrinsically bad, purely because they have been promulgated by the others. Embittered
criticisms pour down on the former teams. Year after year, it is the same without realising that it is those who are in government for one, two, three or more years who are
the ones criticising and that things, rather than getting better, are getting worse. And
this incites the following government, whatever its colour, to do the same. I think this
discontinuity in the Spanish education policy, apart from being profoundly damaging, strongly contrasts with the conduct of other countries of the European Union.
Although their policies may undergo certain touching up, never are they subject to the
making and unmaking which characterises Spanish contemporary education.

The Politico-Administrative Macroproblem
Without doubt the most outstanding event in recent Spanish education history is that
of having converted the education administration from strongly centralised to furiously decentralised. Furthermore, this has happened in a very short space of time.
In a very few years, one of the firmest and longest-lasting characteristics of Spanish
education has been dismantled. And, as to be expected, with doubtful results. These
days, to wonder at the existence, already present or about to be applied, of 17 different education systems in Spain (one for each Autonomous Community) is not simply
work of the imagination.
Does the process followed by Spain correspond to that of other countries, above all,
to those nearest the Spanish cultural and economic environment? Seeing that, today,
it is these countries which have the most influence educationally in the international
arena, and it is important to briefly consider them.
The first thing to remember, in this respect, is that, in the terrain of educational
policy, as in others, to decentralise has already been fashionable for decades encouraged, above all, by the Anglo-Saxon tradition. This decentralisation carries the

--- [PDF Page 342 / Book Page 326] ---

326 García Garrido

implicit idea that it facilitates the efficiency of political action, especially by bringing the administration closer to the citizens and by assuring their participation in the
management of public interests. One way or another, the impression is given that
decentralisation is something naturally required by democracy and that ‘centralist’
actions involve a certain idea of inappropriate control. The practice of so-called
democratic centralism on the part of communist regimes which appeared after the
Second World War confirms this theory. Few were the previous communist countries
which, in the second half of the twentieth century, did not embark on processes more
or less inclining to decentralisation. Centralism defined as ‘right wing’ (from those
brought about by Naziism or fascism to those started more recently in other countries) were especially criticised. Francoism was, in this sense, the object of strong
criticism from both outside and, especially, from within Spain. The surmounting
of Francoism meant essentially, for most of the political powers and the Spanish
intellectuals, a surmounting of centralism and the adoption of decentralist criteria.
The ‘homologation’ of Spain – educationally and otherwise – with countries in our
cultural context seemed to require, for a start, decentralisation.
As mentioned, the models particularly relevant have been those of the Anglo-Saxon tradition and, in particular, those of the United Kingdom and the United States of America.
In both territories, the standard adopted, in cultural matters, is complete regionalisation
(we cannot talk of ‘decentralisation’, in my opinion, given that it was not started from a
centralist regime). With regard to the United Kingdom, regionalisation has been dominated, since the nineteenth century (with strong roots in its past, without doubt) by the
idea of ‘local administration’ of the system, controlled by the Local Education Authorities
(LEAs). In the case of the United States, regionalisation is controlled through the state
administration in that (since the American Constitution) the educational responsibility
corresponds to the States. However, if we are to take note of the predominant tendencies in both countries since the middle of the twentieth century to our own time, we
would have to define them as ‘centralising’ tendencies without distortion of the former
regionalising core. There appeared in both countries, in this period, national Ministers or
Departments of Education which did not exist before, in the United Kingdom in 1944
and in the United States in 1979. From those moments on, these Departments have taken
more and more control of specific tasks despite the more or less declared resistance of
the LEAs in one case and the federal States in the other. That tendency has not slowed
down in either case up to the present and it may be said that, in fact, it is shared by all the
political forces in both countries. In other words, these countries’ conduct in the last few
decades seems to indicate certain caution in the problems caused by excessive regionalisation or decentralisation in the matters that concern us here.
In continental Europe, something similar may be affirmed with respect to the country
which is most based on a federal administration – Germany. Despite the fact that it is
the Länder and their respective Ministers of Education which hold maximum responsibility in educational issues, the Federal Ministry of Education has been increasing
in importance since its creation in 1969. Most importantly, while a large sector of
the population and political life attribute the deficiencies of the education system to
educational regionalisation, the calls for a greater federal intervention are frequently
repeated. It is foreseeable that this intervention will come about in the following years
(in fact it is already happening, particularly in third-level education).

--- [PDF Page 343 / Book Page 327] ---

The European Union and Education In Spain 327

It is true that decentralising tendencies have made a way forward in certain European
countries. This has been the case, for example, with the Scandinavians who, because
of the size of their population, work, logically, upon a predominantly centralising base.
However, this has been, nearly always, decentralisation of a local nature, rather than
regional. This is to say that in education policy matters, decision-taking by the town
councils and other local authorities has gained ground. This, without recurring to territorial distribution of decision-taking on the part of provinces or regions.
With reference to the political habits of strongly centralised countries, such as
France or Italy, the process has tended to fortify their own territorial demarcations
with more responsibility to, in the case of France, les Académies and in the case of
Italy, le regioni. But in both cases, the relevant administrations have always been
peripheral administrators, always under the aegis of Paris or Rome. Basically, this
means a decision-taking reduced to only certain matters of enforcement and rarely in
matters of greater magnitude. Far from what is happening in Spain, Italy is today a
basically centralised country in educational matters. Similarly France; as before, its
décentralization has consisted, as they themselves admit, more in déconcentration.
We can say the same referring to countries of southern Europe, such as Greece or
Portugal, without ignoring their decentralising efforts.
These efforts have also been carried out in countries in Eastern Europe, heirs to
‘democratic centralism’ which was imposed by communism and which they abominate but from which they have been unable to escape until now. In sum, there is only
one country in Europe which, even before Spain, has carried out such a marked division of functions in its territories: Belgium. The motives of this small country have
been of a cultural and linguistic nature, for a long time based on living traditions, thus
understandable to a certain degree; but the educational situation there leaves much to
be desired, politically and qualitatively speaking.
The conclusion reached, then, after this journey through the education policy of
Europe would be, without doubt, to confirm the prevalence and probable continuity
of conciliatory and moderate positions in this subject, positions that seem to flee from
excesses and rather correct from excessive centralisation or decentralisation. At the
same time, it is obvious that globalising movements bring countries everyday closer
to one another, closer also in the similar educational matters adopted in each country.
Certainly, movements of resistance which insist on the richness of indigenous cultural
values are more and more energetically against that globalisation which endangers rich
cultural resources by an impoverishing uniformity.
However, usually, these movements stem rather from local geographical units than
from nationalist desires, now outdated.7 ‘Globalization’ incites what has been called
‘glocalization’ but not ‘glonationalization’. We will surely end up recovering the original concept of natio as place of birth (the small space in which each of us was born).
Almost everywhere, one has the impression that the experience of nationalisms, in
political terms, has not been very positive lately, although it may have been in other
moments of history.
Returning to the case of Spain, the future being forged very little resembles these
world tendencies. Due to the pressure of certain group interests, of political classes
and of a part of public opinion, the Spanish nation appearing at the end of the fifteenth
century and strengthened throughout five centuries seems to be today separating into

--- [PDF Page 344 / Book Page 328] ---

328 García Garrido

other national units, of a still uncertain number. Some politicians have openly referred
to this phenomenon as a process of ‘disjoining’. On the other hand, the road to follow is not clear. Already present in the spirit of some political parties, specifically the
Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE), at the start of the transition from Franco’s
time to democracy, was the idea of a federal Spain. This contemplated, however, the
permanence of the Spanish nation and the admission, perhaps, within that, of various
federal States. But this discourse, which has remained detached from the historical
evolution of Spain, has today been proven wrong. Those who today claim a new political structure do not seem to be satisfied by converting their territories into States, but
into States and Nations at the same time. This means, without doubt, the assumption
of a total national sovereignty and a total state administration only tempered by the
desire to remain in the European Union. This is the aim of the nationalist discourse,
although it recognises a time of gradual approach in which the possession of their own
education systems (national systems in its oldest meaning) is decisive. To make way
for these (their own) education systems is not something that can be left for tomorrow
or the day after. This is something which must be started immediately. This explains
the pressures to obtain the text which has finally prevailed in the recent ‘Ley Orgánica
de Educación’ (Education Act) in 2006. For different reasons, the majority of the
political powers have associated themselves to this ‘disjoining’ project of the Spanish
education system although it is not known how widely it will extend or even what
results will be obtained. Only one political party has opposed this, the Popular Party
which, however, represents the views not only of numerous voters, but of many of the
Spanish people.
What will the immediate future bring? Will the existence (perhaps not yet legalised)
of various national education systems within an already theoretical Spanish education system be accepted? If so, it seems improbable that these systems will be only a
few in number and, more concretely, they will be systems that claim as motive their
condition as ‘historic’ territories. However, in the normal evolution of events, it may
be that, in the beginning, those who decide to follow this model will be these ‘historical’ territories and that the others will limit themselves, as time goes by, to later
reclaiming the same prerogatives. It is also possible that these latter, tired of so much
struggling, later decide to reconstitute a limited Spanish education system, reduced
to the Spanish-speaking territories. This is surely the most desired for solution by the
self-denominated ‘historical nationalisms’ who trust in the power of that line from the
pen of the great poet, Antonio Machado: ‘the walk is made by walking’.
What will be the future? Four or six education systems having recourse to their own
languages? Seventeen education systems each having recourse to the same measure
autonomy, the highest measure? One Spanish education system with certain regional
modifications? It is difficult to predict the final result. At an international level, the
prevalent powers support internationalising movements, the approximation of the distinct national systems, and the elimination of educational frontiers. At a Spanish level,
the prevalent powers support, as we have seen, nationalising movements, the distancing between systems, the construction of new linguistic, microcultural and perhaps,
socio-economic and even (supposedly) ethnic frontiers. It is not clear if this dialectical
conflict will lead to some surviving synthesis. At the moment, the only certain thing

--- [PDF Page 345 / Book Page 329] ---

The European Union and Education In Spain 329

is an inconclusive period of uneasiness and doubt which will slow down, in many
aspects, the international competitiveness of Spanish education.
More obviously, the ‘disjoining’ tendency to which I have referred has had a clear
repercussion in education administration. Bureaucratic proliferation is an evil which the
administrations of all countries suffer in one form or another. Nor is this something of an
exclusive trait of the democratic world (remember what happened in communist countries)
but neither has the evolution of democratic societies succeeded in putting the problem
on track again. It is enough to take a look at the respective web pages of the Ministries
of Education of European countries to understand that, in nearly every case, they are
composed of huge structures, with numerous civil servants. And it is the same when, in
regionalising or decentralising countries, one tries to penetrate the structures of the decentralised units. However, I think that Spain has surpassed itself in this tendency and finds
itself today among the countries which support the most obese education administrations.
What seems true is that in nearly all developed countries there is a concern to
lighten the structure, to ‘recover one’s figure’ which, on the contrary, does not seem
to be the case with Spain, at least at the moment. The Spanish politicians are far from
taking seriously a similar campaign to that which, a few years ago, the French socialist
minister Claude Allègre started with the slogan il faut dégraisser le mammouth (‘the
mammoth must lose weight’), without doubt, referring to the massive French Ministry
of Education. The irresponsible proportions of the ‘Welfare State’ still do not worry
the Spanish. In Spain and in its 17 Autonomous Communities the tendency is to go on
putting on weight administratively speaking without asking if the bureaucratic size of
the prolific administrative personnel is really justified with regard to the tasks assigned
and above all, if there is an acceptable relation between benefits and losses. Trade
Unions, associations and groups which never stop demanding resources for education
rarely wonder if the expansion of these is not excessive or even counterproductive. The
thirst to create new dependencies seems to know no limits, despite knowing that these
new dependencies produce more complications and curvatures in management and the
consequent need for more human resources.
Further, in the case of Spain, a discoordination between central and regional structures
(and among the regional structures themselves) can be clearly observed, a discoordination
not common in other countries. Indeed, the correct homologation of respective functions
in non-central administrations is never easy. A few years ago, the German chancellor,
Schroeder, gave a good example of this when he blamed the poor results of the German
education system in the PISA on the attitude of many regional authorities (the Ministers
of the Länder). But on this point Spain has reached insuperable levels compared to other
countries. To know how to deal with the central Ministry of Education in some autonomies is going to be very difficult, unless it is prepared to commit harakiri.
No one can doubt that the quality of education in every country depends on, as
a fundamental component, the better or worse operative capacity that its administration possesses. An efficient administration is indispensable for the achievement
of its educational objectives even when it is known that that administration does
not correspond anymore to the reality of the times. Many have criticised, for
example, the fundamentally centralist and bureaucratic scheme of the French
administration but few doubt that it is an administration which, in general, works

--- [PDF Page 346 / Book Page 330] ---

330 García Garrido

well. Something similar could be said about some non-European countries like
Japan, despite its verticalism and its frequent inflexibility, or the United States,
despite the prolific variety of its management behaviour. These and the education systems of other countries can and do have considerable defects, but they
are well-articulated, well-led systems which work, which aim at clear and precise
objectives, putting the adequate mechanisms to work in order to attain them. They
are systems whose legislators make laws according to their understanding of the
country’s necessities, the leaders make decisions according to the legislation, the
consultant organisms really consult, the inspectors supervise and control, and the
teaching and administrative workers do the work to which they have been assigned.
People do not agree there that, simply because they live in a democracy, such
duties should be in some way shared or discussed among everyone, disseminated,
altered by momentary circumstances or different pressures. If, occasionally, the
opposite occurs, the mechanisms in society immediately denounce and correct
the faults. Without unnecessary alarm, I don’t think the same can be said about
the Spanish education system.
A few words more, finally, about the perennial contentiousness existing between
the public and the private sectors. Also it is time that Spain, in this aspect, brings
itself up to date and reaches stable solutions of compromise. Even in Italy, where the
private sector has always been quite reduced, left-wing men have defended (Minister
Berlinguer did so a few years ago) the complete parità between both sectors. Countries
traditionally structured on a strong public sector are today making insistent calls for the
collaboration of the social initiative. Spain, on the contrary, has a very old tradition of
non-state schooling, without whose collaboration the system would be a disaster (more
than 30% of Spanish students attend non-state centres). We cannot go on listening to
chants from the end of the nineteenth century or beginnings of the twentieth century
that tirelessly repeat themselves in favour of a ‘single, public and lay’ schooling and
against financial state aid for the centres of social initiative. In Spain, both sectors need
one another if an education administration abreast of the times is to be attained.

Some Problems of Homologation and Quality
As I stated at the start, this last section of the chapter will be dedicated to describe as
clearly as possible some of the peculiarities of the Spanish education system in contrast
to the general situation in countries of the European Union. Far from being an exhaustive
enumeration, I have chosen what I consider to be the five most relevant problems.

A Deficient Conception of Compulsory Secondary School
The General Act of Education of 1970 had applied, already as I have said, the ‘comprehensive principle’ between the ages of 6 and 14, to the Spanish education system.
During this period, students from all centres, public and private, were obliged to follow
the one curriculum, common to all and uniform in every detail. The 1990 Law, while
amplifying obligatory education to 16 years of age also applied to all students up to
this age an identical curriculum. And this in spite of the fact that the majority of the

--- [PDF Page 347 / Book Page 331] ---

The European Union and Education In Spain 331

European countries had already corrected the criterion, looking for formulas of a certain diversification which would serve the real interests and capacities of the students,
especially between the ages of 14 and 16. With a few changes of little importance, the
Law of 2006 has persisted in this line with the result that a high percentage of students
have become completely uninterested in their studies (those colloquially called ‘student objectors’). In this important educational period (between the ages of 12 and 16),
the Spanish education system gives an image which lacks realism, an image of camouflaged inequality, of inefficiency and of a capacity for conflict which strongly contrasts
with the education policies implemented in these years in nearly all the countries of
the European Union.

Clearly Limited Duration of Advanced Secondary School
Having finished compulsory secondary education, students can choose between
vocational education or what is called ‘bachillerato’ which leads to advanced studies lasting two years (between the ages of 16 and 18). The majority of students
choose this secondary education, divided into a few branches (fine arts, science and
technology, humanities and social sciences) but still with a strong common trunk. It
is nearly unanimously agreed that, in this short time, taking into account the abovementioned deficiencies of advanced secondary education, it is nearly impossible to
provide the students with the necessary abilities to attend, with sufficient guarantees, university studies. Furthermore, not one single country in the European Union
has such a short period of advanced secondary education. Some Spanish politicians
have defended themselves saying that the British sixth form is of a similar formula
but they are obviously mistaken: while the sixth form is a time of intensive dedication to a few specialised subjects, the Spanish ‘bachillerato’ contains a curriculum
of 10 or 12 subjects. As a result, it is usual that Spanish students, starting university,
have a training which is qualitatively lower than their European counterparts.

High Rate of School Failure and Mediocre Results
In Spain, one in every four 14-year-old students is in a situation of obvious or hidden
failure, a proportion which increases at 16 years of age, to one in every three. These
data are being insistently repeated in numerous national and international evaluations. Besides being very worrying facts, they are not so worrying, in my opinion,
as the following evidence: the number of Spanish students who reach high grades
‘excellent’) are barely 4% at the end of compulsory education.8 This means, quite
plainly, that the mediocrity of the results is, perhaps, the most illustrative fact of the
Spanish education system.
Although these results may be due largely to the deficiencies I have demonstrated, it
is the almost unanimous conviction of the specialists, the teachers and Spanish society
that the roots of this problem are much deeper. In either case, both facts considered
together (high failure rate in school and general mediocrity), it seems clear that Spain
is one of the lowest ranking among the countries of the European Union, in the company of, perhaps, only a few others. Spain cannot easily contribute to improving the
general situation of education in Europe if it persists in its present plans.

--- [PDF Page 348 / Book Page 332] ---

332 García Garrido

High Level of Teacher Demotivation and Deprofessionalism in School Direction
The first problem I mention here is not something that affects exclusively or more
seriously the Spanish education system than other European countries. However, it
constitutes a deficiency which may put at risk the collaboration of the Spanish teaching
profession with that of other countries when the time comes to build, from the school,
a climate of European citizenship and indeed, that improvement in quality in which the
directors of the European Union insist.
The demotivation to which I refer in Spain has fundamentally social and political
roots and not, as occurs in other countries, economic and labour roots. The economic
treatment of the Spanish teaching profession, without being to my mind the most
desirable, is however, above the European average. They are also above the average
regarding other aspects of teaching life: working hours, teaching hours, studentteacher ratio, number of students per classroom, etc. (it is true that in these aspects
there is quite a lack of proportion between the public and the private sectors, in
favour of the former). However, the proportions of sick leave, requests for early
retirement, situations of stress and above all, despondency have done nothing but
increase in the past years (and precisely more in the public sector than in the private). The fault seems to lie in the lack of social esteem in which teachers are held
(beyond merely rhetorical appraisal). A climate of growing uninterest towards learning on behalf of the students and indeed many families and also a clear increase in
indiscipline and indeed violence (above all, verbal) contribute to making their work
in school, at best, disagreeable.
Added to this is the continual disintegration of the directive team in the last 20 years
which is in Spain, contrary to nearly all the European Union, completely deprofessionalised. The insistence in the necessity (which I don’t doubt) of the participation of
everyone (students, parents, personnel) in the life of the centre has led to the confusion
of participation with leadership, that is to say, the one instead of the other.
The problem affects principally public centres where it is not uncommon that not
one of the teachers applies to cover the directive posts. Although there are, without
doubt, praiseworthy exceptions, many Spanish schools suffer a climate of mismanagement. It is obvious that the main responsibility of these things lies with the inadequate
policy of human resources in education and, in particularly, a repeatedly mistaken
legislation in such important matters.

Homologation Deficiencies in the University Sphere
The two traditional tendencies which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter
–isolationism and Europeanism – are particularly present in what is referred to as
‘educación superior’ (tertiary education), a term which in Spain means university education (in fact, there is no form of tertiary education since the reform of 1970 apart from
university). If, on the one hand, we can see abundant ‘Europeanist’ rhetoric flourishing
in all universities, on the other, isolationism is continually present, even favoured by a
legislation itself caught up in the dynamics. I write these lines when a new law is just
appeared which, in spite of its initial pretensions of Europeanism and substantial change,
is no more than a superficial retouching of the anterior law of 2002 which was itself no

--- [PDF Page 349 / Book Page 333] ---

The European Union and Education In Spain 333

more than another touching up of the 1983 law, a law not so ambitious itself regarding the
drawing-near of the Spanish universities to the European ones. Under the pretext of giving
higher levels of autonomy, what is really being done is, on the one hand, subjecting the
universities to a higher dependence on their respective Autonomous Communities and,
on the other, confirming habits of university management and study plans that, instead of
helping, practically hinder that which is known as the ‘Bolonia process’.
There is a serious risk that the situation of isolationism may affect, in Spain, not only
the ‘common European space of higher education’ but the universities themselves.
The inbreeding of the university teaching profession is, in Spain, an old deficiency,
recognised and criticised by all, but what the legislation seems to bring is rather than
procedures to fight this, new means to foster it. It will be difficult soon to find professors in the Catalan universities who are not Catalan or in the Andalusian universities,
professors who are not Andalusians. These are merely examples, applicable to the other
Autonomous Communities. It is even probable that it will be easier to find in them an
English or German professor rather than a professor from elsewhere in Spain. In all,
the risks of isolationism do not derive only from an inadequate policy of selection of
the teaching staff but from other crucial aspects such as study plans and qualifications
which, instead of converging, can even have a separating effect.
At the moment, despite the manifestation of Europeanism of many politicians and
university authorities, the unanimous conviction exists that Spain will not be fit to
adequately compete in 2010 within the so-called European space of higher education.
Too much time is being lost. If we look at the international evaluations, the image of
the Spanish university from without is quite poor; although one can criticise them,
evaluations such as that of Shangai, The Times, etc., place Spanish universities in positions far from the top, and, without doubt, this creates an unfavourable state of opinion.
However, in contrast, Spain is now the country which attracts most students in the
Erasmus programme. It seems clear that the factors which determine this attraction
are not so much to do with the prestige of the Spanish universities but rather other
factors: language, climate, tourist attractions, cost of living, etc. Even so, the facts are
very positive because, above all, they can be used by the Spanish universities as an
element of international diffusion; if what initially attracted certain students was not
the classrooms, the professors or the quality of studies, these could still end up being
so. The Spanish academic authorities should use this good news not as a tranquillising
element but rather as a challenge to really improve its institutions.

Notes
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

A more balanced critical outlook is given in my latest book: La máquina de la educación. Preguntas y
respuestas sobre el sistema educativo. Barcelona, Ariel, 2006. In fact, most of the ideas developed in
this article have been taken from that book, there contrasted with more openly positive aspects of the
system.
Puelles Benítez, M. de: Estado y educación en la España liberal (1809–1857): un sistema educativo
nacional frustrado. Barcelona, Pomares, 2004.
R. Menéndez Pidal, Los españoles en la historia. Madrid, Espasa-Calpe, 1960, p. 87.
Anuario legislativo de Instrucción Pública correspondiente a 1901. Madrid, 1902, p. 381.
This is what, for example, García Navarro did when presenting his work in 1874 dedicated to Froebel
and the German kindergartens.

--- [PDF Page 350 / Book Page 334] ---

334 García Garrido
6.
7.

8.

Fontanals del Castillo, Joaquín: Necesidad de la instrucción popular en España. Barcelona, Verdaguer,
1865, p. 34.
Particularly relevant is Kirkpatrick Sale’s book (written two decades ago): Dwellers in the land:
The bioregional vision. San Francisco, Sierra Clubs Books, 1985. His arguments have been energetically reproduced in present-day works such as Gred Garrad: Ecocriticism. London, Routledge, 2004,
pp. 118–119.
In order not to abuse of references in relation to evaluations, I refer the reader to the last two PISA surveys, of 2000 and 2003. Consulting the web page of the Evaluation Institute, an organisation belonging
to the Spanish Ministry of Education, ample references and concrete figures may be obtained.

