================================================================================
Chapter 22: Who is Strolling Through The Global Garden? International Agencies and Educational Transfer
Author(s): Jason Beech
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 3: The National, The International, and The Global
Book Pages: pp. 341–357
PDF Pages: pp. 355–371 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 355 / Book Page 341] ---

22
WHO IS STROLLING THROUGH THE GLOBAL
GARDEN? INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
AND EDUCATIONAL TRANSFER
Jason Beech

In 1900 Sadler warned against the transfer of educational policies or practices from one
context to another by noting that ‘We cannot wander at pleasure among the educational
systems of the world, like a child strolling through a garden and pick a off a flower from
one bush and some leaves from another, and then expect that if we stick what we have
gathered into the soil at home, we shall have a living plant’ (Sadler, 1979: 49).
At those times, the ‘children strolling through gardens’ were mostly men (sic) who
were appointed by their governments to develop their own systems of education. These
travellers and reformers believed that by studying other educational systems, such as
Prussia and France (two of the most popular gardens of the nineteenth century) they
could avoid some of the ‘mistakes’ made by other countries in their linear progress
towards an ideal educational system, and, of course, they could find some aspects of
these systems that could be adopted at home.
Even though Sadler’s lecture has been given much attention, and the above is probably one of the most quoted sentences in the literature (in the English language) on
comparative education, his advice was not always followed. Educational transfer has
been the raison d’etre of what has been called ‘applied comparative education’ (Cowen,
2006). Since the times of Jullien, Victor Cousin, Horace Mann, Tolstoy and Sarmiento,
practitioners of comparative education have given policy-oriented advice about which
educational ideas, practices or institutions overseas could be transferred as the solution
to pressing internal problems.
So, for example, when the Japanese were faced with the ‘Black Ship’, which revealed
their technological underdevelopment, they saw education as one of the ‘secret keys’
of the power of the West (Passin, 1965). If Japan wanted to compete with the West it
had to borrow Western education. European educators were hired to run institutions in
Japan, and Japanese leaders and intellectuals were sent to Europe and North America
to observe educational practices (Tanaka, 2005). The administrative model was taken
from France. Co-educational common schools as the basic unit of the school system,
normal schools and vocational (particularly agricultural) education were transferred
from the USA (Passin, 1965); and German Universities were taken as a model for
creating the Imperial University (Tanaka, 2005).
Similarly, in the late 1950s, when the USSR launched the first artificial satellite,
after the failure of two US attempts, there was a great shock in the USA. The Sputnik
341
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 341–357.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 356 / Book Page 342] ---

342 Beech

crisis was conceptualised as an educational failure. American schools were criticised
for their repressive nature and mindlessness (Ravitch, 1983). One solution was ‘found’
in the English infant schools. Academics like Joseph Featherstone and Lillian Weber
pioneered the movement, and spent as much as 18 months (in the case of Weber)
observing English primary schools. In 1969, study teams from 20 American cities
went to England, and in 1971 over 300 articles about the English primary reforms
had been written in the USA. The number of free schools grew rapidly during the late
1960s and early 1970s, reaching around 500 by 1972 (Ravitch, 1983).
This type of policy-oriented comparative education, with an emphasis on transferring
solutions from one context to another, continues in the present days (Beech, 2006a).
However, this chapter suggests that in current times, there are new (or increasingly more
powerful) actors in the educational field who are involved in the business of educational
transfer. It will also be suggested that, given the involvement of new actors in the field,
processes through which knowledge about education moves between contexts has taken
specific forms and that, consequently, comparative education needs new theoretical
frameworks to try to grasp these processes and their practical effects.
The chapter is divided into three sections. The first section will reflect upon the new
configuration of the global educational field. The second part will concentrate on the
analysis on international agencies and the way in which they promote certain ideas and
practices about education. The third section is the conclusion.

New Kids Strolling Through the Global Garden
The movement of educational ideas, policies and practices from one place to another
has been addressed in Comparative Education through the concept of transfer.
Interpretations of transfer have been mostly centred on relations between national
states (Beech, 2006b). However, under current conditions of ‘globalisation’, foreign
influences have become more complex. Giddens refers to a ‘global society’ as a society of ‘indefinite space’ (1994: 107), in which no one is outside, since pre-existing
traditions cannot escape having contact with ‘the other’, and with alternative ways of
life. In such a context, significant social relations exist which are neither between nor
outside states, ‘but simply crosscut state divisions’ (Giddens, 1990: 66–67).
Therefore, in order to analyse foreign influences in education a wider concept of
space is needed. Of course, current theories of foreign influences in education should
still consider the state as a fundamental actor. However, such theories should also be
able to take into account other actors that are involved in processes of transferring
ideas about education between contexts, such as international agencies, consultants,
universities, corporations, development agencies, regional blocks and NGOs.
For example, ‘charismatic consultants’ travel around the world recommending their
solutions and promoting educational change at the school, district and state level.
Similarly, universities in many parts of the world have faced (and are still facing) major
reform pressures which include the notion that they should find ways to supplement
the income that they receive from the government (Cowen, 1996). As Lyotard (1984)
noted some time ago, in our times knowledge is produced in order to be sold. So, if

--- [PDF Page 357 / Book Page 343] ---

International Agencies and Educational Transfer 343

the Department of Education of a given University develops certain knowledge about
how to make schools (or districts or national systems) more ‘efficient and effective’
they should sell this knowledge in the market in order to contribute to the performance
of the organisation. Universities have been involved in the business of consultancy
for some time. But, like mercantilism that fuelled European imperialism in the search
for new markets since the sixteenth century, the current situation in the financing of
universities in places such as the UK creates compelling incentives for the ‘colonisation’ of new markets in which to sell consultancy, especially in the less ‘developed’
countries. Thus, many universities have created (or strengthened) a special unit for
‘international development’, and they are becoming powerful players in the game of
promoting policy-oriented educational ideas.
The European Union also influences educational policies in its Member States, albeit
in a different way. The Treaty of Maastricht established that the principle of subsidiarity
is applied to education – the Community’s action is only subordinate and supplementary
to that of the Member States. Nevertheless, the European Union has done much to orient
education policy within its political space at least in three ways. The first way in which the
Union influences education policy is by promoting ‘co-operation’ between its members
by suggesting that national education authorities should exchange ideas and learn from
the ‘best practices’ that have been identified in different educational systems within
the Union (Nóvoa, 2002). For example, the European Report on Quality of School
Education claims that its intention is to create a climate for dialogue and ‘to provide
a strong basis to learn from one another’ (Nóvoa, 2002). As Nóvoa notes, these words
sound very similar to the rhetoric of the comparativists of the nineteenth century. The
Union also gives policy orientations by establishing certain indicators or benchmarks
that they suggest (given the principle of subsidiarity) should be followed by national
education systems. Finally, the aim to establish a ‘European Higher Education Area’
through what has become known as the ‘Bologna Process’ is an example of the third
way in which the Union shapes national educational policy within its area of influence.
In this case, the Union is explicitly promoting the idea that institutions at the tertiary
level across Europe should become more standardised by developing similar structures
for their courses, a credit system, comparable degrees, and systems of quality control
(Nóvoa, 2002).
Corporations that provide educational services are also becoming powerful players
in what they see as a ‘global educational market’.1 In places like the UK, the public
sector is outsourcing some of its educational services (ranging from building projects
to the running of Local Educational Authorities or the provision of school inspections,
in service training for teachers or school meals) to the private sector in what is known
as Public-Private Partnerships (Cardini, 2006). Some of the companies that participate in such schemes offer educational consultancy and educational services in several
countries. For example, the message from the Chief Executive in the web page of Nord
Anglia Education PLC states that:
Nord Anglia has transformed itself in the last year through harnessing the
strength of our people and services within the UK and using them to realise
overseas growth opportunities. Having recognised the International potential

--- [PDF Page 358 / Book Page 344] ---

344 Beech

for our business, we have been building management capacity and operational
reach in a number of overseas markets for some years (http://www.nordanglia.
com/chairman.php)
Global Education Management Systems (GEMS) is another company that has oriented
its services to the global market. GEMS operates a ‘growing international network’ of
65 schools spread across 7 countries (the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom,
India, Qatar, Germany, Libya and Jordan). According to its Chairman:
GEMS is able to develop and manage schools that meet the needs of any community, anywhere in the world. . . . For over three decades we have provided high
quality education to hundreds of thousands of students from around the world.
Through ongoing research and continuous innovation, and an advisory capacity
to government agencies, GEMS has become a catalyst for change in the education sector. (www.gemseducation.com – emphasis added)
The growth of international schools run by multinational corporations raises a series
of questions about the possible emergence of a ‘global elite’ and the contribution that
these schools could make to its formation (Lauder, 2007). Nevertheless, what is more
significant for the analysis offered in this chapter is that these companies are acting as
educational advisors to schools and local and national governments around the world.
Of course, the operations of these companies cannot be equalled with the imitation
of the Grandes Ecoles in Brazil (Cowen & Figueiredo, 1992) or with the transfer of
the US credit system to Chinese universities (Steiner-Khamsi, 2000). They are different processes. But that is precisely the point I want to make: as new types of actors
participate in the ‘business’ of giving policy-oriented advice based on the transfer of
‘solutions’ from one context to another, global educational space becomes more complex, and comparative education as an intellectual field needs to create new conceptual
apparatuses in order to understand the circulation of ideas about education in the current world, and how this circulation affects actual educational practices in different
contexts.
In order to collaborate with such a project, the next section will offer some reflections about the work of one of the most powerful type of actors in the global educational field – international agencies – and how we could understand the way in which
they influence educational policies and practices through their recommendations.

Global Educational Discourse: International Agencies
and the Circulation of Knowledge
Organisations such as UNESCO, OECD and the World Bank were created for the
reconstruction of Europe after the Second World War (Beech, 2006b). As this function
became redundant, in the 1950s and 1960s, the work of these agencies has been aimed
at the ‘development’ of the world. It should be kept in mind that this new role of international agencies coincides with a period in the field of comparative education that

--- [PDF Page 359 / Book Page 345] ---

International Agencies and Educational Transfer 345

was analysed by Cowen as a period in which little theorising occurred: ‘That is, what
passed as theorizing was the construction of a strong methodological discourse, and
methodological schools’ (Cowen, 1994: 102). The theme of ‘culture’ was subordinated
to discussions about scientific methods. Thus, ‘with the exception of the multicultural
issue, culture was not problematized in terms of the political universe’ (Cowen, 1994:
102). It was a time when studies of comparative education were dominated by an
‘intellectual and political confidence that being a lender was a benign act, and that
being a borrower was not too dangerous if money and good consultancy advice was
available’ (Ibid.). Furthermore, this confidence was reinforced some years later with
analyses such as the one offered by Noah and Eckstein in 1969 that defined the initial efforts of international agencies as being in an advanced position in the fictional
scale created by their belief in a linear progression towards a scientifically legitimated
comparative education: ‘The work of these organizations is in the hands of specialists.
Thus, what began as philanthropy has ended with professionalism’ (Noah & Eckstein,
1969: 82).
At least in Latin America, international agencies promoted developmental and technocratic views about education in the 1950s and 1960s. ‘Planning and Development’
were the governing words. UNESCO and OEA (Organización de Estados Americanos)
organised a ‘Conference of Ministers of Education’ in Lima in 1956, there was an
‘Inter-American Seminar of Integral Planning’ held in Washington in 1958, and in
that same year UNESCO organised the ‘Inter-American Conference on Education and
Economic and Social Development’. Similarly, in 1964, in Argentina, OECD published a study called ‘Education, human resources and economic development’ in collaboration with the National Council for Development, which had been established in
1961 (Southwell, 1997).
When they were promoting developmental and technocratic views, international
agencies were advocating a number of abstract universal social technologies (such as
educational planning) that – in the logic of these agencies – could be used to improve
education in most contexts. With the influence of this technical rationality, which introduced social technologies such as ‘educational planning’ and the notion of ‘curriculum’, there was a tendency to increase the bureaucracy and division of labour (at least)
in Latin American educational systems. In addition, this type of rationality contributed
to a division of labour at the international level: international organisations positioned
themselves as the ‘scientific experts’ that can design universal educational solutions.
Their proposals were and are legitimised by claims to a scientific status (UNESCO,
1996; Lockheed, 1992). Thus, their recommendations are presented as being ‘neutral and objective’ (Papadopoulos, 1994), and they can be applied in most contexts to
improve education.
The ‘transfer’ of educational knowledge is currently considered to be one of the
main roles of UNESCO, the World Bank and OECD. Since its first loan for education
in 1963, the World Bank has become the largest single source of external financing
for education in ‘developing countries’ (World Bank, 1995: 14). However, the Bank
acknowledges that its funding still represents only 0.5% of ‘developing countries’ total
spending in education. ‘Thus, the World Bank’s main contribution must be advice’
(1995: 14). This coincides with a new vision that the Bank has of its own role:

--- [PDF Page 360 / Book Page 346] ---

346 Beech

[T]o become a Knowledge Bank that spurs the knowledge revolution in developing countries and acts as a global catalyst for creating, sharing, and applying the
cutting-edge knowledge necessary for poverty reduction and economic development. (World Bank, Web page, Cited November 2001)
Even though the World Bank expressly embarked in this new vision in 1996, this declaration is rather the recognition of a previous shift in the Bank’s roles. The World Bank
Review: Priorities and Strategies for Education includes amongst its references more than
30 educational texts published by the World Bank before 1996 (World Bank, 1995).
However, it is not only through publications that the World Bank acts as a ‘global catalyst’
of knowledge. The Bank’s lending programmes ‘encourage governments to give a higher
priority’ to certain reforms, or to primary rather than higher education. . . . ‘Bank-supported
projects . . . pay greater attention’ to particular principles, and they support the involvement
in certain practices through emphasis on specific policies (World Bank, 1995: 15).
Thus, when the World Bank declares that its fundamental objective in education is
‘helping borrowers reduce poverty and improve living standards . . .’ (1995: xii). The use
of the word ‘borrowers’ here does not only imply the borrowing of funds. Rather, the
word ‘borrowers’ in this statement should also be seen as it has traditionally been used
in comparative education: as referring to the borrowing of (particular) ideas. That is,
when ‘client countries’ receive a loan for educational purposes from the World Bank,
this act is not only a transfer of funds, but it is also an educational transfer. Together
with financial resources, the ‘client country’ receives a particular vision of education.
The ‘transfer’ of educational knowledge has always been at the centre of UNESCO’s
agenda (Mayor, Sema & UNESCO, 1997). As an ‘organization for intellectual
co-operation’, UNESCO does not have a function of ‘direct control’. Instead, it ‘creates
a favourable environment, puts forward ideas, transfers knowledge . . . and, whenever
possible, resources’ (UNESCO, 1996: 1).
Similarly, one of the most important objectives of OECD is to search for certain universal values, rules and policies and promote them amongst member and non-member
countries. However, the OECD has no prescriptive mandate over its member countries
(Papadopoulos, 1994). As part of this role, the OECD ‘helps policy-makers adopt strategic orientations . . . by deciphering emerging issues and identifying policies that work’
(OECD, Web page, cited November 2001). In addition, OECD produces ‘internationally agreed instruments, decisions and recommendations to promote rules of the game’
in certain areas (2001). Thus, the ‘transfer’ of ‘cutting edge’ educational knowledge is
one of the main self-proclaimed roles of UNESCO, the World Bank and OECD.
Each of these agencies has different proposals for education. The particularity of the
educational vision of the World Bank, when compared with the other agencies being
analysed, is its strong emphasis on economic issues. From this perspective, educational
reform should be oriented towards keeping pace with ‘economic structures’ (World
Bank, 1995: 3). Thus, the first of the two key priorities for education is to ‘meet economies’ growing demands for adaptable workers . . .’ (1995: 1); and East Asian countries are
often used as ‘outstanding examples of what can be achieved when the education system
is reformed along with the economic system’ (1995: 50). Economic inequalities amongst
countries are seen in the Bank’s work as a direct consequence of educational disparities.

--- [PDF Page 361 / Book Page 347] ---

International Agencies and Educational Transfer 347

‘For example, if in 1960 the Republic of Korea had had the same low school enrollment rate as Pakistan, its GDP per capita by 1985 would have been 40 percent lower
than it actually was’ (1995: 23).
The World Bank’s perspective is strongly based on human capital theory, a theory
that – it is claimed – ‘has no genuine rival of equal breadth and rigor’ (1995: 21). The
kind of analyses conducted (or published) by the Bank that help to construct its position in education, are generally based on measurements of social rates of return to
investment in education. Although the Bank acknowledges that these rates are sometimes difficult to measure, they also note that this kind of analysis has ‘withstood
the tests of more than three decades of careful scrutiny’ (1995: 20–21). As a consequence of the Bank’s emphasis on economic matters, most analyses are made in terms
of ‘effectiveness’, defined as cost-effectiveness. For example blackboards, chalk and
textbooks are considered to be the ‘most effective instructional materials’ (1995: 7).
Similarly, group work is seen as a promising teaching technique for ‘developing countries’ because it is ‘known to be cost-effective’ (Lockheed, 1992: 64).
UNESCO has a very different concept of development when compared with the
World Bank. The vision that equates human development to human resource development is criticised in UNESCO (Mayor, Sema & UNESCO, 1997). Human beings
should not be seen as merely the means of production and material prosperity:
It is simply a matter of regarding human beings not as instruments, means to
the attainment of economic objectives, but as ends in themselves, the economic
objectives being subordinated to their self-fulfilment and well-being. (1997: 89)
UNESCO’s is a humanist perspective, in which the human being is at the very heart of
development. From this point of view, education should be directed to ‘the full development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms; . . .it shall promote understanding, tolerance and friendship
among all nations, all racial or religious groups’ (1997: 89–90).
In between UNESCO’s humanist perspective and the World Bank’s emphasis on
economic issues lies the educational position of OECD. Papadopoulos (1994) suggests that although economic concerns have dominated OECD’s work, this dominance
is ‘tempered by recognition of the social dimension and purposes of economic growth
and development’ (1994: 11). Thus, OECD has an ‘inferred role for education, both for
the contribution it can make to economic growth and as means by which the purposes
of such growth, namely an increase in well-being, can be given reality’ (1994: 11).
Therefore, these agencies have conflicting views on some educational issues and they
even engage in explicit controversy (as when UNESCO criticises the World Bank for
making teachers the ‘villains’ of the difficulties faced by countries to reduce educational
costs) (Carnoy, 1999). Jones and Coleman (2005) reveal the role of politics in the space
of multilateral agencies, showing how collaboration, competition, and the demarcation
of geographical and intellectual territories have played a significant part in the shaping of
international agencies dealing with education. For example, they argue that the famous
1996 report Learning: The Treasure Within, prepared by the International Commission
on Education and Learning for the Twenty-First Century for UNESCO was

--- [PDF Page 362 / Book Page 348] ---

348 Beech

an overt attempt to restore UNESCO’s political credibility and fortunes following
the debacle of the mid-1980s. With UNESCO’s ‘lead agency’ status in educational development very evidently in decline, threatened by the OECD in the
north and the World Bank in the south, the commission was charged with promoting in fresh guise UNESCO’s conventional normative concerns. . . . (1996: 85)
However, although the proposals of UNESCO, the World Bank and OECD are different, a recent study about the influence of these agencies on reforms of teacher education in Argentina and Brazil in the 1990s (Beech, 2005) identified a series of underlying
assumptions that were common to the proposals of these organisations between 1985
and 1996, revealing a general system of thought that made these simultaneous and
apparently contradictory opinions possible.
An analysis of the assumptions about the future embedded in the work of these three
agencies revealed a striking similarity in the way that these agencies read the future
as ‘the information age’. Furthermore, these agencies not only have a similar reading
of the future, but they also promote very similar educational principles that should be
used to adapt most educational systems to the information age. Thus, within the educational proposals of these agencies a single universal model of education was identified,
rather than three different models (Beech, 2005).
This model is offered as an ideal for most educational contexts. It should be used
to judge most educational systems and, then, once the faults have been identified, as
a model for reform. In this way international agencies are producing a ‘global educational discourse’ (Beech, 2005).
This discourse is global because of its spatial scope (it has education in the whole
world as its object). It is also a global discourse in the sense that it is a theory that in
the name of some ‘true’ knowledge, and some idea of what constitutes good education
offers a universal model of education as a global strategy that could solve most educational problem in most local contexts.
Global educational discourse moved into the Argentine and Brazilian educational systems
in the 1990s contributing to an all-embracing reform of each of these educational systems,
creating the conditions of possibility for certain educational ideas and practices, while at the
same time limiting the possibility for other ways of thinking about education – which is to
say, ways of acting – to arise. The ideas and practices that could be included within global
educational discourse implied a significant rupture with the kind of education that had
been offered in Argentina and in Brazil. For example, international agencies promoted
in the 1980s and 1990s an education based on the development of competencies. This
type of education is very different from the traditional encyclopaedic definition of knowledge in the Argentine and Brazilian educational systems, where education was very much
based on the transmission of facts and information that students should remember. Thus,
given these differences, it was not only some aspects of these educational systems that
were seen as being inefficient. The view was that the whole system had to be changed, and
the model that was followed was the universal model of education for the information age
promoted by these agencies, based on the principles of decentralisation, school autonomy,
the professionalisation of teachers, a curriculum based on competencies and the setting up
of central evaluation systems (Beech, 2005, 2006b).

--- [PDF Page 363 / Book Page 349] ---

International Agencies and Educational Transfer 349

This abstract universal model is offered as a norm against which the adequacy of
existing educational practices in a given context can be measured. By defining the
‘problems’ in a given educational context, international agencies set the agenda for
discussions about how to ‘improve’ education. Then, once the ‘problems’ have been
identified, there are only a limited number of themes that can be discussed, and a limited number of policy options that can ‘solve’ these ‘problems’. These possible solutions are also offered in the model. Consequently, it is by defining the problems of an
educational context and simultaneously offering the solutions to these problems that
the model promoted by international agencies narrows the discursive space of possibilities in educational contexts to which it moves.
However, the significant changes seen in the 1990s in Argentina and Brazil at the
level of official rhetoric did not necessarily translate into practice. On the contrary, as
portrayed by educators who were interviewed, the implementation in Argentina and in
Brazil of the universal model of education promoted by international agencies was faced
by resistance, reinterpretations and several unexpected practical problems.
Beech (2005) explained the way in which international agencies influence educational reforms by indicating that these agencies were ‘producing’ a global educational
discourse. However, it is not clear where this discourse comes from. Are international
agencies reproducing through their proposals a discourse that they produce? Or are international agencies reproducing a broader discourse that is produced somewhere else?
In order to explore these questions international agencies and ‘global educational
discourse’ need to be placed within a general theory of the circulation of discourse
in the global educational field. The development of such a theory can be divided into
three tasks:
• To identify different positions within the global educational field
• To identify the relations between these different positions or, in other words, to
understand how discourse moves between these positions
• To understand how discourse is transformed as it moves between different
positions
Bernstein’s theory on how different positions of subjects ‘within a discourse’ affect the
way in which these subjects interpret and act upon pedagogic discourse will be adapted
to carry out the first of the tasks defined above (Bernstein, 1990). However, for the sake
of clarity, Bernstein’s vocabulary will be slightly altered and I will refer to ‘positions
within the field’, rather than ‘positions within discourse’.
It is important to emphasise that the different positions within the educational field
are contexts of production, recontextualisation and/or reproduction of discourse.
Individuals can occupy more than one position within the field at the same time, or
they can change their positions in the field at different times. Nevertheless, it will be
the position within the field that will define the resources and possibilities that the subjects who occupy that position have to engage with and act upon educational discourse
(Bernstein, 1990).
Five positions will be identified: global academic space, international agencies, the
state, local academic space and educational institutions. Initially each of these positions will be described and later the relations between them will be considered.

--- [PDF Page 364 / Book Page 350] ---

350 Beech

Global academic space is the site in which ‘new’ ideas are selectively created and
changed, and where specialised academic discourses are developed. This context is
created by the positions, relations and practices arising out of the production of what
I shall call ‘global academic discourse’. It is at this level that the controls of the
thinkable/unthinkable mostly lie:
Today the controls on the ‘unthinkable’ lie essentially, but not wholly, directly or
indirectly in the upper reaches of the educational [field], in the part concerned
with the production rather than the reproduction of discourse; whereas the ‘thinkable’ is a different power-regulated recontextualizing, in the lower reaches of the
educational [field] – that is, in its reproductive rather than in its productive levels
(1990: 181). (The word ‘field’ has been inserted, replacing the word ‘system’
from Bernstein’s quote to adapt it to the language of this chapter.)
Global academic space is constituted by the flow of ideas through social, academic
and political networks. Castells (2000: 408) suggests that there is a new spatial logic
in the information age that he labels ‘space of flows’. This spatial form is characteristic of social practices that dominate and shape what he calls the network society.
By flows Castells understands the ‘purposeful, repetitive, programmable sequences
of exchange and interaction between physically disjointed positions held by social
actors in the economic, political and symbolic structures of societies’ (2000: 442).
The network of (mainly electronic) communications is the fundamental material support that defines this space. The space of flows is the dominant spatial logic of society
because it is the spatial logic of the organisations and institutions which play a strategic role in shaping social practices and social consciousness in society at large. This
is the space that is occupied by the ‘technocratic-managerial-financial [and academic]
elites’ (2000: 443).
The flow of ideas that constitutes global academic space is materialised through different kinds of material supports, such as international academic journals and books,
international conferences, the movement of university staff and students and international research projects.
The people who occupy this position are individuals from different cultures that
participate from this exchange of ideas, but in order to participate, these people need
to be ‘bilingual’: they have to master both their own culture and a cosmopolitan ‘global academic culture’ that is needed to operate in this site. Even though different cultures contribute to the formation of this ‘global academic culture’, this does not entail
that all partners are regarded as equal in the dialogue. Western European and North
American cultures are dominant in global academic space.
The second position that has been identified is the position of international agencies. Based on questions of urgent pragmatism and melioristic action, international
agencies have positioned themselves as the experts that can interpret ‘global academic
discourse’ and translate it (through a process of oversimplification) into practical universal educational proposals.
Thus, international agencies could be seen as a site of reproduction of ‘global academic discourse’. However, as international agencies reproduce this discourse they

--- [PDF Page 365 / Book Page 351] ---

International Agencies and Educational Transfer 351

base their proposals on a similar set of assumptions. They do not problematise that
which is postulated as self-evident. Their concern for questions of urgent pragmatism
blinds them from seeing on what kind of assumptions, familiar notions, of established
and unexamined ways of thinking their practices are based. In this way, international
agencies limit their own discursive space. Thus, as they put forward their proposals,
through a process of oversimplification, they are producing a different discourse that
has been called in this chapter ‘global educational discourse’.
The third position that has been mentioned is the state. Overall, the state is the site of
production of a specific type of discourse that I will call ‘policy discourse’. Therefore,
the state is in a position in which it has to translate other discourses through a process of
negotiation into educational policies. Which discourses? That is a fundamental question
that would have a different answer in different places at different historical periods.
In this sense, the state is the stake of a political battle.
The next position that has been identified is ‘local academic space’. This context
is created by the positions, relations and practices arising out of the production of
‘local academic discourse’. This discourse is partly produced through the interpretation and translation of global academic discourse. However, this position also feeds
global academic discourse with the local discourse in a circular relation. In different
societies there could be considerable differences in the extent to which this position is
developed. Significant particularities in the relations with other positions could also be
expected in different places at different times.
Finally – it is being suggested – educational institutions are overall created by the
positions, relations and practices arising out of the reproduction of discourses produced in all or some of the other positions. In theory, in most societies, it should be
the policy discourse produced by the state that should have the strongest influence
on this position. However, in some societies, local academic discourse could have an
important influence on institutions. In societies in which universities are engaged in
research, a major distinction should be made between types of institutions. In those
cases, universities also participate in the production of local academic discourse,
and some of them could even participate in the production of global academic discourse. Consequently, the subjects who are positioned within the university have
other resources and possibilities to engage with the discourse that they are expected
to reproduce.
Now that the different positions have been defined, the most important issues to
consider are: the relations that are established between the different positions (or how
discourses move between them); and to understand how discourse is transformed as it
moves between different positions.
Overall, in the 1980s and 1990s, the movement of global academic discourse to international agencies resulted in a transformation of this discourse through a process of oversimplification into what has been called in this chapter ‘global educational discourse’.
When international agencies appropriate certain concepts or ideas they transform
them into an oversimplified generalisation that is offered as an educational solution for
most contexts. This advocacy is made without specifying context and thus, inevitably,
ideas need to be simplified to make them malleable enough to adapt to every context,
but at the same time able to retain certain stability. In this way, global educational

--- [PDF Page 366 / Book Page 352] ---

352 Beech

discourse is produced. This discourse then becomes especially attractive for some
states because of its simplicity (Ball, 1998).
This discourse introduces a language, a way of classifying and thinking about education. These words and concepts construct social reality as much as they express it
and mould the way in which education is understood and thought about. An example
can be seen in the difficulty to break away from the concept of ‘educational systems’
or the classification of primary, secondary and tertiary education. These notions have
framed the way in which people think about education for many years and in many
cases they were disseminated by international agencies (Cowen, 2000).
The concept of ‘lifelong learning’, like the idea of an ‘educational system’, was
probably not created by an international agency. But that is not the point. The original concept could have been very complex and specific. It is through the process of
oversimplification described above, that these notions develop into a part of global
educational discourse.
Furthermore, this process of oversimplification is inevitable given the way in which
international agencies define social space, mainly dividing the world into developed
and developing countries. This way of thinking about social space might be helpful to
distribute budgets and decide how much money to ‘invest’ in each country or region.
However, if this definition of space is used for policy diagnosis and for advocating
policy it inevitably develops into dangerous generalisations. In other words, if the specific role of international agencies is to capture educational discourse and translate it
into policy recommendations that can be applied in most contexts of the world (or a
region) it is inevitable that this process will result in the oversimplification and overgeneralisation of the original ideas.
This is a dangerous process because, as has been shown for the cases of Argentina
and Brazil (Beech, 2005), the effects of localising global educational discourse in
practice cannot be predicted. Due to the specific position of international agencies
within the educational field, the universal model of education that they promote cannot
consider the specific contextual circumstances that affect the way in which policies are
interpreted and put into practice (Ball, 2000). Consequently, the practical effects of
the appropriation of global educational discourse in an educational system cannot be
simply read-off neither from the proposals of international agencies, nor from policy
discourse.
On the contrary, it has been shown (Beech, 2005) that there are significant problems in the translation of the abstract simplicities of the universal model of education
promoted by international agencies into context-bound interactive practices. Although
the model is universal (it does not consider the specificities of each context to which it
moves), the way in which the model is adopted and adapted depends on the characteristics of the contexts of reception. Consequently, the main problem is not so much that
the ‘anticipated’ effects are not attained, but rather the unexpected effects that global
educational discourse produces as it is localised. Therefore, maybe international agencies should revise their approach that promotes global abstract strategies to solve local
specific problems.
The relation between international agencies and the state – and for that matter all
of the relations considered in this model – cannot be abstractly analysed. In other

--- [PDF Page 367 / Book Page 353] ---

International Agencies and Educational Transfer 353

words, the positions in the global educational field that have been mentioned could, in
principle, be used to analyse the circulation of discourse between and within different
societies. Thus, the relations between different positions will only be analysed in the
remaining part of this chapter for Argentina and Brazil in the 1990s.
The question about which discourse was used by the state to produce its policy
discourse has a clear answer for Argentina and Brazil in the 1990s: global educational
discourse displaced available discourses in the state in both countries (Beech, 2005).
Furthermore the process through which global educational discourse was translated
into policies did not include a major transformation of this discourse, and no significant differences were perceived between the translations made in the Argentine and the
Brazilian states (Beech, 2005).
So what happened with local academic space in Argentina and Brazil? The basic
question is how local academic discourse related to the state in Argentina and Brazil in
the 1990s. An immediate answer would suggest that there was a blockage between the
state and local academic space. Apparently, global educational discourse pervaded the
state, leaving no space for local academic discourse. However, the uniformity of themes
that can be seen in academic discourse in Argentina and Brazil in the 1980s and 1990s
(Beech, 2002) suggests that there was also a very strong connection between global educational discourse and local academic discourse in Argentina and Brazil in the 1990s.
Thus, there seem to be two major problems with local academic space in Argentina
and Brazil. The first problem is the extent to which local academic space is developed.
The second problem is the extent to which local academic space in these two countries
is independent from both the state and from international agencies.
I would like to put forward the argument that what happened in Argentina and in Brazil
in the 1990s was that the distinction between these three different positions (international
agencies, the state and local academic space) was blurred. Most of the ‘elite’ academics
in Argentina (and at least some of them in Brazil), as they ascend in the academic ‘hierarchy’, are hired by international agencies and/or by the state. Furthermore, international
agencies (and to a certain extent the state) are fundamental sources of research funds in
these countries and they define an agenda when offering these funds.
The result of having the same individuals occupying these three different positions
is that a class of gatekeepers is developed and discursive space is closed in these three
positions. This class of gatekeepers controls the relation of the educational system to
global academic space. Since these gatekeepers also control local academic space they
control the production of knowledge and, consequently the relation of the educational
system with the ‘thinkable/unthinkable’.
If international agencies through global educational discourse close discursive
space in the state and in local academic space it is very difficult for alternative ways
of thinking about education to develop. In theory, it should be local academic space
that should produce an alternative to global educational discourse and compete with
international agencies, trying to occupy the discursive space of the state. However, this
has not happened in Argentina and in Brazil in the 1990s.
Finally, the application of the model to Argentina and Brazil in the 1990s showed
a significant disconnection between global educational discourse (and policy discourse) and educational institutions. At this level global educational discourse was

--- [PDF Page 368 / Book Page 354] ---

354 Beech

significantly transformed as it met local discourses and context-specific circumstances. This
transformation resulted in resistance, reinterpretations and several unexpected effects.
An example of this can be seen in the practical effects of the reform of curricular
regulations in Argentina. Before the reforms of the 1990s, teachers in Argentina were
not expected to have any participation in decisions related to the contents they had
to transmit (Gvirtz & Beech, 2004). Influenced by international agencies, the reform
emphasised autonomy and creativity on the side of teachers who should be able to
have freedom to choose the specific contents of the lessons according to local context
and students’ characteristics, but respecting general guidelines from the central agencies of the state. However, a series of interviews with teachers and teacher educators
showed that many Argentine teachers, as they were faced with an autonomy for which
they were not prepared, started using the indexes of the manuals that publishing companies produce for students to structure their lessons (Beech, 2005). Since the new
curricular documents do not provide a detailed guide to which contents should be
included, (some) teachers looked for another guide that could replace the prescriptive
curriculum which they had in the past. They found this guide in the manuals that editing companies produce for students. Therefore, an idea that is acceptable as an abstract
ideal (that teachers should have autonomy to decide on the contents of lessons) results
in unexpected consequences as it is localised in practice and recontextualised.
Furthermore, the consequences of similar policies were very different in different
contexts. For example, international agencies promoted that practice-based training
in schools should become a major part of the training of teachers. This idea, that was
adopted both in Argentine and Brazilian policies for teacher education, had very different interpretations in each of these countries. In Brazil, dominant conceptions of
teacher education included the idea that future teachers should experiment with real
classes, constructing their own pedagogic knowledge. Consequently, trainees already
spent a great part of time in practice-based activities, and therefore teacher educators
who where interviewed considered the extension of time spent in these activities as
‘delirious’ and impossible to administer. In Argentina, from the perspective of teacher
educators, trainees spent very little time in practice-based training and, therefore, the
extension of time spent by trainees in schools was seen as a positive aspect of the
reform and as a response to a historical demand of teacher educators (Beech, 2005).
As this abstract proposal of international agencies was localized in different contexts
the practical effects were very different in each of these specific localities.
Thus, although international agencies make universal proposals that, in theory, are
applicable to almost every context, the practical effects of these proposals depend very
much on the specific characteristics of the contexts in which they have to be translated
into interactive and sustainable practices. In the end, these processes result in a strong
disconnection between global educational discourse (and policy discourse) and educational institutions.
Considering the uniformity in educational reforms and in local academic discourse
in Latin America it seems as though these overall results could be generalised for many
countries in Latin America. However, the model should be tested in these societies. In
the concluding remarks, some ideas about how the model could be further developed
will be opened up.

--- [PDF Page 369 / Book Page 355] ---

International Agencies and Educational Transfer 355

Conclusion
It has been suggested in this chapter that global educational space has become more
complex, with different types of actors that are increasingly participating in the business of providing policy-oriented advice to governments, based on the transfer of educational ideas or practices from one context to another.
Then, the chapter has concentrated on one specific type of actor: international agencies. A theoretical model was offered, suggesting that the internal logic of international
agencies provided these institutions with certain resources and possibilities to engage
with and act upon educational discourse. It is important to emphasise (again) that the
model analysed international agencies as a given position in the global educational
field. Individuals who work for the agencies can occupy at the same time other positions, such as local academic space if they do research in the university or in research
centres. Nevertheless, although the resources of the individuals are important, the
position they occupy in a specific moment will also have an influence on the possibilities that a given individual has to engage with educational discourse. For example an
academic who does research in the university might take 3 years since the moment
she starts to design a research project until the moment she publishes her findings in a
book. If that same person is then hired by an international agency to undertake a study
about, say, inequities in schools, she might be asked to do the field work, to analyse the
data and to provide the organisation with a report that is ‘relevant to practice’ in 1 year.
Clearly her own training as a researcher will influence the type of knowledge she produces in both cases, but it is also quite evident that the possibilities she had to engage
with educational discourse in one case and in the other is very different, resulting in
two texts, produced by the same person, that offer very different types of discourses.
Then, of course, with the pressures that academics have to generate income for their
institutions and/or for themselves through contract research, the logic of basic research
and of academic space might be changing (see for example Ball, 2001).
Nevertheless, returning to the main argument of this paper, the question is whether
the other actors that have been mentioned as active participants in the global educational field (corporations, the EU, ONGs, consultants) could be included in the model
that has been offered. In order to include these types of actors as specific positions
in the global educational field it is necessary to identify an internal logic from which
certain regularities in the resources and possibilities they have to engage with and
act upon educational discourse could be deduced. So, maybe the profit-making logic
of corporations affects the way in which these organisations promote certain educational practices, and although there are many different types of corporations engaged
in the business of promoting educational ideas and practices, some regularities could
be found in the way in which corporations transform educational discourse into
recommendations for governments and institutions. Similarly, if applying this model to
European space, the European Union should be added as a major position. The internal
logic of the EU as a position in the global educational field cannot be directly deduced
from the logic of international agencies that has been identified in this chapter. The EU
probably has its own logic and specific resources and possibilities to engage with and
act upon educational discourse.

--- [PDF Page 370 / Book Page 356] ---

356 Beech

The other issue to consider is recontextualisation, or how is educational discourse
transformed as it moves into different positions. We need to understand how institutions transform the abstract recommendations of other actors into interactive and
sustainable practices. It is at the level of schools, teacher-training colleges, universities and other practice-based institutions that the practical effects of the circulation of
discourse in the global educational field can be seen. Probably, as Sadler noted, the
gathered cuttings will not transform into a ‘living plant’ when they are implanted in
a new soil, but that doesn’t mean that there are no effects. Even a dead plant carries
micro organisms that can alter an ecosystem, and as comparativists we need to understand how the new kids strolling through the global garden are affecting ours.

Notes
1.

The following reflections about the involvement of corporations in the global educational market have
been inspired by Stephen Ball’s seminar ‘La participación del sector privado en la educación pública’.
Organised by the British Council in November 2005 in Buenos Aires.

References
Ball, S. J. (1998). Big policies/small world: An introduction to international perspectives in education policy.
Comparative Education, 34(2), 119–130.
Ball, S. J. (2000). What is policy? Texts, trajectories and toolboxes. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), Sociology of education: Major themes, Vol. IV. London: Routledge Falmer.
Ball, S. J. (2001) ‘You’ve been NERFed!’ Dumbing down the academy: National Educational Research
Forum: ‘a national strategy – consultation paper’: a brief and bilious response. Journal of Education
Policy, 16(3), 265–268.
Beech, J. (2002) Latin American education: Perception of linearities and the construction of discursive
space. Comparative Education, 38(4), 415–427.
Beech, J. (2005) International agencies, educational discourse, and the reform of teacher education in
Argentina and Brazil (1985–2002): A comparative analysis. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Institute of
Education, University of London.
Beech, J. (2006a) The theme of educational transfer in comparative education: A view over time. Research
in Comparative and International Education, 1(1), 2–13.
Beech, J. (2006b) Redefining educational transfer: International agencies and the (re)production of educational ideas. In J. Sprogoe & T. Winther-Jensen (Eds.), Identity, education and citizenship – multiple
interrelations. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Bernstein, B. (1990) The structuring of pedagogic discourse. London: Routledge.
Cardini, A. (2006) An analysis of the rhetoric and practice of educational partnerships in the UK: an arena
of complexities, tensions and power. Journal of Education Policy, 21(4), 393–415.
Carnoy, M. (1999) Globalization and Educational Reform: What Planners Need to Know. Paris: UNESCO,
International Institute for Educational Planning.
Castells, M. (2000). The rise of the network society, 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cowen, R. (1994) Schools and selected aspects of culture from the perspective of comparative education:
Neither a borrower nor a lender be. In E. Thomas (Ed.), International perspectives on culture and
schooling: A symposium proceedings. London: Department of International and Comparative Education,
Institute of Education, University of London.
Cowen, R. (1996). Performativity, post-modernity and the university. Comparative Education, 32(2), 245–258.
Cowen, R. (2000). Introducción Al Dossier Nuevas Tendencias En Educación Comparada [Introduction to
the Dossier New Trends in Comparative Education]. Propuesta Educativa, 10(23), 4–7.
Cowen, R. (2006). Acting comparatively upon the educational world: puzzles and possibilities. Oxford
Review of Education, 32(5), 561–573.

--- [PDF Page 371 / Book Page 357] ---

International Agencies and Educational Transfer 357
Cowen, R. & Figueiredo, M. (1992). Brazil. In P. W. Cookson Jr., A. R. Sadovnik, & S. F. Semel (Eds.),
International handbook of educational reform. London: Greenwood Press.
Giddens, A. (1990). The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity in association with Blackwell.
Giddens A. (1994). Living in post-traditional society. In U. Beck, A. Giddens, & S. Lash (Eds.), Reflexive
modernization: Politics, tradition and aesthetics in modern social order. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gvirtz, S. & Beech, J. (2004). From the intended to the implemented curriculum in Argentina: exploring the
relation between regulation and practice. Prospects, 34 (3), 371–382.
Jones, P. & Coleman, D. (2005). The United Nations and Education: Multilateralism, development and
globalisation. London: Routledge Falmer/Taylor & Francis Group.
Lauder, H. (2007) International schools, education and globalization: Towards a research Agenda. In
M. Hayden, J. Levy & J. Thompson (Eds.), Handbook of research in international education. Sage:
London.
Lyotard, J. F. (1984). The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Noah, H. & Eckstein, M. (1969). Toward a science of comparative education. London: Macmillan.
Lockheed, M. E. (1992). Improving primary education in developing countries. Oxford: Oxford University
Press for World Bank.
Mayor, F., Sema T., & UNESCO. (1997). UNESCO – an ideal in action: The continuing relevance of a
visionary text. Paris: UNESCO.
Nóvoa, A. (2002) Ways of thinking about education in Europe. In A. Nóvoa & M. Lawn (Eds.), Fabricating
Europe: The formation of and education space. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
OECD. Web page. www.oecd.org
Papadopoulos, G. (1994). Education 1960–1990: The OECD perspective. Paris: OECD.
Passin, H. (1965). Society and education in Japan. New York: Columbia University/Teachers College and
East-Asian Institute.
Ravitch, D. (1983). The troubled crusade: American education, 1945–1980. New York: Basic Books.
Sadler, M. (1979). How far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of foreign systems of
education? Address given at the Guildford educational conference on saturday 20 October 1900. In J. H.
Higginson (Ed.), Selections from Michael Sadler: Studies in world citizenship (pp. 48–51). Liverpool:
Dejall & Meyorre.
Southwell, M. (1997). Algunas Características de la Formación Docente en la Historia Educativa Reciente.
El Legado del Espiritualismo y el Tecnocratismo (1955–76) [Some Characteristics of Teacher Education
in Recent History of Education. The Legacy of Spiritualism and Tecnocratism]. In A. Puiggros (Ed.),
Dictaduras Y Utopías En La Historia Reciente De La Educación Argentina (1955–1983) [Dictatorships
and Utopies in Recent History of Education in Argentina]. Buenos Aires: Editorial Galerna.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2000). Transferring education, displacing reforms. In J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse
formation in comparative education. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Tanaka, M. (2005). The cross-cultural transfer of educational concepts and practices: A comparative study.
United Kingdom: Symposium Books.
UNESCO. (1996). Medium-term strategy 1996–2001. Paris: UNESCO.
World Bank. Web page. www.worldbank.org
World Bank (1995). Priorities and strategies for education: A World Bank sector review. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

