================================================================================
Chapter 24: Fundamentalisms and Secularisms: Education and La Longue Durée
Author(s): David Coulby
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 3: The National, The International, and The Global
Book Pages: pp. 373–384
PDF Pages: pp. 385–396 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 385 / Book Page 373] ---

24
FUNDAMENTALISMS AND SECULARISMS:
EDUCATION AND LA LONGUE DURÉE
David Coulby

Trend Spotting and La Longue Durée
An overview of educational discourse, especially in the UK, might review current
trends, the latest, fashionable moves in writing on education policy at its various levels:
the strands of the discursive strategy of educational policy. Thus, in the last 15 years
of educational publication in the UK and in the World Yearbooks of Education, there
has been writing on education and transitions, the control of the teaching profession,
education and post-modernity, education and globalisation.
Some of this writing is spotting trends, ideally at an international level, internal to
education: the regulation and de-professionalisation of the teaching profession; the
shift to a shorter first degree; a concern at all levels with standards. Another strand
seeks to identify wider social trends, such as the transitions in Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union following 1989 and 1991 (Coulby et al., 2000) or the economic
process of globalisation (Coulby & Zambeta, 2005), and to analyse the ways in which
they impact on education, or indeed are impacted on by education. Again the perspective of this strand is beyond one state and the systems examined within it may be quite
other than that within which the analyst works. An even more ambitious strand seeks
to isolate philosophical shifts either within academe or beyond and to show how these
either help to understand the role of educational institutions or influence the ways in
which they are shaped. Whilst the writing on post-modernity and education might be
the most obvious example here, this strand would also include earlier Marxist writing
and those concerned with the impact of ‘values’ on education and of education on
‘values’ (Cairns et al., 2001). This trend-spotting aspect of the educational literature is
particularly prominent among those writing in comparative or international education.
This is appropriately the case since such analysts are well placed to spot the ways in
which similar concerns, policies and structures are emerging in different states: the
shift to more vocational subjects at secondary school level, the growth of English as
the first foreign language, the charging of fees for university education. Moreover,
ideally, comparative and international commentators will be well placed to pick up the
social and philosophical trends which are emerging within and beyond their state of
location and to relate these to educational policy.
As indicated by the citations above, the World Yearbooks of Education over the last
10 years exemplify this mode of discourse. Their titles are likely to identify a social
373
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 373–384.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 386 / Book Page 374] ---

374 Coulby

or philosophical abstraction – interculturalism, special needs, urbanisation – and to
link this to current and emergent practice in education. This is the normal science
of comparative education. The comparative educationist must be alert to, on the one
hand, trends in policy and practice in a range of states and, on the other, to changes
in the theorisation of the social sciences as a whole. The task then gets to be to provide an exemplified and ever-current set of links between the two. Lo and behold:
Postmodernity and European Education Systems (Coulby & Jones, 1995).
The job of the comparative and international commentator has, over the last 3
decades, become more complex as governments have set themselves up as instant
comparative educationists. The literature and research has in some ways contributed
to this, especially the performance league tables beloved of journalists. Technical education is best in Germany, the Fins are best at teaching literacy, Mathematics is best
in Taiwan (or was it Hungary?). Politicians and bureaucrats scuttle to Heathrow and
Narita in search of instant solutions. Thus one of the trends which comparative and
international commentators have needed to chart has been the idiot cultural borrowing
brought about by the existence of comparative data and research itself. If it works in
Taiwan then obviously it is bound to work in North Rhine Westphalia.
This chapter is not advocating a paradigm shift in comparative and international
education discourse. Rather it will make a contrast between this trend-spotting trend
(as it were) and another approach to understanding social phenomena.
The French historian Braudel and his followers, along with others working in, particularly, economic history and the history of technology, have sought to understand
the long-term shifts in social phenomenon (Braudel, 1985a, b, c, 1989, 1990, 1992).
The question, to take an example that irked Braudel himself, is not who won the battle
of Waterloo? But rather, how, in the period from the Reformation to 1815, demographically and historically insignificant England (later UK) developed the industrial
and military capacity to snatch world domination from the apparently economically
and intellectually superior France?
The long processes of history might be exemplified as the spread of Islam across Asia,
Africa and parts of Europe; the process of European colonisation and decolonisation; the
persistence of the Japanese and Chinese empires; the emergence of North America from
scattered settler societies to the current position of the USA; the impact of Latin American
mineral wealth, especially Peruvian silver, on the sudden rapid take off of the world economy following Spanish imperialism. At its most extreme, human history can be seen as
the agency which spread the plant, wheat, across the surface of the globe (FernandezArmesto, 2001). These movements of history Braudel refers to as la longe durée.
It is possible across the longe durée to identify forces which are operant on a wide
range of social phenomena not least on the curricula of schools and madrassas. The ebb
and flow of languages across the globe and its educational institutions over the last two
and a half millennia may provide an illustration here: Greek, Latin, Arabic, Chinese,
Turkish, Spanish and English. The first point to make about this illustration is that these
shifts hardly result from the decisions of educational policy makers. They are the result
of much longer-term economic, cultural and political forces. Secondly, these changes
would not necessarily have been prominent to contemporary trend-spotters. Even the
most triumphalistic Roman, as late as the Battle of Actium, would have been unlikely to

--- [PDF Page 387 / Book Page 375] ---

Fundamentalisms and Secularisms: Education and La Longue Durée 375

predict that Latin would become an international language in Europe and beyond for the
next millennium and a half. (Though, when asked what was the most important event
of the nineteenth century, Bismarck brilliantly remarked the decision of the US government to make English its official language.) For those less prescient than Bismarck,
however, there may actually be a conflict between trend-spotting and understanding the
longue durée. It may be that a concentration on what is currently widespread and important in education can distract from the long-term, significant movements. Speaking of
the crusades, Fletcher writes: ‘Attitudes laid down like rocks long ago continue to shape
their moral environment for many centuries thereafter. There is a geology of human
relationships which it is unwise to neglect’ (Fletcher, 2004: 159).
The longue durée forces operant on education are often military-political as in the
European conquest of America or the centuries-long decline of Byzantium. They may
also be cultural-political as in the Reformation in northern Europe or the deliberate
attack on tradition by communist forces in the PRC or the former Soviet Union. These
forces are sometimes straight ideological as in nationalistic elements which since
1789, say, have come to inform much of normative social and educational knowledge
across a wide range of states. These forces can also be economic-technical as witnessed by the global spread of universities and in particular their Science, Technology
and Engineering faculties. It would not be helpful to try to generate a strict typology
here as these forces often come together: Islam as well as Arabic expanded geographically in the second half of the first millennia CE.
Nor are these forces uncontested: Catholicism spread with Spanish across Central and
South America but at the local level it was a version of that religion which would have
found little approval at the Council of Trent. Similarly, resistance to western science and
technology remains exceedingly widespread. On the one hand this may be represented by
lunatic fringe, though nevertheless influential, anti-evolution Christian fundamentalists
in the USA and UK. On the other hand there is a more rational critique of the effects of
western science and technology on the environment and on humanity itself. Emerging,
inter-related crises of climate change and hydrocarbon exhaustion are the products of
humanity’s use of science and technology. It is highly unlikely that any solution to these
difficulties – if such there is to be – will be derived exclusively from the scientific paradigm. There is not going to be some wonder science that can reverse global warming and
generate infinite amounts of energy from sea water. No matter how powerful the social,
economic, military or intellectual force, it will not be unopposed and, in the longe durée, it
will reach its limits. Peak oil has already probably passed (Klare, 2005; Roberts, 2005).
The task of this chapter, then, is twofold: firstly to identify the current trends, attention
to which might serve to distract from understanding the longue durée forces or indeed to
ignore or misunderstand them completely; secondly to try to identify the longue durée
forces which will lead to significant lasting change to what is taught in schools and universities. The immediate focus of the chapter is on educational institutions and religion but
the exemplifications occasionally range beyond this. If this were a straight trend-spotting
chapter it would obviously devote more attention to the impact of information and communications technology (ICT) on educational institutions and society (Brown & Davis,
2004). From the perspective developed here ICT is a further advanced manifestation of that
science and technology developed and advocated inside the Enlightenment paradigm.

--- [PDF Page 388 / Book Page 376] ---

376 Coulby

The Distraction of Current Trends
The attack on the World Trade Centre in New York was a manifestation of terrible murderousness. The appalling loss of life has rightly been universally condemned. In the
toll of recent human murderousness it does not stand alone. It may be set, for example,
alongside events in Szerbrinitsa or Dafur. September 11 was not a unique event though
the very fact that both reader and author have internalised this date might imply that it
was. What was unique was that it was an attack by an outside force on the territory of
the USA. This has not happened since 1814. And in the period since 1814 the USA has
become the uncontestedly most powerful state on earth. With this power the USA is
uniquely able to inscribe its version of events across global consciousness. The result
of this has been that the destruction of the World Trade Centre and the attack on the
Pentagon are increasingly seen as a landmark event in both recent history and social
consciousness. This may be exemplified by the use of the current term, ‘post-9/11.’
In political terms the results have been major changes in US policy both foreign and
domestic. In foreign policy the ‘war on terror’ has been used to justify military interventions as diverse as the Anglo-American occupation of the Iraqi oilfields and Putin’s
remorseless persecution of the Chechens. In domestic terms the event has become a
justification for the erosion of civil liberties both in the USA and beyond, to the extent
of the illegal imprisonments at Guantanamo Bay and the widespread sanctioning of the
torture and mistreatment of enemy combatants and civilians.
It is perhaps early days to attempt to discern the influence on educational policy,
or, more precisely, educational policy analysis. But one trend has already been widely
identified by commentators and that is fundamentalism and its perceived rise (Burleigh,
2007; Duijzings et al., 2002; Leirvik, 2004; Micklethwait & Wooldridge, 2005; SoonYong, 2004; Victor, 2005; Zambeta, 2000). For the warriors on terror, fundamentalism
is something that is automatically equated with Islam so that, in the extreme (but widespread), xenophobic version, all Muslims are fundamentalists and all fundamentalists
are Muslims. More balanced commentators have noted fundamentalism on either side
of the conflict, noting the extreme Protestant background of many of the American
proponents of the war on terror, their links with the militia movement as well as their
fervent support for the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and (previously) Gaza.
Others (Sim, 2005) have claimed to discern a more general shift to fundamentalism
including such diverse phenomenon as: Al-Qaeda, the Muslim Brotherhood, Hare
Krishna, globalisation, Le Pen, Pim Fortuyn and the American militias. This holistic
fundamentalism will be considered in due course. At this stage it is worth concentrating on the apparent clash of fundamentalisms eloquently evoked by President Bush
when he referred to the war on terror as a crusade. The fundamentalisms here then
are religious and historical: they have been produced and reproduced by educational
transactions and institutions since at least the bloodthirsty sack of Jerusalem by the
Christians in 1099. On the one hand are the anti-science, anti-women curricular aspirations of the fundamentalist neocons in many of the states of the USA, on the other the
(also anti-science, anti-women) curricula of the Taliban madrassas. Education is seen
as being taken over by the fundamentalists. This trend may be seen to be both pervasive and widespread. Pervasive in the penetration of the Greek school curriculum by

--- [PDF Page 389 / Book Page 377] ---

Fundamentalisms and Secularisms: Education and La Longue Durée 377

orthodox religion (Xochellis & Toloudi, 2001; Karakasidou, 1997; Mazower, 2001) or
the hatred curriculum of the madrassas of north-west Pakistan. Widespread in that, in
various states, Hinduism, Islam and fundamentalist Christianity would all appear to be
on the rampage in both school and society.
Before going on to assess this trend it is appropriate to consider the role of the
comparative or international commentator on education. This is not a matter of solipsistic concern with ‘method’, the fatal attraction of which almost brought about the
institutional destruction of comparative education in the recent past. It is that, in dealing with more than one value system and in particular in considering value systems
different from that in which the commentator was brought up and educated, it is necessary to consider the appropriate intercultural stance. To analyse one fundamentalism
from the perspective of another is to engage in fundamentalism per se rather than
social commentary. Cultural relativism has long seemed to offer some protection from
the dangers of various orientalisms. The theme of fundamentalism is appropriate to a
postmodern, relativistic approach in which all cultural and political forces are treated
with an equal calm remoteness. This approach would seem to avoid the possibility of
bias, of being committed from the outset to a particular grand narrative. Whilst this is
appropriate to a point, and has been a stance much preferred by commentators in, say,
intercultural education, it is not entirely sensible for educational discourse to imply
equality of esteem between Genesis and The Origin of Species. There comes a point
at which the postmodernist is in danger of implying parity of esteem between peace
and war, between tolerance and intolerance, between truth and error. In the selection of
the knowledge to be reproduced in schools and universities all decisions are informed
by values. To claim that a selection is value-free is likely to be privileging a particular
sort of orientation, almost certainly one derived from the Enlightenment. The claim to
value neutrality is rarely other than disingenuous. It may be best then for commentators to acknowledge their background and let the reader make allowance for commensurate bias: I am not religious but have been educated in the European humanistic,
scientific and artistic tradition.
The current climate of perceived fundamentalism might be misleading in terms
of understanding the longe durée forces currently operant on society and education.
Given the events of the first decade of the twenty-first century this climate is understandable. As this chapter was being written, four young men, educated in English
schools and, in some cases, universities, bombed the underground railway and a bus
in London. Reborn nationalism in Russia and Serbia and Bush’s war on terror, can all
too easily link in to fundamentalist forces for their power and justification. Even the
sacred economic orthodoxies of the Breton Wood institutions can link with and reinforce these fundamentalisms in terms of the manifest destiny of new imperialsms. But
such a sweeping analysis might be to identify schools and universities across the world
too closely with the madrassas of north-west Pakistan. Other, less sensational but more
enduring forces are at work on educational institutions.
Two examples might illustrate the ways in which the picture is appreciably more complex and conflicted than the triumph of fundamentalism. In both cases it is appropriate
to note that radical changes do occur in schools and society but that such changes are far
from a frequent occurrence. Fundamentalist Protestantism, firstly, has had a pervasive

--- [PDF Page 390 / Book Page 378] ---

378 Coulby

influence on politics and society in the USA for at least the last 30 years. It has influenced
the formation of institutions and the contents of curricula at all levels of education. But
this influence in fact has been superficial. The common school of the USA is not yet
in danger from these forces, nor is the teaching of Darwinian Science at Ivy League
Universities. Traditionalist strands in the curriculum of the USA are more characterised
by nationalism, and indeed xenophobia, than they are by religion. The nation-building
function of the American education system remains fundamental and indeed is being
renewed in the face of rapid demographic change, not least the expanding Hispanic
presence in southern California. The precepts of the Constitution were designed to meet
such challenges: it is unlikely that they will be overthrown by religious fissiparousness, no matter how politically influential this may be in the short term. Secondly, in
the PRC the curricula of schools and universities have been radically politicised since
1949. Indeed the Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s and early 1970s provides one of
the most extreme examples of the politicalisation of education in the whole of human
history. Yet beneath the surface other less radical trends characterise the development
of Chinese education: the spread of the Han Chinese language, the development of
technical vocational subjects, the blossoming of excellence in music and sport, the
emergence of world class universities. Whilst the West is shocked at the severity of the
repression of Fulan Gong, Llamist and Confucian ceremonies are openly celebrated in
urban as well as rural shrines and temples. The point is that looking backwards through
the revolutions of 1949 and 1911 there are continuities in Chinese history and politics:
the centralisation of policy, the diffusion of the Han language, a regard for the cultural
and technical excellence of the products of the Middle Kingdom, an awareness of at
least equality of esteem with interloping western values (Fairbank & Goldman, 1998;
Fewsmith, 2001; Massonnet, 2000; Nathan & Gilley, 2003; Roberts, 2003; Starr, 2001;
Studwell, 2003; Terrill, 2003). The Mandate of Heaven has been renewed in surprising
ways across the millennia, by Mongols and Manchus for instance. The dislocations of
the twentieth century may similarly conceal the persistence of China.
As well as fundamentalisms, then, other forces are operant on schools and society.
Obviously, as is clear from the two preceding examples, these will differ between
states. However, predominant among these longe durée forces are the ongoing impact
of the Enlightenment Programme together with its negative alter ego of imperialism and
nationalism. The tendency in education has been to see the Enlightenment retrospectively in terms of its major impact on institutions and knowledge itself. One difficulty
with this is that it tends to refer to a rather nebulous Enlightenment Project without
actually analysing particular thinkers or policies (Lyotard, 1984; Jameson,1991). In
fact the Enlightenment is the product of many thinkers operating in a wide range of
intellectual areas and it is impossible to tie it to a few prominent figures. When considering the work of the Encyclopaedists, Kant, Hume or Tom Paine, they seem far from
the work of a unitary project. The Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution
both clearly derive from the Enlightenment but despite their origins they followed different and at times apparently contradictory trajectories (Hobsbawm, 1975).
In 2003 the British Museum reopened the King’s Library as its Enlightenment Gallery.
In doing so it both boldly asserted its own importance – ‘The foundation of the British
Museum was one of the most potent acts of the Enlightenment’ (Sloan & Burnett, 2003,

--- [PDF Page 391 / Book Page 379] ---

Fundamentalisms and Secularisms: Education and La Longue Durée 379

p.13) – and attempted to rediscover the Enlightenment within the terms of its own period.
One of the impacts of this gallery is the sheer amount of material, natural and artificial,
that it contains. Not only is the range of material vast – sculptures, ceramics, butterflies,
books, geological specimens and so on – but so is the actual quantity. The large gallery
is chocked full from floor to high ceiling. One principle of the Enlightenment was simply collection, this preceded and perhaps even superseded organisation. Enlightenment
intellectuals were not overawed by the vastness of either nature or human achievement.
They saw both as their fields of endeavour, even of pillage. It was on this framework that
the Enlightenment became ‘a period when the principles of classification, taxonomy
itself, came into their own’ (p. 13). Rationality, progress, truth and liberty are the abstract
nouns of the rhetoric of the Enlightenment. The political and philosophical ideals of the
Enlightenment impacted on the American and French revolutions and thus on succeeding centuries. But in intellectual and educational terms, it is the spirit of collection and
enquiry that should be stressed; the spirit that believed that the natural and civilisational
universes could be gathered, rationally organised and understood. It is easy to see that
postmodern scepticism would perceive this as the attempt to contain the whole of nature
and the whole of human achievement within a grand narrative of taxonomy, indeed
within a museum. Nevertheless, it is that spirit of undaunted enquiry, that relentless
search for increased understanding of all areas of rational thought that has characterised
the impact of the Enlightenment on the knowledge of schools and universities. Despite
the differences and limitations of its individual thinkers, it is within this strand of the
Enlightenment that fundamentalism confronts a clear antithesis (Dawkins, 2007).
This strand of enquiry was in many cases secular and indeed anti-clerical from the
outset, Gibbon as well as Voltaire. It was to prove devastating in its consequences for
organised religion and belief. In geology as well as natural history, indeed in studies
into the origins and nature of the biblical texts themselves, the Enlightenment spirit of
enquiry undermined the teachings of the bible. As increasing areas of knowledge were
opened to the flood of rational enquiry the terrain of inerrancy disappeared. Religion
became no longer a matter of knowledge but of faith, furthermore of a faith which had
to stand in the face of an ever increasing and varied amount of well established knowledge. The publication of On the Origin of Species in 1859 represented both a culmination and a symbol of this process. Darwin had delayed publication for fear of the effect
his work would have on organised Christianity and the controversy he provoked was
profound and is still surprisingly ongoing.
Many Enlightenment thinkers and scientists had supposed that progress would sweep
organised religion, in particular Christianity, into the dustbin of history (Hume, 1993;
Paine, 1998). Of course, to a large extent this has happened. But organised religion
remains a thriving institution in many states and a key component of identity formation for huge groups of people. Two main reasons may be given for this strange survival, both of them educational. Firstly, in many states of Europe religious institutions
had infiltrated schools and universities prior to and during the Enlightenment period.
The control of many schools and universities in the UK, the Netherlands and Greece,
for example, meant that religious dogma could be reproduced alongside Enlightenment
knowledge. The very framing of Enlightenment rationality was performed by institutions and personnel committed to the traditional, the irrational. Secondly, postmodernity

--- [PDF Page 392 / Book Page 380] ---

380 Coulby

itself has offered prolonged protection for religions. Enlightenment knowledge was the
grand narrative most suspected by postmodernists. If all truth was relative then religious
diversity would be one of the hundred flowers permitted, even encouraged, to bloom.
Thus, in the UK, state Catholic, Protestant and Jewish schools have in the last decade
been supplemented by those representing Islam, Greek Orthodoxy, Hinduism and even
anti-Darwinism. Postmodernity has encouraged traditionalist beliefs and practices and,
in the revived guise of fundamentalism, these have proved hostile and destructive to
Enlightenment knowledge itself.
In the light of the terrorist bombings in Madrid and London it is likely that there
will be a reassessment of the European approach to multicultural societies and intercultural education. Of course a strong element of this reappraisal will be the traditionalistic nationalism and xenophobia which have always opposed cosmopolitanism.
But another element will raise the issue of the anachronism of any kind of religious
involvement in schooling in these highly globalised states. Following the attacks in
London, The Guardian published a poll which reported two thirds of people in the
UK to be opposed to any form of state aid to religious schools, including those run
by Protestant and Catholic churches (Taylor, 2005). It is important at this point, then,
to keep a sense of perspective and not to be over impressed by the continuation and
revival of traditionalistic beliefs and practices. In terms of the long-term development
of the Enlightenment spirit of enquiry these are minor phenomena and their impact on
educational institutions is strictly limited. Whilst it is unequivocally regrettable and
bizarre that a few secondary schools in England should indulge in anti-Darwinism, the
development of science is not seriously impeded. Such indulgence is having no serious impact on the research programmes of laboratories in the Universities of London,
Oxford and Cambridge. Whilst the sponsorship of Islamic schools, or for that matter
Catholic, Protestant or Orthodox schools, by modern states is anachronous and antieducational, the grip of religious institutions over the minds of young people has been
steadily loosening over increasing areas of the globe since the Enlightenment.
Nationalism and imperialism have long been perceived as the down side of the
Enlightenment. Whilst this may be argued in the instance of specific thinkers – imperialism hardly characterises Tom Paine, for instance, or even the slave owning Jefferson
– nationalism was one of the forces which expanded across Europe and beyond with the
armies of the Revolution and Napoleon. The increased trade generated by the Industrial
Revolution, and conducted in the first instance by national trading companies, allowed
ultimately the global penetration of European activities and ideas. The trading companies’ ‘intervention in local affairs – social, political and economic – grew stronger as
increasing national support came not only in diplomatic but also often naval and military
form. Thus while the Museum’s natural history and ethnographic collections and British
understanding of their history and cultures grew as a result of the activities [of the trading
companies] …, so the growing level of intervention by British and other foreign governments often ensured a concordant alteration of those same cultures. As Kant declared in
1784, this was the age of Enlightenment, but not an enlightened age’ (pp. 24–25). The
conquest of much of Africa, Asia and Australasia were to follow. Imperialism was the
major mode of dissemination of Enlightenment knowledge. The cultural confrontations
which resulted and which are ongoing in terms of globalisation form the basis of conflict

--- [PDF Page 393 / Book Page 381] ---

Fundamentalisms and Secularisms: Education and La Longue Durée 381

over much of the school and university curriculum in most states today (Burbules &
Torres, 2000; Coulby & Zambeta 2005; Stromquist & Monkman,2000). The opposition
of the Enlightenment project to fundamentalism indeed to religions in general is neither
a matter of a clash of civilisations nor some eschatology of epistemological right and
wrong. The Enlightenment project has been far from an unmitigated blessing in terms of
school and university curricula. The task of separating rationality from nationalism and
racism in this respect has only just started. The postmodern critique of Enlightenment
knowledge is not misconceived though it has proved unaware of the perils of other discursive strategies of knowledge.
Nationalism and imperialism may themselves now be seen as part of the process of
globalisation. And globalisation represents the principle force currently operant in most
states on both education and religion. The process of globalisation has many aspects
and it has impacted on schools and universities in a variety of ways, not least through
the development of the knowledge economy. However, given the focus of this chapter,
it is the cultural dimension of the globalisation process which is considered here. Three
cultural dimensions may be considered: language, nationalist history and culture and
mass culture. The first two are important components of the school and university curriculum. The third, mass culture, stands potentially in opposition to them.
Firstly, in terms of language, the economic, political, technological and cultural
activities which characterise the globalisation process are all conducted in English.
Air traffic control, scientific and learned journals, the Internet, Hollywood movies, pop
music, international conferences and diplomacy – all are conducted predominantly
and increasingly in English. English is the first foreign language taught in almost every
school system in the world. Increasing numbers of university courses are being taught
in English even in non-Anglophone states. As international mobility among university
students increases it is overwhelmingly the English speaking countries which are the
destinations of choice. Fox, CNN and BBC have virtually global reach thus extending
not only the English language but an Anglo-Saxon view of current events. However,
English is not the only language which appears to be on the march. Although the
spread of Russian has been halted and reversed, Han Chinese is a language which is
increasing both its numbers and its geographical presence in Xinjiang, for instance,
and Tibet. Nor is the spread of English language in any way a process which is unresisted. Each time an educational system or individual school elects to have a different
or even a second foreign language the hegemony of English is resisted. This resistance
has political significance in France as well as in the Arab world.
Secondly, nationalist history and culture have long been identified as fundamental features of educational systems especially at school level (Coulby, 2000). With the intensification of globalisation this role takes on a beleaguered significance. In the face of the
tsunami of mass culture, the globalisation of the economy and the decreasing importance
of individual states as international groupings such as the European Union increase their
powers, countries such as France or Greece use their schools to stress their importance to
the world in historical and cultural terms. Power may have shifted from Athens and Paris to
Brussels and Washington but, in the school-inscribed identity of the individual, Waterloo
can be assuaged, Byzantium retrieved. It is the contention of this chapter that traditionalism
is gradually being eroded from society and educational institutions, but nationalism is

--- [PDF Page 394 / Book Page 382] ---

382 Coulby

proving the most resistant of its elements. (Postmodern forms of cultural and identity
hybridity are one of the most adaptive and even justifiable forms of this resistance, rather
than the emergence of a new episteme.) This is not to say that nationalism cannot be
intrinsically connected to religion as is certainly the case in Pakistan as well as in Greece.
However, the trend has been, since at least the Enlightenment, for nationalism to supersede
religion as the core element in identity and state formation. Current events in the USA or
Saudi Arabia, notwithstanding, this trend is clear in, to use historically significant examples, Belgium, Spain, Mexico and Russia. When nationalism takes on a religious dimension (a common feature of fundamentalism) it certainly manifests one of the currently
most successful resistances to modernity in both societies and schools and madrassas. It
is likely that the school curriculum will remain one of the last bulwarks of nationalism
and xenophobia whether or not religiously inscribed. However, it is the university which
is increasingly the internationally significant institution of the Enlightenment and here the
curriculum is gradually escaping its nationalistic construction.
Mass culture is the third and final cultural dimension of the globalisation process to
be considered here. It is connected to the first, language dimension, considered above
in that it is overwhelmingly transmitted in English: films, television programmes,
popular music, newspapers and magazines, computer games and the internet. Where
it is not transmitted in English, these media have often been created in English and
then translated or distributed with subtitles (Crane et al., 2002). Indeed such is the
potency of English in this area of subculture that popular music or advertising media
are frequently composed and presented in English even where that is not the language
of the society. This is not to deny the validity or global reach of mass culture in other
languages: films from Cairo and Mumbai, television programmes from Brazil, international news broadcasting in Arabic, French and German. But the aspiration of the
most successful proponents of mass culture is almost always to operate and market
in English. The growing economic strength of China is likely to increase further the
spread of the Chinese language. But whilst the number of its speakers may for a while
outnumber the speakers of English, it is unlikely to be able to compete with the latter’s
global reach or penetration of international mass culture. Both religious and educational
institutions have sought to incorporate and manipulate mass culture both as a form of
resistance and as a way of seeking a way of appealing to young people. Nevertheless,
the appeal of mass culture and its separation from and disdain for religious institutions
and values is surely one of the forces serving to undermine fundamentalism: hence the
widespread opposition to mass culture by the proponents of fundamentalism.
To recap: other forces than fundamentalism are currently operant on societies and
educational institutions. Predominant among these is the ongoing impact, far from
exclusively positive, of the Enlightenment Project. Furthermore these forces are themselves currently subject to the process of globalisation. In cultural terms the spread
of and resistances to American cultural products is a global process. ICT has notched
another ratchet on the progress of the Enlightenment Project in terms of communication and dissemination as well as electronic engineering. The Enlightenment agenda
of science and rationality has become a global movement at least at the level of higher
education. From the point of the longe durée then it may be that the impact of fundamentalisms will remain epiphenomenal.

--- [PDF Page 395 / Book Page 383] ---

Fundamentalisms and Secularisms: Education and La Longue Durée 383

Globalisation has itself thrown up trends which superficially would appear to be
transforming education such as the spread of pragmatic capitalist business practice
and theory and its educational embodiment in Business Studies and the currently ubiquitous MBA. Compared to the ground-shifting transformations caused by the developments in ICT these will be seen as but brief fashions. In the decline of religion there
will be periods of revitalisation, fusion or extremism. In order to avoid the risk of
secular fundamentalism the task of postmodernity will be to tolerate and learn from
all differences whilst retaining and developing, no matter how hybrid, the perspective
of rationality. The spread of the English language and its associated cultural products
and values; the apparently unstoppable momentum of Enlightenment science and technology: these are the forces, contested and conflicted in a range of settings, which, in
international terms, are currently transforming schools and universities.

References
Braudel, F. (1985a). Civilisation and Capitalism fifteenth to eighteenth Century. Volume 3, The perspective
of the world. London: Collins.
Braudel, F. (1985b). Civilisation and Capitalism fifteenth to eighteenth Century. Volume 1, The structure of
everyday life. London: Fontana.
Braudel, F. (1985c). Civilisation and Capitalism fifteenth to eighteenth Century. Volume 2, The wheels of
commerce. London: Collins.
Braudel, F. (1989). The identity of France. Volume 1, History and environment. London: Fontana.
Braudel, F. (1990). The identity of France.Volume 2, People and production. London: Fontana.
Braudel, F. (1992). The mediterranean and the mediterranean world in the age of Phillip II. London: Harper
Collins.
Brown, A. & Davis, N. (Eds). (2004). World yearbook of education 2004. Digital technology, communities
& education. Series edited by Coulby, D. & Jones, C. London: Routledge Falmer.
Burbules, N. C. & Torres, C. A. (Eds.) (2000). Globalisation and education: Critical perspectives. New
York/London: Routledge.
Burleigh, M. (2007). Sacred causes: Religion and politics from the European dictators to al-qaeda. London:
Harper Perennial.
Cairns, J., Lawton, D., & Gardner, R. (Eds.) (2001). The world yearbook 2001. Values, culture and education. Series edited by Coulby, D. & Jones, C. London: Kogan Page.
Coulby, D. (2000). Beyond the national curriculum: Curricular centralism and cultural diversity in Europe
and the USA. London/New York: Routledge Falmer.
Coulby, D., Cowen, R., & Jones, C. (Eds.) (2000). The world yearbook of education 2000: Education in
times of transition. Series edited by Coulby, D. & Jones, C. London: Kogan Page.
Coulby, D. & Jones, C. (1995). Postmodernity and European education systems: Centralist knowledge and
cultural diversity. Stoke on Trent: Trentham.
Coulby, D. & Zambeta, E. (Eds.) (2005). The world yearbook of education 2005: Education, globalisation
and nationalism. Series edited by Coulby, D. & Jones, C. London: Routledge Falmer.
Crane, D., Kawashima, N. & Kawasaki, K. (Eds.) (2002). Global culture: Media, arts, policy and globalisation. New York/London: Routledge.
Dawkins, R. (2007). The God delusion. London: Black Swan.
Duijzings, G. (2003). Religion and the politics of identity in Kosovo. London: Hurst & Company.
Fairbank, J. K. & Goldman, M. (1998). China a new history. Enlarged edition. Cambridge, MA/London:
Harvard University Press.
Fernandez-Armesto, F. (2001). Civilisations. London: Pan Books.
Fewsmith, J. (2001). China since Tianenmen: The politics of transition. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

--- [PDF Page 396 / Book Page 384] ---

384 Coulby
Fletcher, R. (2004). The cross and the crescent: The dramatic story of the earliest encounters between
Christians and Muslims. London: Penguin.
Hobsbawm, E. (1975). The age of revolution 1789–1848. London: Wiedenfeld & Nicholson.
Hume, D. (1993). An enquiry concerning human understanding. Indianapolis & Cambridge: Hackett.
Jameson, F. (1991), Postmodernism or the cultural logic of late capitalism. London: Verso.
Karakasidou, A. N. (1997). Fields of wheat, hills of blood: Passages to nationhood in Greek Macedonia.
Chicago & London: University of Chicago Press.
Klare, M. (2005). Blood and oil: The dangers and consequences of America’s growing petroleum dependency. London: Penguin.
Leirvik, O. (2004). Religious education, communal identity and national politics in the Muslim world.
British Journal of Religious Education, 26, 223–236.
Lyotard, J. F. (1984). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.
Massonnet, P. (2000). The new China: Money, sex and power. Trans. Taieb, H. Boston: Tuttle.
Mazower, M. (2001). The Balkans: From the end of Byzantium to the present day. London: Phoenix Press.
Micklethwait, J. & Wooldridge, A. (2005). The right nation: Why America is different. London: Penguin.
Nathan, A. J. & Gilley, B. (2003). China’s new rulers: The secret files. Second, Revised ed. New York: New
York Review of Books.
Paine, T. (1998). Rights of man, common sense and other political writings. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Roberts, J. A. G. (2003). The complete history of China. Stroud: Sutton.
Roberts, P. (2005). The end of oil: The decline of the petroleum economy and the rise of a new energy order.
London: Bloomsbury.
Sim, S. (2005). Fundamentalist world: The new dark age of dogma. Thriplow Cambridgeshire: Icon
Books.
Sloan, K. & Burnett, A. (Eds.) (2003). Enlightenment: Discovering the world in the eighteenth century.
London: The British Museum Press.
Soon-Yong, P. (2004). ‘Cultural politics and vocational religious education: The case of Turkey’. Comparative
Education. 40, 321–341.
Starr, J. B. (2001). Understanding China: A guide to China’s economy, history and political structure.
Second edn. London: Profile Books.
Stromquist, N. P. & Monkman, K. (Eds.) (2000). Globalisation and education: Integration and contestation
across cultures. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.
Studwell, J. (2003). The China dream: The elusive quest for the greatest untapped market on earth. London:
Profile books.
Taylor, M. (2005). ‘Two thirds oppose state aided faith schools’. The Guardian, 23.8.05, 1.
Terrill, R. (2003). The new Chinese Empire and what it means for the United States. Cambridge, MA: Basic
Books.
Victor, B. (2005), The last crusade: Religion and the politics of misdirection. London: Constable.
Xochellis, P. D. & Toloudi, F. I. (Eds.) (2001). The image of the “other”/neighbour in the school textbooks
of the Balkan countries. Athens: Tipothito – George Dardanos Publications.
Zambeta, E. (2000), Religion and national identity in Greek education. Intercultural Education, 11,
145–156.

