================================================================================
Chapter 26: Multicultural Education in a Global Context: Addressing The Varied Perspectives and Themes
Author(s): Carl A. Grant and Ayesha Khurshid
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 3: The National, The International, and The Global
Book Pages: pp. 403–415
PDF Pages: pp. 414–426 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 414 / Book Page 403] ---

26
MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION IN A GLOBAL
CONTEXT: ADDRESSING THE VARIED
PERSPECTIVES AND THEMES
Carl A. Grant and Ayesha Khurshid

We live in a global village shaped by technology that allows us to watch events unfurl in
real time even if they are occurring thousands of miles away. Economic market forces are
reshaping our world in many ways, changing how and where we live. Since the end of World
War II, there have been huge changes in maps of our physical world, as arbitrary political boundaries shift and change and nation states both arise and disappear. Demographic
maps continue to change and evolve, as population numbers increase and decrease due to
birthrates, war and political and economic emigration, and population characteristics such
as age, race, religion, socioeconomic status and ethnicity shift likewise.
As educators committed to multicultural education, we recognise the multiplicity of
identities and cultures that exist in our global village and we acknowledge that they are
often sources of conflict or foci for controversy. We believe that everyone should enjoy
fundamental freedoms for without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion; but
we acknowledge that basic human rights still do not exist in some parts of the world.
We also know that the very words we use to describe our goals and the tools we use to
achieve them remain contested terrain: multiculturalism and multicultural education
mean different things in different countries, and the impetuses for acknowledging and
advocating them often spring from very different sources.
In some countries, multicultural education is promoted as a means to help students
obtain skills for employment in the global society and to educate citizens to accept and
affirm human/cultural diversity. In other countries, the idea of multicultural education (and
multiculturalism) is seen as a way to address equality issues; and still in other countries
it receives a mixed acceptance or it is rejected for various reasons, including a perception
that it is a threat to national ‘solidarity’ (Kanpol & McLaren, 1995; Parekh, 2000).
The reasons why multicultural education has evolved, arrived or been accepted or
contested in countries vary. In some, it is a response to demographic changes created
by immigration, or it is related to the exclusion of indigenous groups (Bullivant, 1981;
Kivisto, 2002; Parekh, 2000). In other countries, it arose from the actions of marginalised groups to achieve equality and equity.
Multicultural education is often seen as a contested space where the issues of diversity,
power, oppression and resistance are shaped in the context of citizenship and by the
affects of globalisation. A comparative examination of multicultural education reveals
403
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 403–415.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 415 / Book Page 404] ---

404 Grant and Khurshid

a number of similar themes in different countries. However, a critical analysis of these
themes shows that they are multilayered and multifaceted constructs (Banks & Banks,
2004; Kivisto, 2002; May, 1999; Parekh, 2000). It is thus difficult to make sense out of
the meaning and impact of multicultural education without first closely examining the
historical and social context in which it is situated.
The goal of this chapter is to address the varied perspective and themes of multicultural education as they operate in different countries. We identify idiosyncrasies
of apparently homogenous themes in part to show that multicultural education is
not a simple concept (e.g. mainly about tolerance) but is complex, multilayered and
ever-evolving. In addition, we address the similarities in the struggles of students and
teachers for better educational opportunities. Our approach is to identity and juxtapose
themes and to discuss how governments, individuals, organisations and events influence attitudes and policies about multicultural education.
Much of the chapter is based on an analysis of the works of educators and researchers
from different countries that grew out of the International Symposium on Multicultural
Education: Theories and Practices, held in 1997 at National Taiwan Normal University.
This conference was then followed by a symposium at the American Education Research
Association (AERA) conference in 1998 and then compiled into a book, published in
2001, titled Global Constructions of Multicultural Education: Theories and Realities
edited by Carl A. Grant and Joy L. Lei. We analyse research on multicultural education from Australia, India, France, Argentina, Taiwan, northern Scandinavia, Brazil,
Pakistan, Canada, the United States, Spain, South Africa, Namibia, United Kingdom,
Latin America and Chile.
This chapter is informed by a critical and multicultural theoretical framework (Grant
& Sleeter, 1985; Sleeter & Bernal, 2004; Sleeter & Grant, 2007). The focus of the
chapter is primarily on the role of the government policy at the national level, rather
than groups, movements or organisations. This is so because national policies and
resources are a major influence on multicultural education, even in those countries that
function under a federalist system. That said we do discuss the struggle and influence
of teachers, students, parents and other social actors for multicultural education.
We will use the following organisation to address the varied perspectives and themes
of multicultural education as they operate in different countries: (1) multicultural education viewed as a problem rather than a goal or solution; (2) multicultural education and
the ‘other’; (3) inspiring events for and opposition to multicultural education; (4) the
focus of multicultural education in different countries; (5) implementing multicultural
education policies; (6) teachers’ roles and participation in multicultural education; and
(7) globalisation and multicultural education. By no means is this chapter intended to
be exhaustive, or even comprehensive. Rather, we hope that the analysis will inspire
increased attention to the subject and spur additional scholarly research and discussion.

Multicultural Education Viewed as a Problem
Multicultural education is considered a problem in most countries. It is often presented
as a social and financial burden on the citizens of a country because it is presented as a
tool for educating immigrant children, who have come with different cultural traditions

--- [PDF Page 416 / Book Page 405] ---

Multicultural Education in a Global Context 405

and languages (Glenn, 1996; Pitkanen et al., 2002; United State Accounting Office,
GAO, 2004). Australia and Canada are two countries where multicultural education
policies are connected to immigrants. In the United States, however, multicultural education is seen as a product of the 1960s Civil Rights Movements (Banks, 2004; Grant
& Ladson-Billings, 1999) and is therefore perceived as a new crusade against racism.
Nonetheless, multicultural education is often viewed as an educational frill in the United
States, and, as such is often underfunded or ignored when budgets are compiled.
In France multicultural is a non-problem problem. It is considered an antithesis of
the republican principles of equality, enlightenment and freedom. There is no policy on
multicultural education because France’s official assimilation policy requires everyone
to adopt and follow traditional French norms and ideology. France is a special case,
because while some other countries use assimilation ideology to guide their multicultural education policies, France is explicit in its argument that multiple identities must
melt into the French culture (Dussel, 2001; Glenn, 1996; Seijuq, 1997).

Multicultural Education and the ‘Other’
An important feature of multicultural education in some countries is a focus on marginalised groups that have been excluded from mainstream society because of their
race, ethnicity, birthplace and language (Kivisto, 2002; Moodley, 2004; Parekh, 2000).
Class is often considered along with these factors, whereas gender is often marginalised because of the ideology of the country.
There is an unstated or stated idea – depending on the country – that multicultural
education is about the Other; and the Other is most often a member of a racial/ethnic
minority, either from an indigenous group or part of an immigrant population. A striking example of this is the “othering” of the Sámi people. The Sami nation’s boundaries
overlap the national borders of Sweden, Norway and Finland. Sweden established separate schools for Sámi people to protect them from the ‘evils of civilisation’. Norway
and Finland, in contrast, established assimilation policies which allowed Sámi students
to attend mixed schools, but placed a ban on the use of Sámi language in schools. The
lumping together of people based on their cultural heritage or language into an artificially constructed Other ignores the multilayered and multifaceted diversity inherent
within and across the groups when developing multicultural education and constructing immigrant policies (Kivisto, 2002; Parekh, 2000).

Inspiring Events for and Opposition to Multicultural Education
The presence or absence of policies about multicultural education in any country
is inherently connected to historical events and social relationships in that country
(Seijuq, 1997). Such events and relationship may create top-down or bottom-up initiatives for multicultural education. In Australia, for example, issues over immigration,
including language and birthplace helped to bring about the creation and adoption
of multicultural policies (Smolicz & Secombe, 2003; Sturman, 1985). In the United
States, multicultural education grew out of bottom-up efforts. It is primarily a
product of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement for racial equality (Banks, 2004; Grant,

--- [PDF Page 417 / Book Page 406] ---

406 Grant and Khurshid

& Ladson-Billings, 1999). The bottom-up and top-down peculiarity reinforces the
importance of connecting the objectives and implementation of multicultural education to its origins.
Opposition to multicultural education is predicated upon different reasons and usually
comes from different groups of actors. In the United States, for instance, much of the
recent opposition comes from some people who believe that issues of equality were
resolved during the Civil Rights movements of the 1960s and 1970s that focused on
racial equality, gender equality and the acceptance of gays and lesbians in society. In
contrast, critical scholars believe that multicultural education is a weak approach to
effecting social justice such as eliminating the structural inequality they believe still
exists in the United States (Sleeter, 1995).
The opposition to multicultural education in France is at the official governmental
level. France does not see itself as a multicultural society, despite a significant presence
of minority populations. The basic premise of French nationhood is that there can be
no group affiliation more powerful than the nation. The official ideology considers
schools as a privileged place where the goals of equality can be achieved through
structures of centralisation and homogenisation (Dussel, 2001; Glenn, 1996, Seijuq,
1997). This ideology remained largely unchallenged until the veil affair when an
official policy introduced in 1994 distinguished and banned only hijabs as religious
symbol in schools. The debate over this issue was presented as a battle between universalism/democracy (‘France’) and integrism/fundamentalism (‘the Muslims and the
ghost of ‘Iran’) (Dussel, 2001; Giry, 2006).
Opponents to multicultural education in Argentina consider it a North American
discourse. However, the nature and content of this opposition is different from the
opposition in France. Opposition to multicultural education in Argentina has grassroots support and is led by working class students and teachers (Glenn, 1996; Dussel,
2001). This movement emerged as a result of the education reform supported by the
World Bank (Dussel, 2001). These reforms replaced the earlier idea of social equity
in schools with compensatory programmes that provided lunch snacks and special aid
to poor children. These compensatory programmes in Argentina differentiated students on the basis of their parents’ ability to obtain resources. These reforms not only
introduced competition amongst schools over scarce resources but also resulted in the
closing down of many schools because of insufficient funding. As a result, working
class teachers and students initiated an opposition movement to resist their expulsion
from schools (Dussel, 2001).

The Focus of Multicultural Education
Historical context, as we noted, plays a central role in defining the focus of multicultural education in any country as well as the focus on the Other. Yet, there seems
to be a somewhat common approach to multicultural education in many countries,
particularly Western countries. For example, multicultural education in the United
States and Australia has arisen from different circumstances. However, both countries
have approached the implementation of multicultural education in a similar fashion.

--- [PDF Page 418 / Book Page 407] ---

Multicultural Education in a Global Context 407

To illustrate this point, we have divided the history of multicultural education in different
countries into three broad categories or phases. These phases are not exhaustive in
reporting all that took place in an approach in every country, but they allow us to see
the general pattern and trend that has been followed in most of the countries.
First phase: The first phase includes using assimilation policies at schools, which
encourage and/or insist immigrant and minority group members adopt dominant
customs, habits and ways of thinking and acting. In most countries we examined, multicultural education is about the endorsement of these assimilation policies to control
ethnic and racial differences. Examples include students of colour adhering to white
middle-class teaching and learning ideologies in the United States and the banning of
Sami language in mixed schools in Finland and Norway. Assimilation policies in both
countries were ineffective in that they failed to eliminate racism and discrimination
against minority students. Nor did these policies improve the academic performance
of minority students.
Second phase: The second phase is marked by the adoption of weak multicultural
education practices such as the acknowledgement of minority groups’ signs and symbols of
culture and celebrating their culture with food fairs and festivals. Some reorganisation
of diversity curriculum is included in the curriculum and some teachers may espouse
a culturally relevant pedagogy, but most of these efforts are superficial (Sleeter &
Grant, 2007). This is especially so in Australia, United Kingdom, Canada and Chile
(Grant & Lei, 2001). The ideology guiding this phase is based on the idea that ethnic
and racial minorities have a legitimate culture that should be celebrated. An interesting
observation of this phrase is that some of the neo-liberals in the countries share the
belief – articulated in Gordon Allport’s contact theory – that contact with the Other
will counter issues of racism, prejudice, ethnocentrism and xenophobia.
Our assessment of this phrase is that official (and unofficial) multicultural education
policies in most countries including the United Kingdom, Chile, Canada and Australia
remain mainly at the level of acknowledging diverse cultures, but not affirming diversity and taking power into account. While the guiding ideology acknowledges that
ethnic and racial minorities have a legitimate culture, it still promotes assimilation,
and mainly advocates tolerance between and among groups. Carl E. James (2001),
for example, points out that policy makers in Canada see multicultural education as
merely ‘difference’ and they base educational policy on an idea of ‘cultural democracy’ that assumes that all the norms, traditions, institutions, laws and policies are
culturally neutral, and each and every citizen should be able to equally avail of them
without any barriers.
James goes on to argue that although multicultural education programmes include
instruction in languages other than English and French; the study of ‘foreign’ cultures,
heritage studies and literature of different groups, the policies and programmes neither
address nor acknowledge the dominance of Anglo-Celtic Canadians as an ethnoracial group and the construction of those of English and French heritage as the ‘real’
Canadians. In addition, he contends that within these policies the ‘cultural other’ is
constructed as exotic and the difference is made out to be ‘foreign’. These policies, he
asserts, overlook the issues of colonisation, power and resistance that shape the lives
and realities of the students in the classroom.

--- [PDF Page 419 / Book Page 408] ---

408 Grant and Khurshid

Third phase: The third phase within the multicultural education movement is marked
with tension between anti-racist/critical multiculturalism advocates and traditional multicultural education advocates. Critical multiculturalism advocates argue that traditional
multicultural education does not address structural inequality in schools and society
(Sleeter, 1995). Harry Tomlinson (2001) argues that traditional multiculturalism focuses
exclusively on culture and assumes that everyone starts on an equal base. He concludes
that these policies, despite good intentions, have put minority students like Black children
at a further disadvantage in the United Kingdom. A number of educators and researchers
from different countries present anti-racist/critical multiculturalism as an alternative to
traditional multicultural education. The anti-racist/critical multicultural perspective seeks
to provide students with a critical understanding of their social position and experiences as
structurally influenced by unequal social relations in school and society. This perspective
is strongly associated with the idea and possibility of social justice, equality and economic
democracy. It also identifies the challenges inherent in the notion of ‘difference’ as well
as the close relatedness of the concept of difference with capitalist exploitation, profit and
individual gains. Thus anti-racist/critical multiculturalism articulates that it is possible
to examine critically the issues of power and racism while supporting the cultural activities. The tensions within the multicultural education movement are reflected in the debate
around this issue in South Africa. Jeremy Sarkin (2001) explains:
The Black Consciousness movement endorses the anti-racist approach by arguing
that multicultural education promotes differences by thinking about people and
culture in specific ways instead of creating national unity in the post-apartheid
South Africa. They assert that culture cannot form the foundation of education
policy since it has been distorted by racism and capitalism. On the other hand,
advocates for the multicultural education perspective argue that multiculturalism
arose out of the struggles of people to have equal and desegregated schools. They
also believe that multicultural education can lead to national reconciliation through
implementing a curriculum, which values diversity, tolerance and appreciation of
cultural differences. This approach, they believe, can help students to manage cultural differences productively without resorting to violence or isolationism.
Joy Lei and Carl Grant (2001) define the tensions within the United States multicultural
education movement in terms of the goals of equity and equality. The equity perspective
advocates an active fight to resolve the racial crisis and other forms of oppression in the
United States, whereas the equality perspective focuses on recognising and valuing various cultures and devotes less attention to race, racism and other forms of oppression.
An additional feature of the third phase calls attention not only to the debate around
diverse approaches to multicultural education, but also to the gaps between theoretical
conceptions and practical implementation of multicultural education. Lei and Grant argue
that multicultural education is much more difficult to implement than to define. Moreover,
they contend it is easier to espouse the equality perspective by committing to implementing equal and fair representation of people of colour, women and people with disabilities
than to espouse the equity perspective because the latter demands making substantial
policy and implementation changes in the entire field of education, in order to eliminate
racist, sexist, Eurocentric, classist, heterosexist and able-ist policies and practices.

--- [PDF Page 420 / Book Page 409] ---

Multicultural Education in a Global Context 409

This argument leads to the next section, which outlines the issues related to the
implementation of multicultural education policies, which often focuses on the equality perspective. We report that the mere presence of a multicultural education policy
cannot ensure a positive result on behalf of equity and social justice.

Implementing Multicultural Education Policy
Both the introduction and implementation of multicultural education have faced
challenges in most, if not all, countries. Some of the challenges are pertinent to
the exclusive focus on multicultural education, e.g., the Aboriginal population in
Canada considers the multicultural education policy irrelevant to them since this
policy makes no reference to their language or culture. However, there are also a
number of other implementation challenges, such as dualisation of schools as well
as a lack of structural support (e.g. funding) at schools to carry out multicultural
education policies.
Dualisation of schools: Sveta Dave Chakravarty (2001) argues that the main objective of multicultural education in India is to bring about an effective education, which
is accessible to all who attend the common school system. Although the constitution
of India provides for protection of different minority groups, the educational system of
India continues to perpetuate inequities which have a long history in the country. The
centuries-old caste system, which confined education to people from higher castes,
and the British colonial system, which encouraged only a small segment of society
to acquire education, are still in place. India has a multi-tiered educational system:
private schools, English medium school and public schools.
Mainly children from the privileged section of the society attend the private schools
or the English medium schools, where they are prepared for elite jobs in society.
Children from the most disadvantaged sections of the society are only allowed to attend
public schools, where they are trained to memorise and recall information instead of
analysing and critiquing information (Chakravarty, 2001; Sinha, 1997).
Chakravarty (2001) contends that although the Indian government has taken some
important initiatives to bring about equal access to education, most of these initiatives
fail because of bad management and/or the way the centralised bureaucratic system
operates. Policies are implemented with an assumption that students across the country will have uniform levels of achievement if the same content is delivered in the same
way. One initiative by the government includes expanding the number of primary and
secondary schools and increasing the enrolment rate. Another initiative is the government reserve seats for students from marginalised groups in higher education institutions and in the elite civil services. These initiatives, and others, however, have not
resolved the problems that the many students from marginalised groups face regarding access to high-quality primary education as well as entrance into and completing
higher education. Chakravarty argues that factors such as high dropout rate and the
Indian multi-tiered educational system are contributing to the school problem in India.
In short, she argues that despite the presence of affirmative action policies at the higher
education level, the education system has largely been unsuccessful is ensuring equal
access to all sections of the society. The main goal of multicultural education in India,

--- [PDF Page 421 / Book Page 410] ---

410 Grant and Khurshid

Chakravarty believes, should not only be to attract and retain children from all backgrounds but also to provide them quality education.
Carlos Alberto Torres (2001) presents a similar case for Latin America. Torres
argues that schools prepare two groups of citizens. The first group consists of students
who are privileged in that they may exercise their political and social rights not only
through voting but also through the networks of power. These students often come
from privileged sections of society. The second group is students who are considered
‘dispensable’. This group faces political isolation, fragmentation and economic disparity. They are citizens who often come from marginalised backgrounds; and some of
their marginalisation comes from the way they are constructed in media. The neo-liberal
thinking that people are free to exercise their right of representation through voting,
and thereby have gained equality in schools and other social institutions is refuted
by the striking disparities in not only the quality of education that these two groups
receive, but also their educational outcome. The gender, racial and class hierarchies
embedded in the social and political structures do not allow the ‘dispensable’ citizens
to use education to improve their social and political position in the society.
In South Africa according to Sarkin (2001) the 1994 post-apartheid legislation ended
the official segregation of schools and promised to provide free and compulsory education for everyone in order that they might be able to overcome past racial inequality in
schools and society. However, this legislation has yet to be successfully implemented,
since it is only the White schools that have been integrated. Black schools still face
issues of overcrowding, under-qualified teaching staff and inadequate funding.

Structural Support to Implement Multicultural Education Policies
There are a number of countries that officially acknowledge the importance of introducing policies and programmes to support the academic and social success of students
from marginalised sections. However, gaps often exist between official education
policy, which espouse the need of multicultural education, and the procedures and
practices within schools. This is sometimes the result of lack of or minimal government enforcement of policies.
The United Kingdom presents an example where the issues associated with racial
inequality are given some attention in curriculum, but issues of racial inequality are
not comprehensively addressed in the overall educational reform programme because,
in part, the education authority does little to enforce policies and practices that directly
deal with racial equality. Instead, sometimes education authorities offer up programmes
that they argue will better prepare students to get jobs, leaving aside attention to racial
inequalities. Harry Tomlinson (2001) argues that many of the educational reform that
advocated forging relationships with community and parents, in practice diverted
attention from race issues by introducing new curriculum and national assessment procedures, local management of schools and open enrolment. He contends that, despite
an explicit acknowledgement of multicultural education, these reform efforts did not
create structural support to address and resolve the issues of racial inequality.
Germany, Italy and Switzerland are some of the other European countries that support the right of racial and ethnic minorities to retain their culture and language in

--- [PDF Page 422 / Book Page 411] ---

Multicultural Education in a Global Context 411

principle, but have not introduced effective programmes, enforcement mechanisms to
translate educational policies into a practice, or encouraged teachers to support multicultural education. Cristina Alleman-Ghionda (2001) argues that a gap exists between
the official pronouncement of support for minority rights and the programmes and practices in schools which instead adhere to the principles assimilation. Alleman-Ghionda
contends that a challenge to the implementation of multicultural/intercultural policies
has to do with convincing teachers to take recommendations for multicultural education
seriously. She argues that it is not possible to translate official policy into practice without the consent and active participation of teachers. Further, Alleman-Ghionda contends multicultural and/or intercultural policies have not been successful in challenging
the influence of the mainstream idea of ‘one region, one culture, one language’.

Multicultural Education: Teachers’ Role and Participation
The preparation and participation of teachers are critical dimensions of multicultural
education. Education scholars argue that teacher preparation is key to multicultural
education as well as the key to working with students who come from diverse sociocultural, racial and ethnic minority groups (Cochran-Smith, 1991;Grant & Gillette,
2006; Grant & Sleeter, 2007; Ladson-Billings, 2000; Nieto, 2000; Sleeter, 2001).
These scholars assert that teacher preparation should engage in critical pedagogy that
should prepare teachers to build on the cultural difference of students, as well as teach
them how to develop and establish positive relationships between teachers, parents and
other community members.
In addition, these scholars presently contend that most teacher education programmes do not prepare teachers to be critical educators. Miguel Santos-Rego and
Servando Perez-Dominguez (2001) argue that teacher preparation programmes in
Spain are isolated and fragmented because of a lack of specific regulations. They contend that universities are given self-rule to prepare teachers according to their economic autonomy. By this, Miguel Santos-Rego and Servando Perez-Dominguez mean
that if the university has funds available to introduce multicultural education and has
professors who are willing to work in the area of multicultural education, they may
proceed. If not, they cannot proceed.
Teachers as individuals and as a group do not have the power (and have not shown
the desire to) to demand staff development in multicultural education. The limited
collective participation of teachers in policy making becomes a significant factor in
their lack of willingness to implement multicultural education programmes (LadsonBillings, 2000). In Brazil, where the official ideology is ‘racial democracy’, the school
curriculum neither acknowledges the diversity of racial groups, nor the existence of
racial inequalities in the society. Here, although there is racial prejudice and discrimination in the public schools, teachers refuse to admit that they notice the race of their
students. However, schools and teachers contend that Dark and Black students should
‘whiten’ themselves in order to be successful at schools (Hypolito, 2001).
In Argentina, teachers have spearheaded a movement which opposes multicultural
education and describes it as ‘a North American discourse’. These teachers, however,

--- [PDF Page 423 / Book Page 412] ---

412 Grant and Khurshid

it should be noted oppose educational reforms that push students and teachers out of
schools, close schools because of lack of funding and question the goals and curricula
of schools that receive support from the World Bank. The premise for this movement
is that current educational reforms have replaced the idea of social equity with differentiating compensatory programmes. In addition, the teachers and students are resisting neo-liberal policies that support the privatisation of schools and the reduction of
schools in the public sector.

Globalisation and Multicultural Education
Educational reforms in a number of countries have turned schools into private enterprises in the name of market competition (Edwards & Usher, 2000). Many countries
have a growing concern about job loss due to international market competition and
focus on the need to prepare students for a global market-based economy. The impact
of globalisation has been particularly devastating for low-income people in ‘third
world’ countries. For example, in Pakistan the education system was privatised in
hopes of producing students with skills needed in the global economy. This privatisation, however, has created even more income disparity between the poor and the rich
than existed before it was enacted.
This is because, although the education system in the past was not particularly successful in serving the marginalised sections of the society, the state-subsidised schooling at all levels did provide some opportunities to people from low-income groups to
enter into professional colleges; and the state-run higher education institutions also
provided quota for students from different sections of the society. However, these provisions and other opportunities are being completely wiped out in the name of educational reforms (Khurshid, 2007).
Tomlinson (2001) argues that the marketisation of schools in the United Kingdom resulted
in a dual process of taking the power from schools and placing it in the hands of parents at
the local level, who often are more interested in examination results than social issues.
Cahill (2001) argues that pro-globalisation educational policies in Australia have been
marked by a popular support for racialised policies towards immigrants and indigenous
groups. He explains that these racialised policies are supported by the downwardly
mobile groups in both urban and rural contexts as well as by the middle-class. This is
because people of the urban and rural working class who lost jobs because of the effects
of globalisation do not want to compete with immigrant and indigenous people for
existing jobs. The middle-class supports these racialised policies because they fear losing their jobs to immigrants. Cahill points out that a number of these racialised policies
have cut services to immigrants and have also negatively affected multicultural education in schools including downgrading the focus on ESL in the education system.
As we look across the different countries, it is clear that globalisation has, to some
extent, resulted in further marginalisation of many minority students in schools. The
reduced role of the national governments in education due to such reform efforts
as privatisation of schools has not only led to limited support for the disadvantaged
groups, but has further jeopardised the well-being of the group. In addition, the effects

--- [PDF Page 424 / Book Page 413] ---

Multicultural Education in a Global Context 413

of globalisation have increased competition over scarce resources, which has in some
cases resulted in the rise of anti-immigrant movements.

Conclusion
This chapter is a reading and discussion of the research on multicultural education in
different nation states. We have used this literature to identify the common themes. We
conclude that multicultural education in the global context is multifaceted and often
constructed on an unequal landscape where power relations are very active. There are
a number of themes that are common to different countries, such as using multicultural
education to support assimilation policy. In addition, we conclude that it is the power
of the people who engage in the struggles for equity and equality that has pushed
establishments in different countries to introduce and implement multicultural education policies. At the same time, we argue, that, based on the literature reporting on
multicultural education, much remains to be done if the goals of equality and equity
are to be accomplished.
Finally, it is clear that while it is advantageous to learn from the history and experiences of the multicultural education movements in different countries, it is, nevertheless a dangerous practice to adopt and transport a model of multicultural education
from one country to another. That said, the recognition and analysis of similar themes
can serve to help build international connections between scholars and educators
throughout our global village.

References
Alleman-Ghionda, C. (2001). Sociocultural and linguistic diversity, educational theory, and the consequences for teacher education: A comparative perspective. In Carl A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global
constructions of multicultural education: Theories and realities (pp.1–26). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Banks, J. (2004). Multicultural education: Historical development, dimensions, and practice. In James A.
Banks & Cheery A. McGee Banks (Eds.), Handbook of research on multicultural education (pp. 3–19).
San Francisco: Wiley.
Banks, J. A. & Banks, C. A. (Eds.). (2004). Handbook of research on multicultural education. San Francisco:
Wiley.
Bullivant, B. (1981). The pluralist dilemma in education. Sydney: George Allen & Unwin.
Cahill, D. (2001). The rise and fall of multicultural education in the Australian schooling system. In Carl
A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and realities
(pp. 27–60). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Chakravarty, S. D. (2001). Multicultural education in India. In Carl A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and realities (pp. 61–92). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cochran-Smith, M. (1991). Learning to teach against the grain. Harvard Educational Review, 51(3),
279–310.
Dussel, I. (2001). What can multiculturalism tell us about difference? The reception of multicultural discourses in France and Argentina. In Carl A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and realities (pp. 93–114). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Edwards, R. & Usher, R. (2000). Globalisation and pedagogy: Space, place and identity. London:
Routledge.

--- [PDF Page 425 / Book Page 414] ---

414 Grant and Khurshid
Glenn, C. (1996). Educating immigrant children: School and language minorities in twelve nations. New
York: Garland Publishing.
Giry, S. (2006). France and its Muslims. Foreign Affairs. September/October. Retrieved July 18, 2007. http://
www.foreignaffairs.org/20060901faessay85508/stephanie-giry/france-and-it.
Grant, C. A. & Gillette M. (2006). Learning to teacher everyone’s children: Equity, empowerment, and
education that is multicultural. Belmont, CA: Thompson.
Grant, C. A. & Joy L. Lei (Eds.) (2001), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and
realities (pp. 135–158). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Grant, C. A. & Ladson-Billings, G. (1999). Introduction, dictionary of multicultural education. Phoenix:
Oryx.
Grant, C. A. & Sleeter, C. E. (1985). The literature on multicultural education: Review and analysis.
Education Review, 37(2), 97–118.
Grant C. A. & Sleeter, C. E. (1995). Turning on Learning: Five approaches for multicultural teaching plans
for race, class, gender and disability (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Grant, C. A. & Sleeter, C. E. (2007). Turning on Learning: Five Apploaches for Multicultural Teaching Plan
for Race, Clars, Gender and Disability. 4th Edition. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Hypolito, A. M. (2001). Multiracial reality, white data: The hidden relations of the racial democracy and
education in Brazil. In Carl A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and realities (pp.159–174). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
James, C. E. (2001). Multiculturalism, diversity, and education in the Canadian context: The search for an
inclusive pedagogy. In Carl A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and realities (pp.175–204). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kanpol, B. & McLaren P. (1995). Critical multiculturalism: Uncommon voices in a common struggle.
Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
Khurshid, A. (2007). Unpublished paper. Madison, WI: University Wisconsin Madison.
Kivisto, P. (2002). Multiculturalism in a Global Society. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing.
Ladson-Billings, G. (2000). Fighting for our lives: Preparing teachers to teach African American students.
Journal of Teacher Education, 51(3), 206–214.
Lei, J. L. & Grant, C. A. (2001). Multicultural education in the United States: A case of paradoxical equality. In Carl A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and
realities (pp. 205–238). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
May, S. (1999). Critical multiculturalism. London: Falmer.
Moodley, K. A. (2004). Challenges for post-apartheid South Africa: Decolonizing education. In James A.
Banks & Cheery A. McGee Banks (Eds.), Handbook of research on multicultural education (pp. 1027–
1040). San Francisco: Wiley.
Nieto, S. (2000). Placing equity front and center: Some thoughts on the future of public education. Equity
and Excellence in Education, 34(1), 6–15.
Parekh, B. (2000). Rethinking multiculturalism: Cultural diversity and political theory. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Pitkanen, P., Kalekin-Fishman, & Verman, G. K. (Eds.). (2002). Education and immigration: Settlement
policies and current challenges. London/New York: Routledge Falmer.
Santos-Rego, M A. & Perez-Dominguez, S. (2001). Intercultural education in the European Union: The
Spanish case. In Carl A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education:
Theories and realities (pp. 239–270). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sarkin, J. (2001). Post-apartheid education in South Africa: Toward multiculturalism or anti-racism. In Carl
A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and realities
(pp. 271–290). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Seijuq, A. (1997). Cultural conflicts: North African immigrants in France. The International Journal of
Peace Studies, 2. Retrieved July 12. http://www.gmu.edu/academic/ijps/vol2_2/seljuq.htm
Sinha, R. P. (1997). Inequality in Indian education. New Delhi: Vakas.
Sleeter, C. E. (1995). An analysis of the critiques of multicultural education. In James A. Banks & Cheery
A. McGee Banks (Eds.), Handbook of research on multicultural education, 1st ed. (pp. 81–96). New
York: Macmillian.

--- [PDF Page 426 / Book Page 415] ---

Multicultural Education in a Global Context 415
Sleeter, C. E. (2001). Preparing teachers for culturally diverse school: Research and the overwhelming presence of Whiteness. Journal of Teacher Education, 52(2), 94–106.
Sleeter, C. E. & Bernal, D. D. (2004). Critical pedagogy, critical race theory, and antiracist education:
Implication for multicultural education. In James A. Banks & Cheery A. McGee Banks (Eds.), Handbook
of research on multicultural education (pp. 240–238). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sleeter, C. E. & Grant, C. A. (2007). Making choices for multicultural education. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Smolicz, J. J. & Secombe, M. J. (2003). Assimilation or pluralism? Changing policies for minority languages
education in Australia. Language Policy, 2(1), April, 3–25.
Sturman, A. (1985). Immigrant Australians and education: A review of research. Australian Education
Review Number 22. Victoria: The Australian Council for Educational Research.
Tomlinson, H. (2001). International perspectives in Education: The response of the mother country. In Carl
A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories and realities
(pp. 317–336). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Torres, C. A. (2001). Education, social class, and dual citizenship: The travails of multiculturalism in Latin
America. In Carl A. Grant & Joy L. Lei (Eds.), Global constructions of multicultural education: Theories
and realities (pp. 337–354). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
United State Accounting Office, GAO. (2004). Illegal alien schoolchildren: Issues in estimating state-bystate cost. Retrieved July 24. http:wwwgao.gov/new.items/do4733.pdf

