================================================================================
Chapter 27: International Development Education
Author(s): Nancy Kendall
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 3: The National, The International, and The Global
Book Pages: pp. 417–435
PDF Pages: pp. 427–445 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 427 / Book Page 417] ---

27
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION
Nancy Kendall

From moralizing calls for its end (Esteva, 1992), to critiques of its discourses and practices (Samoff, 1999), to recent arguments for the potential necessity of its continuance
(Ferguson, 2002), the effects and goodness of the field of international development
(education) has been debated for decades. Despite these critiques, it has witnessed a
renaissance in the past 15 years. This chapter describes the history of the field of international development education, examines current practices and trends, and discusses
emerging questions for the field. It concludes that there are both legitimate concerns
about the effects of international development education practices and reason for cautious optimism about some current practices, particularly those that take account of
past critiques and attempt to restructure the relations and activities undertaken in the
name of development education. International development education continues, however, to rely primarily on out-of-date discourses, rationales for its existence, and ways
of dividing up the world; without addressing these issues in an inclusive manner, international development education funding, policies, and programming will rarely support positive change, will in some cases make things worse, and will lose its relevance
and widespread support. Before continuing, I briefly discuss the terms “international,”
“development,” and “education”.

Development
The vocabulary and concepts employed in the international development arena are
highly contested, as they reflect, represent, and some would argue (re)create underlying
tensions concerning power and authority. The first arena of dispute is the word “development” itself, which, as Grillo and Stirrat (1997) note, is often placed in quotations by
researchers to highlight various problematics. International development is generally
understood to encompass goodwill efforts by richer (industrialzed, “modern”) states
to improve the lives of people in poorer (agrarian, “backwards,” or “primitive”) states.
This general definition draws on a number of historically Western concepts (linear
progress, the nation-state, individualism, state-sponsored mass schooling) that form
the core concerns of many critiques, such as the continued assumption that there is a
unitary and linear path of “development” upon which all people and states must tread
in order to enjoy the good life (Kothari, 2005). For other critics, the central problematic
is the simultaneous creation of under- or undeveloped people and places through the
417
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 417–435.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 428 / Book Page 418] ---

418 Kendall

construction of developed ones (Escobar, 1995). Still others focus on the asymmetrical
relations of power and authority created through development discourses and practices
(Samoff, 1999).
Many of these critiques highlight a central paradox: the concept of international
development seems superficially unimpeachable. In practice, however, international
development efforts are judged failures for many reasons and with great consistency.
Despite this, they continue to serve as the primary official global approach to addressing issues of equity, progress, and our connections as fellow humans. How are we to
understand what it is, then, that development discourses, practices, and resources do to
people and places around the world? How are we to judge whether they help or hinder?
As Rist (1997: 1) states:
[T]he strength of ‘development’ discourse comes of its power to seduce, in every
sense of the term. . . . How could one possibly resist the idea that there is a way
of eliminating the poverty by which one is so troubled? How dare one think, at
the same time, that the cure might worsen the ill which one wishes to combat?
. . . How are we to explain the whole phenomenon, which mobilizes not only the
hopes of millions but also sizeable financial resources, while appearing to recede
like the horizon just as you think you are approaching it?
The history of the concept of “development” is a long one (Fagerlind & Saha, 1989);
it has been used to indicate the current set of activities, ideas, and relationships termed
“international development” for only about the past 60 years. The current definition
crystallized in the post-World War II era as a group of so-called modern states (primarily Western European states and the United States, and later Canada and Japan) created institutions (such as the International Development Association and UNESCO),
ideational statements (such as the UN Declaration on Human Rights), and professional venues and organizations (such as the UNESCO regional education meetings
and the US-based Comparative Education Society) that supported an array of activities
designed to learn about, support, and improve life, including through education, in socalled developing states.
The history of this term is central to understanding its current use. Perhaps the
most important influences on current conceptualizations of international development
(education) stem from the nineteenth century Enlightenment period and the takenfor-granted goodness of particular models of modernity, civilization, Enlightenment,
truth, progress, and schooling that developed in Europe and the United States during
this time (Meyer et al., 1977; Meyer, 2000). These models continue to heavily influence conceptualizations of international development and development education,
from the actors and institutions considered legitimate (e.g. states), to the concepts
of comparison and ranking that drive conceptualizations of neediness and its causes
(Chabbott, 2003; Manzo, 1991).
Rist’s The history of development: From Western origins to global faith (1997)
provides an excellent overview of historical and current development paradigms and
points to some important considerations about current definitions. First, most are
self-referential—that is, they depend upon the definition of progress, justice, desired

--- [PDF Page 429 / Book Page 419] ---

International Development Education 419

lifestyle, and forth held by the individual—and thus are problematic as a shared construct (Rist, 1997). Poerksen’s (1985) notion of “plastic” words may be of great utility
in understanding the power and weaknesses of current definitions of development.
Plastic words are those that began as words with distinct meanings in common parlance, that were then expanded to be used in more generalized scientific discourse, and
finally were taken up in general and technocratic language in such a manner that their
definition is almost infinitely malleable by individual speakers. “Development” is such
a word, and its strengths and weaknesses lie at least in part in the ability of individuals
and organizations to fill it with their desired meanings.
Second, which definitions of development education come to dominate is a reflection not of a singular reality, but instead of the relations of power and authority that
shape the voices heard and their effect on the development imaginary. Current definitions generally begin with the ethical question of how to make sense of, and correct,
inequalities in wealth and life opportunities around the world and the suffering that is
experienced by the world’s poorest people and states. International development aid,
focused on poverty reduction, is the answer of the world’s rich to this problem (Collier
& Dollar, 2000). What, though, constitutes “poverty,” acceptable levels of inequality, or acceptable levels of development aid? These are heavily debated constructs for
which the world’s richest usually set the terms of engagement; so, for example, the
current definition of extreme poverty used by most international development organizations is people living on less than US$1 a day, and the OECD’s member states have
set the goal of having each state provide 0.7% of their annual budget for international
development funding.
Third, the definitions used by most of the powerful actors and institutions in the
international development arena center economistic discourses and indicators of
progress, survival, equity, and justice. Development, poverty, and equity are still
generally measured first and foremost in economic terms (e.g., growth in GDP per
capita; growth in the creation of formal labor market jobs; access to “modern”
resources such as hospitals or electricity). The centrality of economic imaginaries
and rationales (from education as human capital development to people as “homo
economicus”) and the discipline of economics in the field of international development is an important factor in explaining why alternative development imaginaries
(political, cultural, social, religious, etc.) have failed to gain much traction in the
international development arena (Easton & Klees, 1992). Despite the historical
role of education systems as (re)producers of political, cultural, and social relations and generational transmissions, not only of productive laborers, this is true
even in the development education arena. Early works such as Schultz’s 1953 The
Economic Value of Education and Balogh’s 1966 The Economics of Poverty, and
later rate-of-return studies (e.g., Psacharopoulos, 1985) helped reposition education in relation to models of economic growth and development (Schultz, 1953;
Balogh, 1966).
Although there have been challenges to the centrality of economistic measures
of development (e.g., Bhutan’s Gross Happiness Index, which purports to present
an alternate model of human development rooted in Buddhist philosophy), these
alternatives have seldom mounted significant challenges to the presuppositions

--- [PDF Page 430 / Book Page 420] ---

420 Kendall

embedded in mainstream development definitions. They have not addressed the
issue of defining development by defining its desired outcomes (thus ignoring the
problematic “black box” of development practices and relations), nor the significant issue that the process by which alternate models and measures of development have been created has not generally significantly expand the circle of people
and institutions that have power to determine what alternative measures of development might be.
The relative stability of the term “development” thus reflects continued general
agreement amongst powerful actors and institutions around the world on the shape and
scope of the international development arena:
• On the nineteenth century model of modernity that underlies it (Manzo, 1991)
• On the centrality of economistic models in which “homo economicus,” the state,
and more recently the market are the central actors in educational rationales and
processes (Resnik, 2006)
• On what the state’s educational endeavor should constitute (mass school-based
primary education, not initiation ceremonies) (United Nations, 2005)
• On the types of actors and institutions involved in the contemporary field (e.g.,
states and non-governmental organizations) (Federal Ministry for Economic
Cooperation and Development, 2007)
• On the types of exchanges of money, goods, services, and other resources that
constitute valid “development” support (loans, grants, products, technical assistance to less affluent governments in exchange for adopting certain conditionalities
and hiring and buying practices that favor more affluent states, but not “corrupt”
practices such as bribes to public and private institutions) (Walliser, 2004)
More serious debate and destabilization has occurred in the terms used to describe
relations among actors and institutions in the development arena. In much of the
official literature produced by affluent bilateral (USAID, DfID, CIDA, NORRAD,
JICA, and GTZ) and multilateral (the UN, the World Bank, the IMF, and the WTO)
organizations, these organizations are referred to as “donors” of “foreign aid” or
“overseas development assistance.” The states receiving development funds are
referred to as “less developed,” “underdeveloped,” or “developing” states and “aid
recipients.” There have been a number of thoughtful and serious critiques of these
terms, which create the appearance that particular states and organizations (largely
European states, the United States, and Japan) are donating resources to less affluent and more needy recipient states. Perhaps the simplest critique is that the vast
majority of international foreign aid funding returns directly to the “donating”
state. For example, a great deal of aid from countries is tied aid—that is, the money
must be used by recipient governments to purchase “donor” government products.
So, for example, the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) provides resources for a Ministry of Education to print and distribute textbooks to
all government-sponsored schools in a country, but the printing must be done by
a Canadian publisher.
More seriously, the concept of “donation” usually connotes one who gives or contributes to a charitable cause. In contrast, many argue that international development

--- [PDF Page 431 / Book Page 421] ---

International Development Education 421

funding is more often given for geopolitical gain, to maintain or foster neocolonial
relations, or to spend out so-called donor organizations’ funds without regards to
the needs of the so-called recipient (Tilak, 1988; Schraeder et al., 1998; Lumsdaine,
1993). Likewise, there is extensive evidence (Cornia et al., 1987; Sparr, 1994) of the
damage to poor populations, or at a minimum the lack of “development,” that has
resulted from many poor states floating their currencies, reconceptualizing education as a tradable commodity, privatizing industries such as government printing
presses, and shrinking civil service positions and salaries (Alderman et al., 1992);
yet these remain popular neoliberal international development education conditionalities and reforms.
Still another critique of the donor/recipient discourse has arisen in response to evidence that the end result of many reforms aimed at developing so-called recipient
states has been to open up their economies to greater exploitation by “donors” by, for
example, lowering the price of the goods they export or the salaries that they can pay
(Sagasti & Alcalde, 1999; Rankin, 2001). This creates a situation in which the socalled donor states become recipients of people, goods, and other resources from the
so-called recipient states. In this manner, the true recipients are the states and institutions that supposedly “donate” aid.
Lastly, for development funding given as loans instead of grants, “donor” states
and “aid” organizations have made more money in interest from “recipient” states
than those states have received in initial capital (Jubilee USA Network, 2005). In this
sense, again, the traditional understandings of the words “donor” and “recipient” may
be contrary to, or certainly not straightforwardly related to, common usage.
Despite these cogent arguments that destabilize the donor/recipient binary
assumed in international development relations and discourse, these terms remain
in general use, partly because they have been institutionalized in common parlance,
partly because they reflect the development imaginary that is favored by the most
powerful actors and institutions in the arena, and partly because other terms put
forward as alternatives (North/South, industrialized/industrializing, rich/poor) are
generally themselves open to similar contestation. For example, the geographic
binary North/South can be useful in discussing which states and non-governmental
organizations are generally poorer and which are richer in the world. There are,
however, important inaccuracies in the geographical divide, such as Australia in the
“South,” the Caribbean in the “North,” and a growing number of states such as India
and Kuwait that now embody what would traditionally be considered aspects of both
“Northern” and “Southern” states. All of these binary labels, in fact, assume and fix
the focus of developmentalist debates on states at a time when divisions between
rich and poor, “North” and “South” are as great or greater within countries as across
them, thus concealing the issue of how inequality and poverty affect “Northern”
geographical spaces as well as “Southern,” and how people, groups, and development-like resources flow within and across state boundaries. In practice, then, no set
of binary terms can do justice to these complex relations and resource flows, yet the
terms remain in use as shorthand that may in fact reinscribe the central problematics
in the development arena.

--- [PDF Page 432 / Book Page 422] ---

422 Kendall

Education
In contrast to the plasticity and contestation of the term “development,” the “education” concept in use in the international development education arena has been generally fixed since the inception of the field, and has become more so over the past
15 years. Although other models of education have predominated throughout the
world’s history, it is possible to argue for a near-hegemonic understanding of and belief
in formal, Western-style, state-provided, mass schooling as constituting “education”
(for development) in the twenty-first century. This hegemonic conception has its roots
in the Prussian mass education system, which was adopted throughout Europe and
the United States over the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and was
promulgated by many ex-colonies in the post-independence period (Ramirez & Boli,
1987). This model of formal schooling became the focus of international development resources following the 1990 World Conference on Education for All (WCEFA);
has been inscribed in international development frameworks such as the Millennium
Development Goals; and drives the shape and scope of resources made available to
less affluent states through the international development education process.
This model of education, generally speaking, entails support for mass, standardized, state-provided, formal schooling that, in its appropriate form, includes children
learning (primarily from adults), about “high-stakes” academic subjects (reading,
writing, arithmetic, science), on a fixed schedule, in an indoor setting that includes
particular features (desks, chairs, chalkboards, written teaching and learning materials). As with models of international development, there is an imagined, linear
educational progression from informal, family-provided education concerning daily
tasks (such as survival skills learned by hunter-gatherer children from their parents),
through more formalized educational experiences organized by larger bodies (such
as initiation ceremonies or trade apprenticeship systems), to “modern” schooling
systems.
The international development model of education posits that mass, state-sponsored
schooling is: (1) central to the creation of a “modern” nation-state; (2) central to the
development of “modern” workers and families; and, thus (3) central to a state’s “modern”
economic growth and international acceptance. This general conceptualization of education and development has received critical attention since its inception, but has yet
to be significantly challenged.

International
As with “development” and “education,” the term “international” has historically taken
on a particular set of meanings in the international development education arena. The
concepts of development and of mass education described above rest on the centrality
of a particular model of the nation-state that arose in Europe in the eighteenth century
and now dominates maps and our imaginaries alike (Meyer, 2000; Ferguson, 2002). For
the purposes of this chapter, it is important only to note that the term “international”
traditionally refers to interstate affairs and relations. The majority of international

--- [PDF Page 433 / Book Page 423] ---

International Development Education 423

development resources continue to be directed to official state governments, although
there has been a shift since the late 1980s towards increased funding of non-governmental organizations (NGOs). In the post-World War II era, it was the sovereign state that
was given the right to control the natural and human resources within its boundaries,
and the responsibility to fulfil the universal rights (such as for education) of its citizens.
Thus, the state had both the right to inculcate its values in its citizens through education, and the responsibility to provide them with such basic services as were deemed
to be universal by the UN and its constituent state members. State boundaries around
the world reflect everything from wars, genocide, and colonial relations, to topographic
divides and historical compromises. The interest and capacity of various states to provide equal resources to all citizens varies just as much as the historical foundations of
mapped boundaries. Yet in the eyes of the global community, by the end of the 1960s,
most of the world had been divided into sovereign states, each regardless of its size,
resources, or propensities, now viewed as the equal of all other states.
As global economic, political, and social relations have shifted, so too has the utility
of understanding the world as constituted by sovereign states. From regional economic
organizations to intense internal divisions, from NGOs to transnational communities,
from rebel groups that control vast swathes of land to transnational investors that can
collapse national economies in days, from HIV to global climate change, the bodies
and forces that govern people’s daily actions and play a role in determining their opportunities for mobility, survival, and thriving differ in their shape, scope, and imaginaries
from 60 years ago. Nevertheless, with the exception of increased discussion about
the roles of NGOs and private organizations in educational provision (Archer, 1994;
Mundy & Murphy, 2001), the field of international development education has not
responded significantly to these changes. Current state divisions and international conceptions of state sovereignty fundamentally affect the ability of development efforts to
identify and address global, regional, and “local” inequities; however, without destabilizing some of the assumptions currently made about national versus cross- and transnational issues, many inequities conceptualized as state development issues cannot be
addressed by international development efforts (Ferguson, 2006).
Below, I review the history of the field of international development education since
the 1950s, paying particular attention to the actors and institutions involved in the
arena, changing ideas about what constitutes good development education practices,
and the critiques that have been levelled against these practices. As will be noted, there
is a certain cyclical and fickle nature to development discourse and practices: if an
idea, such as universal primary education, gains momentum, the momentum is likely
to be lost just as widespread agreement is reached, only to reappear a decade or two
later in a slightly revised form as the brand new panacea for the constant refrain that
development education. This cycle is likewise visible in education’s positioning in the
broader international development arena.

1950s and 1960s
In the 1950s and 1960s, international development actors posited that there was a
linear progression from hunter-gatherers through to “highly developed,” “modern”

--- [PDF Page 434 / Book Page 424] ---

424 Kendall

industrialized nation-states made up of productive workers (and intelligent, controlled
reproducers) that progressed and developed individually. The nation-state developed
through the cumulative effects of these individual activities. This conceptualization of
modernity and development relied heavily on models of linear progress and growth
stages, often drawn from the natural sciences. The model of the rational, developing
whose individual actions create a greater good drew from Enlightenment ideas and
classical economic theorists such as Adam Smith. Although there was important work
done during this period concerning social, political, psychological, and other forms of
development (see Adams, 1977 for a review), the general focus of the field came to rest
solidly on economic development as, depending on the author, either the absolute or the
proxy for all other forms of human and state development.
This early work laid the foundation for current mainstream conceptualizations of
international development. It argued that all states could achieve development if they
followed the path already trod upon by Western states—modernization through industrialization, urbanization, and population control. Within this framework, education
came to play a major role in state development models, as education was the primary
means to increase individual productivity. It should also be noted that development
education models, which had missionary roots in most poor states, were also seen as
central to “civilizing” non-white, non-Christian people.
The curricula of western schools inculcated a distaste for agrarian (and manual)
labor and fueled students’ desire to move to urban, “modern” spaces (Corby, 1981).
Schooling thus forwarded economic and sociocultural practices viewed as central to
development and modernization. Funding for international development education
reached its highest levels until the 2000s during the 1950s and 1960s, receiving up to
6–7% of all international development funding.
The burgeoning field of development economics laid out what remains the primary
rationale for development education: because state development occurs through the
aggregation of increased productivity on the part of its constituent members, the best way
to develop the state is to increase constituent members’ human capital, and thus productivity. In these models, education is purely functionalist, and education is a worthwhile
investment only to the extent that it translates into increased worker productivity (and
later into other easily quantified health, civic participation, and lifestyle outcomes such
as decreased fertility). Productivity was initially measured in terms of worker wages in
the formal labor sector, and so growth of the education sector only remained productive
as long as the labor market could absorb graduates. Over time, increased productivity
was measured in more diverse ways, such as by increased agricultural output.
This emphasis resulted in the 1950s and 1960s in a strong focus in international
development education on secondary and particularly tertiary education (Buchert,
1995), where the professionals needed for development and modernization (doctors,
economists, planners) were trained, as well as on planning for the “modern” labor
market. Bilateral organizations (such as GTZ and USAID), multilateral organizations
(such as UNESCO), and Foundations (such as Rockefeller and Carnegie) all played
significant roles in first sending people from poor and newly independent states for
training in Europe and in the United States, and later building secondary and tertiary
education institutions in poor and newly independent states.

--- [PDF Page 435 / Book Page 425] ---

International Development Education 425

In the newly independent states, the development education focus was also often
adopted by independence leaders, who emphasized the need for their country to staff
their own bureaucracies and professional institutions in order to be truly liberated.
Nonetheless, development education models focused on tertiary and secondary education sidelined the common pre-independence-era focus on addressing the inequities of
colonization through the massification of (early) educational opportunities. For example,
following independence in 1964 in Malawi, the new government bypassed pre-independence promises of education for all and spent the majority of the education budget
building the University of Malawi, the first tertiary institution in the new state. It received
international development support for this effort. In socialist states like Tanzania, the
focus of education development remained on mass primary education. Schooling was
still conceptualized as human productivity development, but it was the state’s, not the
market’s, responsibility to harness and plan for the use of this improved capacity.
The critiques of this approach diversified over the decades. Early critiques included
those that focused on conceptual flaws in the economic models being used to argue for
the “productivity” of education, such as Balogh’s (1964) scathing set-down of the economic models used to measure the effects of education; those that addressed fallacies
in the concept of linear progress and development; those that argued that educational
experiences were not all equal and models were needed to address the “black box” of
classroom practices and education processes; and those that expressed concerns that
development education practices were fostering neo-colonial relations.
By the late 1960s and early 1970s, critics were discussing the failure of development
education investment to lead to predicted economic growth in many poor states; were
increasingly questioning the nature of the relationships between so-called development
donors and recipients (Altbach, 1971); and drew on Marxist and dependency theories
to argue that one of the reasons for the “failure” of education to increase equity and
life chances was that the model of education promulgated by development education
experts was not a functionalist black box, but instead a system designed to reproduce
class (and other) inequalities (Carnoy, 1977).

1970s
By the 1970s, there was a countermovement amongst many of the states that were targets of international development funding. They argued for a focus on basic needs as
opposed to elite services and fought to center discussions of global and state inequality
in international development debates. There were new discussions about the role of
schooling in fostering neocolonial, as opposed to liberatory, relations (Keith, 1978).
And dependency theory provided a new framework through which to make sense of
relations among “developed” and “developing” states and to understand the failure of
development loans and grants to achieve their expected results (Carnoy, 1977; Altbach
& Kelly, 1978; Lewin & Little, 1984; Little, 2000).
In the education arena, a rich discussion developed about how to improve the relevance of formal education systems in poor people’s lives, as did interesting work on
and critiques of non-formal and adult education as alternatives to formal education
models (Sheffield, 1972). There were new demands for international support for basic

--- [PDF Page 436 / Book Page 426] ---

426 Kendall

education for all (now discussed as a basic need), paralleled by a body of economic
studies that purported to find improved state returns on investments in primary, as
opposed to secondary or tertiary, education. At the same time, critics were pointing
out that economic models used to understand the effects of development and education
were not able to “count” its effects on women or their work (Kelly & Elliott, 1982),
agricultural work, or indeed the informal economy.
At the same time, educational investment by states and international development
organisations generally still targeted secondary or higher education, and development
resources for education began to fall as a growing pessimism concerning the inability
of the past decades’ educational expansion to improve economic growth grew (Weiler,
1978). This trend of disinvestment in and growing cynicism about formal education
expanded when the oil crisis hit. As “developed” economies wobbled, international
debts were called in and resources for new loans slowed, causing crises in newly independent and poorer states with high debt loads (Frieden, 1992). This crisis effectively
silenced the development target states’ countermovement.

1980s
In the 1980s, Structural Adjustment Policies or Programs (SAPs) circled the world
and transformed the funding available for and conceptualization of the role of education in international development. Aimed at restructuring the macroeconomic policies
of states in crisis, SAPs were promulgated and enforced by the IMF and the World
Bank. They included reforms such as state privatization of national resources, floating
national currencies, removing state subsidies for agricultural and food goods, removing trade barriers, and shrinking the state. SAPs were based on the neoliberal notion,
increasingly popular in Europe and the United States, that the market was always more
efficient than the state (Carnoy, 1995; Arnove et al., 1996; Torres, 2002).
Particularly in early SAPs, social services like education were reconceptualized as
peripheral-to-state responsibilities, and in fact likely to be ineffective and unproductive
to the extent that they were state-provided. Education, health, and other social services were defunded and privatized, often at least in part to pay “donor” states back as
older development loans came due (Reimers & Tiburcio, 1993). For example, Malawi
implemented a SAP in 1981. Funding for education dropped from 13.7% to 8.9% of
government expenditures. At the same time, debt servicing increased from 17% to 36%
between 1977 and 1986 (Kaluwa, 1992). Such declines in overall educational expenditures were often accompanied by international restrictions on civil servants’ salaries
and hiring, which weakened the long-term capacity of SAP-ed government institutions
to provide services and train the next generation of administrative leaders.
Throughout this period, mainstream international development education discourse
focused on the need for states to increase the efficiency of education systems so that governments could reap greater benefits with fewer resources (Fuller & Habte, 1992). The
World Bank led a movement to introduce cost sharing in education, a policy perspective
that argued for the need to have individuals and their families pay a greater proportion of
the costs of schooling—even primary schooling (Tan et al., 1984); and reframed repetition and dropout as systemic inefficiency issues. There were also early discussions about
the appropriate role for the private sector in education provision (Colclough, 1991).

--- [PDF Page 437 / Book Page 427] ---

International Development Education 427

There were significant critiques levelled against SAP-influenced education
approaches, ranging from protests over the absolute cut in funding and services for
poor people; to critiques of neoliberalism and its recalibration of state-market-society
relations; to feminist critiques of patriarchal development models and practices
(Beneria & Sen, 1981); to critiques from anthropologists and postmodernists about the
assumptions of Western, progressive concepts embedded in most development education models (Masemann, 1982); to growing concerns about the lack of widespread
participation in development decision-making. New arguments in support of basic
education, both from progressives interested in increased equity and economists who
claimed evidence of the supremacy of primary education investment returns in poor
countries (Psacharopoulos, 1987), gained momentum.

1990s
In 1990, the World Conference on Education for All (WCEFA) was held, heralding
a new discursive phase in international development education. The WCEFA was
the culmination of years of economistic and human rights arguments put forward by
international organizations (multilateral and non-governmental in particular) and poor
states to address rising global and national inequity and their desire to have individuals
and states manage their own development. The conference focused on basic education as a fundamental human right and on the state as the body responsible for its
provision. It centered economistic models of educational utility and effects that argued
that primary education, particularly for girls, was one of the best investments a state
could make in economic growth (Lockheed & Verspoor, 1991). It resulted in a strong
international development education focus on expanding access to primary schooling,
some would argue at the expense of educational quality.
Based on the WCEFA and the mounting evidence that SAPs were fuelling the abjection of millions of poor people without resulting in improved economic growth, international development organizations heralded a new idea: structural adjustment “with a
human face”. They began the arduous process of refunding support for the social service
sectors they had so recently helped to dismantle. Resources for social services increased
a bit, resources for education became more focused on primary education, and calls for
user fees in primary education were discarded; however, there was no net increase to
education funding (Bennell & Furlong, 1997). A programmatic and policy focus on educational expenditure and system efficiency continued, though discussions about the relevance and efficiency of primary education faded somewhat in the face of human rights
arguments that all children had the right to a basic education and could learn to be literate
and numerate—the two tasks repositioned as the primary goals of basic education.
The WCEFA was the first global education conference to include NGOs in any significant way (Mundy & Murphy, 2001); their inclusion reflected growing critiques of
development education practices as neo-colonial, and a new willingness on the part of
state and international governmental organizations to recognize the potential contributions of “civil society” organizations and participatory approaches in improving development education practices and outcomes. This was also the gender decade in international
development education; based on global data showing significant gender gaps in enrolment rates in many areas of the world (Hill & King, 1995), organizations such as USAID

--- [PDF Page 438 / Book Page 428] ---

428 Kendall

provided significant resources to support multifaceted initiatives designed to improve the
status of girls’ education. For example, in Malawi, USAID funded the Girls’ Attainment
in Basic Literacy and Education (GABLE) project, which included support for national
policy reform, the creation of a gender-appropriate curriculum unit, gender-sensitive
teacher training, a social mobilization campaign designed to increase community support
for girls’ education, and a girls’ scholarship program for non-repeating female students.
During this decade, there was also increasing interest in sector-wide funding
approaches (Harrold, 1995). Development experts argued that traditional projectbased support produced short-term, unsustainable, uncoordinated efforts with parallel administrative structures to official government education structures. Sector-wide
approaches, in which international organizations pledged support for a national budget
in exchange for government agreement to meet certain conditions, seemed a mechanism through which to address many of these critiques (Ratcliffe & Macrae, 1999).
Extensive aid accountability frameworks were also put in place to address concerns
about efficiency of aid use in various countries. These measures almost always targeted
aid recipients, not providers, despite evidence that there was corruption and administrative incompetence on both sides (Therkildsen, 2001).

2000s
By the 1990s, it was clear that the “bitter pill” of market (neo)liberalization had not
resulted in the economic growth or improved quality of life assured to citizens in
many poor states. In fact, as measured by life expectancy, educational completion,
GDP/capita, and many other development measures, the last 25 years has resulted in
an absolute decline in the standards of living of many people in the African region
(Ferguson, 1999; Arrighi, 2002). Recently, the World Bank and IMF have acknowledged (even as they continue to push similar reforms) that SAPs have failed (SAPRIN,
2004). In the wake of these acknowledgments, international arguments against state
provision of social services have shifted in important ways. Poverty alleviation plans
and programs that include some attention to public provision of basic social services
have been encrusted over earlier forms of neoliberal state transformation. There are
now even some calls from European states that supported SAPs for poor states to “take
responsibility” for basic social services like education.
This shift has resulted in an increase in total international development spending
on education, raising levels back up to those seen in the heyday of the 1950s and
1960s. Not only international resources to education have increased; in the wake of
the WCEFA, a number of countries (e.g., Malawi, Uganda, Kenya) implemented EFAstyle fee-free primary education systems (usually as part of an officially democratizing political process (Kendall, 2007) ) and now spend upwards of one-quarter of
their entire annual budget on education. There has been rapid growth in NGO involvement in development education activities in many poor states, and they have become
increasingly networked (Mundy & Murphy, 2001). Communities are also investing
significant (and in some cases, more) resources in their children’s education, partially
in response to their perception that education offers their children the best chance of
mobility in a globalizing environment.

--- [PDF Page 439 / Book Page 429] ---

International Development Education 429

These funding increases mirror increased belief in and demands on formal education; as a number of authors have noted, education is once again viewed as a development panacea (Vavrus, 2003), and formal education is expected to do everything
from grow economies, to prevent new HIV infections, to create small and healthy
families, to socialize democratically-oriented citizens. Although as in all social service
areas there is increasing pressure to conceptualize the education sector as a market and
educational services as a tradable good, education has emerged as the social service
in which the state has the most viable, internationally supportable, and public role
to play. This is due in part to the history of state educational provision in the United
States and Europe, to historical models of schooling as a (re)producer of nation-state
citizens, and to the continued conceptualization of basic education as direct human
capital development.
As the actors and resources in the development education arena have increased and
diversified, as the political reality of primary-school leavers clamoring for secondary
school places has hit, and as investment in primary education has proven to be less
transformational than expected, there are now calls for a more “balanced” approach
to education funding. Sectorally, this has translated into support for improved primary
educational quality, improved secondary and tertiary education access, and growing
discursive support for early childhood and adult education. In terms of implementing
agents, national governments’ position as the central development partner continues
to be undermined by the predominant neoliberal rationality in international development. NGOs continue to be viewed by many international governmental organizations
as more representative and more efficient development partners than central governments, and a growing percentage of international development funding is being channeled through NGOs instead of states (Hearn, 1998; Makoba, 2002). Likewise, and
following the roll-out of decentralization reforms often “inspired” by international
organizations, central governments and NGOs are facing new competition for funds
from local government bodies.
Participatory approaches, called for by 1980s and 1990s critics of development practices, are now, at least discursively, fully integrated in most development planning practices
(World Bank, 1996). For some critics, this is seen as a co-opting of radical critique, for
others an honest effort by development organizations to improve their practices (Kendall,
forthcoming). More broadly, international development education has been folded into
both global plans for development transformation (such as the Millennium Development
Goals) and into the poverty alleviation frameworks that now shape most bilateral and multilateral organizations’ funding for new development activities. In both cases, education is
usually incorporated in two ways: as a call for primary schooling for all, and as a call for
gender equity in formal education, and thus development, opportunities (Mundy, 2006).
The poverty alleviation approach, coupled with sector-wide funding approaches and joint
budget financing (Walliser, 2002), has led to a narrowing and intensification of development resources and targets in a smaller number of states throughout the world.
New actors, such as family foundations, individual donors, local governments, private organizations, community-based organizations, and universities have received
increasing attention in the development education arena, as have new issues including HIV/AIDS, early childhood education, educational quality, and child-centered

--- [PDF Page 440 / Book Page 430] ---

430 Kendall

pedagogical approaches (Tabulawa, 2003). Perhaps the most important new focus is on
improving within-classroom resources and practices—that is, affecting change in the
traditional educational “black box.” In most of these efforts, student learning (usually
as measured on standardized tests) is the ultimate measure of educational success. For
example, a current USAID education project, the Malawi Teacher’s Training Activity
(MTTA) provides preservice and in-service training and support to the education sector in the areas of English, science, math, and life skills, as well as in gender equity in
the classroom. It does so by providing preservice teacher training materials, training
school personnel to use local resources to create their own in-service trainings and
teaching/learning materials, providing books from international sources to Teacher
Development Centres so that teachers can update their content knowledge, and creating a mobile teacher training troupe that provides support for improved teaching and
learning through the exchange of innovative practices and ideas across school zones.
Effects are measured primarily by students’ and teachers’ increased content knowledge
scores on standardized exams.

Discussion
Interest in globalization, and particularly the role of education in the creation and distribution of information, opportunity, state and worker competitiveness, and individual
characteristics such as flexibility, has led to a renaissance in international development education (Crossley, 2000). This same movement is destabilizing concepts that
have underpinned the field for over 50 years. Perhaps the most important of these is
the continued emphasis on the individual and the nation-state as the central units of
analysis and action in international development education. Given the practical effects
of globalization on the economic, political, and social coherence of states and people’s
everyday lives, this seems short-sighted. Discussions about the appropriate roles of
NGOs, private entities, substate and regional actors and institutions, and local and/versus international labor markets point to the variety of daily educational and life experiences that are no longer primarily organized by or within the state, and the extent to
which the traditional concerns of development—progress, life improvement, equity—
are no longer (if they ever were) concerns that make sense to discuss within the confines of state borders. A growing literature on globalization and education (Carnoy
& Rhoten, 2005; Welmond, 2005; Suarez-Orozco & Qin-Hilliard, 2004; Burbules &
Torres, 2000; Stromquist & Monkman, 2000; King & Buchert, 1999) highlights the
extent to which the decisions involved in education practices are (differentially) global
in nature, and a parallel literature on global imaginaries (Ferguson, 2002) points to the
transformation of people’s understandings of belonging and opportunity, which have
been poorly addressed by development education researchers and programs.
These changes threaten to destabilize the economic and human rights rationales
that have dominated development education since its inception, and this may be a
good thing. For what continues to be lacking from many of the critiques of development broadly, and development education particularly, is real and sustained engagement with the question of what, exactly, education for development might look like

--- [PDF Page 441 / Book Page 431] ---

International Development Education 431

and mean in people’s lives. It is clear that such a discussion can no longer emanate
from and respond to the demands of any one state or region, as it has historically
done to Western Europe and the United States. It is equally clear that there will be
no single imaginary, and that the currently taken-for-granted models and goals of
education and its relation to state, market, society, and international relations of
power, authority, and survival are in flux. Funding for development education is on
the rise, and there are reasons to believe that these funds can positively affect (by
both “international” and community measures) the lives of people, and even some
poor people, in poor states. The MTTA project described above, for instance, has
had significant effects on the classroom experiences and educational outcomes of
teachers and students in some target schools, and it has positively transformed relations of power and authority among students, teachers, parents, and district officials
in such a manner as to both expand teachers’ willingness to learn from multiple
sources (including each other and students), and to improve community support
of teachers and schools. These shifts have in turn resulted in classrooms that provide students very different, and potentially empowering, messages about learning, authority, knowledge, and success. For, example, they provide students with
opportunities to assume academic leadership roles within the classroom and to see
teachers work collaboratively with other teachers and with community members
around knowledge production.
Such positive outcomes appear to occur most frequently when the “recipients” of aid
take part in development education practices at all stages of the development programming process (planning, implementing, monitoring, and evaluating), and particularly
when they play a role in determining the intended outcomes of the activities. Positive
outcomes are also more likely in situations where initiatives are given time to develop
and to improve, and enough funding to continue for a long enough period of time to
become institutionalized. This rarely occurs in the international development arena,
which usually runs on 3–5 year funding and idea cycles.
There is also reason for caution in supporting international development education efforts. First, even by development standards, there are plenty of failed development education projects and plans. As with all development arenas, these failures
may outnumber the successes and may have actually negatively impacted the lives of
those they targeted, both directly (as in sending more children into unhealthy educational environments) and indirectly (through, for example, increased state dependence
on international monies to fund educational promises and increased domestic spending on debt repayment). Even development education successes may be shallow. For
example, a report on USAID support for education in Malawi notes that projects that
achieved their official goals (e.g., improved teacher training) were hampered from having broader effects by the absence of many students attending class on a regular basis,
of classrooms, and of basic teaching materials (Anzar et al., 2004).
Second, there are serious questions about whether education is the key human right
or economic investment to transform the lives of poor people. When poor states spend
one-quarter of their budget on education without significant changes in their citizen’s
life experiences, we need to question the assumptions that underlie international
support for further investment in education.

--- [PDF Page 442 / Book Page 432] ---

432 Kendall

Third, western education occurs to individuals, and in current models, it is individuals who succeed (or more commonly fail) to progress as a result of their formal
schooling experience. It may thus serve, as Marxists theorists argued in the 1970s, as
a system to constrain people, not as a liberatory process. And development education
resources do not address global inequities, they reinscribe individuals and the state as
the units of analysis that succeed or fail to progress.
Many of the concerns of people living in less affluent countries—how to cobble
together a survival; how to stay healthy and care for the ill; how to access increasingly
privatized resources such as water and land; how to transmit moral, cultural, and religious practices to the next generation—are simply not on the international development education radar.
People in less affluent countries are responding to this reality in perfectly reasonable
ways. For a minority, education is absolutely central to geographic mobility, which
in turn is central to individual and familial survival. For them, continued educational
investment makes sense. For many others, though, schooling is a brief blip that may
or may not provide skills and lessons useful for daily survival and thriving (Kendall,
2007). In countries where neither formal labor, nor expanded agricultural opportunities, nor opportunities to travel to more affluent countries are growing, schooling may
seem relatively disconnected from daily needs or future opportunities. Not surprisingly, enrolment rates are decreasing in some of the poorest countries in the world, and
in others, dropouts are accelerating.
The international development community is always looking for the next panacea:
sustainable environment? Global health? The extent of future support for educational
resourcing from communities, states, and international actors will depend on the field’s
capacity to create space for a multiplicity of actors and institutions to reimagine the
global relations among education, equity, and individual and communal survival and
flourishing. At a minimum, this will require extensive engagement with ideas that move
beyond the current universalizing neoclassical economic orthodoxy (Harriss, 2001)
and human rights frameworks to address the diverse realities of people’s changing
lives, survival strategies and dreams. From these may be drawn, the shape and scope of
potentially empowering educational practices that might be supported by international
development education practices.

References
Adams, D. (1977). Development education. Comparitive Education Review, 21(2/3), 296–310.
Alderman, H., Canagarajah, S. & Younger, S. (1992). Consequences of permanent lay-off from the civil service: Results from a survey of retrenched workers in Ghana. Cornell Food and Nutrition Policy Program
Working Paper, Ithaca: Cornell University.
Altbach, P. (1971). Education and neocolonialism. Teachers College Record, 72(4), 543–558.
Altbach, P. & Kelly, C. (Eds.) (1978). Education and colonialism. London: Longman.
Anzar, U., Harping, S., Cohen, J. & E. Leu. (2004). Retrospective pilot study of USAID-funded education
projects in Malawi. EQUIP 1 publication. Washington, DC: Academy for Educational Development.
Archer, D. (1994). The changing roles of non-governmental organisations in the field of education (in the
context of changing relationships with the state). International Journal of Educational Development,
14(3), 223–232.

--- [PDF Page 443 / Book Page 433] ---

International Development Education 433
Arnove, R., Torres, A., Franz, S., & Morse, K. (1996). A political sociology of education and development
in Latin America; the conditioned state, neoliberalism and educational policy. International Journal of
Comparative Sociology, 37(1–2), 140–159.
Arrighi, G. (2002). The African crisis. New Left Review, 15, 5–36.
Balogh, T. (1964). The economics of educational planning: Sense and nonsense. Comparative Education,
1(1), 5–17.
Balogh, T. (1966). The economics of poverty. London: Weidenfield & Nicolson.
Beneria, L. & Sen, G. (1981). Accumulation, reproduction, and “women’s role in economic development”:
Boserup revisited. Signs, 7(2), 279–298.
Bennell, P. & Furlong, D. (1997). Has Jomtien made any difference? Trends in donor funding for education
and basic education since the late 1980s. Brighton: University of Sussex Institute for Development
Studies.
Buchert, L. (1995). Recent trends in education aid: Towards a classification of policies. Paris: UNESCO/
International Institute for Educational Planning.
Burbules, N. & Torres, C. (Eds.) (2000). Globalization and education: Critical perspectives. New York/
London: Routledge.
Carnoy, M. (1977). Education as cultural imperialism. New York: David McKay.
Carnoy, M. (1995). Structural adjustment and the changing face of education. International Labour Review,
134.
Carnoy, M. & Rhoten, D. (2005). What does globalization mean for educational change? A comparative
approach. Comparative Education Review, 46(1), 1–10.
Chabbott, C. (2003). Constructing education for development: International organizations and education
for all. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Colclough, C. (1991). Who should learn to pay? An assessment of neo-liberal approaches to education
policy. In C. Colclough & J. Manor (Eds.), States or markets? Neo-liberalism and the development
policy debate. Oxford: Clarendon.
Collier, P. & Dollar, D. (2000). Can the world cut poverty in half? How policy reform and effective aid can
meet the international development goals. Development Research Group. Washington, DC: The World
Bank.
Corby, R. (1981). Bo school and its graduates in colonial Sierra Leone. Canadian Journal of African Studies,
15(2), 323–333.
Cornia, A., Jolly, R. & Stewart, F. (Eds.) (1987). Adjustment with a human face, Vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon.
Crossley, M. (2000). Bridging cultures and traditions in the reconceptualisation of comparative and international education. Comparative Education, 36(3), 319–332.
Easton, P. & Klees, S. (1992). Conceptualizing the role of education in the economy. In R. Arnove,
P. Altbach, and Kelly, G. (Eds.), Emergent issues in education: Comparative perspectives. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering development: The making and unmaking of the third world. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Esteva, G. (1992). Development. In W. Sachs (Ed.), The development dictionary: A guide to knowledge as
power. London: Zed Books.
Fagerlind, I. & Saha, L. (1989). Education and national development: A comparative perspective, 2nd ed.
Oxford: Pergamon.
Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (2007, August 18). Approaches and players;
bilateral development: The direct approach to the partner. Retrieved August 18, 2007 from: http://www.
bmz.de/en/approaches/bilateral_development_cooperation/index.html
Ferguson, J. (1999). Expectations of modernity: Myths and meanings of urban life on the Zambian copperbelt. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ferguson, J. (2002). Of mimicry and membership: Africans and the ‘new world society. Cultural
Anthropology, 17(4), 551–569.
Ferguson, J. (2006). Global shadows: Africa in the neoliberal world order. Durham: Duke University
Press.
Frieden, J. (1992). Debt, development, and democracy: Modern political economy and Latin America,
1965–1985. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

--- [PDF Page 444 / Book Page 434] ---

434 Kendall
Fuller, B. & Habte, A. (Eds.) (1992). Adjusting education policies: Conserving resources while raising
school quality. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 132. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Grillo, R. & Stirrat, R. (Eds.) (1997). Discourses of development: Anthropological perspectives. Oxford: Berg.
Harriss, J. (2001). The case for cross-disciplinary approaches in international development. Feminist
Economics, 1(2), 21–46.
Harrold, P. (1995). The broad sector approach to investment lending: Sector investment programs. World
Bank Discussion Papers, Africa Technical Department Series No. 302. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hearn, J. (1998). The ‘NGO-isation’ of Kenyan society: USAID & the restructuring of health care. Review
of African Political Economy, 25(75), 89–101.
Hill, A. & E. King. (1995). Women’s education and well-being. Feminist Economics, 1(2), 21–46.
Jubilee USA Network. (2005). Why drop the debt? Washington, DC: Jubilee USA Network.
Kaluwa, B. (Ed.) (1992). The structural adjustment programme in Malawi: A case of successful adjustment?
SAPES Books Monograph Series 3. Harare: SAPES Books.
Keith, S. (1978). An historical overview of the state and educational policy in Jamaica. Latin American
Perspectives, 5(2), 37–52.
Kelly, G. & Elliott, C. (1982). Women’s education in the third world: Comparative perspectives. Buffalo:
SUNY Press.
Kendall, N. (2007). Parent and community participation in improving educational quality in Africa: Current
practices and future possibilities. International Review of Education, 53, 701–708.
Kendall, N. (2007). Education for All meets political democratization: Free primary education and the neoliberalization of the Malawian school and state. Comparitive Education Review, 51(3), 281–305.
King, K. & Buchert, L. (1999). Changing international aid to education: Global patterns and national
contexts. Paris: UNESCO.
Kothari, U. (2005). Authority and expertise: The professionalisation of international development and the
ordering of dissent. In N. Laurie and L. Bondi (Eds.), Working the spaces of neoliberalism: Activism,
professionalization, and incorporation (pp. 32–53). Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewin, K. & Little, A. (1984). Examination reform and educational change in Sri Lanka, 1972–1982:
Modernisation or dependent underdevelopment? In K. Watson (Ed.), Dependence and interdependence
in education: International perspectives. Beckenham: Croom Helm.
Little, A. (2000). Development studies and comparative education: Context, content, comparison and contributors. Comparative Education, 36(3), 279–296.
Lockheed, M. & Verspoor, A. (1991). Improving primary education in developing countries. Washington,
DC: Oxford University Press, for the World Bank.
Lumsdaine, D. (1993). Moral vision in international politics: The foreign aid regime, 1949–1989. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Makoba, J. (2002). Nongovernmental organizations (NGOS) and third world development: An alternative
approach to development. Journal of Third World Development, 19(1), 53–64.
Manzo, K. (1991). Modernist discourse and the crisis of development theory. Studies in Comparative
International Development, 26(2), 3–37.
Masemann, V. (1982). Critical ethnography in the study of comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, 1, 1–15.
Meyer, J. (2000). Globalization: Sources and effects on national states and societies. International Sociology,
15, 233–248.
Meyer, J., Ramirez, F., Rubinson, R. & Boli-Bennett, J. (1977). The world educational revolution, 1950–
1970. Sociology of Education, 50(4), 242–258.
Mundy, K. (2006). Education for all and the new development compact. Review of Education, 52, 23–48.
Mundy, K. & Murphy, L. (2001). Transnational advocacy, global civil society? Emerging evidence from the
field of education. Comparative Education Review, 45(1), 85–126.
Poerksen, U. (1985). Plastic words: The tyranny of a modular language. University Park: Pennsylvania State
University Press.
Psacharopoulos, G. (1985). Returns to education: A further international update and implications. Journal
of Human Resources, 20(4), 583–604.
Psacharopoulos, G. (Ed.) (1987). Economics of education: Research and studies. Oxford: Pergamon.

--- [PDF Page 445 / Book Page 435] ---

International Development Education 435
Ramirez, F. & Boli, J. (1987). The political construction of mass schooling: European origins and worldwide
institutionalization. Sociology of Education, 60(1), 2–17.
Rankin, K. (2001). Governing development: Neoliberalism, microcredit, and rational economic woman.
Economy and Society, 30(1), 18–37.
Ratcliffe, M. & Macrae, M. (1999). Sector wide approaches to education: A strategic analysis. London:
Department for International Development.
Reimers, F. & Tiburcio, L. (1993). Education, adjustment, and reconstruction: Options for change. Paris:
UNESCO.
Resnik, J. (2006). International organizations, the “education–economic growth” black box, and the development of world education culture. Comparative Education Review, 50(2), 173–195.
Rist, G. (1997). The history of development: From Western origins to global faith. London: Zed Books.
Sagasti, F. & Alcalde, G. (1999). Development cooperation in a fractured global order: An arduous transition. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre.
Samoff, J. (1999). Education sector analysis in Africa: Limited national control and even less national ownership. International Journal of Educational Development, 19, 249–272.
Schraeder, P., Hook, S. & Taylor, B. (1998). Clarifying the foreign aid puzzle: A comparison of American,
Japanese, French, and Swedish aid flows. World Politics, 50(2), 294–323.
Schultz, T. (1953). The economic value of education. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sheffield, J. (1972). Nonformal education in Africa: Micro-solutions to macro-problems? African Studies
Review, 15(2), 241–254.
Sparr, P. (Ed.). (1994). Mortgaging women’s lives: Feminist critiques of structural adjustment. New York:
St. Martin’s Press.
Stromquist, N. & Monkman, K. (Eds.) (2000). Globalization and education: Integration and contestation
across cultures. Boulder/New York/Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield.
Structural Adjustment Participatory Review International Network (SAPRIN). (2004). Structural adjustment
report: The policy roots of economic crisis, poverty and inequality. London/New York: Zed Books.
Suarez-Orozco, M. & Qin-Hilliard, D. (Eds.) (2004). Globalization, culture and education in the new millennium. Berkeley/London: University of California Press.
Tan, J., Lee, K. & A. Mingat. (1984). User charges for education: The ability and willingness to pay in
Malawi. World Bank Staff Working Papers No. 661. Washington, DC: World Bank
Tabulawa, R. (2003). International aid agencies, learner-centered pedagogy, and political democratisation:
A critique. Comparative Education, 39(1), 7–26.
Therkildsen, O. (2001). Efficiency, accountability and implementation: Public sector reform in East and
Southern Africa. Geneva: UNRISD.
Tilak, J. (1988). Foreign aid for education. International Review of Education, 34(3), 315–335.
Torres, C. (2002). The state, privatisation and educational policy: A critique of neo-liberalism in Latin
America and some ethical and political implications. Comparative Education, 38(4), 365–385.
United Nations. (2005). Millennium development goals. New York: United Nations.
Vavrus, F. (2003). Desire and decline: Schooling amid crisis in Tanzania. New York: Peter Lang.
Walliser, J. (2002). Technical cooperation in joint budget financing arrangements: Requirements, experience, and perspectives. InWEnt speeches and issues notes series. Presented at the InWEnt Conference,
2004. Retrieved September 15, 2007 from: http://www.inwent.org/ef-texte/challenges/walliser.htm
Weiler, H. (1978). Education and development: From the age of innocence to the age of scepticism.
Comparative Education, 14(3), 179–198.
Welmond, M. (2005). Globalization viewed from the periphery: The dynamics of teacher identity in the
Republic of Benin. Comparative Education Review, 46(1), 37–66.
World Bank. (1996). World Bank Participation Sourcebook. Washington, DC: World Bank.

