================================================================================
Chapter 29: Can Multilateral Banks Educate The World?
Author(s): Claudio De Moura Castro
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 3: The National, The International, and The Global
Book Pages: pp. 455–477
PDF Pages: pp. 463–485 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 463 / Book Page 455] ---

29
CAN MULTILATERAL BANKS EDUCATE
THE WORLD?
Claudio de Moura Castro1

This paper can be seen as a primer to educators who know little about the World
Bank (henceforth WB) and the Inter-American Development Bank (henceforth IDB).2
It tries to draw a broad picture of these somewhat mysterious and awe-inspiring
organizations.
While both banks lend for a wide variety of sectors and the rules and principles
are approximately the same, the paper focuses on education loans. One consequence
of this narrower focus is to bypass the painful and inconclusive discussions about the
choice of sectors where these banks should operate.
This essay is not the result of reading books and papers – even though some writings are helpful to better conceptualize the issues.3 The author has been an officer of
both banks, as well as a close observer from the outside. This brings to the narrative a
first-hand perspective and an effort to make sense out of a personal experience as an
insider. There has been an earnest attempt to prevent personal interests and perspectives from contaminating his views. However, to claim neutrality in such matters is
naïve, at best.

How Development Banks Work
The logic behind a multilateral development bank needs to be understood clearly. They
are neither commercial banks, nor are they agencies funded and under administrative
control of the rich countries (even though these countries wield considerable power in
major decisions).
Their goal is to promote the economic and social development. After World War II it
helped countries ravaged by wars. After the 1950s it focused their lending in developing countries. Perhaps at some moment in their history, economists thought they knew
how to promote development. But history proved they were wrong. These days, all
certainties about development recipes are gone. Therefore, such doubts compound the
quest to find out whether they have been successful in their endeavors.
As should become clear in the text, no extreme views are warranted. Banks are
neither a disaster nor an immaculate success; neither evil nor saints. They fail and they
succeed. The gist of the presentation is to indicate some common denominators that
have been observed.
455
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 455–477.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 464 / Book Page 456] ---

456 Castro

Economic Rationale: Low Interest Borrowing
Let’s start with a simple question. What is the financial magic performed by a development bank? In other words, in purely financial terms, what has justified their existence?
Several decades ago, a number of countries got together and decided to create a bank
of their own so that some of them could borrow at lower interest rates. But even more
important than that, borrow for long periods of time, such as 15–30 years. Hence, from
day one they were banks owned by governments. Naïve comments about banks not being
“democratic institutions” completely miss the target. They are democratic in the sense that
their governance is exerted by a Board chosen by the member countries. Perhaps some
countries have more power than others in this governance, but that is another matter.
Technically, they are not banks. They are more like credit cooperatives – where only
members can borrow. Or, more precisely, credit cooperatives of participating countries.
How do they work? If the United States decides to borrow money, it issues bonds
that pay the lowest interest rate in the market. Why? Because the country is rated
“triple A” in the financial markets, due to the very low risk of default. Less developed
countries have a much lower financial rating. Therefore, if they decide to float bonds,
they will have to pay a rate of interest much higher than that paid by the United States,
because borrowers are afraid the country will default on its obligations.
If the average Latin American country tried to borrow money today, it would pay
interest that would include a considerable spread, to cover the risk of default. When
the World Bank or the IDB float bonds in financial markets, they can do so at the lowest interest rate of the market. Hence, the whole idea of a “development bank” is little
more than a market trick to allow poor countries to borrow money at rates that can be
as low as half of what they could obtain on their own and with much shorter time to pay
back. But in order to break even, the development banks have to add another percentage point in order to pay the salaries of the staff. And there is lots of staff, because this
is a very complicated business. But since multilateral banks do not make profits, this
in itself further lowers the interest rate.4
Therefore, the trick is to create a bank that includes the poorer countries that want to
borrow and also the rich countries that lend their reputation and reliability. The credit
worthiness of the big countries – the United States, Germany, Japan, the UK, and so
on – permit the bank to have a “triple A” rating. This rating allows the bank to borrow
at the lowest possible interest rate found anywhere in the world.
In contrast to what some people think, Banks do not lend their own money. They
lend the funds they borrow. In fact, development banks do not lend rich countries’
money. They lend the money they borrow from financial markets. Therefore neither
the United States nor any other country is subsidizing the World Bank loans. The
same goes with the IDB, or any other development bank. The United States, like others, contributed a modest amount of money in the beginning, to build initial capital
reserves. Bankers know that just a little bit of capital leverages significant borrowing
in financial markets.
Hence, in this respect, development banks are just like commercial operations; there
are no subsidies involved. They borrow money by issuing bonds, and then they lend
this money at interest rates that allow them to break even.

--- [PDF Page 465 / Book Page 457] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 457

The downside of this operation is that banks have very little funds to make grants.
In fact, it is easier for them to lend $200 million than to give $20,000 as a grant. Why?
Because banks have as the only source of money what they borrow from the market.
And if they borrow, they have to pay back. To be more accurate, they receive a modest
amount of grant money from rich countries (lately, Japan has been the most generous
donor) to selectively support a few projects. But the grand total of grant money is a
very small proportion of what they lend.
The good news is that the banks have a lot of money. They can make a difference in
many countries. They can add to the funds that would be available in public budgets an
amount of money that a country would not otherwise have. In the absence of a loan,
such funds would have to be subtracted from the salaries of civil servants or the provision of basic services.

Countries Have to Repay Their Loans, No Matter What
It is instructive to find that most professionals in the banks don’t know much about
the banking business. Ask anybody at the IDB or the World Bank about interest rates.
Chances are they do not know. And there are good reasons for that.
Banks don’t worry about repayment of the loans either. This is because if the country doesn’t pay, it is put on the IMF’s “black list.” And being in this list is one of the
most uncomfortable situations a country could be. It means that the country will not
be able to borrow from any bank, multilateral or private. Perhaps even more important,
the countries preserve their ability to have both the IMF and the WB as bankers of last
resource, i.e., if worse comes to worst, they still have access to the funds from these
two agencies.
This stiff penalty allows the banks to completely dedicate themselves to the lending
end – or development objectives – of the operation. Bank officers worry about developing and implementing projects. In simple terms, there are no credit risks to worry
about. Therefore, they do not behave like banks in the true sense of the word. They
don’t need to know about interest rates, repayments, or the like.
In many ways, project officers are neither the bleeding hearts who give money away
nor the bankers who think only about interest payments and how to make money off
someone else. Bank officers deal with development projects. They were recruited
because their professional profiles suit them for those tasks.

Loan Preparation Takes a Long Time
Before development banks lend, they have to ensure that the money will go to projects
that are fully spelled out, both in conception and in plans for implementation. There
are good reasons for that.
Improvization is avoided and the ideal conditions for implementation are planned,
including all the precautions against corruption. The first step before a loan is a careful
diagnosis of the sector where the funds will be spent.

--- [PDF Page 466 / Book Page 458] ---

458 Castro

The downside of this has to do with the fears of bureaucrats and their attempts
to protect themselves against accusations of laxity and lack of control. In too many
cases, the bureaucratic requirements go much beyond what seems like reasonable
precautions.
Whatever the reasons, it takes at least 1 year to negotiate a loan and prepare the
requisite contracts and documents. If there are disagreements between the Washington
staff that is preparing the loan and the representatives of the recipient countries, it may
take much longer. In the case of problematic loans or countries with ineffective governments, it may take several years to get it approved.

Strict Contracts Protect Loans from Political Vagaries
The good side of all the bureaucratic formalities is the stability and continuity that it
brings to the programs funded by such loans. A minister can announce a program to
be initiated the next day – to give milk to the children or to build schools. In 3 months’
time, he may have been replaced by another minister announcing another program.
Guess where the money comes from? Of course, from the program that was created
5 or 6 months earlier by the previous minister.
But change is not so easy with projects funded by a development bank. The country
is committed. Contracts are signed. In other words, if both sides go through all the
troubles to prepare and sign a project document, a significant amount of work is needed
to get the project canceled. This is not a good idea. In addition to losing face, the loan
funds cannot be used for alternative uses, because it is locked in this operation.
For decades, for every dollar included in the loan, the country Treasure had to put
another (the exact proportion depended on the level of income of the borrowing country. These are the counterpart funds. One clear implication is that not only the loan
contract was binding for the funds to be disbursed, but it also froze another chunk of
money of the same magnitude.
Compared to the average government program, this inertia gives a much greater
stability and coherence to the bank loans. They are more robust and have far fewer
chances of being killed at the political whim of a new minister or a new administration.
As a result, continuity, structure, discipline and technical support have a greater probability of presenting themselves.
Loan design reflects ample experience with similar loans in other countries. It represents the best practices known in the world, given the broad perspective and knowledge
basis of technical staff.
Another advantage is that loans set aside an amount of money that allows a country
to hire the very best minds in the world, which are expensive. Usually it is politically
difficult for a country to hire such expensive consultants, particularly when local salaries are so low. But well-chosen experts can make a difference.
However, there is also a downside of this inertia. A bad project is difficult to change.
Evolving conditions and circumstance would suggest new strategies that are not easy
to implement. For good and for evil, loans have a great amount of inertia.

--- [PDF Page 467 / Book Page 459] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 459

Why Development Banks are Accused of the Worst Sins?
Gone are the glorious days when the World Bank was merrily prescribing policies and
lending, rather than stirring controversies. Today, some accuse it of being the satanic
tool of “neoliberalism” while others complain that it is plainly ineffective. Bank officers wonder how they can be both at the same time. These days being a multilateral
bank implies that you are criticized, no matter what you do or don’t do. “Fifty years is
enough,” said the critics at the fiftieth anniversary of the World Bank.
The United Nation specialized agencies have been paralyzed by fear of displeasing
member countries. In contrast, the World Bank always came forward with strong views
and outright preaching on just about everything, from structural adjustment to contraceptives. As much as this was a relief from the wishy-washy positions of the United
Nations, the collisions with governments and independent critics were inevitable.
Could this ideological rejection come as a surprise? Well, development banks are
indeed strange animals. As a former employee of these institutions, we did not know
whether we were gods, devils, preachers, bankers, arrogant civil servants with Ph.D.’s,
or just hopeless and pathetic bureaucrats. Actually, we may very well be a mixture of
all these.

Values and Beliefs
The accusations against the World Bank – and to a lesser extent to the IDB – have
been persistent and, if anything, receive ever more press coverage. The days when they
proudly announced their goals of wiping out poverty and backwardness are gone. In
many ways, they now pay for their past arrogance, their hubris, and the obvious fact
that they promised more than they could deliver. But that is not to say that the critics
got it right.
The banks are often accused of being “neoliberal” – the worst insult in the lexicon of
the left. Of course, it would be naïve to imagine that it is possible to have an institution
operating in such central and delicate areas without an ideology. Neutrality and agnosticism are not options. To have any meaning, policies have to accept, deny, or qualify
all-encompassing concepts such as free markets, private property, and public intervention. Therefore, implicitly or explicitly, banks do have their own ideology. The question
is how acceptable this ideology is to the borrowing governments and to its critics.
The World Bank and the IDB still believe in some mild version of the Washington
Consensus. But it is worth noting that this consensus is an ever-shifting notion. In
addition, there is a huge difference in the strengths of such beliefs in either bank.
The true believers have been in the World Bank, the IDB being far less religious and
more pragmatic. However, stripped of all that has been added to this concept – by
friends and foes – principles such as balanced budgets, paying your bills, and controlling inflation are goals that most countries accept these days. Notice that the original
Washington consensus of John Williamson was not much more than that (Kuczinski &
Williamson, Chapter 10).

--- [PDF Page 468 / Book Page 460] ---

460 Castro

Below is a list of the principles current in the World Bank that, in a way or another,
influence education lending (in a toned down version, they are the same in the IDB).
Evidence-driven policies (controlled evidence is the reality check)
Cost accounting (one must know how much it costs)
Quantification (the more one can quantify, the better)
Efficiency (getting more done with less resources is a permanent goal)
Meritocracy (the best are to be chosen and rewarded)
Competition (belief in the “invisible hand”)
Market incentives (rewards and penalties are the most powerful incentives)
No subsidies (prices must reflect true costs)
Privatization (private ownership improves efficiency)
Complying with some version of these principles was mandatory on most project documents, in order for the loan document to have smooth sailing inside the World Bank.
At the same time, while the IDB was always driven by such principles, their defense
was substantially less vehement.
Nevertheless, this is only the beginning of the story. Thinking in either bank is far
from being monolithic and compliance with the ideological impositions is more formal
than real. Many loan officers added to their proposals all the mantras of the moment,
knowing full well that they were not enforceable. Why fight for ideas that will never
get out of the paper? It was more expedient to get the project approved quickly and
then proceed to implementation, where realism prevails.
The idea that bank professionals form a disciplined army, thinking alike and implementing official policies is naïve. This could not happen in an institution that hires the
top graduates of the world’s best universities – with analytical skills honed in debates
and controversies. In fact, attending technical meetings in the WB one cannot escape
the conclusion that professionals enjoy showing off and fencing with one another about
theories and policies, more than anything else. There is a wide range of opinions and
policy orientation among professionals and a lively debate goes on all the time. But in
matters considered as serious, there is far more than intellectual legerdemain. In fact, as
reported by Heyneman and witnessed personally by this author, during the first half of
the 1990s, the doctrinaire clashes between education professionals, division chiefs and
the management of the bank were nothing short of formidable (Heyneman, 2003).

Decision Making: How the World Influences the Banks?
To understand the logic of multilateral banks, it is useful to have a brief discussion of
how decisions are made. Bank policies are generated in the interplay of three main
actors: (i) management and staff, (ii) the Board, and (iii) the outside political forces
that have a say in these matters.
Notice that banks are well-staffed at all levels. It has been said again and again that
no other agency in the world has such an intellectually powerful and experienced staff
in matters of development. In fact, no other contender stands up at the same league.
The mindset of the banks is a natural consequence of the academic origins of its staff.

--- [PDF Page 469 / Book Page 461] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 461

It comes predominantly from the very best universities, with a strong participation of
graduates of leading Anglo-Saxon institutions. Therefore, ideas spontaneously reflect
mainstream economic traditions. Not surprisingly, intellectual arrogance and hubris
often comes in the same package. Ideological and theoretical beliefs derive directly
from these academic origins. Bank practices acquire a style of their own but they rarely
collide with the tenets of classical economics.
Banks operate in a political world and cannot ignore it. The WB members include
just about all countries in the world. The IDB includes Latin American countries plus
most rich and large countries – as mentioned, their presence ensures low risks and
low interests for the funds it must borrow to make available to in the form of loans to
member countries.
In practical terms, the United States (via the Treasury Department) has a disproportionate power. Being the largest shareholder, by the constitution of the Bank, it has more
voting power. Presidencies or vice-presidencies are tacitly allocated to Americans. In
the past, there have been the tugs of war between the United States and other countries.
Today, in the majority of the cases, American positions do not go against the grain of
most other member countries. But there are exceptions. For instance, indirectly, the
United States has been able to prevent the entry of Cuba, both in the WB and the IDB.
Yet, it failed in its attempts to save the presidency of Paul Wolfowitz, when accusations
of nepotism surfaced.
North European countries take a strong stand for the environment, minorities,
Indians, and the very poor. At times, it clashes with borrowing countries that may want
to remain reckless in these matters. In other situations, borrowing countries find that
they are too poor to impose strict Scandinavian standards. And they may be right.
NGOs’ themes are similar to those of the Scandinavians but tend to be more strident
and radical. At first, their whistle-blowing played a useful role. But they seem to have gone
too far, after banks got their act together in those matters. In addition, there is an increasing perception that some horror stories were not true. Particularly in the case of the WB,
NGOs have put much pressure to have a greater say on the lending operations. In fact,
some of them are clearly antagonistic to the very existence of the banks. The “Fifty years
is enough” campaign was very troubling to the WB, to the point that the commemorations
for its half century anniversary were severely curtailed. Washington is a sounding board
for NGOs and they are able to create much noise. This is a very contentious situation, as
the noise created by hundreds such institutions bring a bad press for the banks.
Finally, borrowing countries are entitled to have a voice. Why not? At first, the rationale was much in the line of the “white men’s burden.” Poor countries were thought to
be disorganized, have ineffective and corrupt governments and lack good judgment
on what is good for them. But progressively it has become politically inappropriate to
pursue this line. In addition, many countries have a clear and sound idea about their
needs and preferences. In more recent years they do have a louder saying in deciding
on their loans. It took some time to realize that when borrowers take ownership of the
project, the chances of success are much higher.
These political constituencies have had an oscillating role in influencing the policy
orientations of the banks. For instance, specific projects to deal with one aspect of
development or broad, all-encompassing development policies?

--- [PDF Page 470 / Book Page 462] ---

462 Castro

Resulting from the interplay of all these constituencies, the banks developed their
policies and styles.

Leftwing Educators Battle “Neoliberal” Values
The supra-national agencies such as the IMF and the World Bank . . . [are] like a
kind of economical and political ministries of transitional capital. . .They are the
lords of the world or the de facto power in the world. (Frigotto, 1995, p. 82)
. . . all this [education development] is being orchestrated by the World Bank
with its concept of education systems linked to vocationalization, aiming at preparing individuals to meet the requirement of productive activities and market
circulation. . . . (Ianni, 1996)
There is a growing participation of outside economic agents – the World Bank
and the Interamerican Development Bank – as well as local entrepreneurs.
(Monteiro, 2000, p. 48)
Sector Analysis documents of the World Bank, in general, display a lack of understanding and inadequate knowledge of education and accumulated research in
the field. . . .The dismantling of Education Ministries is, to a large extent, the
direct and indirect result of the World Bank and IMF packages . . . The World
Bank . . . package presents serious shortcomings . . . and instead of contributing
to change in the proposed direction . . . reinforces inefficiency, poor quality and
inequality in school systems. (Torres)
The above quotes illustrate the kind of opposition met by multilateral banks. Most of
them have one feature in common. They reflect little knowledge of institutions and
result from very cavalier research.
Let us look at a very instructive example. A book by a well-known researcher in
Brazil bitterly denounced the World Bank for having master-minded the reform of
technical education, by means of a loan to the Ministry of Education. She went on to
describe how this foreign institution was interfering in domestic educational policies
(Kuenzer, 2000). As it turns out, she did not take the time to verify that the loan was
from the IDB not the World Bank! In fact, the World Bank never lent for technical education in Brazil. Furthermore, it was denouncing policy changes originally proposed
by the author of this essay while he lived in Brazil, 10 years before he joined the World
Bank and the IDB. Subsequently, when the loan to Brazil was being designed, this idea
was introduced in the loan by this author who was part of the project team. Therefore,
the supposed interference by a foreign power was merely an old Brazilian idea proposed by a Brazilian staff.

NGOs’ Fight for Influence in Decision-Making
From the 1990s on, NGOs claimed increasingly greater power to influence and to
veto loans to developing countries. This has been particularly true in loans where
environment issues were at stake.

--- [PDF Page 471 / Book Page 463] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 463

It is a documented fact that some dams proposed by the World Bank were environmental disasters. And it is to the credit of watchdog NGOs that such reckless projects
were denounced. In part due to such criticism but also as a result of a greater overall awareness towards environmental issues, the Boards reacted by imposing a severe
environmental screening, since the early 1990s.
Notwithstanding, the NGOs toned up their criticism. The whole issue became
somewhat muddled, as the NGOs kept repeating the criticism levied against old
projects, since there was little to criticize in the more recent crop. This lead to bitter
confrontations after bank projects became very careful along the lines of protecting
the environment. In fact, some loans imposed unreasonable increases in expenditures
on the projects, in order to avoid some minor problems (for instance, to protect a
small monkey from a road development in Brazil). Ultimately, in deciding the fate of
a large loan, angry activists can wield more power than some major countries.
The whole issue seems to have gone overboard. One ridiculous example was a small
project by this author to conduct student-achievement tests in ten Latin American
countries. The preparation of the project was delayed by requests of one participant in
the environmental clearance board. This person wanted further assurances that applying tests to a few thousand students committed no sins against nature.

How Development Banks Design and Negotiate Loans
In order to understand the operation and the logic of development banks, it is useful to
examine how loans are prepared and negotiated.

What Governments Want, What Countries Need and What the Banks Want to Sell
When the bank sends a project officer to negotiate a loan, this action mobilizes several
actors and lead to the discussion of a complex and sometimes contradictory set of
goals. It is useful to try to understand the typical scenarios.
Bank officers have development goals in their minds. Typically, they honestly try to
analyze the situation and derive the policies that would be most helpful to the country.
Critics may deny such lofty goals. Hypocrisy? Fake idealism?
My own experience of 10 years inside both banks leads me to believe that my colleagues meant well and did know their line of business. They try to design projects that
respond to what they perceive as the legitimate needs of the countries. Of course, they
can be dead wrong, but that is not the issue. In some cases, they may be indulging in
what is called “cookie-cutter projects” that repeat solutions tried elsewhere. But that is
not the predominant situation.
In fact, professionals tend to be moved by an earnest sense of duty in the search
for the best policies. In principle, they propose what they see as the ideal solutions to
the problems faced by the country. Their most egregious sin is to ignore institutional
barriers to implementation, such as the presence of politically strong opposition to
some dimensions of the project. In this sense, the project may be unrealistic, because it
proposes to do more than is politically possible. But staff means well.

--- [PDF Page 472 / Book Page 464] ---

464 Castro

Program officers do not have “the country” as counterpart. Instead, they deal with
ministers and those representing them. The Minister may be easily persuaded that what
is proposed by the Bank is what his country needs. Low and behold, Ministers are
politicians who have as their number one priority, survival in the position. As mentioned by the French Minister Luc Ferry, many appointed ministers believe that they
have been given a horse, in order to go somewhere. But it takes little time to realize
that they are in a different sport. They are in a rodeo and the goal is not to fall from
the bucking horse.
Therefore, what is good for the country may be politically impossible, may cost his
job, or erode his political capital. What most impressed this author in many missions
to discuss direction and content of loans was this ludicrous situation in which a foreign representing a bank defends the real interests of the country while the Minister
is concerned with the arithmetic of power. But there is nothing evil in the Minister’s
behavior. It is just the game of politics.
If there is a frank dialogue, the Minister may be candid about his predicament. In
common accord, political means to make the project more palatable to its adversaries
may be sought. Very often, it is agreed that the blame for including this or that item
will be put on the Bank, the Minister playing the role of a passive victim.

Economic Rationality or Political Feasibility?
Practical economists and bank officers very often face a severe trade-off between what
is the best economic solution and what is politically feasible in a given situation. In
order to understand that, one needs to follow the ups and downs of how decisions were
taken by banks, along their history.
The World Bank was born as an institution to fund the reconstruction of an Europe
ravaged by World War II. It was a brick and mortar bank and it did not need be more
than that. All that Europe required was to rebuild its physical infrastructure.
After having done that, the WB moved on to lend to less developed countries, all
around the world. Sooner or later it became clear that these countries needed more than
buildings and roads. Their institutions were in severe state of disrepair.
In the 1970s, the World Bank added institutional reform components to its loans.
The idea was perfectly sound. But its implementation turned out to be far more ridden
with problems than imagined. The results were not very good. The relations with clients became very confrontational and, in many cases, little reform was achieved.
At the same time, the IDB went on with simple loans to construct and equip. Little
was asked in the line of reforming institutions. These loans were far more successful.
They were easier to implement, even though the serious problems – mostly in dysfunctional institutional settings – remained untouched.
In the 1990s, the IDB modernized and became more concerned with reforms. At the
same time, the World Bank softened its demands for institutional changes – after having seen so many projects stalled. Progressively, the two banks became more similar in
the way they operate. In a few extreme cases, the IDB became more reform-oriented

--- [PDF Page 473 / Book Page 465] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 465

than the World Bank. But overall, they are still different banks. Let us examine a picture that is far too exaggerated.
The World Bank approaches the countries with elegant solutions to their problems.
It does its homework and produces sophisticated papers analyzing the issues and proposing creative and well spelled-out schemes. When the time to negotiate comes, it tends to
be prescriptive and to insist on its own elegant views. Quite often, the project officers do
not know well the country, its politics, its bureaucracy, and power structures.
Countries that are less able to defend their ideas succumb to the pressures of the
World Bank and accept the loans as proposed. Several outcomes are possible. In one
scenario, the loans are not implemented. In others, little in terms of reform takes place,
despite great consumption of energy on both sides.
Another scenario is when the Bank staff meets well-prepared and assertive government
staff on the other side. Sharp disagreements may ensue. Such countries are forthcoming
in what they want and they stand behind their ideas. But once agreement is reached, after
much give and take, there is a much better chance of successful implementation.
IDB style tends to be different. It goes to the country and asks the Minister what he
wants. Its officers know better the country and its institutions. And they always speak
the language. Several outcomes are possible. In one scenario, a very simple loan is
proposed, foregoing the potential to achieve something else in reforming institutions. In
more favorable scenarios, politically viable reforms are negotiated with the Minister.
The above is a simplistic and exaggerated description of either bank. But for this
reason, it helps one to understand the tone of the negotiations and the differences
between the two banks.
But in addition to all those considerations, purely personal elements and circumstances – on both sides – play a role that is far greater than anyone wants to admit.
Project officers end up having much leeway in negotiations. They are relatively free to
fine-tune the projects or to make blunders.
A skillful officer has a refined perception that allows him to go as far as possible, but
not farther, in insisting that this or that feature be included. He knows whom to trust
and he knows where the real power is.
A clumsy or arrogant officer may clash with his counterparts and insist on what is
not politically possible. Bad choices can be made.
By the same token, local staff makes an enormous difference. Here is one example. The IDB and the WB prepared two similar education loans to Ecuador. The IDB
went to the rural sector and the WB to urban marginal schools. The WB was a great
success. The IDB project never really functioned properly. The reason had to do with
the excellent local manager of one loan and the unfortunate succession of mediocre
managers of the other project.

Conditionalities: Powerful, Potentially Useful But Dangerous
Let us now examine what is the most delicate part of development banking. This is
something called conditionalities. It reminds us of Teddy Roosevelt, when he proposed
to speak softly and carry a big stick.

--- [PDF Page 474 / Book Page 466] ---

466 Castro

Loans may have strings attached. Conditionality thus means that the country must
fulfill a certain number of requirements in order to get the loan. For instance, reforming
teacher statutes, reducing deficits, charging full costs of utilities, preserving the environment, or whatever is fashionable at the time. In the majority of the cases, conditionalities will have two key features: (i) They are good for the country – at least in the long
run (ii) and they carry political costs to incumbents that must implement the reforms.
Ideally, a conditionality uses the clout of the Bank and the massive volume of funds
it has to offer to push through reforms which, most informed citizens agree, are welcome but politically costly. Therefore, they probably would not be undertaken if not
backed up by bank pressure.
This puts a frightfully dangerous weapon in the hands of the banks, but it is a most
formidable weapon for pushing reform. It allows a Ministry to overcome political opposition or inertia. Conditionalities give the banks the power to be a catalyst for reform.
However, past experiences with conditionalities have taught very humbling lessons.
First, things can go wrong. Second, to be quite frank, the banks cannot impose reform.
This was the painful lesson the World Bank learned in the 1980s, when as much as one
third of its portfolio was underperforming.
Why? Because the Bank tried to impose loans and reforms by brute force. We need to
be very clear about this: Banks cannot reform. They are pitifully weak in this regard. The
picturesque expression “herding cats” has been used to describe those failed efforts.
However, banks can be catalysts for reforms that are close to happening. In order to
achieve that, they should have good antennas to find where reforms are brewing. Along
these lines, the best they can do is to find the good guys at the right moment and support them in their efforts to make reform happen. The education reform of the State of
Minas Gerais (Brazil), in the 1980s, illustrates this successful strategy. A strong leader
with considerable experience in education became State Secretary of Education and
pushed for reform. A WB loan made implementation much easier.

Conditionalities in Action (or Inaction?)
Since conditionalities are the most critical and contentious element of a loan, it is
worth offering some concrete examples. Cases were chosen due to the author’s proximity to them and to illustrate the variety of possible outcomes.
Let us start with one of the worst scenarios. The political price of reform may be
excessive and the advice ill-conceived. Bolivia accepted a reform that imposed tests
for teachers and eliminated the tax that funded their unions. When the government
tried to implement these policies, this created such a political turmoil that the country
went into state of siege. This conditionality was a bad idea.
Paraguay contracted a very elaborate loan with the IDB, in order to reform and support vocational training. The loan had two parts. One went to an executing agency that
set up a competitive fund to train employees of small firms. The firms received training
vouchers for their staff that could be used in any of the approved private schools. This
segment of the loan was a great success. The other part of the loan, much larger, was
directed to the national training authority. But it was contingent on several structural
reforms in an institution that was undergoing a severe crisis. Years elapsed and the
second part could never be implemented.

--- [PDF Page 475 / Book Page 467] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 467

Morroco took a WB loan to construct technical schools and to undertake some
structural reforms in their system. The technical schools were built and became an
instant success. But the loan also prescribed that part of the budget of the Office de la
Formation Professionele was to be redirected to a fund, in order to invite competitive
bids from private training institutions. Years went by and, in every visit, the officer of
the WB would meet the Minister and ask about the creation of the fund. The answer
would be predictably evasive. Of course, it goes against the grain of civil servants to
take away from their own budget to fund private schools. The condition imposed was
unrealistic to start with.
Brazil wanted a loan to fund technical schools. But the predicament of these schools
was that they offered an academic education of the highest quality, parallel to the
occupational training. As a result, upper class students would bid out the more modest students in the competition to enroll in the technical school. But all the selected
students were interested in was, once graduated, to get approved in the most competitive examinations for higher education. The other students who could have an interest
in the occupations taught would be left out. For all practical purposes, the expensive
occupational training was a complete waste. The IDB imposed as a condition for the
loan that the technical schools were to be split into two separate programs: the academic secondary school and the occupational training. Therefore, upper class students
would not be interested in enrolling in the vocational track. They had all the good reasons to choose only the academic program, leaving vacancies in the occupational track
to students who really wanted this type of courses. The Minister welcomed this condition. For him, this was the right thing to do and he had the power to face the political
opposition. However, when an IDB executive tried to propose that the secondary track
be closed, this was a non-starter. The Minister simply said no. Here is an example of
a condition that was agreeable to the Minister and was met. The other condition was
unacceptable and was discarded during negotiations.

Are Loans Effective?
The ultimate criterion in judging the role of multilateral banks is to check the result of
the loans. This is the end, everything else is the means.

Who Benefits?
By looking at the performance of loans, one should be able to derive some generalizations about the profile of those countries that benefit the most and those who get little
out of them.
It is curious to notice that despite an incredible volume of papers and documents
produced by banks, relatively little was done to gauge the effectiveness of loans and
their ultimate impact on development. Matters have improved considerably in the last
5 years. But it does not seem that the present situation is entirely satisfactory.
Loan procedures follow very predictable and spelled-out procedures, both to prepare
and to manage during execution. Nothing is left to chance. And to wit, on both stages,
this is a very complex and demanding work, putting a very heavy burden on public

--- [PDF Page 476 / Book Page 468] ---

468 Castro

bureaucracies. In fact, first-hand experience shows how painfully slow and inadequate
is their delivery of services. Given the shortcomings of most public bureaucracies, we
know full well how painful is the burden created by these requirements. Therefore, it
is not a surprise that the weaker the civil service, the more excruciatingly slow is their
operation. It follows that the execution of the loan will be harmed.
It must be noted that even in the same country, some ministries are alert and efficient
while others are ponderous and unable to deliver. Hence, bank officers must evaluate
each bureaucracy and gauge its ability to handle the loan.

What Can Go Wrong with Loans?
Projects in the social area can go wrong in many possible ways. Unless they are mere
physical infrastructure operations, social projects are complicated and depend on
the adequate performance of a multitude of agents who cannot be directly controlled. But from the point of view of this paper, let us examine the following typical
problems.
Disbursement delays are the most conspicuous difficulty and the easiest to understand and measure. The cash flows, automatically monitored by bank accounting, capture many of the difficulties and shortcomings that may suffer a project. In other words,
anything that goes wrong usually delays disbursements. It could be waiting approval
in a slow-moving Congress. Until some years ago, delays in counterpart funds were
a most recurrent problem (more recent loans dispense with them). Or, the executing
group is not efficient. These are problems that tend to be purely administrative and
reappear frequently in projects that have very little in common.
All such snags converge to a single result: money is not disbursed and the timetables are not met. And the more complex the loan, the more difficult it is to implement.
While this author does not know any systematic research on this subject, first-hand
observation suggests that countries known for their weak bureaucracies tend to have
loans that do not perform or are delayed.
The same applies to different ministries. Loans that perform well in one ministry
tend to be followed by other successful loans in the same ministry.
Of course, there are accidents, such as the loss of critical officers managing the loan,
on either side. Contrariwise, problem-loans can be fixed and fine-tuned to perform
splendidly. An extreme case is an education loan to the northeast of Brazil that took
10 years to really get it working well.
Reform-intensive projects are the most vulnerable loans. Even in poor countries
banks often do well in building infrastructure. They overcome the bureaucratic weaknesses by hiring international firms that know the business of building bridges and
railroads. School or hospital construction is usually subcontracted to the private sector.
But problems appear when banks try to tackle more complex development problems,
such as reforms that change the way people and public institutions work.
When banks try to go beyond heavy infrastructure and help the poor in poor countries, this may turn out to be impossible. Such projects require a level of bureaucratic
robustness on the receiving end that is rarely – if ever – found. Programs to help the
poor must break down the resources in very small parcels that will go to a multitude

--- [PDF Page 477 / Book Page 469] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 469

of small institutions. Controlling this complex web of transactions is a nightmare. This
is the case with rural schools, health posts, distribution of milk, or whatever requires
capillarity to reach the bottom of society.
Sometimes, bank staff cannot even prepare loans because the bureaucracy on the
other end is administratively weak and cannot present background data and statistics.
When the loans are made under such conditions they often end up being failures or
bad projects.
To sum it up, banks can help the very poor in middle-income countries. But they
have too often failed in trying to help the poorest of the poor in poor countries. This is
an unfortunate contingency.
In recent years, both banks have become less arrogant and more humble, learning to
be more careful in adjusting the projects to prevailing conditions within countries.
The World Bank has tried to sell reform time and again, particularly in the 1980s.
More often than not, it has not worked. It used to be that designing a modern reform
project was a challenge for bank staff. Now, staff in both banks knows how to prepare
such projects. The real challenge is to understand the country and to know how far it
can go in reforming its institutions.
In conclusion, development banks do have something to offer, even to poorer countries. But it has to be tailor-made for each case. The good news is that they are learning
their lessons.
However, banks cannot escape from a serious predicament. The better off the countries, the more effective and reform-oriented can be the loans. And the poorer the
countries the more they need reform and the more difficult it is to help them. Let us
consider, for instance, that some of the recipient countries have fewer phones than the
offices of the WB. Or, countries in which horse-drawn plows represent a technological
innovation (Mallaby, 2004: 342). In other words, those who need the most are the ones
who can benefit the less from the multilateral banks – at least, the way they are organized nowadays. Worse, even at the design stage, no better solutions have been found
for funding development in these poorer countries.
Ultimately, too much depends on the internal dynamics of the country. Banks are
unable to alter it significantly. If the country cannot get its act together, loans are likely
to perform poorly and have little impact on development.

Managing Loans: A Nightmare of Paperwork
Banks are not as evil and incompetent as their nemesis denounce. That, however, is not
the critical issue. In fact, most accusations miss the target. They focus on policies and
policy controversies and usually fail to notice the most critical weakness of multilateral banks: the implementation stage.
Outside authors, both right and left, focus their comments on policies, policy debates,
and the intrinsic merits of what the banks are proposing to do. Yet, to my understanding, this is not where the real problems are. How useful is it to discuss endlessly the
ideological soundness of a proposal to reform teacher regulations if all the countries
can implement is the construction of schools?

--- [PDF Page 478 / Book Page 470] ---

470 Castro

Past experience has taught the banks very humbling lessons. First, everything can go
wrong – and things do go wrong. Banks do not advertise much their failings at the implementation stage. Some projects die at the preparation level, due to the inability of the country teams to respond to the requests for information or due to basic disagreements about
what the project should look like. A few are approved but never disburse, due to legal snags
or bureaucratic inertia. Most loans actually disburse but slower than predicted. In fact, very
few loans come to completion within the originally scheduled program. A significant proportion gets stuck somewhere along the line, due to many different reasons, the major one
used to be delays in counterpart funding. A cycle of 15 years is not uncommon.
The fact of the matter is that loans have very complex disbursement mechanisms
and accounting, since banks and the local government share costs and responsibilities.
Bureaucratic controls to avoid corruption and embezzlements slow down everything.

Evaluation has Unclear Impact on Design and Procedures
In all fairness, banks have departments that have as their main task to evaluate past
performance of their loans. Some of the papers produced are well prepared and candid
in their appraisals. However, banks are not too eager to disseminate statistics showing
which projects fall victim of each of the problems already mentioned.
The fact of the matter is that all the internal incentives to find out and denounce
projects that did not do very well are quite dim. All parties concerned stand to lose.
Perhaps this is the weakest link in the entire system.
Ultimately, one would want to know whether the loans achieved their purpose. This,
of course, is a thorny issue, not very popular among bank administrators. Not only
that, but agreeing on what is the purpose of the loan is just as delicate. There are several measures of achievement. The one favored by current bank procedures is disbursement. Lack of disbursement is the only real embarrassment for bank staff.
The failure rate, measured as not disbursing all the money in the loan is relatively low.
It used to be10% in the IDB. But even though the vast majority of the projects eventually
disburse all the funds and come to an end, the delays are recurrent and serious. It is not
uncommon for a project to take more than twice the planned time to be executed.
Once the money is disbursed, there is a sigh of relief and few want to probe further. The next step, also formalized in the banks’ rituals, is whether the money purchased what it was supposed to purchase. In other words, was the prescribed number
of schools built? Were all the targeted teachers trained and the books purchased? This
is part of the contract and is duly verified by accountants and auditors. But this is
tantamount to measuring results by measuring inputs.
The issue is not whether teachers have taken courses. But have they learned anything? Are the students benefiting from their increased skills? We often know that the
purchased books were distributed. Perhaps we can find out whether they are being
used. But are students learning more as a consequence?
Loan officers and the bank bureaucracy rarely, if ever, ask these questions. But
ultimately, they are the truly relevant questions. Otherwise, why have loans if students
do not benefit from them?

--- [PDF Page 479 / Book Page 471] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 471

To be fair, special studies by evaluation offices of the banks do ask such questions.
And they are becoming better and increasingly frequent.
Low and behold, the results, while not tragic, tend not to be very flattering. The
bureaucrats pay attention to the papers and attend seminars organized by evaluation offices. They politely acknowledge the results, agree on their importance and do
nothing about it. Given the existing rules, there are no rewards for doing much along
these lines. Nobody gains by admitting that loans have less spectacular impacts than
assumed by the standard rules of measuring results. And finding culprits of unknown
sins is not good form among peers.
Probing a bit deeper into the realities of implementation, there is one recurring
result that is often mentioned by observers – mostly inside the banks. The less physically concrete the line of activities, the greater the chance of not being implemented.
Typically, all schools are built, most teachers are trained and computers are purchased.
Also typical, the reform component is not implemented.

Are Banks Learning Organizations?
After so many years of doing projects, it is fair to ask whether banks are learning
from their experience and from their mistakes. In other words, are they learning
organizations?
This author and an associate (from the IDB) have conducted an analysis of the entire
IDB portfolio of education projects, asking exactly this question. The paper was never
published, which is understandable, considering the sensitive nature of the material.
What is worrisome, but not surprising, is that it never received much attention from
the management of the Bank (even though it was widely requested and read by staff)
(Castro & Verdisco, 2000).
The results are surprising in more ways than one. Firstly, they are clear-cut, which is
not common in such analysis. Secondly, they show a sharp dichotomy in the answers
that were found to the basic question asked.
When asked whether a new project reflects what was learned in the previous loans
along the same line, the answer was clearly positive. Each project tends to incorporate
learning and lessons from the previous. The IDB tends to repeat success stories and
tries to fix problems found in previous projects that are similar. Hence, in this sense,
the IDB is a learning organization.
However, when we looked at implementation, the answer is just the opposite. The
tools of implementation are cumbersome and do not seem to improve. What did not
work before in managing and controlling projects reappears again in the next one.
The same mistakes are repeated again and again. The projects get stuck exactly in
the same hurdles (lack of counterpart funds, poor management, lack of leadership,
bureaucratic snags, and many other recurrent causes).
Offering management-training programs is naively taken as administrative reform
or improvement. Local control procedures are too complicated. Fear of corruption
traumatizes small bureaucrats who would rather slow down a project to a halt, rather
than run the risks of petty irregularities. Supervision is purely from an accounting
point of view, failing to notice obvious errors of judgment along the way.

--- [PDF Page 480 / Book Page 472] ---

472 Castro

What is worrisome is that these weaknesses do not generate any counterforces to fix
the system. There is great inertia in the system. The banks are not learning organizations in what concerns implementation. They are stuck with dysfunctional procedures,
fail to detect problems, fail to fix them, and fail to create any meaningful motivation to
learn and use this learning to improve design.

Ideas or Funds?
Late in the 1990s, the WB management floated the theory that it should go into the
business of helping countries with ideas, papers, and policy suggestions, instead of
lending money. In addition to loans, it would become a huge consulting firm. After all,
the technical competence of the WB is peerless.
This proposal seems a good launching pad to discuss the reform components of
loans. Are there the good ideas that the banks could provide to countries? Would countries pay for them?
We cannot go beyond conjectures and subjective perceptions. But for what they are
worth, it seems to this author that these ideas will never fly. Ministries do not seem
particularly motivated to contract expensive consultants to propose reforms that are
politically painful. And most reforms are painful.
Let us not forget that other international agencies, such as UNESCO, are prodigal in
advice to member countries. And it is quite clear that countries do not pay much attention to what they propose, even though the ideas come free of charge.
Experience seems to suggest that one big and real motivation to engage in reforms
is the large sums of money that come with the loans. Therefore, what sets banks apart
from other international agencies is exactly the fact that the funds provided by the
loans, somehow, force the Ministries to pay attention to the policy suggestions. In fact,
the conditionalities – mentioned before – are just the mechanism to obtain the implementation of the policies proposed.
Small countries – or those that are very anxious to get a loan, in order to have more
slack in their budgets – are the ones that tend to take the advice more seriously, particularly when they come as conditions for the loans.
More affluent countries are in a better position to resist conditionalities that have
a heavier political price tag. Take the case of Brazil, where the national development
bank lends three times as much as does the WB to the entire world. In fact, WB loans
in Brazil will not buy a reform that is needed but politically uncomfortable. If the
country undertakes a reform, it is because the moment is ripe, not because of the loan
contracted with one of the banks.
Having said that, it is also necessary to recognize that banks are powerful and creative
proponents of new and valuable ideas and policies. Hundreds of professionals and an even
greater number of distinguished academics are engaged to do serious research on most
areas in which the Bank lends. The close links with the academic world give a strong credibility to the ideas disseminated by the WB – and to a lesser extent, by the IDB.
In fact, many ideas that acquired currency and legitimacy were originally proposed
by them. This is the case of testing students and using the results to evaluate progress
in education. The same can be said of the emphasis on high-quality textbooks and
teaching materials, as well as computers. Ideas on health and social security reform

--- [PDF Page 481 / Book Page 473] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 473

originated in the WB. They were at first rejected but eventually, were successfully
implemented.
In this respect, it is interesting to notice that new ideas take long to mature. The first
paper on health reform came out more than 10 years before the first country adopted
it – to wit, Colombia.
Another wild card in this game is that ideas change. Cynics may claim that they are
subjected to the same vagaries that determine feminine fashion. The World Bank and
the IDB pushed higher education vigorously. Then, they decided that there was over
investment in universities and the crisis area was basic education. No more lending to
higher education for over one decade and a barrage of papers denouncing the mistake
of putting money in universities – even though, often the money came from the banks.
Now higher education is back in fashion.
The question that comes to mind is the inevitable doubt about the impact of new
ideas versus the impact of the loans in the long run. One could argue that good ideas
eventually become acceptable and implemented, while loans tend to merely build
schools or equip them. As much as this is a critical issue, it does not seem that we have
good evidence to clarify matters.
There has been much discussion on matters of ideas versus money, particularly in
the WB. In part, they have been prompted by outside critics that tend to exaggerate the
power of multilateral banks. Yet, some observers have a much more sobering or even
pessimistic view. For instance:
World Bank funding exerts little influence on social policy. . . . High concentrations of World Bank funding have virtually no impact on the share of educational
resources devoted to primary education. . . . Although the World Bank has the
financial resources and the technocratic allies to buttress the transmission of
its ideas, bureaucratic and political forces often get in the way. . . . In the final
analysis, the World Bank can pressure but cannot force the Brazilian government to adopt its recommendations. . . . Domestic political forces prevail over
international technocratical linkages when it comes to redistributive social polity making. (Hunter & Browne, 2000)
Be that as it may, in the long run, ideas and a better understanding of problems may very well
be the most important contribution of development banks. But they take long to mature.

Lessons?
There has been mounting criticism levied against the Banks (as always, the WB is the
main target). Much of it is heavily ideological. Some is just the visible manifestation of
interest groups, in their efforts to influence the bank lending and policies.
Our central contention is that most criticism is misdirected. The egregious shortcoming of the banks is the fact that great ideas succumb in the process of implementation. Countries just cannot implement the projects funded by the loan. But the banks
are just as guilty, because they misjudged the implementability of the loan.
At first, life was easy, countries badly needed the loans and were not ready to take an
adversarial stand. But more and more, strident critics from the left began to criticize the

--- [PDF Page 482 / Book Page 474] ---

474 Castro

banks, both in the advanced and in the less developed countries. Banks were accused
of being an arm of imperialism and to impose their ideology on borrowing countries.
These indictments often have a grain of truth but are largely unwarranted as attempts
to disqualify almost everything the banks do. The argument here is not that banks are
entirely innocent. They are not, but the critics tend to miss the target.
The ideology that stands behind bank loans reflects what Western mainstream
economists believe. Surely, there are dilemmas. For instance, more growth with larger
deficits and inflation? Or a more conservative financial management? More reform or
more bricks and mortar?
Be that as it may, only a few of the bank loans are contentious. It seems that minimally rational critics could find little to complain about the average loan. Who can be
against roads or hospitals in the case they are truly needed?
As someone who has had significant contact with those designing and implementing loans, the impression one gets is that most officers are eminently competent, have
ample experience in what they are doing and mean well. Perhaps idealism is too strong
a word, but very few officers are cynical or jaded about their work. They try to get to
know the aspect of the country they are dealing with and produce competent analysis,
leading to the policy lines they think would be most appropriate. Of course, they have
made many mistakes along the way. But they are doing their best and nobody really
knows how to promote the development of a country. It was an easy bet to rebuild factories or roads in Germany. But what should they do in Chad or Haiti?
A most relevant aspect of their work has to do with new ideas for reforming policies and institutions. No other agency in the world has generated so many innovations
in these matters, most of the time, backed by solid empirical research. In fact, no
other agency has several thousands well-trained professionals in their staff, with ample
experience in the field.
Long gone are the days when UNESCO had a leading role in spearheading new ideas in
education. The WB has taken up this role in earnest. It is instructive to remember that the
Jomtiem meeting of Education for All had the strong leadership of the WB. UNESCO had
no choice but to participate, without having a strong voice in the ideas and organization.
In education alone, the banks have championed the use of student’s evaluations,
carefully prepared textbooks, accountability of programs and agencies, merit pay for
teachers, competitive bids for training contracts, new schemes for vocational schools,
student loans, vouchers, and many other policies.
It is instructive to notice that some of these ideas were initially rejected with
vehemence but, after so many years, became acceptable practices. A case in point
is students’ evaluation that is increasingly considered as the best tool to monitor
education.
The main problem is that the speed of acceptance of new ideas often does not coincide
with the life cycle of a loan. It may take much longer for an idea to be accepted. Loans
are bureaucratic procedures with timetables and budgets. Ideas have a life of their own,
float around, and may find strong rejection for a much longer time than the loan lasts.
Policy and ideological issues have become the object of live discussion and sometimes bitter arguments by outside critics. Yet, it is the contention of this paper that most
of these invectives miss the point.

--- [PDF Page 483 / Book Page 475] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 475

The Achilles’ heel of the entire lending process is not ideology or imperialism. The
real issue is whether the loans deliver what they are supposed to deliver, ultimately,
development. As suggested before, implementation is a big problem. Banks staff and
rules are a lot less enlightened in delivery than in conception. Bank procedures to
execute a loan are ponderous and inflexible.
Worse, there are no powerful forces to seriously repair projects that do not seem
to be performing well. There are no prizes for whistle-blowing. In fact, along the
chain of design and execution, everybody may be guilty of some error if the project
does not perform. For that reason alone, there is a strong reluctance to denounce
poor performance and to redress procedures. For almost all concerned, hiding weaknesses may be a more expedite line of action. This is also true for the Ministry that
receives the loan. It is highly probable that its performance has been less than stellar
in managing it. The last thing it wants to do is to recognize those failures and do
something about them.
Loans get delayed, disbursement stalls for bureaucratic snags, and abrupt changes in
staff create havoc with execution. And above all, those reform components that happen
to carry a greater political price fall behind and may never be implemented.
That is not to say that all or most of the loans are ultimately ineffective. This is not
the case. However, despite the effort of evaluation offices, we know little about their
impact on development.

The New Scenarios
The world is changing, perhaps faster than one would expect or like. The situation of
multilateral banks is presently quite different from what it was 10 years ago.
Many of the implementation problems presented in this essay reflect recurring
issues facing the banks. However, while most of these problems have not been solved,
new ones emerge.
Banks have no problems to raise capital. All they need is to float titles in the world’s
financial markets. However, potential borrowers are increasingly less interested in taking loans.
In the 1990s, many countries were having difficulties in continuing to take loans
from development banks. Several were indebted beyond the agreed limits of the IMF.
They just could not borrow more.
In more recent years, surfaced another equally serious problem for the banks. It has
to do with the better creditworthiness of some countries (in Latin America, Brazil,
Chile, and Mexico are classical cases) and the huge amount of private capital migrating to “emerging markets.” The implications are clear. Countries now can borrow from
the private banking system at favorable interest rates. And with private banks, the hassle of preparing a loan and executing the project is drastically reduced. Private banks
do not ask many questions on how the funds will be spent. Once satisfied that the client will pay back, the rest is not their problem. Therefore, some of the operations that
previously were going through multilateral banks are diverted to private banks.
This has been a major setback for the multilateral banks and matters may become
worse in the future. In Latin America, the largest countries, borrowing the bulk of the

--- [PDF Page 484 / Book Page 476] ---

476 Castro

available funds, have slowed down and reduced their business with the WB and the
IDB. In smaller countries, even when they are permitted to borrow, the total of their
operations amounts to a small proportion of the funds set aside for lending. In addition, the fixed costs of preparing a loan hardly justify the amount borrowed.
In the last several years, both the WB and the IDB have initiated programs to lend to
the private sector of their client countries. These operations are growing and this is an
area in which considerable expansion may be possible.
However, it does not seem reasonable to think that they can expand to the point
where they make up for the loss of business resulting from the limitations imposed
on countries to borrow more. After all, the same abundance of private credit makes
the multilateral banks less competitive, given their ponderous and time-consuming
bureaucratic procedures.
Perhaps the most promising responses by the bank, in order to face these new and
difficult predicaments, lie in the development of new financial products. While both
banks always had a variety of modes of lending, the conventional loans to fund a well
spelled-out set of projects always predominated.
The new trend is to expand loans under which the country agrees on a broad set
of objectives and receives a lump sum of money to pursue them. These are outcomebased loans. Since countries freely choose the project, they thereby acquire greater
“ownership.”
But there are also variations on the conventional loans. An interesting alternative
is to negotiate a step by step loan. Instead of making a loan and repeating the entire
bureaucratic rites for the next one, along the same lines, there is an agreement that
once the first is successfully completed, it can lead almost automatically to the next.
All things considered, multilateral banks are not in a comfortable position. Living in
a buyers’ market is far more difficult. For a long time, countries could not change fast
enough to satisfy their goals of reform. Now the world seems to be changing too fast
for them to catch up.

Notes
1.

2.
3.
4.

The author is presently the President of the Advisory Board of the Pitágoras System, but he has been
a regular staff member of the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. My gratitude
to Ricardo Santiago, also a former IDB officer who read the manuscript and made useful suggestions.
However, he does not necessarily endorse all ideas presented here.
While other multilateral banks are similar, the author is not familiar with them.
Some of the sources come from internal memoranda and other papers that were not meant to be published.
To simplify the discussion, this chapter ignores what are called IDA operations, geared to the poorest
countries in the regions. These loans use money directly provided by donor countries. In these loans,
the countries providing the capital have a much stronger voice.

References
Barbosa de Araujo, A. (1991). O Governo Brasileiro, o BIRD e o BID: Cooperação e Confronto. Brasília: IPEA
Castro, Claudio de Moura. (2002). The World Bank Policies: Damned if you do, damned if you don’t.
Comparative Education 38(4).

--- [PDF Page 485 / Book Page 477] ---

Can Multilateral Banks Educate the World? 477
Castro, Claudio de Moura & Verdisco, A. (2000). Philogenetic approach to portfolio monitoring. Working
Paper IDB
Costa Couto, R.. (2000). A história viva do BID e o Brasil. Edição BID.
Frigotto, G. (1995). Os delírios da razão. In P. Gentili (Ed.), Pedagogia da exclusão. Petrópolis: Editora
Vozes.
Heyneman, S. (2003). The history and problems in the making of education policy at the World Bank:
1960–2000. In D. Baker & D. Gustafson (Eds.), International perspectives on education and society
(pp. 315–337). Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Hunter, W. & Browne, D. (2000) World Bank directives, domestic interest and the politics of human capital
investment in Latin America. Comparative Political Studies, 33(1).
Ianni, O. (1996). Teorias da globalização, cadernos de problemas Brasileiros, No 318.
Jones, P. W. (1992). World bank financing of education. London and New York: Routledge.
Kuenzer, A. (2000). Ensino médio e profissional. São Paulo: Cortez Editores.
Mallaby, S. (2004). The world banker. Penguin Books. Washington: The Penguin Press.
Moisés Naim (April 1994). The World Bank: Its role, governance and organizational culture. Washington:
Carnegie.
Monteiro, M. A. (2000). Aprender a aprender: Garantia de uma educação de qualidade?, Presença
Pedagógica, 6.
Torres, R. M. (1996). Melhorar a qualidade da educação básica? As estratégias do Banco Mundial. In:
Tommasi, L. De. Warde, J. M., Hadded, S. (orgs.) O Banco Mundial e as políticas educacionais (pp.
125–194). São Paulo: Cortez Ed.
Williamson, J. (2004). Nossa Agenda e o Consenso de Washington. In Kuczynski, P. & J. Williamson (orgs).
Depois do Consenso de Washington (pp. 283–291). São Paulo: Editora Saraiva.

