================================================================================
Chapter 30: Towards The European Panopticon: EU Discourses and Policies in Education and Training 1992–2007
Author(s): George Pasias and Yiannis Roussakis
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 3: The National, The International, and The Global
Book Pages: pp. 479–495
PDF Pages: pp. 486–502 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 486 / Book Page 479] ---

30
TOWARDS THE EUROPEAN PANOPTICON:
EU DISCOURSES AND POLICIES IN EDUCATION
AND TRAINING 1992–2007
George Pasias and Yannis Roussakis

Introduction
The 1990s were marked by various challenges, changes and transformations at the economic, geopolitical, social and technological levels (Held & McGrew, 2000; Adam,
Beck & van Loon 2000; Reich, 1991) which, in several instances, affected the ongoing transformation processes of the European Union (EU). These challenges were often
related to factors such as the globalisation of the economy, the growth of Information and
Communication Technologies (ICTs), the rapid development of ‘techno-science’ and the
immigration influx to Europe. At the economic level in particular, changes were dominated by the widespread effects of the new technologies in the industries and the enterprises, and by international agreements for the liberalisation of markets and trade (e.g. the
World Trade Organisation General Agreement on Trade in Services – WTO/GATS), which
changed both the relative significance of the production factors and the international division of labour (Aglietta, 1998). The perceived challenges of this new economic order were
underlined in the new ‘human and social capital’ theory (Baron et al., 2000), which argued
for a new, knowledge-based distribution of labour, flexible production forms and relationships, high specialisation, performativity and mobility of the workforce (Lyotard, 1984;
Burton-Jones, 1999; Hargreaves, 2003). In the early 1990s, the structural and social consequences of these economic and technological changes were acknowledged at the EU level,
with special reference to the ‘technological/competition gap’, the ‘regional inequalities’
between the member states, the ‘demographic problem’ and ‘unemployment’ and ‘social
exclusion’ in the European societies (Maravegjas & Tsinisizelis, 1995). These transformations accelerated the decisions concerning the institutional, political and economic statusquo of the European Union, and they led to changes in the economic dimension (e.g. the
establishment of the EMU and the Euro zone, 2001), in the geopolitical dimension (e.g.
the enlargement with the Eastern and Central European countries in 2004), in the political
dimension (e.g. the process for establishing a EU Constitutional Treaty between 2004 and
2006) and in the social dimension (e.g. accounts of demographic ageing, modernisation
of pension systems and employment).
All these developments gave new meaning to significant concepts like European
Union, European citizen, economic and social cohesion, European governance, and
479
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 479–495.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 487 / Book Page 480] ---

480 Pasias and Roussakis

introduced new discourses on competitiveness, quality, employability, performativity,
convergence, which permeated the EU politics and policies (Bonal 2003; Marglhaes
& Soter, 2003; Pasias, 2006b: 63–70). They also constructed a new operational context for education, which gradually became a high-priority area in the Community’s
politics and policies. Education and training were directly linked with the central EU
policy choices in the fields of the economy, social cohesion, scientific research and
innovation, which, in the words of the Lisbon Strategy, aimed at ‘Europe to become the
most competitive knowledge economy in the world’ (European Council, 2000a). At the
same time, education became a part of political actions aiming at the enhancement of
the symbolic and ‘imagined’ content of European integration (e.g. European governance, European citizenship, European identity), and the transition to the ‘knowledge
societies and economies’ and the constitution of a European polity.
In the Sorbonne Declaration (1999), the document which had set the ground for the
‘Bologna process’ in European higher education, the Ministers of Education of France,
Germany, Italy and the UK, four of the core members of the European Union, stated that:
The European process has very recently moved some extremely important steps
ahead. Relevant as they are, they should not make one forget that Europe is not
only that of the Euro, of the banks and the economy: it must be a Europe of knowledge as well. We must strengthen and build upon the intellectual, cultural, social
and technical dimensions of our continent. (Sorbonne Declaration, 1999: 1)
The concept ‘Europe of Knowledge’ in its current EU meaning emerged in the 1990s to
describe the radical changes that took place in the field of ‘knowledge’ and to categorise contemporary societies and post-industrial economies which are considered to be
knowledge-based and informational, open, innovative and communicative (Stehr, 1994;
Delanty, 2001; Stone, 2000; Castells, 1998). As an approach to education, ‘Europe of
Knowledge’ is sometimes considered as a signifier of a certain socio-economic, political, cultural and educational ‘paradigm’, identified with a certain construction of the
European educational reality. In this sense, the way ‘Europe of Knowledge’ is presented
by the EU actually serves as a ‘roadmap’ or a ‘diagram’ of ‘power-knowledge’ relations
in the European Union, exemplifying the close nexus of discourses and practices that
aim at the formation of a European Area of Education.
The purpose of this chapter is to examine critically the educational discourses and policies of the European Union since its institutionalisation with the Treaty of Maastricht in
1992, and their constructed concept of a ‘Europe of Knowledge’. It will be argued that
the educational policies of the EU are strongly related to its political and economic goals,
and that they are often enjoined to serve these goals in a passive and uncritical manner.
It will be argued that the educational discourses and practices of the Union are often used
as, what M. Foucault would call, ‘regimes of truth’ (Foucault, 1980: 133). They indicate
acceptable systems of knowledge, which are in turn used for knowledge politics control
and the legitimation of educational reforms, at both the national and the European levels. It
will also be argued that the educational politics and policies of the EU are dominated by the
interrelated discourses of marketisation, regulation, competitiveness and performativity,
which draw from and are influenced by the ideology of ‘technocracy’, and by the ideas and

--- [PDF Page 488 / Book Page 481] ---

Towards The European Panopticon 481

practices put forward by certain economically oriented international organisations such as
the OECD, the World Bank and the IMF. Finally, it will be argued that the rhetoric of ‘quality’, ‘sustainability’, ‘employability’, ‘competitiveness’, ‘accountability’, ‘economic and
social cohesion’, used by the EU in its Europe of Knowledge educational discourses and
practices, is actually a form of ‘governmentality’. As such, it could be argued that the EU
is dictating, in a covert or overt manner, politics of ‘surveillance’ and ‘control’ of national
education policies and planning, literally establishing a contemporary ‘Panopticon’ of the
European Education Area.

Education in the EU after Maastricht
Education and training were institutionalised as ‘competences’ of the European
Community for the first time in the Treaty of Maastricht (Treaty of the European Union/
TEU, European Council 1993). The relevant articles were based on the principle of subsidiarity, which delegated the division of power over education and training to the member
states and the European Union. The phrasing of the text indicated that there was a clear
differentiation of the scope and the aims of Community action between education, where
the Community ‘contributes to the development of quality education’ (Article 126), and
training, where the Community ‘implements a vocational training policy’ (Article 127).
The two policy areas were further differentiated with respect to the decision-making
processes which prevailed for each one of them. For education, decision-making usually followed the procedures of Article 189B (the co-decision procedure), while training
issues were decided following mostly the procedures of Article 189C (the cooperation
procedure). The institutionalisation of education in the TEU also entailed the upgrading
of the administrative structures responsible for education and training in the European
Commission, leading to the establishment of a General Directorate in 1995.
In examining the involvement of the EU in education and training since 1992, we can
distinguish three different periods, which are marked by different perceptions of the role
of education and training in the Union and the predominance of different discourses and
policy practices. These periods are: 1993 to 1996, 1997 to 1999 and 2000 to date.

The Policy Consolidation Period, 1993–1996
The first period, which is characterised by the Commission’s attempt to consolidate education in the Community apparatus, extends from 1993 to 1996. This period was characterised by intensive debate and activity which resulted in important changes in the ways
education, as discourses and practices, was perceived in the EU context. It also resulted
in the expansion of the indirect and implied competences of the Community towards
education. Concurrently, a wider legalisation procedure was launched which aimed at
strengthening the complementarity of education and training to other policy areas of the
Community (especially to in the social, the technological and the cultural domains).
Education was perceived to be an important element of a wider strategy, which aimed
at the consolidation of the EU as a political and economic entity and a world player, but
also as an ‘imagined community’, in Benedict Anderson’s meaning (Anderson, 1983).

--- [PDF Page 489 / Book Page 482] ---

482 Pasias and Roussakis

This second task seemed urgent at the time, considering the difficulties encountered
during the ratification process of the Maastricht Treaty. The reactions of the European
electorate emphatically showed that the European integration project needed ideological and symbolic depth within the national civil societies. In order to respond to those
voices which argued that the EU perspective was irrelevant or hostile to the European
societies, the European Commission circulated several policy documents that referred
to issues with a visible impact on concerned Europeans. Such issues included ‘social
solidarity’ (EC, 23-12-1992), ‘social policy’ (EC, 17-11-1993), ‘citizenship’ (EC, 2112-1993), ‘democratic deficit’ (EC, 5-5-1993) and ‘transparency’ (EC, 2-6-1993) of
the EU governance. All these documents and the policies which they initiated, served,
in one way or another, the attempt to enhance the symbolic, imagined and ideological
meaning of European integration and to coin expressions such as ‘European home’,
‘Europe of citizens’, ‘European governance’ and ‘diminution of democratic deficit’.
In order to take advantage of education as a ‘Europeanisation’ factor and to pinpoint
the huge European intellectual and human potential as a ‘competitive advantage’ in its
struggle against international rivals (such as the USA and Japan), the EU had to consolidate education and training in the Community edifice as soon as it would be able to do
so. So, in a very short time, it attempted to construct a discourse that would bring about a
significant change in the perception of the role of education in Europe. The institutional
framework of education in the Maastricht Treaty made this attempt easier than ever before
in the history of the Community. In the 1980s, particularly during the 1986–1992 period,
the European Commission used the political and economic goals of the Community (e.g.
European unification, the common market and the emergence of European citizenship),
to justify its involvement in education through action programmes, and to legitimise
the educational initiatives put forth at the European level (Pollack, 2000: 520). After
Maastricht, the educational objectives were used in order to support and enhance the
political, economic and social goals of the EU (e.g. convergence, adaptation, interaction
and cohesion). By the late 1990s, a radically different perception of the role of education,
at the discourse level, had taken shape, mainly in the context of the European Strategy
for the Employment and Social Cohesion. Education, which was formerly perceived by
many European governments to be part of the crisis of the welfare systems, had gradually been transformed to perhaps the most significant institutional factor which would
help Europeans to resolve this crisis (Pasias, 2006a: 373–374).
In the ‘Guidelines for education in the’90s’ (European Commission, 1993c), a document which summed up the Commission’s initiatives, we see clearly that the European
Commission had developed its educational discourse through commonly agreed significant documents (mainly Green and White Papers). These documents were powerful
instruments of political intervention both at the European level – through the support
provided to cooperation networks among educational organisations, the labour market
and social partners – and at the national level by affecting national educational planning and reforms. The discourse which emerged from these documents linked education and training policies with the EU policies for competitiveness, employment and
social cohesion.
In the White Paper ‘Growth, Competitiveness, Employment: The Challenges
and Ways Forward into the 21st Century’ (1993), which described and analysed the

--- [PDF Page 490 / Book Page 483] ---

Towards The European Panopticon 483

perceived challenges for the European Union in a changing international environment,
it was argued that:
The Community should set firmly and clearly the essential requirements and
the long-term objectives for measures and policies [in education and training]
in order to make it easier to develop a new model for growth, competitiveness
and employment in which education and training play a key role and to ensure
essential equality of opportunity and the coherent development of the three
dimensions of the European system of education and training (education, training and culture). (European Commission, 1993a: 122)
It was also proposed that this should be done by ‘developing, generalising and systematising lifelong learning and continuing training’. According to this White Paper,
this meant that ‘education and training systems must be reworked in order to take
account of the need which is already growing and is set to grow even more in the
future’ (European Commission, 1993a: 120).
The same principles were further elaborated in the Commission’s White Paper
‘Teaching and Learning - Towards the Learning Society’ (1995). This Paper attempted
to identify the role of education in an emerging European Knowledge Society and
Knowledge Economy in the light of three presumed ‘factors of upheaval’, namely
‘globalisation’, ‘information society’ and ‘techno-science’. It also attempted to mark
out a strategy for the development of human resources in view of the EU’s transformation of the European ‘Knowledge Society’. Right from the start it argued that
‘investment in knowledge plays an essential role in employment, competitiveness and
social cohesion’, and that ‘the individual’s place in relation to their fellow citizens will
increasingly be determined by their capacity to learn and master fundamental knowledge’ (European Commission, 1995b: 1–2).
In both these texts the Commission actually constructs a ‘market orientated discourse’ for education. It has been argued that this discourse draws from, and aligns
with, the neoliberal perceptions of international economic organisations such as the
OECD, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund, as they foreshadow the
future development of education and training systems in the post-industrial societies
(Kazamias, 1995; Field, 1998; Spring, 1998). In order to identify the labour market
relationships and the employment conditions of the future ‘knowledge societies and
economies’, the aforementioned White Paper coined a number of key-concepts such
as: ‘competitiveness’, ‘adaptability’, ‘elasticity’, ‘flexibility’, ‘quality’, ‘certification’
and ‘evaluation’. It also advocated policies which primarily aimed at the development
of flexible skills and competences, at the expansion of access to continuous training,
at the certification of formal and informal qualifications and at the closer relationship
between educational institutions and business enterprises (European Commission,
1995b: 44–47). On another widely debated issue, that of the financing of education,
the White Paper questioned the view that education is a public good and advocated
the reduction of public spending and the promotion of co-financing or self-financing
processes by education and training recipients (European Commission, 1995b: 48).
The influence of the market discourse on the White Paper is further underlined in its

--- [PDF Page 491 / Book Page 484] ---

484 Pasias and Roussakis

proposals to establish an outcomes-oriented system of evaluation of education based
on measurable criteria (e.g. quality, productivity, performativity and effectiveness) and
to finance education and training systems based on results (European Commission,
1995b: 46–49). In this sense the educational project presented in these White Papers,
leads to a circumscribed perception of the ‘Europe of knowledge’ dominated by the
neoliberal views about the world economy.
In an attempt to counterbalance this ‘economistic’ view of education, the
Commission, in both documents discussed above, but also in the Green Paper on the
‘European dimension in education’, included some references to the cultural tradition of the European education systems. In the Green Paper, the Commission pointed
out the need for the adaptation of the educational process to the new economic,
social and cultural context of a unified Europe, which aimed, among other things, at
the construction of a European identity, the improvement of the quality of education,
the preparation of young people for better social and professional integration, and
the further promotion of cooperation among educational institutions in the member
states (European Commission, 1993a: 9–13).
The EU educational discourse during this period was further elaborated in three
consultation documents: the Green Papers on ‘Innovation’, ‘Life and Work in the
Information Society’ and ‘Obstacles of Mobility’. In these texts the Commission: (a)
pointed out that one of the obstacles to innovation was ‘the insufficient adaptation of
education and training systems to the reality of a changing world as well as the great
lack of flexibility of structures and their rules of development’ (European Commission,
1995a: 36–37), and (b) proposed a radical restructuring of education and professional
training systems which would incorporate the ICTs for their future development since
‘the basic need for Europe is to develop a new architecture via lifelong learning and
professional training’ (European Commission,1996a: 26). Mobility was then considered to be an answer both ‘to the economic challenges via the internal market formation processes and to the social implications, particularly to employment matters’
(European Commission, 1996b: 1).

Education in the Shadow of the Structural
and Employment Policies, 1997–1999
The second period of the EU’s involvement in education extends from 1997 to
1999. During this period, education was directly linked to the Community’s structural and employment policies which aimed at supporting the readjustment of the
relevant policies of the member states and the modernisation of the education,
training and employment systems. The new Structural Funds Regulation (1999) as
well as the European Strategy for Employment (1997–1999) were built, according
to the Luxemburg European Council Conclusions on four distinctive policy pillars,
namely ‘employability’, ‘entrepreneurship’, ‘adaptability’ and ‘equal opportunities’
(European Council, 1997).
The new cartography of the EU education policy also included the construction of
two specific educational ‘policy networks’:

--- [PDF Page 492 / Book Page 485] ---

Towards The European Panopticon 485

(a) An ‘official’/‘formal’ network, which drew upon and was supported by Articles
126 and 127 of the TEU and was framed by the EU Council Decisions and
Directives. This network included the Community action programmes
(SOCRATES, LEONARDO and TEMPUS) as well as the mechanisms for
the mutual recognition of qualifications (ECTS, Europass and EQF). It was
financed by the new DG 22 of the Commission and it operated according to the
Community method. Its central goals were cooperation, mobility, exchanges
and recognition of qualifications, aiming at integrating initial and further education systems.
(b) An ‘informal’ educational network, which drew upon other competences of
the EU (such as employment, mobility and social cohesion) and was linked
to other policy areas (e.g. structural, employment, social, research and culture). It was framed by the Decisions of the European Council, which regulated
the EU structural policies, the European Strategy for Employment and the
Lisbon Strategy, and was intended to control national educational planning.
It was implemented via both the Community method (through the Structural
Funds Regulations) and an early form of the Open Method of Coordination
(OMC). This method aimed at economic convergence and social cohesion
in the member states, which was also reflected in the pursuit of ‘commonly
agreed’ educational objectives. The national action plans for employment and
education, which were subsidised by Community resources made available to
the member states through the Community Support Frameworks (also known
as Delors I, Delors II and Santer packages) are a genuine example of this
approach (Addison & Siebert, 1994; Christodoulakis & Kalyvitis, 2004).
In the late 1990s, the major EU educational policies were characterised as follows:
(a) By the predominance of an economic-technocratic-instrumentalist perception
which was connected with and controlled by the emergence of new ‘discourses’,
the imposition of new ‘regimes of truth’ and a new mode of setting and implementing ‘regulatory processes’ such as globalisation, marketisation, risk society,
ICT society, governmentality and performativity (Pasias,2006a; Kazamias &
Roussakis, 2007).
(b) By the prioritisation of the development of a ‘new competence framework’,
consisting of professional and social competences, which was based on a ‘new
human and social capital theory’. The new competences aimed at the adaptation of the European workforce to the requirements of the job market and the
new knowledge based distribution of labour, and at the reduction of the obstacles of intra-EU mobility (European Commission, 2005b, d)
(c) By their emphasis on a ‘high-quality general education’, on the enhancement
of innovative lifelong learning structures and on the development of horizontal competences, such as ‘learning to learn’, ‘cultural awareness’, ‘foreign
languages’ and ‘entrepreneurship’, which were then considered as inevitable
requirements for the incorporation and the growth of enterprises (European
Commission, 2001, 2005d).

--- [PDF Page 493 / Book Page 486] ---

486 Pasias and Roussakis

These features clearly marked a shift in the EU discourse on education, which was now
seen as an instrument to achieve the political goals of the Union. This shift to the ‘politics
of knowledge’ was discussed for the first time in Agenda 2000 (European Commission,
1997a). In this text the Commission argued that the globalisation of the economy and
the information and communication technologies favoured the emergence, the growth,
the dissemination and the utilisation of new ‘immaterial goods’, which affected the EU
economic enlargement, competitiveness and employment. To the extent that ‘technological research, education and training constitute essential immaterial investments, the
“politics of knowledge” (innovation, research, education and training) have decisive
consequences for the future of Europe’ (European Commission, 1997a:12–13).
The ‘politics of knowledge’ were further elaborated in ‘Towards a Europe of
Knowledge’ (European Commission, 1997b). Here the European Commission presented
in a comprehensive way the Union perspective for education, namely the functional
framework, the perceived significant factors, the dimensions that should be developed
and the objectives that should be pursued. The Commission argued that the Community
politics for education ‘are inspired by a fundamental orientation: the progressive creation
of an open and dynamic European educational space, in which the principles of lifelong
learning education and training will be implemented’. The Commission also underlined
that the challenges for the formation of the European educational space presupposed ‘the
unification of sectors of education and training’ and required the rationalisation of the
educational policies of the member states through ‘the economy of the intentional objectives’, the ‘restriction of measures and the dissemination of actions’, and the establishment of a ‘framework of common purviews between the Community, the member states
and the other involved agents’ (European Commission, 1997b: 5–7).
The wider perspective of the Europe of knowledge, which encompassed most of
the Community discourses and practices for the economy and employment, is schematically presented in Table 1. The politics of knowledge in this document have been
fundamental to the central policy talk and policy practices which have dominated the
post-1997 period. It can be argued that they constitute the matrix of the objectives, the
practices and the technologies occupied by the Lisbon Strategy, which was adopted in
2000 and is discussed in the next section.
From the texts discussed above, it appears that the educational policy of the EU was
constructed on the basis of the key-conceptual axes of ‘convergence’, ‘cooperation’,
‘cohesion’ and ‘prospect’. By the late as the1990s, both the Commission and the member states had accepted the view that the possibilities of a wider educational cooperation that aimed at convergence/cohesion in education and training were limited, while
strictly following the ‘action program-approach’.
The Commission was heavily criticised for ‘ineffective administration’ of the action
programmes and for ‘disproportionate bureaucracy’ (Ertl, 2006:14). It was also obvious at the EU level, that owing to the institutional barriers imposed by the principle
of subsidiarity it would be impossible for the Commission to advocate or promote
interventionist policies in the educational reforms of the member states that aimed
at the convergence and the European modernisation/Europeanisation of the national
educational systems. There were strong views (see for example, Berggreen-Merkel,
1999: 3–4) that the medium-term and long-term perspectives of educational cooperation

--- [PDF Page 494 / Book Page 487] ---

Towards The European Panopticon 487
Table 1.

Europe of knowledge and the educational Panopticon

European Educational Space

Knowledge
European Knowledge Society

European Knowledge-Based Economy

The politics of Knowledge

The Lisbon Strategy for Education

The educational Panopticon

The 3 basic dimensions
Knowledge Citizen Employment
The 4 basic areas
Innovation Research Education Training
The 5 main axes/objectives
(a) To develop lifelong learning and continuous training
(b) To maintain the social model in the European Union
(c) To preserve European identity
(d) To decrease the social gap
(e) To increase employability
Keywords used to describe the education – employment
Relationship
Innovation Competitiveness Compliance
Employability Flexibility Adaptability
Quality Evaluation Certification
Performativity Effectiveness Expendability
Instrumental rationality technocratic discourse
Legalised reframing scientific legitimation
Voluntary participation cooperation cohesiveness
The concrete future objectives
Quality Accessibility Openness
(via lifelong learning processes)
The technologies of knowledge
Participation, representation, consultation, theasis, mutual
learning, governing, management, monitoring,
evaluation, accountability, control,
performativity, surveillance
The continuous evaluation and surveillance
OMC, benchmarking, custody rules, standards, indicators,
criteria, strict timetables, monitoring, mutual learning,
exchange of best practices, peer review

clearly demanded new working procedures in agenda setting and in the operation of
the EU, e.g. the EU Education Council. In this context, the initiative for the Council
resolution on the ‘Rolling Agenda’ (1999) was received as a clear step towards ensuring a greater continuity and enabling a more effective exchange of information, experience and good practices between the member states (Hingel, 2001:9).

Discourses and Policies of Education for the New
Millennium, 2000 Until Now
In the light of the challenges of economic globalisation and the geopolitical transformations at the international level after September 11, 2001, the European integration process acquired particular interest at the pragmatic level (e.g. the economic and
social) and at the symbolic/imagined levels, pertaining to the role and the status of the
European Union in the new world order. The establishment of the European Monetary

--- [PDF Page 495 / Book Page 488] ---

488 Pasias and Roussakis

Union (EMU), the enlargement towards Eastern and Central European countries and
the ambitious project towards the establishment of a Constitutional Treaty, all contributed to a further conceptualisation of the EU as a single, sui generis comprehensive
geopolitical totality with members sharing common goals and views for the future. As
a consequence, with the new millennium, both the context and the content of the EU
politics and policies became more complex and were radically reconstructed.
In the early 2000s, both the member states and the Commission decided that further steps towards a cohesive European educational policy were needed, which, still
under the principle of subsidiarity would promote convergence of educational systems
and the making of a European education area of lifelong learning. This perspective
was deeply influenced, among others, by (a) the effects of the European Monetary
Union (EMU) and the introduction of a common currency in the Euro zone, (b) the
commonly agreed European strategy for employment, (c) the perceived competences
needed for the knowledge society, and (d) the developments towards a more open and
transparent European governance that gave meaning to the European citizenship.
In this renewed process of the ‘unionisation’/Europeanisation of education and training,
the main goals put forward by the Commission since the late 1990s, summarised in
the views that the EU expressed towards knowledge, competitiveness and employment
have been directly linked to distinctive EU policies, processes and strategies.
In the years after 2000, the division between the Commission’s official/formal action
programmes and the informal national action plans, as well as the Commission’s educational politics and policies have been acute. The initiatives of the member states,
through an extensive agenda of intergovernmental activities and agreements, have
been decisive for the planning of future educational policies. Such activities and agreements have included the Lisbon process that aimed mostly at general education, the
Copenhagen process that dealt with vocational education and training and the Bologna
process, which aimed at the construction of a European Area of Higher Education. The
first two drew immediately from the Lisbon Summit Conclusions (European Council
2000a), while the Bologna Process began as an independent intergovernmental initiative in which the Commission although sceptical at first, chose to take an active part.
All these processes deployed some form of the Open Method of Coordination (OMC),
which, as we elaborate below, has been a major breakthrough in the way education and
training are steered by the Union. The most distinctive initiatives affecting education
and training, which derived from these processes, included the following:
(a) The contribution of education and training to the formation of the “European
labour market, open to all, with access to all” (European Commission, 2001)
and to the European strategy for employment and the growth of the knowledge
economy (European Commission, 1997b). The EU supported this development through life long learning, education and training policies, such as the
Action Plan for skills and mobility 2002–2004 and the “Lifelong Learning
Programme” (2007–2013).
(b) The modernisation and the quality improvement of all levels of education
and training, in consonance with policies aiming at innovation and competitiveness in the information society. This initiative involved the promotion of

--- [PDF Page 496 / Book Page 489] ---

Towards The European Panopticon 489

convergence and a more centralised control of national educational planning,
as advocated by the Programme “Education and Training 2010” (Council of
the EC, 2002, 2003).
(c) The construction of the European Higher Educational Area, which would facilitate, on the one hand, the mobility of students, researchers, academics and
education services, and on the other, the mutual recognition of qualifications
and periods of study.
(d) The formation of the European vocational education and training area promoted
by the “European Competences Passport” (Europass), the European certification
of qualifications (EQF) and the European recognition of periods of study.
(e) The strengthening of a European identity, of European citizenship and of social
cohesion, in tandem with the objectives of accessibility, openness and equality
of opportunities that aimed at the maintenance of a distinctive European social
model (European Council, 2002).
Since the late 1990s, it has been obvious that lifelong learning gradually has become the
central concept and the strategic objective of education and training policies towards the
knowledge based societies (European Council, 2000a, 2000: 1). The Commission emphasised that ‘the enormous economic and social changes that happen in Europe require a
completely different approach of education and training, … which must be faced off by
a framework of lifelong learning, … which will be directly linked to youth, employment,
social inclusion and active participation in society’ (European Commission, 2001: 3).
Although the Commission recognised the limitations of the ‘action programme
approach’, it renewed the implementation of SOCRATES, LEONARDO and TEMPUS,
and initiatives such as ‘e-learning’ and ‘skills and mobility’. The Commission reframed
this approach by introducing the new integrated Lifelong Learning Programme (2007–
2013). At the same time, it emphasised ‘education and training 2010’, which stemmed
directly from the Lisbon strategy. Moreover, the role and the status of the Commission
continued to grow stronger in two areas: (a) in the discourse/policy talk formation (e.g.
‘Europe of knowledge’, ‘European governance’, and ‘active citizen’), and (b) in the
policy practices implemented through the European strategy for employment and the
distributive policies of the Structural Funds (Pasias, 2006b: 91–94).

The Lisbon Process for Education and the Open
Method of Coordination
The Lisbon Process for education, the Copenhagen Process for vocational education
and training and the Bologna Process for higher education, are the constituent elements of the discourse that constructs, deconstructs and reconstructs the European
educational landscape. Placed conveniently within the rhetoric of lifelong learning,
European Knowledge Society and Knowledge Economy, these processes initiate and
demand innovative and radical challenges, at both the EU and the member states levels, of decision-making processes and policy choices for education and training. They
challenge the long established ‘Community approach’, which operates through the

--- [PDF Page 497 / Book Page 490] ---

490 Pasias and Roussakis

implementation of the Community initiatives, programmes and action plans, in favour
of a ‘common interest/common goals’ approach. This ‘common goals’ approach is
essentially a ‘steering by results’ approach to education and training which requires and
leads to wider changes both at the discursive and the political/administrative levels.
The ‘Europe of knowledge’ as perceived through this new educational ‘canon’, corresponds with a specific construction of European reality which is directly linked to
‘technocratic’ claims in education. These claims are articulated in such key-concepts
such as ‘new knowledge’, ‘new skills’ and ‘new competences’, which describe the
requirements of knowledge-based economies and societies (OECD, 2000; European
Commission, 2005b, d). In this sense, the formation of a European educational area is
closely connected with the emergence and dominance of a new political-technocratic
elite of educational ‘eurocrats’, which is comprised of groups of ‘experts’ (technocratsbureaucrats-administrators) both at the national and the EU levels. This elite acts and
makes decisions that are based more on technocratic criteria than on democratic ones
(Radaelli, 1999).
In the Lisbon Summit, the first European Council summit of the new millennium,
the European leaders attempted to respond to the challenges posed for the Union by the
contemporary global discourse. Specifically, these challenges included: (a) the external
challenges, such as globalisation and marketisation, (b) the future steps in the process
of ‘unionisation/Europeanisation’ (enlargement, convergence, integration and unification), and (c) the major concerns of the member states towards needed reforms.
As we have already mentioned, the strategic overarching goal for the European Union
as was articulated in the text of the Lisbon Summit Conclusions, was ‘to become …
the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world’. Towards
this end, the Open Method of Coordination (OMC) was adopted as a process of policy
choice and implementation and as a ‘means of spreading best practices and achieving greater convergence towards the main EU goals’. Among other things, the OMC
allows the Commission:
(a) To coordinate intergovernmental bodies in the process of setting European
guidelines and translating them into national and regional policies
(b) To set specific measurable targets towards the commonly agreed objectives
(c) To adopt measures and timetables of implementation, using indicators and
benchmarks for the comparison of its performance with non-European global
competitors
(d) To evaluate the progress through periodic monitoring and peer review
The Lisbon Process for education initiated a number of changes in the educational
policy of the EU. These included the following:
(a) A shift from the European Commission’s ‘action programme approach’, to the
Council’s ‘competence-based model’. This new approach prioritised short and
mid-term commonly agreed objectives, and entailed the continuous assessment of
the educational initiatives of the EU with the use of indicators and benchmarks
(b) Downplay of the ‘Community method’ of co-decision and, concomitantly, of
the subsidiarity principle for Community involvement in education, in favour
of the open-ended and voluntary open method of coordination

--- [PDF Page 498 / Book Page 491] ---

Towards The European Panopticon 491

(c) The gradual abandonment of the dogma of ‘non-harmonisation’ of the education systems member states, in favour of a more ‘Europeanised’ control of the
national education planning and policy choice
These changes in the views of the EU towards education can be seen as a result of a
wider shift of the policy process in the EU. After 2000 the EU gradually moved from
the neutral/defensive intergovernmentalism of the 1990s, which prioritised the subsidiarity control of the scope of the EU activities, to two radically different directions.
It adopted an emphatic/aggressive intergovernmetnalism, which entailed the voluntary
commitment of the member states, and a resurrected notion of ‘neofunctionalism’,
which advocated the spillover effect from education to the economy and employment.
The changes mentioned above can be clearly read in the mandate of the Lisbon
European Council to the Education Council of the EU, ‘to undertake a general reflection on concrete future objectives of education systems, focusing on common concerns
and priorities while respecting national diversity’. One year after the Lisbon Council,
the Education Council identified three strategic objectives identified for the European
education and training systems:
• ‘Increasing quality and effectiveness of education and training systems in the
European Union’
• ‘Facilitating the access of all to the education and training systems’
• ‘Opening up education and training systems to the wider world’ (Council of the
EU, 2001: 7)
These three strategic objectives became the basis for the establishment in 2002 of the
‘Education and Training 2010 Programme’ as the single comprehensive framework
for cooperation in the field of education and training. The Programme transcribed
the three objectives into specific policy areas that would be closely monitored and
reviewed by specialised working groups which would use a defined set of indicators
and benchmarks (European Commission, 2003a).
Six years after the launching of the Lisbon strategy, the findings of research as well
as the official progress reports indicate that the effects of the Lisbon process for education appeared to be ‘more rhetoric than real’ (Ertl, 2006: 22). It was found that there
were serious inequalities in the achievement of the commonly agreed objectives among
the older European core member states, e.g. England, France and Germany, the southern European region (Greece, Spain and Portugal) and the new EU members states
of central and eastern Europe (Ertl & Phillips, 2006; European Commission, 2005a).
In their reports, the Commission and the Council attributed these drawbacks to the
vagueness of the Lisbon objectives, arguing that they covered vast policy areas which
were poorly coordinated and without clearly stated priorities (European Commission,
2003b,c). They recognised that the Open Method of Coordination did not bring about
the expected results, since it depended too much on the willingness or the ability
of the member states to compromise the objectives for European convergence with
their national particularities. Scholars of education policy, on the other hand, have
argued that the main reason for the observed disparities and the non-achievement of
the Lisbon objectives is the diversity in the historical national contexts of education.
Community directives, initiatives and action plans, concerning the implementation of

--- [PDF Page 499 / Book Page 492] ---

492 Pasias and Roussakis

both the Lisbon and the Copenhagen Processes, are interpreted and implemented in
different and often divergent ways by the various member states (Ertl & Phillips, 2006:
86; European Commission, 2005c).
Even though there are clearly identifiable drawbacks in the Lisbon Process, the fact
remains that, through the Lisbon strategy, the Community policy discourses and practices have operated as mechanisms of control of educational policies of the member
states. The aim of this process was to achieve convergence of education and training
systems via a mechanism of continuous monitoring, measurement and surveillance
(Hodson & Maher, 2001; Hostens, 2003; Pasias, 2005). As several scholars have argued,
this approach coincides with the discourse on control, evaluation and performativity of
education and training systems, emanating from international organisations such as the
World Bank, the OECD and the International Monetary Fund (Spring, 1998; Borg &
Mayo, 2005; Ball, 2003; Ilon, 2002). This discourse uses terms such as competitiveness,
productivity, adaptability, flexibility, employability, trainability, effectiveness and accessibility to describe the basic main characteristics that modern educational systems must
possess in order to adapt to the globalised, competitive and changing economic environment (OECD/CERI, 1994). It also advocates processes such as control, monitoring,
accountability, total quality control, standards, indicators and benchmarks, to describe
the basic instruments which education systems must use, to adapt to the demands of
the knowledge-based economies (OECD, 2002). This approach significantly changes the
nature of knowledge pursued by education and training systems. It emphasises and prioritises outcomes, learning products and qualifications. Acceptable knowledge is the useful, measurable knowledge. In the context of a technocratic knowledge-based economy,
knowledge is a commercial commodity-product which can become ‘consumable’ and
constantly renewable. The whole argument of lifelong learning is based on the assumption that knowledge is ‘consumable’. In the context of lifelong learning, however, it is
not only knowledge itself that is ‘consumable’, but also the object of knowledge as well
as the subject of knowledge, both individual and collective.
In this context, OMC, a process directly drawn from the evaluation procedures of
multinational companies for education (Arrowsmith et al., 2004), creates the need
to produce ‘technologies of surveillance’ as tools for the measurement of progress
towards certain defined objectives, e.g. (a) to invent ‘technologies of performance’ as
tools for the exchange of best practices; (b) to introduce ‘technologies of theasis’ (gazing) as tools for imprinting and depicting outcomes such as indicators, tables, graphics
and statistics; and (c) to utilise ‘technologies of governance’ as tools of mutual learning which may provoke political dialogue (Haahr, 2004; Nóvoa & Yariv-Mashal, 2003;
Pasias, 2005). Since the member states decide in common the criteria, the indicators
and the benchmarks and formulate the evaluative processes, they accept external controls in policy planning. In doing so they incorporate mechanisms of surveillance and
conformity in sensitive and critical sectors of social and educational policy (Hostens,
2003; Badham, 2003).
The setting-up of the Lisbon agenda constitutes a critical situation of the EU’s
symbolic, discursive and political/administrative control in the arena of education
and in society. It draws its legitimation from the common interest approach of
the member states and is closely connected with the neoliberal technocracy-based

--- [PDF Page 500 / Book Page 493] ---

Towards The European Panopticon 493

paradigm, which is rapidly transferred from the economy to education and training
through benchmarking practices and OMC technologies. Thus the European educational landscape is gradually dominated by ‘regimes of truth’ and ‘systems of knowledge’, which introduce, reproduce and legitimise the technocratic rationale in order to
establish a modern European Panopticon based on technologies of governmentality,
surveillance and control.

References
Adam, B., Beck, U. & van Loon, J. (Eds.) (2000). The risk society and beyond. London: Sage.
Addison, J. T. & Siebert, S. W. (1994). Vocational training and the European community. Oxford Economic
Papers, New Series, 46(4), 696–724.
Aglietta, M. (1998). Capitalism at the turn of the century: regulation theory and the challenge of social
change. New Left Review, 232, 41–90.
Arrowsmith, J., Sisson, K. & Marginson, P. (2004). What can ‘benchmarking’ offer the open method of
co-ordination? Journal of European Public Policy, 11(2), pp. 311–328.
Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism. New
York: Verso.
Ball, S.J., (2003). The teacher’s soul and the terrors of Performativity. Journal of Educaion Policy, vol.18,
no.2, pp. 215–228.
Baron, S., Field, J. & Schuller, T. (Eds.) (2000). Social capital: Critical perspectives. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Badham, L. (2003). Benchmarking for European community countries – a critical analysis, in Educational
ambitions for Europe, CIDREE/SLO, Netherlands Institute for Curriculum Development, Enschede,
pp. 153-162.
Berggreen-Merkel, I. (1999). Towards a European educational area. European Journal for Education Law
and Policy, 3, 1–7.
Bonal, X. (2003). The neoliberal educational agenda and the legitimation crisis: Old and new state strategies, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 24(2), 159–175.
Borg, C. & Mayo, P. (2005). The EU Memorandum on lifelong learning. Old wine in new bottles?,
Globalisation, Societies and Education, 3(2), 203–225.
Burton-Jones, A. (1999). Knowledge capitalism: Business, work and learning in the new economy. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Castells, M. (1998). The Information Age: Economy, society and culture. Vol. I: The rise of the network
society. Oxford: Blackwell.
Christodoulakis, N. & Kalyvitis, S. (2004). The second CSF (Delors’ II Package) for Greece and its impact
on the Greek economy. Economics of Planning, 31(1), 57–80.
Council of the European Communities (2002). Detailed work programme on the follow-up of the objectives
of the education and training systems in Europe. OJ C 142, 14/06/2002, Brussels: Office for Official
Publications.
Council of the European Communities (2003). Council Conclusions on reference levels of European average performance in education and training. OJ C 134, 07.06.2003, Brussels.
Council of the European Union (2001). The concrete future objectives of education and training systems.
5680/01 EDUC 18, 14 February 2001, Brussels.
Delanty, G. (2001). Challenging knowledge: The university in the knowledge society. Buckingham: Open
University Press.
Ertl, H. (2006). European Union policies in education and training: The Lisbon agenda as a turning point?
Comparative Education, 42(1), 5–27.
Ertl, H. & Phillips, D. (2006). Standardization in EU education and training policy: findings from a European
research network. Comparative Education, 42(1), 77–91.
European Commission (1993a). Green Paper ‘European dimension in education’, COM (93) 457 final,
29-9-1993, Brussels.

--- [PDF Page 501 / Book Page 494] ---

494 Pasias and Roussakis
European Commission (1993b). White Paper ‘Growth, competitiveness, and employment: The challenges
and ways forward into the twenty-first century’. COM, (93) 700 final, Brussels.
European Commission (1995a). Green Paper ‘Innovation’. COM(95)688, Brussels.
European Commission (1995b). White Paper ‘Teaching and learning: Towards the learning society’, COM,
(95) 590, Brussels.
European Commission (1996a). Green Paper ‘Education, training, research: The obstacles to transnational
mobility’. COM (96) 462, Brussels.
European Commission (1996b). Green Paper ‘Life and work in the information society. People first’. COM
(96) 389, Brussels.
European Council (1997). Presidency conclusions. Luxemburg (20-21/11/1997), Brussels.
European Commission (1997a). Action Program 2000 (Agenda 2000). COM (97) 2000, Brussels.
European Commission (1997b). Towards the Europe of knowledge. COM (97) 563, Brussels.
European Commission (2001). Making a European area of lifelong learning a reality. COM, (2001) 678
final, Brussels.
European Commission (2003a). Standing group for indicators and benchmarks, final list of indicators to
support the implementation of the work programme on the future objectives of the education and training systems, Brussels.
European Commission (2003b). Investing efficiently in education and training: an imperative for Europe.
COM (2002) 779 final, Brussels.
European Commission (2003c). Education and training 2010. The success of the Lisbon strategy hinges on
urgent reforms. COM (2003) 685 final, Brussels.
European Commission (2005a). Commission staff working paper: Progress towards the Lisbon objectives in
education and training. SEC (2005) 419, Brussels.
European Commission (2005b). Commission staff working document Towards a European qualifications
framework for lifelong learning. SEC(2005) 957, Brussels.
European Commission (2005c). Modernising education and training: A vital contribution to prosperity and
social cohesion in Europe. COM(2005) 549 final, Brussels.
European Commission (2005d). The new competences for lifelong learning. COM (2005) 548 final,
Brussels.
European Council (1993). The Treaty of the European Union. Brussels: Office for Official Publications.
European Council (2000a). Presidency conclusions. Lisbon (23–24/3/2000), Brussels.
European Council (2002). Presidency conclusions. Barcelona (15–16/3/2002).
Field, J. (1998). European dimensions: education, training and the European Union. London: Jessica
Kingsley.
Foucault, M. (1980). Truth and power. In C. Gordon (Ed.), Power/Knowledge (pp. 109–133). Brighton:
Harvester.
Haahr, J.H. (2004). Open co-ordination as advanced liberal government’, Journal of European Public
Policy, 11(2), pp. 209–230.
Hargreaves, A. (2003). Teaching in the knowledge society: Education in the age of insecurity. Buckingham:
Open University Press.
Held, D. & McGrew, A. (2000). The global transformations reader: an introduction to the globalisation
debate. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hingel, A.J. (2001). Education policies and European governance – contribution to the interservice groups
on European governance. European Journal for Education Law and Policy, 5, 7–16.
Hodson, D.-Maher, I. (2001). The Open Method as a New Mode of Governance: The Case of Soft Economic
Policy Co-ordination, Journal of Common Market Studies, November, 39(4), pp. 719–46.
Hostens, G. (2003). Educational policymaking in Europe : a new game, in Educational ambitions for Europe,
CIDREE/SLO, Netherlands Institute for Curriculum Development, Enschede, pp. 21-45.
Ilon, L. (2002). Agent of global markets or agent of the poor? The World Bank’s education sector strategy
paper, International Journal of Educational Development, No.22, pp. 475–482.
Kazamias, A. & Roussakis, Y. (2007). Education for and beyond the knowledge society: A critical analysis of the European discourse on education. Comparative and International Education Review, 8,
71–91 [in Greek].

--- [PDF Page 502 / Book Page 495] ---

Towards The European Panopticon 495
Kazamias, A. (1995). Neo-European modernization and education: discourses and policies in an ‘imagined
Europe’. In A. Kazamias & M. Kassotakis (Eds.), Greek education: Prospects for restructuring and
modernization (pp. 550–586). Athens: Seirios editions [in Greek].
Lyotard, J. F. (1984). The postmodern condition: A report to knowledge. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.
Magalhaes, A. M. & Stoer, S. R. (2003). Performance, citizenship and the knowledge society: A new mandate for European education policy. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 1(1), 41–66.
Nóvoa, A. & Yariv-Mashal, T. (2003). Comparative Research in Education: a mode of governance or a
historical journey? Comparative Education, 39 (4), pp. 423–438
Maravegjas, N. & Tsinisizelis, M. (Eds.) (1995). The integration of the European Union. Athens: Themelio
[in Greek].
OECD/CERI (1994). Markets for Learning and Educational Services, CD (94) 9, Paris : OECD.
OECD (2000). Knowledge management in the learning society. Paris: OECD.
OECD, (2002). Peer Review: A Tool for Cooperation and Change. An Analysis of an OECD Working
Method. Paris: Mimeo .
Pasias, G. (2005). OMC as a policy of ‘learning’, as a practice of ‘theasis’ (spectation) and as a technology
of ‘surveillance’ (custody), Comparative and International Education Review, 5, Athens: Patakis [in
Greek].
Pasias, G. (2006a). European Union and education. Vol. I: Institutional discourses and educational policy
(1957–1999). Athens: Gutenberg.
Pasias, G. (2006b). European Union and education. Vol. II: Educational discourses and policies (2000–
2006). Athens: Gutenberg.
Pollack, M.A. (2000). The end of creeping competence? EU policy-making since Maastricht. Journal of
Common Market Studies, 38(3), 519–538.
Radaelli, C. (1999). Technocracy in the European Union. London: Longman.
Reich, R. B. (1991). The work of nations: Preparing ourselves for the 21st century. London: Simon &
Schuster.
Spring, J. (1998). Education and the rise of the global economy, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stehr, N. (1994). Knowledge societies. London: Sage.
Stone, D. (Ed.). (2000). Banking on knowledge: The genesis of the Global Development. London:
Routledge.

