================================================================================
Chapter 32: Industrialization and Public Education: Social Cohesion and Social Stratification
Author(s): Jim Carl
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 4: Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Education
Book Pages: pp. 503–518
PDF Pages: pp. 506–521 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 506 / Book Page 503] ---

32
INDUSTRIALIZATION AND PUBLIC EDUCATION:
SOCIAL COHESION AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION
Jim Carl

The expansion of public education and industrialization went hand in hand. After all,
had not the pioneering philosopher of free-market capitalism, Adam Smith, foreseen
good reasons at the outset of the industrial revolution for nations to educate their
populations? “The more they are instructed, the less liable they are to the delusions
of enthusiasm and superstition,” he argued. “An instructed and intelligent people,
besides, are always more decent and orderly than an ignorant and stupid one” (Kandel,
1933: 51). Before the industrial age, provision of formal schooling virtually everywhere was scarce – dependent on tuition and fees, voluntarist, and usually limited to
males. Education belonged to the church in feudal Europe, and with seven out of every
ten workers engaged in agriculture, the slender surplus enabled only small percentages
of people to earn their bread through the written word (Bloch, 1963; Cipolla, 1993).
Although some states, especially in Protestant regions, required villages and towns to
keep schools, such edicts were subject to the wants and resources of the localities, and
often had little material effect. With the growth of industry, support for public education grew, and the result was a transformation of schooling from limited provision into
widespread and hierarchical educational systems (Katz, 1987).
Precise relationships between industrialization and the rise of public education are
difficult to pin down, however. If we take as our unit of analysis the long nineteenth
century that stretches from the dawn of the industrial revolution to the eve of World
War I, then we discern a general correspondence between the spread of industry and
the rise of mass schooling. The industrial revolution sparked prolonged, rising rates of
productivity, first in the British economy and then in continental Europe, the northern
United States, and Upper Canada (Madrick, 2002). As educational access widened, the
education of women increased, the study of the classical curriculum declined, and, by
the twentieth century, the importance of schooling for both national economic development and individual mobility took on the status of an “education gospel” (Grubb
& Lazerson, 2004: 1–2). Gains in income and wealth during the industrial age made
possible larger public expenditures for the welfare of the general population, and all
governments considered schooling in their expanded social calculus.
But it was a political and cultural question as to what purposes taxes would be
applied: Internal improvements? Poor relief? Old-age pensions? Popular education?
While the industrial revolution generated the surpluses that contributed to the demand
for educational expansion in the trans-Atlantic world, it was other factors – social,
503
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 503–518.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 507 / Book Page 504] ---

504 Carl

cultural, and political – that dictated the pace (Muller et al., 1987). Adam Smith, for
example, did not herald education for its direct economic utility, but, rather for its
potential to stabilize society. In the rise of the new educational systems, social cohesion was central to the schooling directed to every child, whereas schooling’s selective
upper reaches ensured that educational distinctions grew in importance as markers of
social stratification.
Thus, when we view the growth of public education with either the nation-state
or the region as the unit of analysis, the role of industrialization as a causal factor
becomes less apparent. As is well known, there has been a long-standing mismatch in
the industrial age between what is learned in school and the skills required on the job
(Easton & Klees, 1992). Moreover, in the long nineteenth century rates of industrial
and educational growth do not necessarily correspond. Britain was the first society to
industrialize, but Parliament did not put England and Wales on a path toward universal
primary education until the last third of the nineteenth century. Conversely Prussia,
a largely agrarian society, led the world with its extensive system of primary schools
for most of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, despite its industrial backwardness compared to England (Rury, 2005; Boli et al., 2000). In the United States it was
the rural areas of the Northeast and Midwest (but not the South) where schooling
reached the highest percentages of children in the first half of the nineteenth century
(Reese, 2005). And in many of the oldest secondary schools, colleges, and universities
in the Atlantic world, there were reactions in the nineteenth century that strengthened
the classical curriculum and rejected science. Philippe Aries (1962) reminds us that
a template of schools had already extended their importance with the advent of new
constructions of family life in early modern Europe. Industrialization breathed life into
patterns of schooling that had already been set in the emerging market societies, and
only in limited instances – the founding of engineering schools, say, or the existence of
short-lived factory schools – did schooling mirror industrialization exactly.
Due to the chronological mismatch and because of the dearth of industrial educational forms, comparative historical studies of the origins of public education do
not posit industrialization as the direct causal factor. National citizenship and social
control within a changing economic order – this is the continuum that receives the
most emphasis (Nóvoa, 2000). Comparative works in recent years draw from four
perspectives to explain public education’s rise: state formation, the rise of the western
cultural frame, status attainment, and democratization (Carl, 2000). The state formation perspective in education looks to the evolving industrial state in its efforts to forge
national identities and legitimize the changing economic order through its leadership
in education reform. This perspective is utilized by many writers, among them Martin
Carnoy (1992), Bruce Curtis (1992), Ting-Hong Wong (2002), and Andy Green (1990,
1997). Green connects uneven educational development to the efforts of dominant
class-fractions to use the state to maintain hegemony and argues that educational
development follows “the different modes of state formation in different countries”
(Green, 1990: x).
The rise of the western cultural frame perspective emphasizes social, political, and
intellectual developments of the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the Enlightenment
in the creation of a new form of social organization. This perspective is featured in the

--- [PDF Page 508 / Book Page 505] ---

Industrialization and Public Education 505

work of John Boli, Francisco Ramirez, and John Meyer (Boli et al., 2000). Two of these
authors suggest that public education developed to promote “national unity” and “national
success,” through the cultivation of a western cultural frame that emphasized rational
individuals, humanized religiosity, egalitarianism, and universal citizenship (Ramirez &
Boli, 1987: 3; Boli & Ramirez, 1992). More recently, Stephen Provasnik (2001: 23) also
posits schooling as a “constitutive factor in the making of western society.”
If the first two perspectives are indebted to Antonio Gramsci and Emile Durkheim,
respectively, explanations that center on status attainment and credentials markets arise
from Max Weber. Margaret Archer (1979) suggests that bourgeois groups in Europe competed with religious organizations that sought to protect their role as educators. Sometimes
the new “educationally dominant and assertive groups” forced the state to restrict the reach
of church schools, sometimes they substituted schools of their own, and sometimes they
cooperated with church authorities if the schools were reformed to meet the needs of the
assertive groups (Archer, 1979: 143). Randall Collins (2000) argues that credentials markets
drive educational expansion and decline: an oversupply of university credentials led
to their decline in medieval and renaissance Europe, for example, and competition for
scarce credentials has driven secondary and then university expansion over the last two
centuries. With a similar focus on secondary and higher education, Fritz Ringer and others
bring in Pierre Bourdieu’s theory of social reproduction to emphasize school hierarchies in
the reproduction of social distinctions (Muller et al., 1987).
Democratization has been featured recently by economist Peter Lindert (2004) to
explain uneven educational development. He considers education as a form of social
spending, and his larger project explores the relationship of social spending and economic growth. He argues that the rise of mass schooling corresponds especially to
expansions of male suffrage and, in its initial phase of growth, to local control. In
the northern United States popular education developed rapidly and early because of
well-established voting rights and local flexibility. Lindert applies this perspective to
the seemingly undemocratic German states as well, by suggesting that decentralized
educational control enabled Germany to behave “like a set of local democracies when
it came to primary education” (Lindert, 2004: 122).
This chapter utilizes these comparative histories as well as single-nation studies to
examine the influence of industrialization on public education in Europe and North
America. This new system of production generated many changes for workers and
their families, but for our purposes the most salient one was that it simultaneously created work sites characterized by new routines and forms of control for the many, but
also creativity and “highly sophisticated” skills for the few (Berg, 1979: 25). This new
industrial order and the social dislocations and political turbulence that it generated
gave rise to education systems, ostensibly open to all, that were marked by widening
access and increasing standards that gave cohesiveness to national populations, on the
one hand, but provided segmented educational experiences that helped to fix young
people’s places in an increasingly complex and stratified labor market, on the other.
I begin with a discussion of how industrial work processes influenced educational
development in England. Roughly following the historic gradient of regional industrial
development (Pollard, 1988), I also consider educational transformation in France and
then Germany, before proceeding to the United States.

--- [PDF Page 509 / Book Page 506] ---

506 Carl

England
The incubator of industrialization was the transition from feudalism to capitalism, the
causes of which have long been open to debate, and concern us only to the point that
social and organizational changes such as the creation of wage labor and the production of commodities are more important than technological inventions or widespread
literacy as prerequisites for industrial development, especially before 1870 (Aston &
Philpin, 1990; Madrick, 2002). English textile production in the late eighteenth century was the cradle of the industrial revolution, and here not only were schools besides
the point, but industrialization had an initial negative impact on literacy and school
attendance (Stephens, 1998). Whether the domestic production of the “putting-out”
system or the factory system that arose beside it, owners and parents required the labor
of children, and in neither sector was literacy a prerequisite for the work. Indeed, the
only education necessary for child workers was brief training on site in the repetitive
work processes themselves (Berg, 1986; Wardle, 1976).
Schooling was also largely irrelevant for the skills of the entrepreneurs, capitalists, and managers of the early factories and proto-industrial operations of the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Skills acquired through apprenticeships and
technologies honed through trial and error – together with the social capital necessary
to unite capitalist with entrepreneur – were the requirements, not skills and credentials
acquired in school. “Even some of the leaders of the Industrial Revolution . . . though
skilled craftsmen, were virtually uneducated,” according to W. B. Stephens (1998: 57).
For most of the British inventors and innovators, the dissemination of ideas took place
in public lectures and via membership in scientific societies rather than in technical
schools and universities (Mokyr, 2002). Agitation for the extension of formal schooling was prevalent among many capitalists and workers active in England’s manufacturing region, but the demand for child labor and the fact that the north of England
industrialized with a population that was largely unschooled provided powerful counterarguments even in this, the most economically advanced part of the world at the turn
of the nineteenth century.
If the technological developments of the first industrial revolution were modest, the
social changes wrought by the new system of production were immense, especially for
the laboring poor. Here the reliance on wages, the monotony of the work, and explosive urban growth uprooted them from “pre-industrial experience, tradition, wisdom,
and morality,” states Eric Hobsbawm (1990: 87). The poverty and disarray faced by
the children of this new proletariat was not lost on contemporary observers, many of
whom looked to education for solutions (Simon, 1960). Middle-class reformers sought
to establish a network of popular education, and in the first years of industrialization
some of them went as far as to argue for universal education of the same variety for all
classes of people. However, “industrialization led to a deeper and much more explicit
class separation . . . than had even been the case in pre-industrial England,” according
to Harold Silver. “The conception and provision of education were, like all aspects of
society, influenced by the different angles of vision” (Silver 1975: 23). Once the state
extended voting rights to men with property in the 1830s, class divisions widened on
proposed education reform, with workers arguing most forcefully for primary schools

--- [PDF Page 510 / Book Page 507] ---

Industrialization and Public Education 507

and adult education that they could control, and the middle-class reformers concentrating their efforts on extending secondary schools and universities for their own children
and on advocating elementary schools that they deemed appropriate for the masses.
Such reformers often merged their support for popular schooling with their admiration of the factory. In the early nineteenth century, for example, reformers looked to
a monitorial system to educate large numbers of poor children cheaply. Proponent
Joseph Lancaster and others claimed to have perfected a method by which hundreds of
children of all ages and abilities could be taught in a single room via “the division of
labor applied to intellectual processes” (Kaestle, 1973: 12).
Yet, the middle-class admiration for the factory and the promise of efficient schools
at low cost were not enough to bring primary education to the English masses. Laissezfaire political outlooks remained popular among national elites. Most, but not all,
historians agree that voluntarism – religious or otherwise – was not enough to generate mass schooling (Green, 1991; West, 1975). Within the voluntary system that
prevailed until 1870, however, the working class strove to educate itself and enrollments increased in a variety of schools across England (Lacqueur, 1976). The state
extended its reach only gradually into primary education, initially with the series of
Factory Acts in the first half of the nineteenth century to encourage the schooling of
children who toiled in the mills, then with the 1870 Education Act that created public
school boards and authorized them to establish elementary schools where there were
none, and finally with compulsory education in 1880 and the abolition of fees in 1891
(Simon, 1965). These developments roughly paralleled extensions of the franchise for
men in the 1860s and 1880s (Lindert, 2004).
In the literature on industrialization and schooling in England, delays in educational
development often figure prominently in explanations of England’s relative economic
decline vis-à-vis the rest of the industrialized world. In fact, several scientists and
industrialists of the nineteenth century, some of whom were products of the betterdeveloped Scottish educational system, lamented the dearth of technical education
compared to the rest of Europe. England relied for most of the century on an apprenticeship system in manufacturing augmented by part-time technical schools (Green,
1997). As England entered what Fritz Ringer (2000: 47) calls the “high industrial
phase of modern European education,” extending from the 1860s to the 1920s, older
schools across Europe “found themselves confronted by a group of younger rivals,
whose curricular emphases were relatively ‘modern’ or ‘practical.’ ” In response to
the brisk economic growth of Germany especially, the English state abandoned its
laissez-faire approach and began to establish technical schools in earnest by century’s
end. Along with higher education, the tripartite system of secondary education that
included exclusive “public” schools, endowed grammar schools, and expanding higher
grade elementary schools began slowly to link students to technical jobs in manufacturing, but it was the commercial, governmental, and professional sectors that welcomed the bulk of the graduates, some of whom were women (Lowe, 1987). Even
the aristocratic public schools extended their enrollments to sons of professionals and
industrialists, and there is little evidence to suggest that the gentlemanly public school
ethos dissuaded students from following their fathers into similar careers (Rubenstein,
1993; Honey, 1987). Working- and middle-class demands for schooling in accord with

--- [PDF Page 511 / Book Page 508] ---

508 Carl

an economic system that was rapidly industrializing and bureaucratizing made inroads
into secondary and higher education, but within a system in which the public schools,
endowed grammar schools, and ancient universities retained their exclusiveness and
their classical curriculum (Kazamias, 1966).

France
In France at the end of the old regime, it was not at all evident that England had overtaken it in manufacturing power. To the north and west of Paris, in a region extending
into Belgium and Germany, a similar transformation to proto-manufacturing and the
factory system in textiles proceeded, augmented by adequate deposits of coal and iron
ore (Pollard, 1988). Moreover France’s population, while not as literate overall in the
eighteenth century as England’s, was as interlaced with church schools and educated
subjects in its northern region as one could find anywhere in the world. Except for the
smallest and most isolated communities of the French interior, villages provided at least
a modicum of funding for a teacher, and in the larger towns this was fleshed out by private and charity schools (Maynes, 1985). As to schooling beyond the elementary level,
the monarchy had established a series of military, mining, and civil engineering schools
that were truly pathbreaking, and the secondary schools and universities, while disrupted
by the expulsion of the Jesuits in the 1760s, provided similar provisions to those of other
Western European societies for the education of elites (Artz, 1966; Barnard, 1969).
The revolution and resulting warfare to 1815 did much to postpone France’s industrial development (Schama, 1989), whereas in education this period was punctuated
with false starts in popular education and institution building for the schooling of
elites. The educational legacy of this era was the principle of the secular state over
the church, which interrupted the extension of schooling for all even as it accelerated
the development of technical education and a unified system of secondary and higher
schools. Assemblies in Paris generated two well-known plans, attributed to Talleyrand
and Condorcet, that called for primary schooling to be made available to everyone,
male and female, but deepening crises of authority prevented their enactment (Bailey,
1988). The anticlerical thrust at the end of the eighteenth century disrupted the supply
of teachers and curtailed church revenue, thereby reducing the numbers of primary
schools, something that Napoleon did little to remedy in spite of the lingering revolutionary spirit of equality and his rapprochement with the church. Technical education,
on the other hand, expanded with the founding in 1794 of the École Polytechnique and
then other schools. Napoleon’s imperial state bolstered secondary education with its
network of lycées in 1802 and its codification of a hierarchical educational system,
the Université, that placed all schools, secular and religious, under centralized state
supervision (Green, 1990).
The French state mandated provisions for mass schooling in the 1830s, 1860s, and
again in the 1880s, with the latter decrees by education minister Jules Ferry making primary education compulsory and tuition-free. In this expansion, several trends
related to industrial development. In departments with relatively high commercial and
industrial activity, state and church provided more schools and enrolled more pupils

--- [PDF Page 512 / Book Page 509] ---

Industrialization and Public Education 509

than in the departments most isolated from emerging markets. In the industrial districts
themselves, however, school attendance was often lower relative to nearby commercial
towns and villages due to children working in the mills. Although France’s only factory
school law, passed in 1841, mandated part-time instruction, it was not widely enforced
and owners could limit instruction to one hour daily. The distinction in school provision among departments across France diminished in the second half of the nineteenth
century as state requirements penetrated the rural areas (Grew & Harrigan, 1991;
Anderson, 1975). Economic development laid the monetary foundation for educational expansion; state mandates came in the middle of periods of educational growth.
The highest rate of growth in the establishment of schools occurred during periods
of Restoration and July Monarchy early in the century, but the Guizot Law of 1833,
which mandated a school in every commune, increased state and local tax support for
education still further (Grew & Harrigan, 1991; Lindert, 2004).
Primary schooling by the end of the nineteenth century became the norm, with enrollments and funding approaching the levels of Germany and the northern United States.
In rural France increasing percentages of parents recognized the utility of sending their
children to school, especially in terms of access to government jobs and independence
from intermediaries when making simple transactions and correspondences (Weber,
1976). The purposes of primary school expansion began to shift at mid-century, so
that industrial justifications took their places beside the purposes of citizenship, morality, religiosity, and deference. Reformers began to educate the “sons of workers” for
the lowest rungs of the technical occupations, as the middle class tended “to abandon
industry for the liberal professions” (Anderson, 1975). For boys and increasingly girls
not bound for the lycées and beyond, the écoles primaire supérieure, common in larger
towns after 1833, made room for commercial study, and later, the écoles pratiques de
commerce et l’industrie, also extending from the primary schools, provided vocational
training for skilled work and commercial duties (Green, 1997).
Sharp class distinctions between primary and secondary schooling remained for
younger pupils, however; nothing like common schools for French children in the early
grades appeared until the 1920s. Secondary and higher education for the rest of the
century continued on elite paths that emphasized the liberal arts at the base and technical and commercial expertise at the apex. The lycées maintained their positions of high
status even as the Université increased the study of the natural sciences, so that a third
of the students prepared in a scientific curriculum by the 1880s. However, French, Latin,
mathematics, and philosophy maintained their privileged positions. Distinctive to France,
the grandes écoles in the nineteenth century expanded over the nearly moribund universities –
the grandes écoles were highly selective institutions that essentially enrolled sons of
professionals, industrialists, and bureaucrats, and they did so with unique mixtures of
the liberal and the technical. For admission, academic preparation and entrance examinations relentlessly focused on the liberal arts, but once admitted, most grandes écoles
stressed engineering, applied science, and business and public administration (Ringer,
1979; Bourdieu, 1996). Although most of the captains of the French economy and polity,
by the early twentieth century, received schooling in commercial and technical subjects,
selection for such study remained wedded to bourgeois membership and traditional
academic disciplines rather than to the practical needs of industry.

--- [PDF Page 513 / Book Page 510] ---

510 Carl

Germany
As in England and France, there was turbulence in the late-eighteenth-century
German countryside in the shift to a market economy, even though the development
of water- and steam-powered factories lagged behind England by a generation or
two. A few regions experienced proto-industrialization in textiles, with some schools
combining reading and religion for part of the day and wool and flax spinning for
the remainder. Meanwhile, estates in the east consolidated to harvest grains more
efficiently for export. Significantly, such changes in the division of labor occurred
within states, especially in Prussia, where the leadership already encouraged elementary education for peasants and workers. Whereas in England, elite positions
that opposed state schooling for the masses had the upper hand throughout the
first phase of industrialization (Kaestle, 1976), Prussia and other German states
favored compulsory schooling of “the lower orders,” so long as it “inculcate[d]
obedience and diligence” rather than a desire to leave the agricultural or protoindustrial workforce (Melton, 1988: 114). Military defeat in the Napoleonic Wars
propelled schooling further, with the expansion of the Volksschule system and the
creation of a Prussian educational bureaucracy that aided nation-building efforts
(Green, 1990).
Moreover, the German states advocated elementary schools that inherited a pietist
tradition, one that may have differed from the outlooks of the rulers and their high
clergies but was in accordance with the bulk of the common people. Schools, and
the teachers and students within them, remained organized along confessional lines
through World War I (Melton, 2001; Lamberti, 1989; Kennedy, 2005). Combined
with a greater degree of local control, relative church-and-state unity may explain
why workers and peasants acquiesced to funding and sending their children to statesponsored elementary schools to a greater extent than their counterparts in England,
and why, in the early nineteenth century, the German states had the most extensive
system of primary education in the world.
Sharp industrial expansion did not occur until the 1850s to the 1870s, however,
when the regions of the Ruhr, Saxony, and Silesia led the way. This roughly coincided
with the rise of imperial Germany. It is therefore easy to overestimate the development elementary education prior to mid-century: Frederick II of Prussia may have
announced his famous compulsory school edict for rural children back in 1763, but
lack of efficient transportation networks and necessary revenues for social spending
meant that schooling was not universally available (Melton, 1988). The ability of local
authorities to raise taxes through their own school boards rather than depending on
the imperial state to do so for them translated into some regions (especially in the
urbanizing and industrializing west) with extensive networks of elementary schools,
while elementary education in the eastern agricultural regions with large estates generally lagged in funding and enrollments, a reflection of local elite’s reluctance to have
schools interrupt labor supplies, in spite of Prussia’s desire to Germanize children in
the Polish areas (Lindert, 2004). In the west the state aided school attendance at midcentury by restricting child labor in factories and requiring young workers to attend
school part-time (Lamberti, 1989).

--- [PDF Page 514 / Book Page 511] ---

Industrialization and Public Education 511

German secondary education also benefited from state support that strove to tie
the schools more closely to the social structure. Von Humboldt made the nine-year
Gymnasium a state institution, for example, with an examination that certified students
for university study and state bureaucracies. Subsequent curricular reforms made
greater room for the study of the natural sciences in these classical institutions than
did the English public schools (Green, 1990). The Gymnasium mainly enrolled sons of
members of the learned professions and highly placed civil servants, but new forms of
secondary schooling emerged at mid-century, especially the Realschule, which drove
a fine line between emulating the high-toned academic culture of the Gymnasium and
preparing their more commercially and industrially minded clienteles with curricula
that had a greater scientific focus. For boys who left school early and for those who
remained to graduate and even attend university, this emerging system of academic
secondary schools had close links to labor markets, not in terms of what was studied,
but rather in terms of educational credentials that corresponded to occupational ranks
pioneered in the civil service and then extended to commercial and industrial bureaucracies (Muller, 1987).
Other school forms and reforms beyond the elementary level had closer industrial
applications, in that what was studied had as much importance to technical, commercial, and managerial work as the educational credentials. In part-time continuation
schools for the male graduates of the Volksschule, for example, much of the curriculum centered on “vocational training for future workers in agriculture, industry, and
commerce” (Albisetti, 1996). Spurred on by the 1897 Handicraft Protection Law, the
German state established a system of vocational education and certification centered
on both the school and the firm (Hansen, 1997). This well-articulated network of vocational education for blue-collar occupations emerged parallel to the academic secondary schools. At the tertiary level, imperial Germany founded a network of Technische
Hochschulen (essentially polytechnical universities), and within the older universities, scientific study with industrial applications burgeoned: industrialists underwrote
Göttingen’s Association for the Advancement of Applied Physics and Mathematics, for
example. But the demand for engineering and scientific expertise could not be met by
higher education alone; a host of proprietary technical schools and industry-supported
business colleges emerged in the 1880s and 1890s to tighten the connections between
managerial and technical skills learned in school and the leading-edge chemical and
electrical industries (Albisetti, 1996; Mokyr, 2002; Gispen, 1989).

United States
In the United States, where industrial and educational development after the Civil
War proceeded at rates that eclipsed European growth, the education system maintained a degree of autonomy from the logic of capitalist development, but to a lesser
extent than the educational systems developing on the European continent. United
States educational provisions at the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels equaled or
surpassed the most educationally advanced countries in Europe, including Germany,
which American education reformers sought to emulate beginning in the 1830s, so that

--- [PDF Page 515 / Book Page 512] ---

512 Carl

by World War I even secondary education was becoming a rite of passage for a majority
of adolescents, male and female (Jeismann, 1995; Reese, 2005; Lindert, 2004).
Leaving aside, for a moment, the large regional variations that such generalizations
about the United States mask, what accounted for such sharp educational growth? As
is well known, the United States differed from many European nation-states in several
respects after the Revolution: no hereditary aristocracy or monarchy, a Protestant identity but no established church, the absence of an insulated and identifiable bureaucratic
class, a heavily decentralized governmental system, relatively high levels of male suffrage, a heavy reliance on immigration, and expanding frontiers, all of which checked
the opposition to mass schooling (Green, 1990). Moreover, the market revolution permeated the new nation almost from the beginning, and this reinforced an ideology of
individual self-improvement that was popular across a wide cross-section of the public.
Not only did this generate further demand for schools, it helped to cement a widespread belief that schooling should be closely linked to the world of work (Sellers,
1991; Cohen, 1999; Finkelstein, 1991). These characteristics helped to shape a widely
diffused system of popular education that drew, at once, more elite and mass appeal
than its English counterpart, and one in which access was determined more by culture
than by class. In other words, as a growing nation that encompassed several linguistic,
religious, and ethnic groups from Europe, Africa, Asia, and North America, educational
reformers sought “civic cohesion” in the midst of “contentious democracy,” even as
they shaped systems marked by racial and cultural hierarchies (Tyack, 2003: 3).
Although it is difficult to make an airtight case for correspondence between industrialization and educational development in American primary education, there are
nevertheless strong links between the two. In the northern United States before the
industrial revolution, where small landholdings of pietistic Protestants of various
denominations predominated, rudimentary schooling was already widespread (Axtell,
1974; Cremin, 1970). The three decades before the Civil War witnessed the birth of
a factory system in cotton textiles, the concentration and systematizing of the manufacture of other commodities in larger workplaces, the reliance in the growing cities
on immigrant labor, and, with the canal and railroad boom, the growing lure of the
market for northern farmers. At the same time the district schools, supported locally
through a combination of property taxes and tuition, became a target of educational
reformers, as did the urban schools, which featured greater class, cultural, and gender distinctions than their rural counterparts. Influential social leaders who sought
to standardize and centralize the primary schools during these years, such as Horace
Mann of Massachusetts, generally had the support of factory owners and merchants,
even though urban school enrollment rates tended to lag behind those of the rural district schools (Bowles & Gintis, 1976; Kaestle & Vinovskis, 1980).
Conversely, in the southern states, the industrial revolution concentrated agriculture
onto a single, slave-grown crop for export; southern legislators viewed mass schooling as a northern institution inimical to the social stability of a southern agricultural
economy whose most dynamic sector rested on un-free labor. Although the “freed people’s educational movement” of the 1860s put the southern states on the road to mass
schooling (Williams, 2005, p. 6), the response of southern elites to demands for education within a diversified commercial system of “wage labor and market production”

--- [PDF Page 516 / Book Page 513] ---

Industrialization and Public Education 513

resulted in schooling on a racially segregated and highly unequal basis (Leloudis,
1996, p. xii). Although the footprint was smaller in the common schools of the northern states, here too racial segregation accompanied industrialization (Douglas, 2005).
Common school reformers in the Northeast and Midwest succeeded in transforming
rural and urban schools into coherent educational systems with a modicum of centralized control. Although this “common school revival” did not bring with it a spike in
attendance rates or school construction, state centralization was necessary to push the
increases beyond what could have been accomplished through local, voluntary efforts
alone. Moreover the common school movement that swept northern states standardized primary schooling through the reformers’ advocacy of graded classrooms, careful
record-keeping, and the beginnings of formalized teacher education (Kaestle, 1983;
Katz, 1987). For white Protestant children living in the northern United States, common schooling became nearly universal by mid-century. Although the consolidation
of this system corresponded temporally to capitalist development, educators packaged
their delivery of the rudiments of reading, writing, and arithmetic in a wrapping of
discipline, religious piety, and respect for the nation rather than preparation for mill
and market.
In the early nineteenth century, secondary and higher education consisted of a smattering of Latin grammar schools, a vibrant network of often-coeducational academies,
and a well-diffused collection of men’s colleges organized along denominational lines.
Institutionally, the most striking changes of the next hundred years were the rise of
the public high school and the birth of the modern research university. Unique among
the educational systems discussed, secondary education in the United States evolved
upwards from the common schools instead of outwards as responses to schools monopolized by the aristocratic and professional classes (Golden & Katz, 1999). Instruction in
Latin had already waned in secondary schools in the decades straddling the Revolution;
most families that could forgo their children’s labor sought a curriculum that was both
practical and academic, and this meant that English and science took their places beside
classical study (Reese, 1995; Nash, 2005). The academies generally drew their students
from a cross-section of the middling classes (Beadie & Tolley, 2002), but advocates of
the common schools painted them as elitist in their efforts to absorb them and build high
schools as “people’s colleges” – the capstones of the public system (Reese, 1995: 57).
Many bourgeois families accommodated the common school reformers’ agenda
for secondary education. Partly, this support was attributable to the dearth of academies with large endowments (steady tax support ensured institutional stability for
a secondary sector that had been dominated by the more entrepreneurial academies),
partly it was attributable to the persuasiveness of the high school boosters’ meritocratic rhetoric (selective admissions based on academic achievement played well in
the Jacksonian democracy at the same time it preordained that middle-class sons and
daughters would have a leg up on the academic competition), and partly this was due
to a limited tradition of church-supported secondary schools at mid-century (Reese,
1995; Terzian & Beadie, 2002). By the time of the second industrial revolution around
1900, the groundwork for the comprehensive high school already had been laid. The
decline of paid labor for adolescents contributed to burgeoning high school enrollments in the first two decades of the twentieth century. School leaders responded with

--- [PDF Page 517 / Book Page 514] ---

514 Carl

a differentiated curriculum of vocational, domestic, commercial, and college preparatory courses within a single institution, and this along with widespread suffrage and
acrimonious relations between management and labor usually blunted efforts to build
separate, tax-supported academic and vocational schools for US adolescents.
In the mid-nineteenth century, high schools competed with academies, normal
schools, and colleges for students, but colleges and universities began to supplant
high schools at the top of the pyramid by century’s end. Since economic developments caused many business owners and farmers to view their economic positions
as precarious, parents looked to protect their offspring through educational credentials, first at the secondary level as an entree into salaried positions in the growing
manufacturing and commercial sectors, and later, in the early twentieth century – when
working-class sons and daughters enrolled more frequently in the high schools – at the
tertiary level, which gave middling families the added benefit of a secure route to the
professions (Labaree, 1997; Brown, 1995). Industrial growth provided the necessary
foundation for the colleges to meet the growing demand. The concentration of wealth
provided colleges with vast new endowments and the creation of educational foundations expanded curricular offerings and brought order to the new system. The federal
government boosted support for applied research in agriculture, engineering, and mining with a series of land grants that began in the Civil War but greatly expanded in
the 1890s. The leading colleges themselves brought professional schools within their
orbits and, via their interest in admissions from the high schools, became important
players in secondary education reform. Offerings in technical education, while not yet
at the same level, perhaps, as the leading schools of continental Europe, contributed
to the exchange of expertise between the new American universities and the largest
corporations (Thelin, 2004).

Conclusion
Industrial growth made the development of mass schooling possible in European and
North American states; the economic surplus enabled states to make good on their
earlier Enlightenment goal of forging national identities for the populations contained
within their borders. The challenge of concentrating on the role of industrialization in
the growth of public education, however, is to avoid the pitfalls of economic functionalism. Although schooling expanded its importance for both individual socioeconomic
rewards and regional and national industrial development over the course of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, there are no ironclad relationships between what
is learned in school and economic growth, or between what is learned in school and
what workers do on the job (Bills, 2004). Neither growth in the complexity of the division of labor nor increased economic productivity triggers qualitative and quantitative
changes to the education system in any immediate way.
There are two buffers between educational and economic systems that make their
relationships complex and diffuse. First, school systems are creatures of the state,
whether in the ecclesiastical state of medieval and early-modern Europe or the civil
state in ascendancy since the eighteenth century. The give-and-take of elite and popular

--- [PDF Page 518 / Book Page 515] ---

Industrialization and Public Education 515

demands enlarged the scope and reach of the state in the industrial age, endowing
its authority and power with the legitimacy of a mediator. Struggles in the relations
of production became, increasingly, buffered through the state’s bureaucratic mechanisms, including its shaping of knowledge through the institution of the school (Apple,
1996; Carnoy, 1984). Second, educational systems have their own autonomy and logic.
Autonomy, in that schools are an ancient institutional form – capitalist development
did not bring them into existence. Logic, in that academic tradition inherited from the
past serves as a powerful counterweight to the vocational demands of students and the
requirements of employers. Even within the technical, professional, and vocational
turns that have marked secondary and higher education over the last century, the liberal
arts continue to assert themselves in the curriculum (Labaree, 2006).
It is these two buffers – state formation and institutional autonomy – that make it
important for comparative educators to pay close attention to history, for it is in the
historical-comparative studies of the growth of educational systems in a variety of
regions and nation-states that variations and differences can be uncovered. Pursuit of
a single causal factor, such as industrialization, can only illuminate general, long-term
trends. For a finer-grained analysis, tempering such singleness of purpose with careful historical study of the entire milieu – cultural and political as well as economic
– yields richer understandings. For example, the thesis of an emerging western cultural
frame as the elemental force of educational expansion since the Renaissance, developed by sociologist John W. Meyer and others at Stanford University, is valuable for
understanding global trends in education. However, such an emphasis on schooling as
the crest of a new western social organization tends to mask important regional and
national variations. Some of the variations are hinted at here, such as Anglo-Germanic
distinctions in vocational education or Franco-American differences in the relationships of professional schools to universities. To reiterate, comparative works that
address state formation and enduring educational forms inherited prior to the transition from feudalism to capitalism hold the most promise for explaining the similarities
and the differences in the comparative history of public education.
Social stratification and social cohesion endured as twin features of the systems of
public education that developed in the industrial age. Access to the highest reaches of educational systems, where professional and technical preparation occurred most systematically, filtered through courses of study in elementary and secondary schools that remained
relentlessly academic, especially in the knowledge that received the highest status. Yet the
leaders of educational systems also sought to socialize every child to the new economic,
social, and political patterns that reorganized the nation-states of the Atlantic world. In the
long nineteenth century, then, the result was systems of public education that contributed
to the cohesiveness of nation-states even as they emerged to determine and legitimate new
forms of social stratification in societies undergoing rapid industrial change.

References
Albisetti, J. (1996). Education. In R. Chickering (Ed.), Imperial Germany: A historiographical companion
(pp. 244–271). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Anderson, R. D. (1975). Education in France 1848–1870. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

--- [PDF Page 519 / Book Page 516] ---

516 Carl
Apple, M. (1996). Cultural politics and education. New York: Teachers College Press.
Archer, M. (1979). The social origins of educational systems. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Aries, P. (1962). Centuries of childhood: A social history of family life. (R. Baldick, Trans.). New York:
Vintage (Original work published 1960).
Artz, F. D. (1966). The development of technical education in France, 1500–1850. Cleveland, OH: Society
for the History of Technology.
Aston, T. H. & Philpin, C. H. E. (Eds.) (1990). The Brenner debate. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Axtell, J. (1974). The school upon a hill. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Bailey, C. (1988). Municipal government and secondary education during the early French Revolution: Did
decentralization work? French History, 12, 25–42.
Barnard, H. C. (1969). Education and the French Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berg, M. (Ed.) (1979). Technology and toil in nineteenth century Britain. CSE Books: London.
Berg, M. (1986). The age of manufactures, 1700–1820. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bills, D. (2004). The sociology of education and work. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bloch, M. (1963). Feudal society. (L. A. Manyon, Trans.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press (Original
work published 1939).
Boli, J., Ramirez, F., & Meyer, J. (2000). Explaining the origins and expansion of mass education. In
S. Sanderson (Ed.), Sociological worlds: Comparative and historical readings on society (pp. 346–354).
Chicago, IL: Fitzroy Dearborn.
Bourdieu, P. (1996). The state nobility. (L. C. Clough, Trans.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press
(Original work published 1989).
Bowles, S. & Gintis, H. (1976). Schooling in capitalist America. New York: Basic Books.
Brown, D. (1995). Degrees of control: A sociology of educational expansion and educational credentialism.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Carl, J. (2000). Le rouge et le noir: Approaches to the origins of mass schooling. In J. Bouzakis (Ed.),
Historical-Comparative Perspectives (pp. 333–347). Athens: Gutenberg Press.
Carnoy, M. (1984). The state and political theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Carnoy, M. (1992). Education and the state: From Adam Smith to Perestroika. In R. Arnove, P. Altbach, &
G. Kelly (Eds.), Emergent issues in education: Comparative perspectives (pp. 143–159). Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press.
Cipolla, C. (1993). Before the industrial revolution: European society and economy, 1000–1700. London:
Routledge.
Cohen, P. (1999). A calculating people: The spread of numeracy in early America. New York: Routledge.
Collins, R. (2000). Comparative and historical patterns of education. In M. Hallinan & H. Kaplan, (Eds.),
Handbook of the sociology of education (pp. 213–240). New York: Plenum Publishers.
Cremin, L. (1970). American education: The colonial experience, 1607–1783. New York: Harper & Row.
Curtis, B. (1992). True government by choice men? Inspection, education, and state formation in Canada
west. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1992.
Douglas, D. (2005). Jim Crow moves north: The battle over northern school desegregation 1965–1954. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Easton, P. & Klees, S. (1992). Conceptualizing the role of education in the economy. In R. Arnove,
P. Altbach, & G. Kelly, (Eds.), Emergent issues in education: Comparative perspectives (pp. 123–142).
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Finkelstein, B. (1991). Dollars and dreams: Classrooms as fictitious message systems, 1790–1930. History
of Education Quarterly, 31, 462–487.
Gispen, K. (1989). New profession, old order: Engineers and German society, 1815–1914. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Goldin, C. & Katz, L. (1999). Human capital and social capital: The rise of seconday schooling in America,
1910–1940. Journal of Interdisciplinary history, 29, 683–723.
Green, A. (1990). Education and state formation: The rise of educational systems in England, France, and
the USA. London: The Macmillan Press.
Green, A. (1991). The peculiarities of English education. In Department of Cultural Studies, (Eds.), Education
limited: Schooling and training and the New Right since 1979 (pp. 6–30). London: Unwin Hyman.
Green, A. (1997). Education, globalization and the nation state. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

--- [PDF Page 520 / Book Page 517] ---

Industrialization and Public Education 517
Grew, R. & Harrigan, P. (1991). School, state, and society: The growth of elementary schooling in
nineteenth-century France–A quantitative analysis. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Grubb, W. & Lazerson, M. (2004). The education gospel: The economic power of schooling. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Hansen, H. (1997). Caps and gowns: Historical reflections on the institutions that shaped learning for
and at work in Germany and the United States. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Wisconsin-Madison.
Hobsbawm, E. (1990). Industry and empire: From 1750 to the present day. London: Penguin.
Honey, J. (1987). The sinews of society: The public schools as a “system.” In D. Muller, F. Ringer, & B.
Simon, The rise of the modern educational system: Structural change and social reproduction, 1870–
1920 (pp. 151–162). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jeismann, K. (1995). American observations concerning the Prussian educational system in the nineteenth
century. In H. Geitz, J. Heideking, & J. Herbst (Eds.), German influences on education in the United
States to 1917 (pp. 21–41). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaestle, C. (1973). Joseph Lancaster and the monitorial school movement: A documentary history. New
York: Teachers College Press.
Kaestle, C. (1976). Between the Scylla of brutal ignorance and the Charybdis of a literary education:
Elite attitudes toward mass schooling in early industrial England and America. In L. Stone (Ed.),
Schooling and society: Studies in the history of education (pp. 177–191). Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Kaestle, C. (1983). Pillars of the republic: Common schools and American society, 1780–1860. New York:
Hill and Wang.
Kaestle, C. & Vinovskis, M. (1980). Education and social change in Massachusetts. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kandel, I. (1933). Comparative education. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Katz, M. (1987). Reconstructing American education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kazamias, A. (1966). Politics, society and secondary education in England. Philadelphia, PA: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Kennedy, K. (2005). The persistence of religion in Germany’s modernizing schools, from empire to republic.
Paedagogica Historica, 41, 119–130.
Labaree, D. (1997). How to succeed in school without really learning: The credentials race in American
education. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Labaree, D. (2006). Mutual subversion: A short history of the liberal and the professional in American
higher education. History of Education Quarterly, 46, 1–15.
Lacqueur, T. (1976). Working-class demand and the growth of English elementary education, 1750–1850.
In L. Stone (Ed.), Schooling and society: Studies in the history of education (pp. 192–205). Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lamberti, M. (1989). State, society, and the elementary school in imperial Germany. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Leloudis, J. (1996). Schooling in the new South: Pedagogy, self, and society in North Carolina, 1880–1920.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Lindert, P. (2004). Growing public: Social spending and economic growth since the eighteenth century.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lowe, R. (1987). Structural change in English higher education, 1870–1920. In D. Muller, F. Ringer, &
B. Simon (Eds.), The rise of the modern educational system: Structural change and social reproduction,
1870–1920 (pp. 163–178). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Madrick, J. (2002). Why economies grow: The forces that shape productivity and how we can get them working again. New York: Basic Books.
Maynes, M. J. (1985). Schooling for the people: Comparative local studies of schooling history in France
and Germany, 1750–1850. New York: Holmes & Meier.
Melton, J. (1988). Absolutism and the eighteenth century origins of compulsory schooling in Prussia and
Austria. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Melton, J. (2001). Pietism, politics, and the public sphere in Germany. In J. Bradley & D. Van Kley (Eds.), Religion
and politics in enlightenment Europe (pp. 294–333). South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.

--- [PDF Page 521 / Book Page 518] ---

518 Carl
Mokyr, J. (2002). The gifts of Athena: Historical origins of the knowledge economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Muller, D., Ringer, F., & Simon, B. (Eds.) (1987). The rise of the modern educational system: Structural
change and social reproduction, 1870–1920. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Muller, D. (1987). The process of systematization: The case of German secondary education. In D. Muller,
F. Ringer, & B. Simon (Eds.), The rise of the modern educational system: Structural change and social
reproduction, 1870–1920 (pp. 15–52). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nash, M. (2005). Women’s education in the United States, 1780–1840. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Nóvoa, A. (2000). Europe and education: Historical and comparative approaches. In J. Bouzakis (Ed.),
Historical-comparative perspectives (pp. 47–69). Athens: Gutenberg Press.
Pollard, S. (1988). Peaceful conquest: The industrialization of Europe 1760–1970. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Provasnik, S. (2001, October). Seeing the rise of universal schooling in the making of modern western society: A synthesis of scholarship. Paper presented at the History of Education Society Annual Meeting,
New Haven, CN.
Ramirez, F. & Boli, J. (1987, January). The political construction of mass schooling: European origins and
worldwide institutionalization. Sociology of Education, 60, 2–17.
Reese, W. (1995). The origins of the American high school. New Haven, CN: Yale University Press.
Reese, W. (2005). America’s public schools: From the common school to “No child left behind”. Baltimore,
MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ringer, F. (1979). Education and society in modern Europe. Bloomington, IA: Indiana University Press.
Ringer, F. (2000). Towards a social history of knowledge: Collected essays. New York: Berghahn Books.
Rubenstein, W. D. (1993). Capitalism, culture, and decline in Britain, 1750–1990. London: Routledge.
Rury, J. (2005). Education and social change: Themes in the history of American Schooling. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Schama, S. (1989). Citizens: A chronicle of the French Revolution. New York: Knopf.
Sellers, C. (1991). The market revolution: Jacksonian America, 1815–1846. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Silver, H. (1975). English education and the radicals 1780–1850. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Simon, B. (1960). Studies in the history of education, 1780–1870. London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Simon, B. (1965). Education and the labor movement, 1870–1920. London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Stephens, W. B. (1998). Education in Britain, 1750–1914. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Terzian, S. & Beadie, N. (2002). “Let the people remember it”: Academies and the rise of the public high
schools, 1865–1890. In N. Beadie & K. Tolley (Eds.), Chartered schools: Two hundred years of independent academies in the United States, 1727–1925 (pp. 251–283). New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Thelin, J. (2004). A history of American higher education. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Tyack, D. (2003). Seeking common ground: Public schools in a diverse society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Wardle, D. (1976). English popular education 1780–1975. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Weber, E. (1976). Peasants into Frenchmen: The modernization of rural France, 1870–1914. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
West, E. (1975). Education and the industrial revolution. New York: Barnes & Noble.
Williams, H. (2005). Self-taught: African American education in slavery and freedom. Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press.
Wong, T. (2002). Hegemonies compared: State formation and Chinese school politics in postwar Singapore
and Hong Kong. London: RoutledgeFalmer.

