================================================================================
Chapter 33: Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change: A Note on Argentina and Brazil
Author(s): Márcia Cristina Passos Ferreira
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 4: Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Education
Book Pages: pp. 519–537
PDF Pages: pp. 522–540 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 522 / Book Page 519] ---

33
INDUSTRIALISATION, KNOWLEDGE ECONOMIES
AND EDUCATIONAL CHANGE: A NOTE
ON ARGENTINA AND BRAZIL
Márcia Cristina Passos Ferreira

This chapter will discuss, by describing aspects of Brazil and Argentina in the period
1950–1990, some of the ways in which economic ideas, ideologies and systems are
related to educational systems.
The theme of the chapter, at its broadest, is a puzzle about whether the patterns
of educational systems in Brazil and Argentina are directly deducible from two discourses – one about the nature of the ‘industrial society’ and the other about the nature
of the ‘knowledge economy’. Both these discourses had their roots in international
debates, but, it will be suggested, they were both made local, and contextualised, and
became different. In other words they were both ‘domesticated’ in different ways in
Brazil and Argentina.
Clearly the terms ‘industrial society’ and ‘knowledge economy’ have ordinary – that
is, academic – meanings. They are not merely political slogans, or the labels for policies. So there is some point – before moving on – in stabilising the routine academic
meaning for both terms. They can be located in mainstream (and well-known) academic literature.
The concept of ‘industrial society’ was well sketched in a classic text of the 1960s:
Modern industrial societies are distinguished in their structure and development
from others of comparable complexity, principally by the institutionalization of
innovation – that is to say, by the public and private organization, on an increasingly large scale, of scientific research in the service of economic and military
growth. (Halsey et al., 1961: 2)
In other words, the academic concept, here as used by sociologists, reflects a shift in
an industrial economy from manual to technical and scientific skills, a change which
has serious implications for the kind of qualifications required by students entering the
job market. Traditional forms of education, in which bodies of skilled craftsmen, aided
by labourers or apprentices, work under the supervision of foremen, yield to a more
complex structure and are turned to the new objectives of the modern economy.
Thus, from this academic and sociological perspective, educational systems might
become similar because of industrialisation. There is an implicit ‘convergence’
519
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 519–537.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 523 / Book Page 520] ---

520 Ferreira

and even a determinist ‘convergence’ thesis here which ought – by extension – to apply
to Argentina and Brazil. Historically, both have undergone similar processes of economic change from an economy based on agriculture to increasing industrialisation.
And of course within such a theory, ‘education’ is also relocated sociologically in a
specific way: education itself is given unprecedented economic importance as a source
of technological innovation, and the educational system is increasingly geared to providing a labour force and acting as an apparatus of occupational recruitment and training.
Similarly – about 20 years later – another definition of economies was constructed.
It has been argued, academically, that during the 1980s, a new economic world order
emerged as a result of globalisation. This new economic world gained a new classificatory term: the knowledge economy.

The ‘Knowledge Economy’
The ‘knowledge economy’ as defined by Giddens is one in which much of the workforce is involved not in the physical production or distribution of material goods, but
in their design, development, technology, marketing, sales and servicing. An economy
in which ideas, information, knowledge underpin innovation and economic growth
(Giddens, 2001: 378).
In analytical terms, the implication of this is that modern economies are powered
by the work of ‘symbol analysts’ in areas like designing, marketing or servicing which
require intellectual rather than physical skills. Symbol analysis requires knowledge of
information technology and computer skills – but more importantly the ability to think
abstractly, to analyse and to conceptualise.
Similarly a ‘convergence’ proposition is under construction here: because of the nature
of such economies, education is judged to be even more important – and must be of a
certain kind. Thus we have two historical moments, in which a definition of an economy
is offered (e.g. ‘industrial society’). It is defined academically; and as a discourse it
becomes a shaper of educational systems. Did this happen to Brazil and Argentina?

‘Industrial Society’ and Education
Thus the analysis of this chapter tries to indicate how a fairly clear academic idea
(industrial society, knowledge economy) becomes an international idea, a discourse
which affects countries – and which as it affects countries is absorbed differently in
terms of politics and institutionalisation and thus produces ‘different results’.
The chapter, in other words, analyses these processes of ‘domestication’: the absorption and shaping of a common discourse for reform in these two countries – in different
ways – at a particular historical period. Following this, the patterns of the educational
reforms are defined, including the reforms of vocational-technical education.

The Economy and Industrial Development in Brazil
Industrialisation on a significant scale began in Brazil during the First World War
(1914–1918) and its objective was to serve as a ‘substitute for imports’ – there was a

--- [PDF Page 524 / Book Page 521] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 521

great expansion in heavy industries in this period (Baran, 1957: 8). After the 1950s, the
rapid industrial expansion and growth of big multinational corporations disrupted the
local socio-economic structures. Economic development, however, depended on foreign investment and large companies were set up in Brazil, which made new demands
on public services (Barnett et al., 1975: 35–37).
However, the changes were not merely economic. As Barnett et al. (1975: 35) point
out, industrialisation led to the emergence of new social alliances, demands on the
state and political movements, such as populism. This was one of the effects of the
growing power of the urban middle and working classes.
In general terms, the educational policies were designed to restructure the educational systems so that they were suited to the economic and social changes brought
about by the ‘industrial society’ (and modernity).
The expected link between education and economic development was implicitly
expressed in the resolutions drafted in Regional Conferences of UNESCO’s in the
early 1960s. For example, the Santiago Conference on Education and Economic
Development, in 1962, recommended adopting the numbers of enrolments in secondary schools as the criterion for measuring social and economic progress in each
country in Latin America (Gimeno, 1983). Brazil was in the first and worst group,
with an enrolment figure of less than 13% of pupils of attendance age at secondary
schools. Argentina was in third group with enrolments higher than 25% (Gimeno,
1983: 31).
The figures in Brazil implied the need to reform education, and the reforms in secondary schools stressed training-for-work as a means of responding to the requirements of economic development in the region (Gimeno, 1983). Ianni (1975) showed
how in the 1950s and 1960s Brazil faced a great challenge to create an industrial
economy, which led to desenvolvimentismo, a political ideal of that time that supported
a strong industrial, national economy, until its ‘domestication’ was interrupted by the
1964 military coup.

The Brazilian Political Scene After the Military Coup
of 1964: Domestication
After the military coup of 1964, there was a new economic model supported by the
industrial elite, military authorities and middle classes backed by international or
state-owned companies (Cardoso, 1975). During this period, increasing authoritarianism restricted access to the decision-making process, and only powerful economic
interests were able to influence the technocrats when they came to define economic
policy. Cardoso (1975: 196) argues that, after 1964, the Brazilian state was reorganised as a hybrid system of oligarchical interests (multinational corporations), powerful
state-owned corporations and an authoritarian government.
This alliance shaped educational reform and involved vocational education which
was strongly influenced by this model of economic industrialisation. Moreover, social
policies and reforms were viewed as a means of compensating the social groups which
had not directly benefited from economic development. The purpose of these policies,

--- [PDF Page 525 / Book Page 522] ---

522 Ferreira

in the view of specialists (Cardoso, 1975: 127), was to create stable conditions which
would not impede economic efficiency.
The regime set about a full-scale ideological campaign, with efficiency as the main
criterion for all its policies (Fiechter, 1975). Through Education Law 5692/71, which
introduced vocational education, the authorities sought to demonstrate their concern to
address social demands, in a period of political stagnation and repression (Black, 1977),
but in the context of an annual increase of GNP of up to 10%. The rapid growth or ‘economic miracle’ resulted from an expansion of consumerism and exports, as well as the
freezing of workers’ wages (Saviani, 1987: 23). It was characterised by authoritarianism
and a strong belief in economic development with the aid of international capital. The
government also sought to create legitimacy through social measures to incorporate the
lower strata of society.
It was in this context that the discourse of ‘industrialisation’ and its relation to vocational education was ‘domesticated’ in Brazil. In counterpoint, how did the international discourse move into the context of Argentina, and what happened?

The Economy and Industrial Development in Argentina
The Argentinian industrial sectors depended on the interrelationship between the discourse of the ‘industrial society’, educational growth, the need for industrial skills,
and politics. The country had experienced rapid economic decline since the 1920s,
accompanied by a high rate of recent immigration, and was in search of a new national
identity. The politics of Peronism explains how the discourse of ‘industrialisation’ was
domesticated in Argentina and applied to educational reform. This general motif is
repeated later in the nationalistic military dictatorships of the 1960s and 1970s.
During the Peronist period (1945–1955), the purpose of increasing technical and
vocational education was to encourage industrial development and make Argentina
‘economically independent’.
Rein (1998: 16) describes the Peronist doctrine of Justicialismo [social justice], as
consisting of a threefold aspiration to social justice, economic independence and political sovereignty. This doctrine aimed to transform Argentina’s economic infrastructure
by abandoning an exclusive reliance on agricultural exports in favour of industrial
development (Di Tella, 1999: 255). In the view of Rein (1998: 17) industrial development combined with continued agricultural exports would ensure economic growth.
There followed the Plan Quinquenal [five-year plan] designed to boost local industry
and agricultural exports whose market price was high, in the 1940s, and thus finance
modern technological imports. Technological advances, an improved energy supply
and modern means of transport would lead to greater industrial growth. The plan also
included protectionist policies to favour the growth of local industry (Romero, 1994:
143). Di Tella (1999: 268) shows how, as a result, local industry grew and the volume
of industrial production rose in the 1940s from 61% in 1939 to 76% in 1945 and 100%
in 1948. However, industrial growth in the Peronist period followed the pattern of the
early 1940s, caused by the country’s isolation during the Second World War (Di Tella,
1999: 264). The value of exports from USA had fallen from 109 million dollars in
1941 to 31 million dollars in 1943 (Rosa, 1992: 307).

--- [PDF Page 526 / Book Page 523] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 523

This historical context shaped the development of Argentine industry, and as
Romero (1994: 143) points out, most industries were improvised workshops. Despite
the inefficiency caused by the lack of raw materials and technical equipment (Rosa,
1992: 307), industry expanded rapidly, partly assisted by protectionist policies which
hindered foreign competition.
However, the relative growth of the industrial sector was largely due to the expansion of small businesses, such as the textile sector (200 small businesses with 62,000
workers). The textile industry, which remained the leading industrial sector, employed
50% more workers in 1946 than in the late 1930s – mostly unskilled females and
young men (Rosa, 1992: 167). However, industrial growth was uneven since some sectors (like steel and paper) did not just rely on unskilled labour and there was a failure to
improve the country’s power supply and transport system (Luna, 1984: 78–80).
Thus industrial growth in the period relied mainly on labour rather than on technology. According to Rein (1998: 20), the economy had deteriorated by the end of the
1940s and it was realised that the industrialisation and modernisation programmes had
never really materialised; the country’s foreign-currency reserves were depleted and
inflation was rising.
Perhaps surprisingly, the agricultural sector did not benefit much from reform either.
By 1946 the effects of Castillo’s 1942 measure to freeze rural rents (Luna, 1984:
175) meant that many small farms needed government support or credit to expand
(Lumerman, 1994: 188).
Lack of investment and modern technology resulted in a gradual decline in agricultural productivity. There was no increase to meet the significant post-war demand for
agricultural products. As a result, by the end of the 1940s, Argentina found it hard to
meet home demand and increase exports at the same time, let alone finance industrial
modernisation.
Argentine industrial growth did not experience technological advances in the
Peronist period either. As Luna (1993: 56) shows, this period witnessed an increasing demand for labour and a 30% increase in wages leading to an expansion of light,
labour-intensive industry (Romero, 1994: 147). The sluggish industrial growth meant
that there was no significant demand for educated labour (Donghi, 1994: 123).
However, limited demand for skilled labour does not account for the intense educational progress that occurred in this period. The aims of the educational reforms were
political and reflected one of the aspirations of Justicialismo which was the integration of the poorer sectors of society. Rein (1998: 16–20) states that the First Five-Year
Plan, echoing Perón’s desire for a ‘socially just nation’, attempted to implement a
‘new social policy which would make men more equal and would offer them equal
opportunities’.
The Derechos del Trabajador [workers’ rights] (1949) sanctioned the reforms the
state introduced in 1947 to protect workers’ rights. The social project included wage
increases, improved working conditions and food subsidies (Rein, 1998: 24). Thus,
through Justicialismo, Perón attempted to win the support of the working class and also
to make schools accessible to all Argentinians regardless of their economic status.
Overall, then, during the 1950s and early 1960s in Brazil, and 1945–1955 in
Argentina, there was a debate about creating an ‘industrial society’ and hence becoming

--- [PDF Page 527 / Book Page 524] ---

524 Ferreira

modern. The logic of accepting this vision, and the discourse, led to a desire to change
the educational systems and to adapt them to the needs of economic development. This
was accompanied by foreign financial assistance for educational reform in both countries, following the rationale that education would help industrial expansion.
However, the notion of the discourse of the ‘industrial society’, which is contextualised in this section, has shown that the crisis in education mirrored the crisis of the
whole social system and educational reform was a means of overcoming this crisis.
Finally, after adopting these policies and under increasing pressure for reform, by
1970, Brazil and Argentina were beginning to face the world of the ‘knowledge economy’. What happened?

The ‘Knowledge Economy’ and Education
In very broad terms, the processes were similar: the ‘new idea’ began to affect the way
education was regarded, and – when framed as a discourse – the range of ‘educational
reforms’ possible. In principle, the new discourse should have led to the same pattern
of educational reforms, in both countries including vocational-technical education.
How and why it did not is the concern of the next part of this chapter, together with the
economic systems of both countries in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
De Moura Castro (1998: 9–10) argues that Brazil and Argentina found themselves
in a new ‘world situation’ in which knowledge had become the main factor of production
and the principal means that nations could obtain a competitive advantage over their
rivals. Filmus (1994) attributes this change to the high speed of scientific-technological
progress, the internationalisation of the economy, and the emergence of a new ideology about production and labour organisation.
This, it was argued, had implications for education, since a lack of qualifications
among the people would exacerbate existing inequalities. In Brazil, Pastore (1995:
31–38) predicted that there would be a growth in demand for personnel with a postsecondary education, and a decline for those with less formal education. Research
into the modernisation of technology in five Latin American countries revealed that
the gap between the newly qualified and ‘unqualified’ was growing significantly wider
(Ascelrad, 1995: 50–62).
The globalisation of the world economy and the new international division of
labour seriously harmed the economy of certain regions and productive sectors in
Brazil (Rattner, 1995: 19–22), while others were introducing technological and organisational innovations (Gallart, 1997: 15). This, it was argued, would result in greater
social polarisation, where a minority would earn a high income and have an affluent
lifestyle, while the majority would not be able to satisfy their basic needs (Rattner,
1995: 25–28). A reason for this was that the ‘big companies’ were producing high-tech
goods or offering sophisticated services that required very skilled labour.
In rational terms ‘knowledge’ can be seen as the main factor of production and education as of fundamental importance for economic competitiveness and employability.
For example, the problem of unemployment is regarded as being a problem of lack of
qualifications. Hopkins (1987: 15) raises the prospect of an ‘uncertain future’ in which

--- [PDF Page 528 / Book Page 525] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 525

in the view of Delors (1998: 48) the only thing that could be predicted was a ‘rapidly
changing world’. As a result of this discourse, lifelong learning and education for work
are advocated as remedies that do not involve ‘practical’ education but rather a general
education based on the transmission of ‘competencies’.
In this discourse, the need for change in education is largely expressed in economic
terms and particularly with regard to the preparation of a workforce and competition
with other countries as shown in the following extract from an OECD text:
Only a well-trained and highly adaptable labour force can provide the capacity
to adjust to structural change and seize new employment opportunities created
by technological progress. Achieving this will in many cases entail a re-examination, perhaps radical, of the economic treatment of human resources and
education. (OECD, 1993: 9)
This discourse about the ‘knowledge economy’ regards schools as a part of the national
economy rather than simply belonging to the ‘welfare society’, with the role of creating ‘human capital’ that can be invested in production and turned into profit. In the
case of Brazil and Argentina, this discourse has prescribed a set of parameters for
educational thought and action to limit ideas and practices; moreover they have been
domesticated and became part of social struggles and political strategies.

The Domestic and the International
This domestic debate was apprehensive about the future and strongly influenced by
the international ‘debate’. The World Bank was very clear about what a ‘knowledge
economy’ is:
A knowledge-based economy relies primarily on the use of ideas rather than
physical abilities and on the application of technology rather than the transformation of raw materials or the exploitation of cheap labour. It is an economy in
which knowledge is created, acquired, transmitted, and used more effectively by
individuals, enterprises, organizations, and communities to promote economic
and social development. (World Bank, 1998d: 1)
The OECD was also aware of what was happening (and by extension, what should be
happening):
The knowledge economy is transforming the demands of the labour market in
economies throughout the world. In industrial countries, where knowledge-based
industries are expanding rapidly, labour market demands are changing accordingly. Where new technologies have been introduced, demand for high-skilled
workers, particularly high-skilled information and communication technology
(ICT) workers, has increased. At the same time, demand for lower-skilled workers
has declined. (OECD, 2001: 1)

--- [PDF Page 529 / Book Page 526] ---

526 Ferreira

This sent clear messages for economic competition and, hence, for the reform of education. Moreover, to compete effectively in this constantly changing environment,
workers must be able to upgrade their skills on a continuous basis.
In contrast, in Brazil and Argentina, the domestic debate emphasised social problems
and intellectual resistance. In Brazil, during the 1990s, the new methods of production
were regarded as the cause of unemployment. Yet, although the problem was largely
seen as a lack of qualifications in the workforce, some like Ascelrad, thought that the
discourse of competitiveness in Brazil was used to justify ‘a productive rationalisation
based on the intensification of work’ (Ascelrad, 1995: 61). ‘Labour’ was portrayed as
an obstacle to efficiency, and concern about the social progress of workers was seen as
obstructing competitiveness. The failure to train workers was used to justify the massive redundancies in companies and workers could be blamed for firms losing their
competitive advantage (Ascelrad, 1995: 50–53).
In Argentina, for example, Gore (1996: 108–110) argues that during the 1990s, there
were very many ‘badly trained’ people whilst there was a need for qualified workers.
Thus, there was a huge number of unemployed on the streets, while companies were
unable to fill their vacant posts because they could not find the ‘kind of people they
needed’ (Gore, 1996: 108). In fact, as Gallart (1997: 3) and Filmus (1994: 9) noted,
only a few people were involved in the new technological processes. As a result, a high
proportion of the public was destined either to become destitute or to be forced to work
in the ‘black’ economy (Gallart, 1997: 4).
Yet the job losses in Argentina, particularly where low qualifications were required,
set in motion processes that could create other jobs (Filmus, 1994: 9–10). Thus there
was a need for higher educational standards and better qualifications.
Etcheverry (2001: 36) stressed the importance of the time spent in formal education,
and a person’s income. A study by the Inter-American Development Bank in Buenos
Aires and its suburbs showed that in the 1990s, the incomes of those who had completed
six years of education were 35% higher than those with no formal education. Moreover,
someone who had completed 12 years of studies earned 80% more than someone without
formal education. Finally those with 17 years of education (including university) earn
160% more than someone without any formal education (Etcheverry, 2001: 35–37).
In Brazil the link between less education and lower incomes was ‘widespread’
(Birdsall et al., 1996: 11). Barros and Ramos (1996: 193) stated that education could
explain up to 50% of the inequalities of earnings in the country. Birdsall et al. (1996: 35)
noted that the unequal distribution of income was perpetuated by the ‘quality gap’
between the education provided to poor and wealthy children. As a result, it was
believed that a high standard of basic education could result in a more productive
labour force, faster economic growth and less inequality (Birdsall et al., 1996: 35).
The issue of educational reform can only be understood in the light of the socioeconomic and educational inequalities of the two societies.

The Implications of the ‘Knowledge Economy’ for Education
There was some doubt about the capacity of society to generate employment in the
industrial sector both in Argentina and Brazil during the 1990s. Despite the increase of

--- [PDF Page 530 / Book Page 527] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 527

productivity in manufacturing industries, there was a decline in the number of people
employed in this sector (Gallart, 1997:3). Since industries that require intensive, lowcost labour were not deemed to be viable, low-cost labour was ceasing to provide a
competitive advantage for a nation (De Moura Castro, 1998: 10).
Thus, by the late 1990s, the literature in Brazil and Argentina advocated a model of
development based on knowledge, scientific-technological advances and a new system
of education. In other words, a new discourse began to emerge. Filmus (1994: 5) stressed
the overriding importance of skills in providing a competitive advantage. Thrurow and
Reich cited by Filmus (1994: 5) argued that the crucial productive resources of the
twenty-first century – capital and new technology – would spread rapidly around the
globe. Of course, people would relocate themselves, but at a slower rate than other
‘factors of production’. The location of the essential industries of the new century
(microelectronics, biotechnology, telecommunications and informatics) would depend
on existing human resources (Filmus, 1994: 5).
The enhancement of ‘human resources’ was seen as essential for Brazil and
Argentina to participate competitively in the increasingly knowledge-based global
economy. Failure to improve people’s skills could result in these countries being separated from the networks of the international economy. Filmus (1994: 11–12) noted that,
in Argentina, knowledge had become the main requirement for sustained development.
He suggested that ‘being at the margin of this knowledge means that one is excluded
from all possibilities of participating actively of this growth’ (Filmus, 1994: 15). In
Brazil, De Moura Castro (1998: 13) cited President Cardoso as saying that educational
systems in Latin America must either ‘invest heavily in R&D and endure the “information economy” metamorphosis, or they become unimportant and unexplainable’.
It was not only that people needed more education, but also a different kind of education. For example, it was said that the concept of literacy had changed in the new
discourse. During the period of the ‘industrial society’, someone who could read and
write basic texts was considered to be literate. On the other hand, in the new ‘knowledge economy’, people can only be regarded as literate if they are capable of interpreting a manual (Pastore, 1995: 38).
It was in this context that the literature in Brazil and Argentina witnessed a major
shift in the definition of ‘education’, especially the notion of competencies. These
were defined as being halfway between knowledge and action and a set of constantly
changing properties that were tested when concrete problems arose in work situations
involving uncertainty and technical complexity (Gallart, 1997: 10). These competencies were not easily transmissible because they were a synthesis of theoretical knowledge and concrete experience of the real world. Hence, the definition and transmission
of these competencies requires the collaboration of both education and sections of the
labour force (Gallart, 1997: 10).
From the perspective of the new discourse, the new labour force required a solid
general training, a capacity for abstract thinking and a global understanding of the
production process. In addition, workers had to be multifunctional, flexible and adaptable so that they could adjust to different working situations and to companies that
were becoming increasingly more flexible (Filmus, 1994: 13–14). It was also noted
that there was a tendency towards decentralisation in decision-making, which meant

--- [PDF Page 531 / Book Page 528] ---

528 Ferreira

that workers had to be autonomous so that they could think strategically and respond
creatively to shifting demands. At the same time, they should have the capacity to
make decisions when faced with unexpected situations and put ideas into practice. In
terms of attitudes, what was needed was to be self-disciplined and capable of working in teams. Finally, since students would have to face considerable technological
innovations throughout their working lives, they had to have a positive attitude towards
continuous learning (Filmus, 1994: 15).
Filmus (1994: 15) recommended that, in Argentina, the whole population should
have access to high-quality education. Although more sophisticated employment could
not be guaranteed to everybody, it was necessary for everyone to be ‘employable’
(Filmus, 1994: 14). Gallart (1997: 10) refers to the importance of reducing the disparities between the competencies that are acquired in elite education and those acquired
in the public sectors. Llach et al. (2000: 188) outlined a plan to construct a society that
was more adapted to the challenges of the knowledge society, but over all, a ‘more
equitable nation’. The literature revealed a consensus in Argentine society about the
need for the competencies described above to be taught in the educational system.
In Brazil, transmitting the ‘necessary’ competencies to everybody was regarded as
both a question of equity and an issue of national interest: for the economic benefits of
the country, educated workers needed other educated workers with whom they could
interact (Llach et al., 2000: 189). Thus it was not beneficial to have a small number of
highly educated workers and a low average level of education. It would be more productive to have ‘a large pool of moderately educated workers that could communicate
effectively with one another’ (Llach et al., 2000: 372).
Thus, in Brazil, changes in the production processes and the labour force were seen
as liberating workers from hierarchical relations and automated work. In addition, the
problem of unemployment was described as being rooted in the ‘under-qualification’
of workers.
It was assumed that the problem could be addressed by ‘adapting’ the educational
system, so that it transmitted the competencies that were required for work in the
‘knowledge economy’. Amongst these competencies, autonomy, problem-solving,
flexibility and adaptability were identified as the most important since it was believed
a number of technological revolutions could be ‘predicted’ in the near future. These
included an increase in the international competitiveness of Argentina and Brazil and
an alleviation of the problem of unemployment and inequality.

The Reforms of Education: Domestication
and Social Struggle
However, the idea that one particular reform proposal could cater for the interests of
all social groups was perhaps simplistic and based on the assumption that all ‘social
needs’ can be identified. In addition, the similarity in the proposals contained within
Argentine and Brazilian academic discourses suggested that social changes brought
about by the ‘knowledge economy’ imply similar ‘social needs’ in both countries.
Embedded in this discourse was the assumption that just as the ‘needs’ of ‘industrial

--- [PDF Page 532 / Book Page 529] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 529

society’ could be defined, the ‘knowledge needs’ could be identified too and these were
applicable, with some adaptations, to every society.
Judged from the perspective of the ‘knowledge economy’, Argentina and Brazil were
in a state of social, economic and educational crisis – and a great deal was expected from
education. Thus, introducing ‘the right changes’ into Argentine and Brazilian education
to ‘adapt’ the workforce to the ‘knowledge economy’ was of crucial importance, since
spreading ‘quality’ education was essential to make these nations internationally competitive, as well as for training responsible citizens, and the employability of the individual.
Hence, the principles within the discourse of the ‘knowledge economy’ have been
treated by the Brazilian and Argentine literature as natural, self-evident facts. Elements
of the discourse of the ‘knowledge economy’ were being used as social strategies –
they had been turned into legitimising principles operating within the educational field
– and in both countries the curriculum pedagogy and the organisation of the educational system were changed.

The ‘Educational Domestication’ of the
‘Knowledge Economy’ Debate
The literature in Brazil and Argentina made a number of criticisms and recommendations aimed at adapting education to the ‘knowledge economy’ discourse. These ideas
were centred in two main themes. The first largely concerned the curriculum and pedagogy, and the second the organisation of the educational system and the institutions
themselves.
In Argentina, the first proposal made in terms of the curriculum and pedagogy (especially for secondary education) addressed the dichotomy between general and professional education. Braslavsky (1995: 4) suggested abandoning the traditional view of
secondary education, which believed the purpose of education was to give students
access to a lot of information, a verbal command of the contents of books and training
in the exercise of memory. She thought that ‘vocational’ tendencies should be rejected
too. The discourse required changing occupational profiles so that they encouraged a
capacity for abstraction rather than practical skills (Braslavsky, 1995: 4–5).
Braslavsky (1995: 6) believes professional education should be separate from secondary education, in Argentina. The lower secondary school ought to concentrate on
transmitting basic competencies that ensure autonomous and effective processes of
learning, and the chance to understand and establish abstract models. At the same
time, professional education should be less bureaucratic and more flexible, adopt a
modular structure and employ competent workers to teach specific practical abilities
(Braslavsky, 1995: 7).
Similarly, in Brazil, secondary education was criticised for lacking identity and
being detached from the requirements of the modern world. The encyclopaedic curriculum of secondary schools and its pedagogy were censured for only preparing students for entrance to university (Bastos, 1998: 305). Teaching students to learn, and
preparing them to acquire new technologies to produce goods, services and knowledge
were mentioned amongst other new roles that secondary education should undertake.

--- [PDF Page 533 / Book Page 530] ---

530 Ferreira

In Brazil, there was also a sense that educational improvement was always lagging
behind changes in the labour market and that the acquisition of higher educational
standards had not resulted in more labour opportunities for the young. This situation
(which can be seen in the whole of Latin America) can be attributed to the expansion
of education in ways unrelated to changes in the labour market (Jacinto & Suarez,
1995: 152).
Within the Brazilian academic discourse, there was a definition of an ideal kind
of person or ‘economic man’ designed to address the ideological implications of the
‘knowledge economy’. This definition required a curriculum that embraced certain
basic competencies and skills that schools should encourage, including critical thinking and creativity amongst its students (Viciani Gonçalves, 1995: 134). Rather than
simply transmitting knowledge that was then applied in the workplace, the school
should be an innovative environment, a laboratory that constructs new knowledge
through the relationship between student and teacher and a place where theory can be
combined with practice (Bastos, 1998: 305). It was even recommended that vocational
education should apply pedagogical methods based on the creative use of practice to
teach the fundamental theoretical paradigms required for the ‘knowledge economy’.
Within the Brazilian academic discourse, knowledge was given greatest priority. Thus, great importance was attached to ‘learning to learn’ and lifelong learning.
The stress on content should be reduced by giving more space to a kind of pedagogy
that laid emphasis on the learning process and encouraged the student to learn more
(Pieroni & Achcar, 1995: 120–130). This was explained on the grounds that there was
a need to prepare professionals to be able to handle technological changes in their everyday practice and throughout their careers (which implied having the ability to absorb
new information and be trained to keep abreast with changing trends in education)
(Rachid & Githay, 1995: 64–70). As a result, people’s timetables would be divided into
working time, leisure time and learning time. Thus, it was considered essential that
students should ‘learn how to learn in school’ (Pastore, 1995: 37).
In the literature, it was believed that Brazil could only adapt to the ‘knowledge economy’ if this education encouraged flexibility, adaptability and autonomy. According to
Bastos (1998: 306–310), schools should realise that they did not have a monopoly of
knowledge and must form a relationship of mutual learning with the productive sector.
He agreed with Ferretti in suggesting that the radical changes and greater flexibility in
the productive sector should be reflected in the educational system at all levels (Bastos,
1998: 311–320). Rachid and Githay (1995: 70–84) noted that entry into an unpredictable world required people to have a global understanding of the process so that they
could apply their knowledge in future situations. At the same time, Jacinto and Suarez
(1995: 153–155) recommended that students should acquire greater autonomy, as well
as being capable of being organised and working in teams.
In Argentina, both Braslavsky and Gallart agreed with Tedesco (2001: 2) on the
need for secondary education – and the whole educational system – to abandon its
endogamy, put an end to the institutional isolation of the school and strengthen its links
with social communities and the world of production and work (Gallart, 1997: 12–17).
However, Etcheverry warned against an ‘utilitarian’ idea of knowledge, since ‘contemporary pragmatism’ left us trapped in the dichotomy between ‘useful’ and ‘useless’

--- [PDF Page 534 / Book Page 531] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 531

knowledge. Everything that was deemed as not useful for making money was discredited by parents and children (Etcheverry, 2001: 88). The school became an institution that prioritises the acquisition of ‘tools’. However, the author suggested that the
apparently practical advantage of aligning public education with the labour market is
an illusion. By concentrating on technology – on computers for example – one would
simply produce obsolete graduates (Etcheverry, 2001: 89).
In Argentina, there was an educational dilemma between ‘theoretical’ and ‘practical’
knowledge which, in the opinion of Gallart, derived from a false conception of knowledge. If knowledge were understood as something directly related to action, where
‘to know’ meant to be able to handle the necessary languages so as to be able to act
competently in determined domains, the distinction between intellectual and manual
capacities would be blurred (Gallart, 1997: 9–10).
In this context, Gallart outlined the following requirements for secondary schools in
Argentina: a capacity to understand the relationship between the abstract and the concrete, an intellectual ability to handle abstraction and symbolic operations, a capacity
to make quick decisions, an ability to organise other people and the use of materials,
machinery and financial resources (Gallart, 1997: 8).
However, both Gallart (1997: 9) and Etcheverry (2001: 49) noted that the abilities that the school needed to foster, such as problem-solving and learning to learn,
could not be acquired in a vacuum of ‘content’ (Etcheverry, 2001: 50). There had to
be a balance between factual knowledge and the capacity to make ‘socio-historical
interpretations’ (Gallart, 1997: 8). Reverting to the example of computers, Etcheverry
(2001: 50) observes that any literate person with a reasonable capacity of abstraction
and logical thinking could learn how to operate a computer program at any age.
Yet, Gallart (1994: 17) warned against compiling a ‘curriculum by aggregation’ in
Argentina, since incorporating new subjects, like technology or ecology, could easily
lead to a strengthening of ‘encyclopaedism’. She suggested that new content should
be included in the curriculum in a creative and imaginative way, across the basic competencies. Gallart (1994: 18) also observes that the basic cognitive competencies that
were required for the future had not changed substantially since the curricular reforms
of the 1970s. Like Etcheverry (2001: 49), she argued that reading, writing, mathematics and basic general knowledge were amongst the weakest areas of secondary education in Argentina.
Thus, in both Argentina and Brazil, it was considered essential for education to
relate to its context, and the world of labour and production and the traditional ‘encyclopaedic’ curriculum was condemned. There was evidently a need for a curriculum
more closely linked to the question of students’ employability. However, this did not
imply having a practical curriculum, but rather one based on competencies like learning how to learn, and including values such as creativity, flexibility, autonomy and a
capacity to work in teams.
Another aspect of the ‘knowledge economy’ is the advocacy of a new style of management and organisation within the educational system and its institutions. Decentralisation
and school autonomy were seen as the guiding principles of this new approach.
Tedesco (2001: 2) stresses the radical nature of the expected educational changes
in Argentina. Instead of reforming pedagogical methods and revising the content, it

--- [PDF Page 535 / Book Page 532] ---

532 Ferreira

was necessary to work out the right pedagogical and institutional formulae to improve
content, methods and institutional design. Furthermore, he questioned the value of
dividing the educational system into primary, secondary and tertiary levels. The needs
of society and the requirements of scientific and technological progress established a
need for lifelong learning, and this refuted the idea that knowledge could be acquired
progressively through a lineal sequence.
In this context, it was suggested that the system should be decentralised, with
enhanced central agencies and a significant growth in the autonomy of the schools
(Ministério da Educação Brasil, 1999: 18). The strengthening of the institutional autonomy of schools was justified on two grounds. First autonomous schools could make
better use of ‘increasingly scarce resources’ (Gallart, 1994: 16–17). By this was meant
that schools should have more freedom to draw up their institutional projects and decide
how to devote their time, as well as how to employ teachers and organise their work
(Gallart, 1994: 16–17). A further point was that institutional autonomy would make it
easier for communities to be involved in school decisions (Braslavsky, 1995: 4).
Preti (1999: 21) pointed out that a ‘neoliberal educational policy’ has been implemented. In a society which values knowledge as a form of merchandise and which also
attaches great importance to social and labour relations, the ‘neoliberal project’ has
persuaded society that education was the only means of tackling the economic crisis
(Preti, 1999: 22). Preti said that, from the perspective of the neo-liberal logic, schools
were ineffective in a society where those with the ‘greatest knowledge’ were the winners, as a result of a management crisis. Thus schools had to carry out administrative
reforms to become competitive, and enter the job market.
In the case of Argentina, a wide range of problems have arisen from the decentralised organisation of the educational system, with a number of different strategies being
suggested to overcome them. These notions of decentralisation were not only perceived and recognised as legitimate, but were also internalised as natural phenomena
and thus used as a social strategy.
Preti (1999: 21) argues that the ‘neoliberal discourse’ imposed a hegemonic ideology
and questions if education has had much influence on employability and economic competitiveness and decentralisation policies. He also referred to the indispensable need for
continuous ‘retraining’, as well as the new qualifications required for work, like learning
to learn and a good general training (Preti, 1999: 21). Thus, although Preti struggled to
escape from the ‘knowledge economy’ discourse, his work finally came to terms with it.
Although some authors made different recommendations, each author incorporated
the debate about – and even the discourse of – the ‘knowledge economy’ into his or
her work. As a result of the varied but intense interest in the ‘knowledge economy’, it
became an ideal the Argentinian and Brazilian academic world absorbed, and indeed
helped domestically to construct.

Conclusion
This chapter has traced an idea in motion, mainly by sketching four themes: identifying
the idea of both ‘industrial society’ and the ‘knowledge economy’ as academic concepts, noting how they became a ‘discourse’ at international level, and indicating how

--- [PDF Page 536 / Book Page 533] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 533

these two discourses were domesticated in two places, Argentina and Brazil, in particular time periods.
As the discourse was domesticated and absorbed by local politics, it changed and
it certainly led to different educational policies, including vocational technical education policies in the two places. In other words, important academic concepts changed
into powerful political discourses at international level, and in both countries, but their
domestication – their political acceptance and reformulation – led to new and different
patterns in the two educational systems.
During the 1960s, Latin American countries sought to meet the requirements of
an ‘industrial society’ by setting out (especially Brazil and Argentina) their ‘modern’
and ‘progressive’ economic goals. The result of this restructuring was that their educational policies were adjusted to cater for the needs of national development and the
discourse of the ‘industrial society’.

Brazil
In Brazil, it was easy for the post-1964 military authorities to introduce their policies because there was no significant opposition from bodies such as democratic trade
unions or student movements – this represented a very particular political form of
‘domestication’. During the 1960s, in Latin American countries, there was a new
impetus to meet the requirements of economic development and enter the international
market. Brazil, in particular, strengthened its economic policies and undertook a process of financial and administrative restructuring, the purpose of which was to link education policies to the interdepartmental goals of the national development plans. As a
result, vocational education programmes were introduced to prepare workers through
non-academic courses. Stress was laid on preparing the pupils for the labour market,
on the assumption that there was an increasing need for qualified personnel. However,
the educational planners had failed to anticipate that there would be a resulting mismatch between the economic model and the training programmes for jobs.
One aspect of ‘domestication’ is clear: by means of vocational education, the government of Brazil assumed it would be possible to expand secondary education, as well as
tackle social problems such as unemployment. The introduction of vocational education policies occurred when Brazil was undergoing a phase of industrial expansion.
However, the ‘economy’ was not able to cope with the uncontrolled expansion of school
enrolments. Vocational education which had formerly been seen as a remedy, took on
a more sophisticated form: in fact, there were several reforms to give all secondary
schools a vocational character with a view to preparing young people for work.
The other aspect of ‘domestication’ was that the vocational education programmes
and the school system were based on foreign models, and introduced by policymakers
as a means to fulfil economic and social needs. These needs arose from the nature of
the new companies being set up, industry was dependent on investment from overseas
(e.g. the World Bank), and the ideological assumptions of the ‘industrial society’. The
policymakers played a key role in the process of introducing vocational education and
borrowing a model of educational innovation from the United States. The reforms of
the educational systems were part of a package of loans and assistance programmes
for economic development.

--- [PDF Page 537 / Book Page 534] ---

534 Ferreira

Perhaps there are two international discourses here – one about ‘industrial society’
and another about vocational-technical education. The obvious research question is
whether the two discourses gradually took on an ideological status – served as an
ideological tool – in so far as they helped governments to disguise increasing socioeconomic inequalities.

Argentina
In Argentina, too, the idea of an ‘industrial society’ was ‘domesticated’, but in startlingly different ways from Brazil. In contrast to Brazil, the rapid expansion of education experienced in the Peronist period (1945–1955) was not closely tied to demands
for skilled labour to meet the demands for industrial growth. In fact, neither the large
educational expansion nor the development of technical education was clearly linked
to the requirements for skilled labour – despite the fact that Perón’s project for national
economic growth aimed at fostering industrial development. As Rein (1998: 16) states,
‘[T]he Peronist doctrine consisted in a threefold aspiration to social justice, economic
independence and political sovereignty.’ Perón’s plans gave priority to encouraging
local industry and included the following: the financing of modern technology through
agricultural exports, an improved power supply and modern means of transport, protectionist policies, preferential credit and state subsidies. However – although industry
did grow rapidly and intensively – industrial development did not take place quite as
Péron had planned.
By the end of the 1940s, the Argentine economy started to decline and the programmes for industrialisation and economic modernisation never materialised. Thus,
the modest growth in the industrial sectors and their reduced technological progress
meant there was a decline in demand for skilled labour. What is even more striking is
the way in which the industrialisation and economic modernisation discourse found
political expression: the development of education was geared to serve the political
interests of the Peronist state, contribute to social order and foster political stability.
Perón domesticated the industrialisation discourse in a very specific way – claiming
to be transforming Argentina into a ‘socially just nation’ and making the state responsible for protecting the weak sectors of society. In other words, the Peronist movement
sought to create ‘new Argentinians’ for the ‘new socially just Argentina’ and the education system was an important tool for achieving this objective.
Of course, education also indirectly contributed to economic growth by providing
basic skills for life in urban and rural areas. The expansion of vocational and technical
education did meet some of the needs of labour while providing completely new career
opportunities for the urban middle class. Both escuelas industriales [the industrial
colleges] and Universidad Obrera [the Workers’ University] with their emphasis on
applied sciences provided more practical education for those who could not attend
colegios nacionales [national colleges]. However, although the reforms originally
aimed to foster industrial development, this never occurred. The Peronist educational
reforms were tied to the social policies of the State.
Thus in the discourse of the ‘industrial society’, the objectives of vocational education, in both countries, were a crucial form of investment but also acted as a political

--- [PDF Page 538 / Book Page 535] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 535

and social strategy, although in different ways. Clearly, however, the exact patterns of
educational reforms were not directly attributable to the discourse about industrialisation. The social and political framing of education altered the emphasis.
In Brazil, the reforms and the role of the state after 1964, during the military period,
included both authoritarianism and a strong belief in economic development financed
by international capital. In contrast, in Argentina, Perón took political measures that
consisted of a threefold aspiration to social justice, economic independence and political sovereignty by employing protectionist policies which hindered foreign competition. Moreover, this domestic and social struggle gave rise to a good deal of inner
conflict.
Both Brazil and Argentina found they were under increasing pressure to introduce
reforms. However, by 1970 they were beginning to be faced with a new phenomenon –
this was the arrival of the ‘knowledge economy’ and its accompanying discourse which
required both countries to make a suitable adjustment.
There was considerable evidence that several academics have been debating the
‘knowledge economy’ in terms of the assumptions and expectations of the international discourse. The discourse on ‘industrial societies’ overlaps with the discourse
on progress and modernisation and the even less clear concept of ‘globalisation’.
However, the educational implications are clear. Notions such as curriculum-based
competencies, lifelong learning, decentralisation and school autonomy are recognised
by the literature as being legitimate in this new social context.
When analysing educational policies in these countries, the influence of the ‘knowledge economy’ discourse on world outlooks was apparent and it can be regarded as
having become an ideology. Moreover, this ideology has acted as the guiding principles for educational reform in Brazil and Argentina since the 1990s and has had a
profound effect in shaping educational systems and changing the status of vocationaltechnical education. Under the ‘knowledge economy’ discourse or ideology, this has
gradually given way to a situation where much of education has become training in
competencies.
Perhaps, now, we are witnessing convergence?

References
Ascelrad, H. (1995). ‘Trabalho, qualificação e competitividade’ [Work, qualifications and competitiveness],
Em Aberto 15, 65.
Baran, P. (1957). The Political Economy of Growth. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Barnett, T., Oxaal, I., and Booth, D. (Eds.) (1975). Beyond the Sociology of Development: Economy and
Society in Latin America and Africa. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Barros, R. & Ramos, L. (1996). ‘Temporal evolution of the relationship between wages and education of
Brazilian men’, in N. Birdsall et al. (Eds.), Opportunity Forgone: Education in Brazil. Washington DC:
Inter-American Development Bank.
Bastos, J. A. S. L. (1998). ‘O ensino médio: A grande questão’ [Middle school: The big issue], Revista
Brasileira de Estudos Pedagógicos 78, 188/189/190.
Birdsall, N. et al. (1996). Opportunity Foregone: Education in Brazil. Washington DC: Inter-American
Development Bank.
Black, J.K. (1977). United States Penetration in Brazil: Univercity of Pennsyluania Press.

--- [PDF Page 539 / Book Page 536] ---

536 Ferreira
Braslavsky, C. (1995).‘La educación secundaria en el contexto de los cambios en los sistemas educativos
latinoamericanos’ [Secondary education in the context of changes in the Latin American educational
systems], Revista Iberoamericana de Educación 21. p. 91–123.
Cardoso, F. H. (1975). Autoritarismo e Democratização [Authoritarianism and Democratization]. Rio de
Janeiro: Paz e Terra.
De Moura Castro, C. (1998). Education in the Information Age. Washington DC: Inter-American
Development Bank.
Delors, J. (1998). Educação: um tesouro a descobrir [Learning: The Treasure Within]. São Paulo: Cortez.
Di Tella, T. (1999). Historia Social de la Argentina Contemporánea [The Social History of Contemporary
Argentina]. Buenos Aires: Troquel.
Donghi, H. (1994). Argentina en el Callejón [Argentina in a cul-de-sac]. Buenos Aires: Ariel.
Etcheverry, G. (2001). La Tragedia Educativa [The Educational Tragedy]. Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura
Económica.
Fiechter, G. (1975). ‘Institutionalizing authoritarianism: Brazil since 1964’. Latin American Research
Review, 14(1), 29–60.
Filmus, D. (1994). ‘El papel de la educación frente a los desafíos de las transformaciones científicotecnológicas’ [The role of education facing the challenges of scientific-technological shifts]. Available
from http://www.oei.es/oeivirt/fp/cuad1a06.htm. [Last accessed 05/07/2007].
Gallart, M. A. (1994). Democracia y productividad: desafíos de una nueva educación media en América
Latina [Democracy and productivity: challenges of a new secondary education in Latin America].
Available from http://www.oei.es/oeivirt/fp/cuad2a02.htm [Last accessed 05/07/2007].
Gallart, M. A. (1997). ‘Micro política en la escuela: los cambios en la relación escuela-mundo laboral’
[Micro politics in school: Changes in the relation between school and the world of work], Revista
Iberoamericana de Educación, (15).
Giddens, A. (2001). Sociology. 4th Edition. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gimeno, J. (1983). Education in Latin America and Caribbean: Trends and Prospects: 1970–2000. Paris:
UNESCO.
Gore, E. (1996). Fuentes para la transformación curricular: tecnología [Guidelines for Curricular
Transformation: Technology]. Buenos Aires: Ministerio de Cultura y Educación de la Nación
Argentina.
Halsey, A. H. et al. (1961). ‘Introduction’. In A. H. Halsey, J. Floud, & C. A. Anderson (Eds.), Education,
Economy, and Society: A Reader in the Sociology of Education. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
Hopkins, D. (1987). Improving the Quality of Schooling: Lessons from the OECD International School
Improvement Project. London: The Falmer Press.
Ianni, O. (1975). O Colapso do Populismo no Brasil. [The End of Populism in Brazil]. Rio de Janeiro:
Civilização Brasileira.
Jacinto, C. & Suarez, A. (1995). ‘Juventude, Pobreza e Formação Profissional na América Latina’ [Youth,
poverty and professional education in Latin America]. Em Aberto, 15(65). Vol 15, p. 152–157.
Llach, J. J. et al. (2000). Educación para Todos [Education for all]. Buenos Aires: Distal.
Lumerman, J. P. (1994). Historia Social Argentina [The Social History of Argentina]. Buenos Aires:
Editorial Docência.
Luna, F. (1984). Perón y su Tiempo I [Perón and His First Period]. Buenos Aires: Sudamericana.
Luna, F. (1993). Breve Historia de los Argentinazos [Brief History of the Argentinians]. Buenos Aires:
Planeta.
Ministério da Educação Brasil (1999). O Novo Ensino Médio [The New Secondary Education]. Available
from http://www.mec.gov.br [Last accessed 06/07/2007].
OECD. 07 July 1993. Employment OutLook, Paris.
OECD (2001). The Knowledge Economy and the Changing Needs of The Labor Market. Available from
www1.worldbank.org/education/lifelong_learning/publications[Last accessed 06/07/2007].
Pastore, J. (1995). ‘O futuro do trabalho no Brasil e no mundo’ [The future of work in Brazil and the world].
Em Aberto, 15(65). Vol 15, p. 31–38.
Pieroni, J. L. & Achcar, I. (1995). ‘Reconversão profissional: conceitos e propostas’ [Professional recycling:
concepts and proposals]. Em Aberto, 15(65). Vol 15, p. 118–135.

--- [PDF Page 540 / Book Page 537] ---

Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Educational Change 537
Preti, O. (1999). ‘Educação à distância e globalização: desafios e tendências’ [Distance education and globalisation: challenges and trends]. Revista Brasileira de Estudos Pedagógicos, 79(191), 19–30.
Rachid, A. & Githay, L. (1995). ‘Programas de qualidade, trabalho e educação’ [Programmes of quality,
work and education]. Em Aberto, 15(65). Vol 15, p. 63–93.
Rattner, H. (1995). ‘Globalização: em direção a um “mundo só”?’ [Globalisation: towards “one world”?].
Em Aberto, 15(65). Vol 15, p. 2–10.
Rein, M. (1998). Politics and Education in Argentina 1946–1962. New York: Sharpe.
Romero, L. A. (1994). Breve Historia Contemporánea Argentina [A Brief History of Contemporary
Argentina]. Buenos Aires: Fondo de la Cultura Económica.
Rosa, J. M. (1992). Historia Social Argentina [Argentinian Social History]. Buenos Aires: Oriente.
Saviani, D. (1987). Escola e Democracia [School and Democracy]. São Paulo: Cortez Editora Ltda.
Tedesco, J. C. (2001). ‘Introducción. Los cambios en la educación secundaria y el papel de los planificadores’ [Introduction. Changes in secondary education and the role of policy makers]. In C. Braslavsky
(ed.), La educación secundaria. Cambio o inmutabilidad? Análisis y debate de procesos europeos y latinoamericanos contemporáneos [Secondary Education. Change or Immutability? Analysis and Debate
on European and Latin America Contemporary Processes]. Buenos Aires: Editorial Santillana.
Viciani Gonçalves, W. (1995). ‘Formação de professores: eixo estratégico da educação para o trabalho’ [The
education of teachers: the core strategy of education for work]. Em Aberto, 15(65). Vol 15, p. 19–30.
World Bank (1998d). The Knowledge Economy and the Changing Needs of The Labor Market. Available
from www1.worldbank.org/education/lifelong_learning/publications[Last accessed 06/07/2007].

