================================================================================
Chapter 34: Education, Jobs, and Vocational Training
Author(s): Leslie Bash
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 4: Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Education
Book Pages: pp. 539–550
PDF Pages: pp. 541–552 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 541 / Book Page 539] ---

34
EDUCATION, JOBS, AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING
Leslie Bash

Introduction
In the last quarter of the twentieth century a state-generated agenda, with a focus on
issues of employment and employability, assumed an increasing position of prominence in the comparative education literature. One of the more prominent examples,
the 1995 World Yearbook of Education (Bash & Green, 1995), offered a range of perspectives, drawn from commentaries on a diversity of contexts, on the relationship
between education and work in addition to some of the more salient issues concerning
the integration of young people into society. These included:
The ramifications of global economic and political change
The impact of industrial restructuring
● Changing labour markets, lifelong learning, and systems of vocational education
and training
● Diversity and equality in the transition from education to work
●
●

The above use of vocational education and training necessitates a working definition
based on the conventional view that it comprises: ‘all more or less organised or structured activities that aim to provide people with the knowledge, skills and competences
necessary to perform a job or a set of jobs, whether or not they lead to a formal qualification’ (Tessarin & Wannan, 2004: 13).
In signalling the developing impact of globalisation the World Yearbook exemplified an expanding narrative which was to reflect, both literally and metaphorically, a
growing sense of fin de siecle. There appeared to be little anticipation of the kinds of
dramatic political events to come (such as 9/11 and the Iraq War) and the ensuing anxieties concerning the apparent alienation of specific constituencies of the young and
perceived threats to national and global security. However, it did make an additional
contribution to an approach to comparative education that was to focus increasingly
upon the unifying consequences of international economic integration.
To place these issues into perspective it may be helpful to open with some comments
which would appear fairly evident to those with only a casual acquaintance with a
comparative and historical knowledge of education. First of all, questions concerning
its connection with the world of work began only to possess meaning once education
ceased to be a minority, elite pursuit. Indeed, the classic elitist approach placed a premium on education precisely because it was judged to be irrelevant to the masses.
539
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 539–550.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 542 / Book Page 540] ---

540 Bash

Thus, the requirement that those in leadership positions receive an education was itself
dependent upon an acceptance that the mass of workers did not – and vice versa.
Plato’s view that a liberal education – intellectual, aesthetic, and physical – would provide the necessary foundation for the guardianship of society has persisted over space
and time (Plato, 1955, Book 7).
Secondly, however, there has also been a long-standing view that if the masses were
not to be educated they at least might be trained in order that they perform their essentially manual labours in an efficient and effective manner. The nature of such training
was to be highly prescribed, frequently little more than a process of modelling the
tasks to be learned against existing practice: the traditional institution of apprenticeship enshrined in the master–pupil relationship. This institution was to be found in
diverse forms but was generally based upon the common notion of mastery, insofar as
apprentices were successfully inducted into a ‘guild’ of practitioners. Essentially, there
was the expectation that the pupil would defer to the master as the ‘gatekeeper’ to the
world of recognised craftsmen. Note also that apprenticeship, as with elite education,
was gender-specific, being mainly the preserve of the male sector of the population
– and many respects this would appear to remain the case. While, in the UK, the recent
renaissance of the system (the Modern Apprenticeship) is apparently open to all, neither occupational stereotypes nor the process of gendered occupational segregation
have disappeared (Fuller et al., 2005).
Thirdly, subtle changes begin to occur in the narrative. Thus, the term vocational
was progressively incorporated into the vocabulary of those with a remit for policy
and practice in respect of the preparation of individuals for specific occupations. While
vocation had been previously associated with the notion of a profession which evoked
the idea of a calling, its adjectival counterpart came to have a rather more prosaic
meaning: that which pertains to skilled jobs, often with a manual aspect, but ranking
below those for which a university education was a prerequisite. Thus, the plumber
and the electrician might have been in receipt of vocational training while the doctor
and lawyer would be expected to have received a university education. In this regard,
Wolf (2002: chapter 3) notes that policymakers in the developed world have promoted
vocational education and training as a necessarily good thing for national economies
while at the same perceived as ‘a great idea for other people’s children’.

The Vocationalisation of the Academy
The apparent rupturing of the boundaries that have conventionally separated vocational
training from liberal education signalled widespread changes in the structure and content of work. In addition, it also suggested a more general shift in social relations. In
the context of higher education Kazamias and Starida (1992) have identified a process of vocationalisation as opposed to that of professionalisation where the emphasis
is on preparation for employment. Here, the focus is the market and thus the necessity
for a relatively rapid response to its dynamic. Bearing in mind the competitive nature
of the global employment market governments which, in the spirit of free enterprise,
had previously taken a somewhat laissez-faire approach have in recent years sought to

--- [PDF Page 543 / Book Page 541] ---

Education, Jobs, and Vocational Training 541

develop regulatory processes. Consequently, diverse occupations, such as teaching, law,
and medicine, previously characterised by relative institutionalised autonomy have come
under an increasing degree of state control. Garoupa suggests this has occurred, particularly in the latter half of the twentieth century, as clients began to demand more information about the services provided by professionals and where the market is perceived to
have failed ‘to produce the socially optimal quantity and quality of the professional service. . . . [Thus] some protection for the consumer of professional services is necessary to
guarantee quality and mitigate inefficiencies. Protection of consumers frequently takes
the form of regulation of the profession and its markets’ (Garoupa, 2004: 4).
Other jobs traditionally needing at most a course of work-based vocational training
are now the province of higher education. Thus, a specialised undergraduate degree is
increasingly a global requisite for occupational areas such as nursing, childcare, catering, and retail management. While one possible implication has been that universities
have undergone significant changes to enable assessment according to a skills-based,
rather than a knowledge-based, agenda it has also raised the issue of an ‘over-educated’
population. Chevalier (2000) argues this position as a consequence of having taken
a considered empirical approach to the issue of ‘over-education’, specifically in the
context of the match between education, qualifications, and the degree of satisfaction
with work. Yet it remains undoubtedly a contested concept, especially in an era where
a dominant theme in the political narrative suggests that education is the solution to a
good many defined social ills. Yet, it could be argued that the likelihood is that even if
there is an apparent mismatch between credentials and the requirements of the job in
the short run the nature of work itself will change as a consequence of the increased
value derived from a more qualified labour force.
From a comparative perspective, the last 30 years or so have provided a tableau upon
which has been written the story of an increasingly global quest to establish and maintain international economic competitiveness. One consequence of this has been an
ideological move away from one perception of individuals, whose possession of skills
and knowledge contributed to personal and social identity formation, to another perception which marked them out essentially as embodiments of human capital (Wilson
& Woock, 1995: 8–9). Just as with any other item of capital, educationists and education policymakers began to speak heavily of such items as investment, evaluation,
outputs, and profit.
An increasingly globalised move during the last quarter of the twentieth century
towards the marketisation of education and training reflected both the accelerating
transnational shifts in production and advances in new technologies. The suppliers of
education and training recognised the need for a rapid response to a much more flexible global economy where manufacturing jobs declined in the West as they shifted to
the less-industrialised regions or were replaced by advanced technologies. At the same
time most Western countries at the centre of global economic activity acknowledged
these changes in the formation and implementation of policies even if that acknowledgment was often masked by a view of individuals which marked them out as lacking
relevant skills rather than as recipients of a market failure to supply jobs.
It should be further noted that until the demise of the state socialist regimes, Eastern
Europe continued to operate, unsurprisingly, in a conventional centralised manner,

--- [PDF Page 544 / Book Page 542] ---

542 Bash

regulating both the supply of, and the demand for, labour. Schools, vocational training
institutions, and universities tended to be little more than conduits for the deployment
of human capital within an economic structure characterised by significant state intervention. Arguably, this resulted in a skewed employment structure and contributed to
an economy unable to deliver on either the domestic or international fronts. Of course,
the state socialist systems of Eastern Europe were not alone in this sponsorship process even though a contest process may have preceded it (cf. Turner, 1960). In France,
a place at a grande école would provide a guaranteed future in the elite sectors of
employment, while the Ivy League and Oxford and Cambridge universities continued
to perform similarly for the US and the UK respectively. By and large, however, by
the end of the twentieth century, the majority of industrialised societies in being committed to marketisation rejected the centralised role of the state, except insofar it was
needed to deal with perceived threats to the national social and political order or of
threats to the national position in the global economic order.
It was not altogether surprising therefore that as youth unemployment began to
accelerate in the 1970s the impetus for the establishment of ‘training’ policies in the
West became that much greater. What became known in much of the literature on
education and work as the ‘new vocationalism’ was exemplified by the Youth Training
Scheme (YTS) in the UK. The ‘new vocationalism’ departed from the conventional
notion of vocational training in that its primary aim was not to equip young people
with sets of specific skills acquired through an often lengthy period of apprenticeship,
which would mark them out as qualified technicians and craftsmen. Rather, the focus
was on the development of young people to a state of readiness for employment, as
Dale states:
The aims . . . include the need to adjust to a new status, somewhere between work
and non-work. The objectives of the new vocationalism are as much occupational versatility and personal adjustment as anything that would formerly have
been recognized as skill training. (Dale, 1985: 7)
Thus the YTS and its immediate predecessors appeared to assume that the cause of
youth unemployment was lack of relevant skills among the young. Significantly, such
schemes did not suggest that youth unemployment might be connected with the overall lack of work opportunities. The ‘new vocationalism’ was based upon the notion of
generic or transferable skills (such as those relevant to success in job interviews) and,
in due course, was to have an impact upon higher education as universities began to be
transformed into managerialist degree-delivery systems.
It was clear, however, that the ‘new vocationalism’ was not simply a political response
to an apparent acute phenomenon of youth unemployment. It possibly also reflected
a realisation that the economy was increasingly global in character, that comparative
advantage was becoming much more fluid, and that ‘jobs for life’ was an anachronistic
concept. In the UK context the disappearance of manufacturing which had traditionally accommodated significant numbers of young people lacking formal academic and
vocational qualifications constituted a clear change in the socio-economic structure.
In their quest for lower costs large multinational corporations began to transfer

--- [PDF Page 545 / Book Page 543] ---

Education, Jobs, and Vocational Training 543

manufacturing capacity to regions where wages were significantly lower than Europe
and North America. At the same time, new technologies (robotics, computer-aided
design and manufacture) additionally contributed to the lower demand for unskilled
and semi-skilled labour while also increasing productivity.
This was all far removed from the pioneering approaches to the education–work
relationship, as characterised by Dewey in the US and the polytechnicism of the early
post-revolutionary period of the Soviet Union. Here, in principle, the world of work was
to be perceived as little different from any other area of human activity and, therefore,
could be treated as an authentic aspect of the school curriculum. Work experience was
not to be equated with vocational training but as a means of enhancement of the totality of learning. Of course, in the case of the Soviet Union, there was an undoubted ideological agenda to polytechnicism (Bash, 1991) while Dewey’s approach blended with
the Gemeinschaft of the American local community. Also, while the focus remained
upon the internal socio-economic structures of both countries, experimentation in education or work was permissible. Once, however, the political-economic elites in the US
and the USSR began to see the future in terms of international economic, political, and
military competition there was little room for idealism. ‘Calvinistic’ Stalinism – the
Stakhanovite exhortation to all workers to increase their productivity – together with
the cold war actions of both the US and the USSR combined to provide a backcloth
to the competitive race for global dominance in the 1950s and the 1960s. Centralised
direction shaped the vocational narrative in the Soviet Union, with a heavy emphasis
on science and technology, while, as in other areas, the fear that the Americans could
be upstaged in respect of their supremacy in science resulted in unprecedented Federal
intervention in education policy in the shape of the National Defense Education Act
of 1958.
In the less-industrialised countries the narrative has tended to be of quite a different
order. Basic education is often perceived in terms of the development of human capital, both as a vital contribution to GDP and as a contribution to personal income, with
the argument reported by Wilson and Woock (1995: 9) that:
[T]he education and skills level of a nation was crucial for its economic
development. . . . This simple formula of expenditure on education in developing
countries equalling growth still underlies many of the programmes of education
and training fostered by international agencies working in developing nations.
Status issues emerged in the early postcolonial context where many parents, as with
their counterparts in the industrialised West, had elite aspirations for their children (the
law, civil service, and similar occupations). On the other hand, the demand for a skilled
labour force, able to maximise manufacturing and agricultural capacity, needed to be
recognised by the newly formed nation states, especially in Africa. However, there
was an underlying assumption, challenged strongly by, among others, Philip Foster
(1965a, b), that the education system was actually in a position to deliver such skills to
emergent economies, that it could remedy deficits in the areas of practical engineering
and modern farming. Despite the alleged ‘fallacy’ of vocational schooling, it appeared
to be particularly attractive to Nyerere’s Tanzania, with its focus on primary education

--- [PDF Page 546 / Book Page 544] ---

544 Bash

as the generator of basic human capital, a theme enshrined in ‘Education for SelfReliance’ (Nyerere, 1968) which eschewed the need for widespread secondary or
higher education. No doubt, given the global perspectives of the twenty-first century,
many would now consider these positions somewhat short-sighted, with the unintended
consequence of consigning less-industrialised countries to the periphery of the international economy. Indeed, Foster’s thesis was quite clear in demonstrating that aspiring
school students and their parents understood that some kind of ‘elite’ education was
in their interests. No doubt a macroeconomic approach to the market economy would
suggest that such an increase in aggregate educational demand would constitute a positive contribution to national income and GDP with the consequent additional human
capital and overall economic demand. The obverse of this is that vocational schooling,
while seen as a universal panacea, would simply reinforce a situation characterised by
low-level technology, limited productive capacity, and low wages.
However, the exposure of the ‘vocational schooling fallacy’ in the context of the
less-industrialised countries did not prevent its later reinterpretation in the West. That
there should be a close fit between education and work is apparently reflected in the
vocationalist narratives of the last 30 years. It stands in contrast to the traditional view
that the manifest content of education merely signalled to employers the potential status of future employees. Thus, the classical curriculum, the conventional preserve of
the European middle and upper classes, was a marker for the professions. It mattered
little that it was of a ‘non-vocational’ character; indeed it was precisely because it was
directly removed from the world of work that the classical curriculum, paradoxically,
was regarded as having particular relevance. The significance of the classical curriculum according to Stray (1996) was to be found in its symbolisation of academic rigour,
social aspiration, and self-discipline. The narrative of the early twenty-first century,
however, is founded on the assumed correspondence between education and work:
measured vocational competencies as assessed in programmes of study, from secondlevel schooling through to doctoral dissertations.
Davies anticipates this when he notes:
that the tendency to ‘vocationalise’ the curriculum and favour traditional subject
specialisms in schools and colleges has led to a narrowing of the academic curriculum and a stress on vocational training. This is an education and training
emphasising standards, discipline, attitudes and dispositions compatible with
employers’ views of the proper characteristics workers and employees should
possess. This vocationalisation of learning opportunity has become part of new
divisions of certification and at the higher levels of attainment has undermined
the liberal approach to higher education which favoured general and humanistic
approaches. (Davies, 1997: 8)
Thus, the attempted democratisation of education at all levels and of the process of
transition from formal education to employment has inevitably resulted in the proliferation of accountability mechanisms. Accountability manifests itself not least in the
assumed process of dispassionate, objective, neutral assessment with patronage and
nepotism, while not entirely disappeared from the world of work, nonetheless having

--- [PDF Page 547 / Book Page 545] ---

Education, Jobs, and Vocational Training 545

less legitimacy in the earlytwenty-first century. The process of entry into employment
is increasingly formalised, subject to the possession of publicly recognised skills-based
credentials, and frequently shaped by the outcomes of varieties of psychometric and
other tests.
In the midst of this quest for correspondence between education and work it is clear
that a status hierarchy will remain. While the UK government is pledged to introduce
a new-style Diploma (Department for Children, Schools and Families, 2007), initially
specialised but followed by a more general version, in 2008 to run alongside the existing school-leaving combination of GCSE and GCE Advance Level qualifications,
even the Education Secretary (in 2007) warned of its possible rejection as second-best
by parents. Echoing Foster’s previously mentioned observations of Ghana, the fear
appeared to be that the Diploma, while possibly providing some kind of improved
preparation for work, would be likely to be associated with the relatively low-status
vocational areas. As such, it would track young people into a segregated stream – the
‘secondary modern’ qualification as opposed to the ‘gold standard’ provided by GCE
A levels. At the same time, a proposed GCSE in construction and building (2007)
signalled a number of anxieties and tensions among which are the remedying of skill
shortages and the motivation of ‘non-academic’ students.
In sum, this section has attempted to demonstrate that a profound change has taken
place in the relationship between education and work in the late twentieth and early
twenty-first centuries. This change is characterised by a shifting context from the
national to the global. In particular, the vocationalisation process in the West has proceeded from a focus on ‘training’ in generic and transferable skills for working-class
young people having few or no formal qualifications to one that is now much broader in
scope. In brief, economic and employment considerations have now come to dominate
the entire educational agenda. Accordingly, attention is now turned to the relevance of
globalisation to the changing relationship between education and work.

The Globalisation Problematic
In the context under discussion, globalisation, as partially reflected in the Bologna
process (European Ministers of Education, 1999) – the creation of a European Higher
Education Area – signals the possibility of the convergence of education systems as
attempts are made to implement diverse aspects of harmonisation. As a consequence,
schools, colleges, and universities may be perceived as little other than adjuncts of the
international economic order. Doubtless, some national superstructural features will
remain, reflecting closely guarded cultural legacies. Thus, whichever political direction France will have taken as a result of the 2007 presidential election, it is probable
that it will continue to display a certain national distinctiveness despite the pressures
of the supposed efficiencies of global economic management and the accompanying
American-style work ethic. At the same time, leaving aside assertions regarding corruption in the less-industrialised regions of the world, it might be judged that familial
and non-democratic influences will continue to be a significant factor in the school–
work transition in various parts of the globe.

--- [PDF Page 548 / Book Page 546] ---

546 Bash

Significantly, it is difficult to see how even those countries which are relatively
peripheral to the global economy and the transnational networks by which the global
economy is constituted can escape the pressures to vocationalise the entire educational
system. The overwhelming power of the discourse of globalisation is manifested in
continually re-created narratives that signal the urgency with which education should
engage with the economic infrastructure. This is despite the wealth of data collected
by comparative educationists over the past 50 years suggesting that there is little evidence to indicate a causal connection between increased participation in education
and national economic development. Or, as Wolf (2002: 53) notes: ‘[T]here is no clear
indication at all that the UK, or any other developed country, is spending below some
critical level, or that pumping more money into education will guarantee even half a
per cent a year’s extra growth.’
However, this does not appear to have prevented governments from continuing to
pursue what Wolf (2004: 330) has considered as simplistic policies rooted in targetoriented and over-centralised control ideologies rather than more sophisticated policies connected with the understandings of students and their parents.
Two key difficulties facing the governments of those nation states concerned with
their position in the global economy are signalled here. The first concerns the means
by which the education system can deliver the skilled and knowledgeable labour
perceived to be required at all levels. The second concerns the means by which all
sectors of the population will eventually have access to livelihoods which will meet
individually, socially, and culturally defined material and non-material needs. The role
of schools, colleges, and universities in each country will differ in detail and will
be subject to prevailing educational, economic, and political agendas. In this respect,
China, for example, continues to perform an interesting balancing act. On the one
hand, it seems to be prepared to foster higher educational development to the extent
that it temporarily exports students to the West in pursuit of a significant place in the
global market. On the other hand, as evidenced by the 17th National Congress of the
Communist Party of China (2007), there appears to be a continued maintenance of
close, centralised micromanagement of the internal social and political order. Thus, it
seems likely that societal tensions in China will increase as the relationship between
education and work is progressively globalised while social, cultural, and political life
remains relatively constrained.
In the final analysis, at the level of popular discourse, a global view of the education–work relationship might suggest a continuing belief that a ‘good’ education
enhances employment prospects and, therefore, economic development. At the macro
level, governments and other agencies persist in actions which appear reminiscent of
Foster’s ‘vocational school fallacy’ as policies are devised and implemented to ensure
a better ‘fit’ between the products of the education system and the demands of the
economy. In an era of rapid globalisation, futurology is invoked in attempts to forecast
employment needs for the next 10, 20, or 30 years as structures are put into place to
ensure the production of the specific stratified labour force required for the middle of
the twenty-first century. At the micro level, individuals tend towards action which if
not always entirely rational nonetheless reflects a perception of self-interest rather than
of the collective. Schooling, even if not consistently instrumental in the achievement

--- [PDF Page 549 / Book Page 547] ---

Education, Jobs, and Vocational Training 547

of personal, social, and economic advancement is, at the very least, seen as a means
of ensuring employment that will meet the socially and culturally defined basic needs
of most individuals. It is here that both parents and children place an emphasis upon
what may be viewed as the ‘facilitation of positional advantage’, i.e. ‘the labour market advantage conferred by the exchange value of education’ (Williams, 2004). Wolf
(2002: 54) puts this more concretely in noting that: ‘[S]chooling and qualifications
do signal certain substantive skills – and people’s earnings are related not just to their
paper qualifications but also to their relative academic ability.’

Conclusion
Comparative studies of the relationship between education and work no doubt illuminate differences in practice, policy, and ideology. However, as this chapter has
attempted to demonstrate, such differences are not necessarily explained through
conventional modes of analysis, utilising dichotomies such as ‘centralised/decentralised’, ‘capitalist/socialist’, ‘centre/periphery’. These polar concepts have either ceased
to have substantial meaning in the wake of the historical events of the final decades
of the twentieth century or else globalisation has resulted in an economic geography
that reflects a continuing and increasingly fluid dynamic. The economic convergence
resulting from increased global commercial integration has implications for a greater
convergence of education policies across national systems. As industries become evermore reliant upon advanced scientific, technological and managerial skills, and knowledge, this is likely to be reflected in the agendas of policymakers. At the same time,
public concerns increase with the accelerating pace of change in technologies with
the fear that innovative, ‘relevant’ education and training policies are outmoded even
before they come on stream. As might be predicted, those countries which are judged
to be in urgent need of a close, effective relationship between education and employment and, thus, in need of serious capital and recurrent funding, may be the least likely
to receive it. Low GDP and national income combined with a failure to capture a sufficient volume of international inward investment contribute obstacles to educational
expansion, as exemplified by the case of Bangladesh (Rabobank, 2005: 2): ‘The country is classified as a low-income country by the World Bank. Although 53% of GDP is
generated by the services sector, nearly two-thirds of the population are employed in
the agricultural sector (20% of GDP).’
The likelihood is that the wealthier countries will continue to be characterised by
education systems which both reflect – and contribute to – relatively higher income
levels. This is the case whether second-level schooling is comprehensive or selective,
whether the work dimension is a central element in general education or confined to
the vocational streams. The relegation, or indeed the elimination, of ideological conflict in this area has heralded a much more fluid situation.
On the other hand, it also seems clear that socio-economic divisions will continue
to be manifested in the internal dynamics of educational institutions across national
systems and, importantly, in educational and employment outcomes. This might be
seen in the adoption of policies to promote lifelong learning, a watchword that has

--- [PDF Page 550 / Book Page 548] ---

548 Bash

now entered the discourse with the connotation of the provision of a panacea for
continuing skills deficits in a context of a rapidly changing globalised economy. While
its focus is the post-compulsory sector, lifelong learning impacts upon the twenty-first
century educational narrative as a whole. The changed narrative appears to continue
to emphasise the education–work relationship through a process of marketisation that
places the responsibility for vocational success on individuals as consumers and their
take-up of learning packages rather than on the quality of employer provision (Ryan,
2003). In the context of the European Union its focus is a set of ‘key’ competences
defined as: ‘those which all individuals need for personal fulfilment and development,
active citizenship, social inclusion and employment’ (Official Journal of the European
Union 30.12.2006: 13).
When unpacked, these are distilled into eight headings:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Communication in the mother tongue
Communication in foreign languages
Mathematical competence and basic competences in science and technology
Digital competence
Learning to learn
Social and civic competences
Sense of initiative and entrepreneurship and
Cultural awareness and expression

(Official Journal of the European Union 30.12.2006: p13)
It might be observed that the term competence as used here is somewhat broader
in meaning than that signalled by conventional usage in that it references mental states rather than just being confined to behaviours. Nonetheless there is the
inference that all such competences are capable of being tested and measured,
thus reinforcing a progressive shift towards vocationalisation. At the same time,
it is also a further shift in the direction of marketisation as learners are transformed into traded ‘commodities’. With the acquisition of ‘value-added’ social
and cultural capital, learners enter an increasingly globalised employment arena
of bidders and sellers – and one that is constantly shifting. Here, conventional
notions of supply and demand together with that of monopolistic competition offer
some insights into the relative positions of those with diverse general educational
and vocational qualifications at specific moments in space and time. Accordingly,
those with internationally recognised advanced skills and qualifications enter with
a greater capacity to determine the course of the market in their favour than others
whose employment destinies would seem to be almost entirely determined by the
market, whose forces are beyond their control.
Thus, the connections between education and work appear to be increasingly reinforced by global patterns. By the middle of the twenty-first century comparative educationists may be examining the prospect of a progressively globalised structure of
educational processes geared towards engagement with an increasingly integrated
world economic order, while, less convincingly, into an international civic order. Or,
more pointedly, it may be necessary for comparative educationists in their quest to

--- [PDF Page 551 / Book Page 549] ---

Education, Jobs, and Vocational Training 549

make sense of global patterns of education to heed the observations of Stiglitz (2007)
who has noted the uneven consequences of globalisation where economic integration
is accompanied by international social segregation and marginalisation.

References
Bash, L. (1991). General education and work: The Soviet model. In R. Cowen & C. Jones (Eds.), Essays in
Honour of J. J. Tomiak. London: Institute of Education, University of London.
Bash, L. & Green, A. (Eds.) (1995). World Yearbook of Education: Education Employment and Youth.
London: Kogan Page.
Chevalier, A. (2000). Graduate Over-Education in the UK. London: Centre for the Economics of Education,
London School of Economics.
Communist Party of China. (2007). 17th National Congress.
Davies, D. (1997). From the further education margins to the higher education centre? Innovation in continuing education. Education and Training, 39(1), 4–13.
Dale, R. (Ed.) (1985). Education, Training and Employment. Oxford: Pergamon.
Department Children, Schools and Families. (2007). 14–19 Education and Skills: Diplomas. http://www.
dcsf.gov.uk/14–19/index.cfm?sid = 3&pid = 224&ctype = None&ptype = Contents. Accessed November
2007.
European Ministers of Education. (1999). The Bologna Declaration of 19 June 1999. http://www.bolognabergen2005.no/Docs/00-Main_doc/990719BOLOGNA_DECLARATION.PDF. Accessed November
2007.
Foster, P. (1965a). The vocational school fallacy in development planning. In C. A. Anderson and M. J.
Bowman (Eds.), Education and Economic Development. Chicago: Aldine.
Foster, P. (1965b). Education and Social Change in Ghana. London: Routledge.
Fuller, A., Beck, V., & Unwin, L. (2005). The gendered natured of apprenticeship: Employers’ and young
people’s perspectives. Education and Training, 47(4/5), 298–311.
Garoupa, N. (2004). Regulation of professions in the US and Europe: A comparative analysis. American
Law & Economics Association Annual Meetings Paper 42.
Kazamias, A. & Starida, A. (1992). Professionalisation or Vocationalisation in Greek Higher Education.
European Journal of Education, 27(1½), 101–109.
Nyerere, J. (1968). Freedom and Socialism. A Selection from Writings & Speeches, 1965–1967. Dar es
Salaam: Oxford University Press.
Official Journal of the European Union. (2006). 30 December. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/
oj/2006/l_405/l_40520061230en00600067.pdf. Accessed November 2007.
Plato. (1955). The Republic. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Rabobank. (2005). Country Report: Bangladesh. Economic Research Department. Country Risk Research,
December.
Ryan, P. (2003). Lifelong learning: potential and constraints with special reference to policies in the United
Kingdom and Europe, Working Paper 15, In Focus Programme on Skills, Knowledge and Employability,
ILO, Geneva.
Stiglitz, J. (2007). MBA Podcast: Making Globalisation Work. Times Online. 18 February. http://business.
timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/economics/article1402854.ece. Accessed November 2007.
Stray, C. (1996). Culture and discipline: Classics and society in Victorian England. International Journal of
the Classical Tradition, 3(1), 77–85.
Tessarin, M. & Wannan, J. (2004). Vocational Education and Training – Key to the Future. Luxembourg:
Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
Turner, R.H. (1960). Sponsored and contest mobility and the school system. American Sociological Review,
25, 855–67.
Williams, K. (2004). Vocational purposes and the aims of schooling. Policy Futures In Education, 2(1),
5–13.

--- [PDF Page 552 / Book Page 550] ---

550 Bash
Wilson, B. & Woock, R. (1995). Education, work and global economic change. In L. Bash & A. Green
(Eds.), World Yearbook of Education: Education, Employment and Youth. London: Kogan Page.
Wolf, A. (2002). Does Education Matter? London: Penguin.
Wolf, A. (2004). Education and economic performance: Simplistic theories and their policy consequences.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 20(2), 315–333.

