================================================================================
Chapter 35: The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition: A Historical and Anatomical Study
Author(s): Guy Neave
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 4: Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Education
Book Pages: pp. 551–568
PDF Pages: pp. 553–570 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 553 / Book Page 551] ---

35
THE EVALUATIVE STATE AS POLICY
IN TRANSITION: A HISTORICAL
AND ANATOMICAL STUDY
Guy Neave

‘All animals are equal but some are more equal than others’
Animal Farm

Introduction
Over the past two decades in Western Europe, the Evaluative State has grown, is growing
though whether, like the power of one of Britain’s more unfortunate monarchs, George
III, ‘it ought to be diminished’ is a question as delicate as it is misplaced. In this chapter, I
will explore the historic forces behind this particular phenomenon with a view to getting
some purchase over where it is likely to lead us. And this in turn engages one of the most
fundamental developments that higher education in Europe has to grapple with today
– namely, the rise of what at different times and across different disciplinary perspectives
has been variously described as ‘the European dimension’ (Huisman et al., 2000) as the
intergovernmental layer (Maassen & Neave, 2007: 135 ff) or even amongst the more
metaphysically inclined within the scholarly community, as the ‘supra governmental’
dimension in the affairs of higher education (Maassen & Olsen, 2007: 3–24).
By and large, the Evaluative State on the one hand and the so-called Bologna
Process on the other have been treated as separate and watertight issues – and, to some
extent, indeed they are. The former quite obviously took shape and matured within in
that classical setting of higher education policy, namely within the Nation State. The
latter, however, represents a new and very certainly a permanent additional dimension
or level of decision-making that both ties in with, whilst at the same time forming, a
species of ‘supra ordinate’ layer beyond what for the past two centuries served as the
highest level of aggregation in the evolution of the universities in Europe.

… a Double Transition and a Historical Watershed
Once we shift our sights from the Evaluative State as it evolved within the Nation State
to its broader setting as a central dimension within the emerging European Higher
Education Area, clearly we find ourselves involved in a species of ‘double transition’.
551
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 551–568.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 554 / Book Page 552] ---

552 Neave

The first involves changes the Evaluative State brought about on the home front. The
second focuses on those further adjustments subsequently made to take account of the
Bologna Process and the emergence of a European Higher Education Area. There is,
however, one final justification for bringing together the Evaluative State and Bologna
and it is no minor one. The rise of the Evaluative State, viewed within the evolving
Bologna Process is perhaps the last example of policymaking in higher education conceived uniquely as a national venture (Neave, 2006c: 27–46). And though it is difficult
to anticipate with any degree of precision where individual national administrations
will draw the line between spheres wholly domestic, and those requiring at very least
a modicum of benevolent neutrality from other Member States whether individual or
collective, the very imprecision serves merely to emphasize this historic watershed.

The Dynamic and the Origins of the Evaluative State
The Evaluative State has as its essential purpose to ensure the continual mobilization of
the higher education system by the regular evaluation of its productivity, performance and
its usage of public resources. In short, it is a highly dynamic construct. Hence we need to
attend closely to its dynamic aspect, if we are to grasp the full import in the shifts it has
brought about. As with most things in higher education policy, the Evaluative State unlike
Athena, did not spring fully armed from the thigh of Zeus, of the Prince or whatever
allegoric figure one cares to associate with the activities of a Nation’s administration. The
Evaluative State emerged from a number of measures, few of which could, at the time
they were taken, be seen as unambiguous pointers to what was to emerge later. In tracing
the historical roots of the Western European version of the Evaluative State, one has to
admit that the selfsame measures, which later matured into this construct, had greater kinship with the routine husbandry that systems of higher education demand to keep them
running than with a self-conscious and deliberate move to place the relationship between
higher education, government and society upon a radically different series of principles
and operational procedures. Nor were the motives that underlay the drive towards the
Evaluative State necessarily as homogeneous as they now appear. Suggesting this begs a
few questions. What is the Evaluative State? What were the driving forces that brought it
about? How has it changed the relationship between higher education and society?
To answer these central questions I shall concentrate on Western Europe for the plain
and simple reason that this is where the Evaluative State assumed its modern and, in all
probability, its most sophisticated form. I shall not, however confine my attention there.
There are equally good reasons to justify a wider excursion, not least to avoid the charge
of parochialism – l’esprit de clocher – which is ever present even in studies that claim
to be comparative.

Roots
The roots of the Evaluative State are to be found in three closely interrelated crises that
in Western Europe reached a head in the mid-1980s. These were first of all the resurgence of social demand for higher education and on a scale far beyond all precedent.

--- [PDF Page 555 / Book Page 553] ---

The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition 553

In short, national administrations faced a situation for which they had neither planned
nor foreseen whilst their colleagues in finance faced coffers distressingly empty.
If the first wave of the 1960s drove higher education beyond its historic mission of
socializing the future political elites and on to the more complex task of mass higher
education, the second wave was no less radical in redefining the purpose of higher education in terms of providing access at a level which for certain countries – France being
one – by the last half of the 1990s reached universal status. For others, rates of participation at a similar level became the official target of higher education policy. This was
the ambition of Britain (White Paper, 2003) and the Netherlands (Kwikkers et al.,
2005) – to have more than 50 percent of the relevant age group in what is now fashionable to call ‘Tertiary Education’ by the year 2010. ‘The ‘universal’ stage is commonly
held to be attained when participation in higher education reaches 40 percent of the
appropriate age group (Trow, 1974).
The second crisis was how to fund so massive a demand – an issue all the more
urgent for the fact the main weight of demand did not fall on the private sector – which
was relatively marginal in terms of student enrolments in Western Europe – but rather
on universities which were state funded and controlled to upwards of 95 percent of
their annual income.
The third element underpinning the drive towards the Evaluative State was the
question of operational efficiency. Whilst the first two elements – social demand
and funding – even with the wisdom that hindsight brings with it, may be seen as
largely routine aspects in running a national system of higher education, the notion
of operational efficiency was, in the medium term, to provide a powerful lever in
moving routine administrative adjustment and accommodation towards what is
often fashionably alluded to in the inimitable jargon of technocracy as ‘system
re-engineering’. For this notion, see Mungaray-Lagarda (2002).

Operational Efficiency: A Central Concept
Operational efficiency is key to the rapid emergence of the Evaluative State in Western
Europe. To put no finer point on it, the emergence of the Evaluative State itself reflects
a species of definitional dynamic – or if one cares to view the phenomenon in terms of
philosophy or linguistics – as a species of ‘epistemic drift’. What was understood as
‘operational efficiency’ itself underwent rapid transformation both in respect of those
dimensions subject to, and brought under, administrative and public scrutiny. For this
same reason, extending the dimensions of oversight also entailed extending the range
of procedures, measures of verification and assessment that could be brought to bear.
If we look closely at the condition of higher education in those countries where the
rise of the Evaluative State emerged earliest in Western Europe – Britain, France, the
Netherlands – it is clear that the main challenge posed during the mid-1980s was
the distribution and usage of resources. From this it followed that the main goal of
policy turned around their further optimization – first by cost reduction, and second
by measures in rationalizing the national coverage in disciplines.1 Operational
efficiency remained fully in accordance with the usual range of administrative

--- [PDF Page 556 / Book Page 554] ---

554 Neave

action – cost cuttings, a halt on the recruitment of permanent staff or their substitution
by part-timers (de Weert & Enders, 2004) and closer scrutiny over student input. There
were, however, clear signs which entailed accelerating one particular process, which
was already operant in certain systems of higher education in Western Europe before
the onset of crisis – namely, the gradual detachment of funding higher education on the
basis of student numbers and the gradual abandonment of historic incrementalism –
that is, the use of an annual adjustment to take account of inflation, cost of living,
etc. (Glenny, 1979).
None of these measures, widely applied though they were across systems as varied
as the British, the Belgian, the Dutch and the German, can be interpreted as reform of
a radical sort, though that is not to deny their often painful effects.2 On the contrary, the
development of indicators of institutional performance can, in its early stages, be seen
not as an alternative to the long-established procedures of system coordination by law,
decree, close financial oversight and accounting – systems which some commentators
then interpreted as State control (van Vught, 1989). Rather, in its early stages, the ‘new
instrumentality’ was conceived more as a supplement, a more sensitive series of pointers
that served first of all the internal needs of ‘system steering’. This it would do in principle
by improving both the quality of, and the speed with which, information flowed between
the institutional and the systems level within the Nation’s provision of higher education. The immediate purpose of what was to become higher education’s ‘new instrumentality’ was not to lay down principles for a new relationship between government and
higher education. Rather, its purpose was conceived in terms of updating and making the
existing relationship more efficient – an efficiency operationalized primarily in terms of
budgetary compression, with new parameters for the usage of academic resources. One
of the more spectacular of these latter was the readiness of central authorities to let the
staff/ student ratio float as the student wave engulfed higher education whilst imposing a
policy of ‘no growth’ upon the size of the Academic Estate.
What then altered thinking about the place of performance indicators? Where are
the origins of that new, powerful and highly sophisticated instrumentality which, in its
early stages, was heralded by many students of higher education as a new relationship
between government, higher education and society, a relationship based on the notion
variously qualified as ‘remote steering’, ‘a facilitatory relationship’? (Neave & van
Vught, 1994; van Vught, 1989) This is important to understanding the driving forces
that changed an administrative procedure into a full-blown theory, which redefined
both the operational dimension itself and changed radically what was held to be the
‘proper and effective relationship’ of higher education with society.

Two Schools of Thought
The first of these driving forces may be cast as ideological, though often presented in a
technical discourse. It turned around the conviction amongst national authorities that the
Guardian relationship – which had determined the historical and political ties between State
and higher education for over a century – was no longer sustainable in its present form3.
To this line of argument were several strands best summarized in terms of two dis-

--- [PDF Page 557 / Book Page 555] ---

The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition 555

tinct approaches. The first focused primarily around a discourse where the Economic
imperative predominated (Dill et al., 2004). Its heartland – at least up to 1989 and the
fall of the Berlin Wall – lay in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. In terms of
economic doctrine, it may be variously qualified as ‘neo-liberalism’, or when applied
to the purpose and relationship between higher education and society, it assumes the
trappings of the ‘productivist thesis’. Both strands assigned a fundamental redefinition
to operational efficiency. Operational efficiency was no longer conceived as a subset
within the established relationship of government, higher education and society. On the
contrary, under the canons of neo-liberalism, operational efficiency became the essential credo, the singular, central purpose and objective – and let it be said, the main lever
– that opened the way to root and branch ‘re-engineering’ of the higher education system in toto. From a historian’s standpoint, it brought the Guardian relationship between
government and higher education to an abrupt end and that, as the sinister expression
has it, ‘with extreme prejudice’. In effect, the ‘operational’ became ‘the political’.
There is, however, a second school of thought. It too also performed sterling service
in shaping the rise of the Evaluative State in Western Europe. It too was no less political. Its focus, however, was very different. Its roots are to be found less in an economic
discourse – though obviously this element was not absent. Rather its origins lie within
the domain of participant democracy and, more to the point, related to the consequences
that social change and enhanced participation in higher education held for the place,
identity and responsibility of communities other than the Nation State in the affairs of
higher education. Under this setting, operational efficiency took on very different overtones. Whilst it did not deny the desirability of institutional accountability and the other
elements of closer financial scrutiny, these were neither its alpha nor its omega. To use
a theory less current at the time than it is today, the second school of thought revolved
around the principle later to be known in EU circles as subsidiarity – that is the delegation of responsibility to the point where services are provided (de Groof, 1994).
Seen in these terms, operational efficiency took the form of reassigning elements
of control and responsibility from central national administration and their relocation,
sometimes in the purlieu of regional authorities, sometimes reassigning them back
to the individual establishment. This parallel process parades under many flags: ‘the
Offloading State’ when seen from a perspective of national administration, ‘the repatriation’ of functions when viewed historically and from the standpoint of the region or
the individual institution (Neave, 2001, 2003). Seen within the perspective of politics,
it corresponds to the classic and routine notions of administrative decentralization and
the devolution of power. This dimension in the rise of the Evaluative State was particularly marked in France, Spain and Italy. It accompanied the federalization of Belgium
in 1988 and the splitting of a hitherto national system of higher education into two
linguistic communities – one Flemish-speaking and the other French-speaking. Each
of the Belgian community developed its very specific institutional form of evaluation
policy (Lub, 2003: 5) This was also the route followed by the 13 Spanish Autonomous
Communities (Miguel Diaz, 1999) and forms a leitmotif in Swedish higher education policy (Bauer, 1988; Bauer and Kogan 1997). Interestingly, the one exception
to the federal model is to be seen in Germany. There, though reform to institutional
funding, autonomy and the introduction of the principle of contractualization took place

--- [PDF Page 558 / Book Page 556] ---

556 Neave

during the latter half of the 1990s, it resulted not in strengthening the apparatus of
the Evaluative State at federal level so much as its fragmentation between each of the
individual Länder. Paradoxically, the rise of the Evaluative State in Germany was not
accompanied by the Central State acquiring further leverage. And to this extent, the
Evaluative State in Germany took root within the traditional administrative framework between provinces and central government, rather than altering it (Kehm &
Lanzendorff, 2006).

Roads to Rome
Regardless of whether the rationale of the Evaluative State obeyed the canons of neoliberalism or adhered to the imperatives of participant democracy, irrespective of
whether the emphasis lay on reasserting the ‘rights of the individual’ to ‘consume higher
education’ or, on the contrary focused on the no less indisputable rights of historic and
linguistic communities to have greater sway over the institution that intimately shaped
both regional identity and regional fortunes, each posed a direct challenge to the place
of the central State in the affairs of higher education. Interestingly, both schools of
thought shared a common presumption, even if the remedies they advanced differed
radically. Both concurred with the desirability of limiting the power of central
government. For the theorists of neo-liberalism, the state as regulator was replaced with
the notion of ‘market forces’ as the prime regulator of system development. For the
supporters of ‘communitarism’ the main burden of change called for a redefinition of
the administrative relationship of higher education and government along the lines of
a shared partnership between central government and regional authorities – in effect,
strengthening the intermediary level between national administration and individual
university. Or, as we have seen in the case of Germany, the preservation of the cultural
sovereignty the Länder had long possessed. There are, in short, many roads and many
justificatory routes that lead on to the Evaluative State.
Leaving aside a more detailed analysis of which higher education system took which
pathway to the salvation the Evaluative State held out, let us simply note the amazing
dynamic the Evaluative State displayed in Europe. One gains some impression of this
dynamism when account is taken of the number of national systems, which moved
towards a formal evaluation system in its modern sense. The first step along this road
was taken in 1985, with the creation of the French National Evaluation Committee
(Staropoli, 1987). By the summer of 2002 within the 30 odd national systems of higher
education that formed part of the European Network of Quality Assurance Agencies,
created in Finland in 1998, some 34 agencies were given over to Evaluation and
Accreditation (Schwartz-Hahn & Westerheijden, 2004).

The Evaluative State and Legal Homogeneity
Irrespective of the particular discourse that accompanied the evolving Evaluative State,
whether justified in terms of neo-liberalism or participant democracy, the functions of
oversight and the assessment of institutional performance were not the only ones to

--- [PDF Page 559 / Book Page 557] ---

The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition 557

undergo marked change. Also to the fore was what some students of higher education
policy have termed ‘Legal Homogeneity’ (Neave & van Vught, 1994).
The concept of Legal Homogeneity may be seen as the prime legal construct that governed the relationship between higher education and society, and very particularly so in
the historically large systems of Western Europe – Germany, France, Spain, Italy, and at
a less exalted level, the Netherlands and Sweden. Legal homogeneity upheld a number
of powerful legal fictions, which are not shared by the Anglo-Saxon systems of higher
education and thus may be seen as features of essential difference (Neave, 2001). Prime
amongst them is the notion that all public universities are on a footing of legal equality
and thus have similar status. The second is no less significant. It largely determined the
way systems adjusted to change, an adjustment registered in formal, legal enactment
which, worked out by central authority, applied homogeneously across a given sector of
higher education – universities, short-cycle higher vocational establishments, etc.
Legal homogeneity also determined the nature of system change by linking it indissolubly to the political process at the national level, often requiring full debate in the National
Assembly, or its equivalent. To this should be added a further detail: system adjustment
rested on the presumption that change, when finally legislated, was introduced in a uniform manner across the appropriate sector. The principle of legal homogeneity emerged at
its most visible and powerful in such areas as the conditions of individual access to higher
education, the structure, titles and privileges attached to officially certified knowledge that
universities awarded in the name of the State, conditions of academic employment, career
and promotion. In effect, precisely because of the very principle of legal homogeneity,
change involved both heavy formal procedures, often greatly time-consuming, legislative
enactment and for that self-same reason tended to be highly politicized.
It is not coincidental that it should be France – a nation where legal homogeneity
stood as part of the revolutionary tradition of equality before the law – which established the first of the modern institutions of evolution and oversight, largely in an
effort to break out of political deadlock that had long beset higher education policy.
No less important was its parallel objective – to put in place a mechanism of review
and assessment with the purpose of strengthening institutional capacity for selfdetermined innovation and initiative. In short, the purpose of Evaluative State à
la française was to attenuate the rigidity of legal homogeneity by encouraging the
Academic Estate to develop a proactive capacity and initiative in developing and
shaping the individual establishment, rather than looking to central government or
to the Ministry. In the French context, the purpose of institutional evaluation was to
provide a map, regularly updated which furnished a synoptic statement of the development
and performance of the higher education system, a map that showed the place the
individual university occupied in the national system, the better to base institutional
initiatives on clear, pragmatic and comparable information. (Neave, 1996)

Evaluatory Homogeneity: A Powerful Lever
The Evaluative State was set in place to speed up, facilitate and lighten the complexities of reform at the level of the individual institution. Yet, the price of its advance
involved the deliberate fragmentation of earlier procedures that had accumulated

--- [PDF Page 560 / Book Page 558] ---

558 Neave

around legal homogeneity. This it did through various initiatives – through delegation
of responsibility – sometimes presented in terms of ‘strengthening institutional leadership’ – through enlarging the activities that individual universities could determine
on their own – which is also presented under the rubric of the managerial revolution in higher education, or as extending the canons of what is termed as the ‘New
Public Management’ (Pollitt, 2002). By so doing, the Evaluative State also involved
redefining the notion of homogeneity. More significantly such a redefinition shifted
the concept of homogeneity from its legal habitus into the operational domain of the
evaluation process itself.
Legal homogeneity thus migrated towards the operational domain and evolved into
evaluatory homogeneity – a homogeneity explicitly and deliberately upheld by formal
and rigorous procedures of auditing, located sometimes as a separate service within
the organization entrusted with the task of evaluation and assessment – which is the
model found for instance in England and Sweden – or sometimes handed off to a
separate body; for example, to the Inspectorate of Higher Education in the Netherlands
(Scheele et al., 1998; Jeliazkova & Westerheijden, 2002) and France (Neave, 1996).
Evaluatory homogeneity – which may be seen as a complicated way of describing
‘bench-marking’ – that is, the setting of minimum targets of achievement and productivity – is an extremely potent construct within an instrumentality of assessment,
evaluation and verification already powerful. Indeed, a very good case can be made for
seeing the principle of homogeneity operationalized through review and assessment as
more pervasive, penetrating and effective by far than its legal counterpart could ever
have dreamt of. Powerful and sensitive on its own account, evaluatory homogeneity
becomes a force to be reckoned with when taken in conjunction with other developments and very particularly so when one attends to changes in university funding
systems.

Conditional Financing: Prime Instrument of Leverage
in the Evaluative State
That public sector higher education is today expected to compete for private resources
comes as part of that fundamental change in mentality, which the Evaluative State
was designed to bring about. Higher Education is no longer viewed as being wholly
a public good. Not surprisingly, the quest for resources other than from the public
purse received no small urging by governments and Ministry, though obviously the
degree of pressure brought to bear and the means by which it was brought to bear,
are legion depending on the state of national wealth and hellfare! Amongst the more
obvious forms of leveraging policy in Western Europe have been the introduction of
‘conditional financing’, the establishment of a contractual and continually renewable
and therefore negotiable relationship between central government – and in certain
instances such as France, Spain and Italy – between regional government and the individual university. And whilst few if any systems of higher education have gone so far
down the road as the British by directly tying institutional performance to finance, the
implicit association between one and the other is clear for all to see. What enhanced

--- [PDF Page 561 / Book Page 559] ---

The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition 559

the leverage that evaluation could exercise, however, came in the shape of a posteriori
financing – that is, funding by output rather than as had previously been the predominant practice, funding on the basis of input – mainly related to student numbers. That
funding higher education now focuses on the same area as evaluation – both concentrate on institutional output as the supreme criterion for assessing performance, measuring productivity and institutional output – must surely be one of the most telling
factors in shaping institutional behaviour.
This in turn raises a number of questions. How influential is the Evaluative State?
In what way does its operational core differ from the legally based instrumentality that
preceded it?

The Power and the Potency of the Evaluative State
With higher education policy largely dominated today by the economic perspective,
which naturally places weight upon resources, their origins, their generation, their
usage and, last of all, what that usage achieves, older and more classic perspectives
tend to go by the board. The questions of power, authority, who wields it and to whose
benefit it is wielded tend to take a back seat before dissecting out and verifying the
technical effectiveness and methodological validity of new procedures and criteria of
assessment that by their very nature are precise and lend themselves to both evaluation
and sometimes literally to satisfying reward. Furthermore, policy research, as it takes
on greater precision also acquires a deeper technicity often at the price of a concomitant and distressing narrowness (Neave, 2004a). As a result, we are well able to count
the leaves on the branch, even distinguish their hue and shape, but we tend to have lost
any grasp over the state of the forest, let alone its topography and its extent. To this
general proposition, the Evaluative State is no exception.
The Evaluative State is about verifying performance, about tracking – the worldweary might say, racking up academic productivity – whether construed in terms of
students graduating within the legal time limit, the number of PhDs produced in areas
deemed relevant to the Nation’s future (Lindqvist, 2006), refereed publications, patents
taken out or splendidly enormous contracts signed with firms prominent in the Fortune
500. The Evaluative State is an agent for verifying efficiency and thus many of the
studies that have been made of it, tend in the same direction. They tend to eschew the
question: ‘What is the basis of power that makes the Evaluative State so potent?’
Perhaps such delicacy and discretion simply reflect that at one level the answer
stares us in the face. The Evaluative State is powerful precisely because its function
is to verify the take-up of policy. It is the agent whose prime purpose is to ascertain
implementation on the one hand, and on the other to make sure the individual university, Fachhochschule, Institut Universitaire de Technologie and polytechnic, upholds
its commitment to the thrust of public policy. In other words, the Evaluative State is
concerned with the capacity – whether at system, regional or institutional level – to
sustain policy goals and, at the same time to ascertain an institution’s capacity to adapt
where necessary. Graphically put, in these latter days, for the university world the
Evaluative State fulfils a function very similar to the Holy Office in days long gone.

--- [PDF Page 562 / Book Page 560] ---

560 Neave

Institutional evaluation serves to remind the laggardly of the horrid consequences of
persistent sinning. Its theology finds a counterpart in the rigours and orthodoxies of
economic efficiency. The Evaluative State is powerful by the nature of the information
gathered and by the degree to which that information lends itself to disaggregation,
to re-aggregation across different operational levels from base unit, to institution and
on to systems level. Any oversight that at one and the same time allows comparison between individual institutions – even individual disciplines – and also permits
re-aggregation into regional, provincial and national level cannot be entirely weak,
though over time its effectiveness can be eroded and sometimes even blunted (Huitema
et al., 2004; Scheele et al., 1998; Jeliazkova & Westerheijden, 2002; Neave, 2006b).

‘Academic Time Versus Productive Time’:
A Very Long Perspective
These are the more obvious forms of power the Evaluative State wields. There are others. They have direct consequence for the evolving relationship between higher education, government and society. Indeed, they flow directly from setting up the Evaluative
State itself. The first of these is commonly alluded to as ‘productivism’ – that is, the
direct harnessing and application of university production to economic purpose, which
may also be national purpose as well. There is, however, another aspect to ‘productivism’. It relates to the notion of ‘academic time’, which has been central to the way the
university has functioned for a very long time indeed.
For the best part of nine centuries, the one element over which academia had great if
not total mastery was precisely over time – time to teach, to learn and to acquire knowledge. To be sure, universities tend no longer to consider their mission ‘sub specie aeternitatis’. Nevertheless, the days are not too distant when the pursuit of higher learning
was still possible without major research grants simply because the prime value – time
itself – was academia’s principal and unique capital. That is what tenure and its granting
are all about – the pursuit for knowledge irrespective of the time it might take.
The command of time was the essence of academic freedom, even in the days when
knowledge itself was revealed rather than scientific (Neave, 2006a). Evaluation and
assessment regularly undertaken as a national exercise are in effect the essential lever
to ensure that ‘academic time’ mutates into, and is replaced by, ‘productive time’. For
in truth, even if this consequence is nowhere written explicitly into the list of objectives that are assigned to such agencies of Quality Assessment, Accreditation, Audit
or Public Accounts that are variously associated with regular scrutiny of institutional
performance, this shift nevertheless had taken place. To be sure, there are various
technocratic terms that disguise the unpalatable reality – ‘time budgeting’ is one,
‘speeding up institutional response’ another. But this is merely a linguistic sleight of
hand that in no way undermines the essential truth that the conversion of academic
time into ‘productive time’ is a salient, silent and hugely significant trend in presentday higher education policy. As an aside, the use of such terms as ‘time-budgeting’ is
itself redolent of the deepening techncity and linguistic alienation in policy research
alluded to earlier.

--- [PDF Page 563 / Book Page 561] ---

The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition 561

The Externalization of Academic Norms and Functions
Changing academic time to productive time stands at the intersection of a number
of separate processes all of which involve fundamentally redefining both university
identity and hence its relationship with society. The introduction of ‘productive time’
into the groves of academe can of course be justified as a necessary development and
very particularly so when change is held to be continuous rather than as a stop/go
process. In the second place, it may also be seen as part of that process of ‘incorporation’ which in turn has two meanings: the taking over of corporate business practices,
forms of organization, job description, hierarchy and very often conditions of service
(de Weert & Enders, 2004); second, the redefinition of the university no longer as a
unique organization – with a unique task – so much as one subset in a broader series of
linkages sometimes qualified as the ‘innovation system’ (Neave, 2006b).
These developments, disparate though they might appear, nevertheless possess a
common thrust, namely the subordination of long-held university norms and their realignment upon external practice – a trend that reaches its fullest expression in the
notion of competition itself. Competition has never been absent from the university.
On the contrary, as the American sociologist, Burton R. Clark pointed out nigh on a
quarter of a century ago, competition is the central currency of academia – the gold
coin of exchange, repute, standing and excellence (Clark, 1983). And this latter perspective gives us a further clue to the power of the Evaluative State.

An Operational Core More Sophisticated
If we scrutinize the central core in the Evaluative State’s operational domain, we see
that academic time is not the only condition to have changed. There are others and they
have a strange odour of expropriation. For if the Evaluative State confirms a mutation
and change in the referential norms that now shape the higher education enterprise, it
has also taken over to its own account and to its own particular ends two other instruments that are equally vital in shaping what another American policy analyst, Martin
Trow, termed the ‘private life of academia’ (Trow, 1975). The most telling addition to
the leverage – and thus the influence – the Evaluative State can exercise over academia
has been the addition to its operational armoury of competition and peer review. The
use of peer review – quite apart from the derivatives that the Lords of Evaluation
may devise in their own interest, ‘guided’ ‘focused’ peer review, for instance – (El
Khawas, 1992) – is a clear example of that broader process, central to constructing
the Evaluative State – namely the externalization of practices previously internal to
academia and their application to the business of assessment and verification.
Whether such additions to the central operational core of the Evaluative State illustrate
the process of ‘externalizing’ the practices that previously characterized the University’s
private life (Kogan, 2006) or whether they are simply presented as elements central to
installing a new transparency in tracking the dynamics of higher education development,
it is, I think, undeniable that both interpretations provide a very substantial pointer to the
high sophistication of the instrumentality the Evaluative State now commands.

--- [PDF Page 564 / Book Page 562] ---

562 Neave

Institutional Image: Creation, Destruction and Impact
There remains one last area where the Evaluative State wields much influence. This
concerns what is best described as the ‘individual university’s image’. I say ‘would
appear’ because to the best of my knowledge the question of the impact of evaluation
upon the standing a university might have amongst the public has yet to be tackled. Yet
the question of image is important, both in the setting of the Evaluative State and more
so as part of the policy of ‘marketing’ higher education. Whether the key product of the
Evaluative State – league tables of ranking as a result of assessment – effectively do
influence student choice is not in itself important. What is important is that institutions
and their leadership appear to believe they do. More to the point, though this is not yet
a universal trend, institutions set about capitalizing on favourable results or limiting
damage if performance has not been up to their own expectations.
Thus, the Evaluative State plays a crucial role in the area of institutional imagebuilding. Indeed, the more higher education is construed as a ‘marketable product’, the
greater the influence must accrue around any agency that has the express purpose to
define a university’s public image which, soit dit en passant is not necessarily always
the same in academia as it is to the parent in the street, even though the purpose of the
Evaluative State is to ensure that as far as possible, they coincide. The Evaluative State
provides the basic material for the public’s perception of both the higher education
system and the individual universities within it. Expressed in the hackneyed language
that all too often belittles the art of journalism, the Evaluative State is wholeheartedly
engaged in ‘putting an end to the ivory tower’. To traduce the expression of the father
of Sociology, Max Weber, the task of the Evaluative State is to ensure that the university is both ‘in the world and of it’.
From a different angle, but no less significant, it is at this point that institutional performance becomes the handmaiden of competition with the one reinforcing the other.
Thus, the power of the Evaluative State resides in the images it allows to be built of the
higher education system it evaluates. However, image-building is yet another instance
amongst the many we have already noted of that process analysed earlier in the context
of ‘the displacement of functions’. Here, however, it involves modifying and relocating the hitherto closed cycle of reporting and accounting, which in that earlier mode of
system coordination identified with Legal Homogeneity, took place exclusively – and
very often privately – between university leadership and national authorities. It brings
that cycle into the public domain.

Exporting the Evaluative State
Earlier in this chapter it was argued that the Evaluative State represents a transition
inasmuch as policymaking in higher education thereafter rapidly took on a European
dimension. And whilst the coincidence in the timing as individual Nations began to put
the structures of the Evaluative State in place may also be interpreted as ‘policy convergence’ within a Nation State setting and with individual Nations acting independently
to meet change unceasing, so there is sufficient evidence of another phenomenon that

--- [PDF Page 565 / Book Page 563] ---

The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition 563

anticipated if it did not directly give further weight to the supranational aspect. In the
inimitable jargon of the Brussels bureaucracy, this involves the principle of ‘portability’ – that is, the take up and application of a policy devised by one system of higher
education by another. There are, not surprisingly, other descriptions: in the classic
vocabulary of comparative education it parades under the flag of ‘borrowing’.
It should not be thought, however, that ‘portability’ is a development found only
in Old Europe, though the rise of the Evaluative State – above all after 1991 – saw
an intense activity on the part of the ‘pioneering’ Nations to export their particular
versions of it. Thus, we find France advising authorities in Italy, Spain, and Portugal,
and the Netherlands active in making its experience in the area of performance indicators and quality assurance procedures available to the Czech Republic, Slovenia,
Hungary, Poland and Russia.4 Then, there are the British who give advice on evaluative
techniques to everyone and the Swedes who give advice to none since they are taken
up with shaping their own radical edition of the Evaluative State, based on a series
of assumptions and purposes very different from the rest of Europe (HSV Rapport,
2005). Interesting and indeed vital though this example of ‘cross-frontier exchange’
and portability of policy very certainly is in moving the governing principles of higher
education policy from Legal Homogeneity to Evaluative Homogeneity, it responded to
very different needs in the ‘New Europe’.

Inside, Outside
To newly liberated countries, struggling to reach some measure of order and stability
in the relationship between government and higher education, the strengthening profile
of the Evaluative State in Old Europe was not a matter of polite interest alone. As Old
Europe multiplied the numbers of agencies involved in overseeing Quality Assurance
and as the procedures to review, visit, monitor and assess both institutions and systems
became institutionally embedded features, so close scrutiny from the New Europe
grew (Tomusk, 2006). The extension of Evaluatory Homogeneity to include the central
issue of accreditation – the assessment and validation of institutional fitness to develop
new programmes, degrees and qualifications – merely concentrated interest further.
Several motives were at play. In the first place, the development of quality assurance,
evaluation and accreditation structures were seen by the newly independent lands as
key and quintessential features in what they held to be – and indeed often described in
their official publications as – ‘the European system of higher education’.
The very idea of a ‘European’ system was premature. Indeed, the notion itself
received little sympathetic hearing from precisely those engaged in substituting Legal
Homogeneity with Evaluatory Homogeneity in Western Europe. Important though the
quest for quality and access to accreditation both were to those Nations in Old Europe
actively engaged in their development, neither was regarded as a major identifying feature in any system, let alone a European system, the idea of which was at the very best
but a single dimension in the complexities of higher education policy, still largely conceived in terms of individual Nation States (Neave, 2001). Yet the persistent allusion
by authorities in the newly liberated lands to a ‘European higher education system’,

--- [PDF Page 566 / Book Page 564] ---

564 Neave

grossly inaccurate and thoroughly eschatological though it was, had a purpose. That
purpose was for internal consumption only and destined for the home front.

Vision and Purpose: The Solution to the Crisis of Legitimacy
In the ‘New Europe’, the vision of a ‘European system’ of higher education provided
an example and a goal for national purpose. This it did – not simply by focusing attention in the higher education community back home upon the issue of European integration (Tomusk, 2006). By associating Quality Assurance and Accreditation with a
‘European system’, however mythical it might appear to outside observers, authorities
in the ‘New’ Europe could justify establishing similar agencies of control, with similar
functions and often similar titles, irrespective of the nature of the system – private
or public. The re-establishment of control was thus legitimated. This was not state
bureaucracy resuscitated or the resuscitation of Stalin’s ghost. On the contrary, the
taking on board of both Quality Assurance and Accreditation, the measures to set them
in legislation derived from a new legitimacy – which operated on two levels. These
two levels were: first, that the policy of legislating the status of the private sector was
not to bring it to heel or to constrain it.5 Rather it formed part of an overall strategy to
bring the national system of higher education up to a modicum of formal organization
and administrative harmony that could sustain competition and the possible challenges
of European integration, when the time came. Second, the legislative enactments this
required were far from a reverting to an earlier administrative homogeneity through legislation. They were, on the contrary, the necessary preliminary to the establishment of
these mechanisms and procedures to bring the national system into line with the most
recent policy in Western Europe. Far from being a step backwards, legislating a framework of Evaluatory Homogeneity in New Europe served as a clear sign of the wish by
governments to be seen as part of the ‘European’ system they professed to see.

Envoi
In this essay, I have examined changes in the relationship between higher education
and government in Europe, West and East. I have focused on the rise of the Evaluative
State. In both the ‘Old’ Europe and the ‘New’, though for reasons very different in
each case, the Evaluative State is a powerful policy construct, though the role it played,
just as the policies it advanced, were also radically different in each. Whether these
differences will move on towards a common vision is a matter that only time, political
intent and sheer institutional capacity to endorse that vision will tell.
In tracking the rise of the Evaluative State, I have also sought to dissect the basis
of its power. It is considerable. Its instrumentality is deeply penetrative into the lives
of individual institutions. In certain countries, it is deeply penetrative into the lives of
individuals too. Yet, it is also subtle and sophisticated. In effect, the instrumentality of
institutional evaluation and assessment moves the discourse that surrounds the notion
of ‘remote steering’ onto a different plane. The Evaluative State works through assessing institutional output. Whilst it still remains the case that very few Nations tie public

--- [PDF Page 567 / Book Page 565] ---

The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition 565

funding directly to performance, from the standpoint of the leverage evaluation has
upon institutional behaviour and leadership’s perception of institutional repute and
excellence, it is arguable that close ties are not necessary – at the moment. They may
be later, however (Jeliazkova & Westerheijden, 2002).
The heart of the system of leverage –if leverage may be said to have such an organ
– resides in the Evaluative State conveying its results publicly so they are available to
all stakeholders. It acts directly on institutional repute and claims to excellence.
It verifies on a regular basis the quality of the services provided by institutions of
higher education. If the truth were out, the Evaluative State, acting directly through
agency evaluation and agency oversight gives a new reality to the notion of ‘remote
steering’. By so doing, it raises the question whether the claim of political authorities
to have reduced the power of the State is reflected in reality, in face of a rhetoric which
is as pervasive as it is so often at odds with that reality (Neave, 2004b).
One of the more important changes the Evaluative State has brought about is the
replacement of what is sometimes known as ‘Legal Homogeneity’ as one of the central principles that shape the relationship between higher education and government.
In the Evaluative State, Legal Homogeneity, yields before the notion of ‘Evaluatory
Homogeneity’. It is a change of major import if only for the fact that ostensibly it pays
scant attention to the classic issue of public versus private in the Nation’s provision
of higher education. When the judgement of institutions is made on the basis of their
output, it really does not matter a fig what the form of ownership takes. Still, ownership
may be relevant when we seek to explain outstanding achievement – whether for better
or for worse. That, however, is a different kettle of fish.
The Evaluative State, I would suggest, brings the debate in higher education to
other pastures. It moves debate on, for instance, to the impact and consequences the
Evaluative State has upon the emergence of new forms of institutional differentiation
as institutional leadership responds to the perceived standing – or ignominy – that
public evaluation lays upon the individual institution. Since one of the elements in
public policy that has marched in step with the rise of the Evaluative State has been the
extension of the scope of institutional self-government, the interaction between evaluated status and institutional behaviour becomes a matter of the utmost interest – and
relevance! Evaluatory homogeneity shares a common point with Animal Farm. As
Mr Blair – Eric not Tony – had Napoleon the Pig point out to his stalwarts ‘All Animals
are equal, but some are more equal than others.’ Whether universities are more equal
or less is, of course, the duty of the Evaluative State to find out! The shame or fame are
matters for consumers and stakeholders to judge (Neave, 2002).
In effect, the Evaluative State returns us to the fundamental issues of power, authority and above all, the ends to which the Evaluative State is set to work and to service. It does so paradoxically because the Evaluative State itself is focused largely on
means. Efficiency is a means in search of an end. And what is justified in the name
of efficiency can be – as in a not too distant past, it has indeed been – used to uphold
social constructs of the most dubious sort. The Evaluative State then brings us back
to the basic and abiding questions that society has always to pose to itself. It does so
because the overall – and perhaps artificially coherent – vision of higher education
that Legal Homogeneity once provided is dissolving. With individual institutions of

--- [PDF Page 568 / Book Page 566] ---

566 Neave

higher education using the greater latitude officialdom has granted to shape their own
particular profile and mission, coherence wavers before the prospect of fragmentation.
The technicity of the Evaluative State, its sophistication and methodological nicety
ought not to blind us to the fact that performance is important. So is coherent purpose.
With an instrumentality more effective in shaping institutional behaviour than ever
before, the central questions remain: Higher Education for whom? On whose terms?
To advance what type of society? And to realize what social vision?

Notes
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.

The latter aspect was of particular concern to the Dutch authorities for whom the solution lay primarily
in terms of the Division of Tasks and the Concentration of higher education.
Chronologically, reductions in university expenditure began in 1981 in the UK and the Netherlands, in
1986 with the Santa Anna Plan in Belgium
Others may see it in terms of the Humboldtian Concordat between State and University in which the
former guaranteed the intellectual independence of individual scholars grouped within that corporation
and which took the operational form of a State monopoly over the financing of the public sector as part
of the national heritage and achievement. (For this see Neave et al., 2006)
Though by no manner of means alone in this undertaking, the Centre for Higher Education Policy at the
University of Twente has been closely involved in providing the technical input both to intergovernmental exchanges as well as training Ministry officials from East and Central Europe in the arcana of the
evaluative state, quality assurance, evaluation and accreditation for the past 15 years.
This was not always born out later. For instance, whilst the Russian Law of 1992 recognized the right to
establish higher education on religious or corporate basis, and was thus relatively accommodating, its
successor in 1996 began to apply accreditation procedures to separate sheep from goats in the private
sector. Some have interpreted this as bid by the Old Guard in Ministries to protect the State sector
(Tomusk, 2005). Whilst this might well be so, there is little point in putting in place accreditation systems à l’occidentale if they are deprived of judgemental teeth. Besides, the new theology recognizes
that such rigour can always be justified in the name of consumer protection (Ovodenko, 2004; Smale
and Gounko, 2006).

References
Bauer, M. & Kogan, M. (1997). Evaluation systems in the UK and Sweden: Successes and difficulties.
European Journal of Education, 32(2), 129–143.
Bauer, M. (1988), “Evaluation in Swedish higher education: recent trends and the outlines of a model,”
European Journal of Education, 23, 1-2 pp. 25–36.
Clark, B. R. (1983). Higher Education Organization: Cross-national Perspectives. Berkeley, Los Angeles,
London: University of California Press.
De Groof, J. (Ed.) (1994). Subsidiarity and Education. Aspects of comparative, education, law. Leuven/
Amersfoort, Paul von der knapp.
De Miguel Diaz, M. (1999). Calidad de la Enseñanza universitaria y excelencia academica. Oviedo,
Universidad de Oviedo, Servicio de Publicaciones.
Glenny, L. A. (Ed.) (1979). Funding Higher Education: A Six-Nation Analysis. New York: Praeger.
El-Khawas, E. (1992). Are buffer organizations doomed to fail?: Inevitable dilemmas and tensions. Higher
Education Policy, 5(3), 18–20.
Huisman, J., Maassen, P., & Neave, G. (Eds.) (2001). Higher Education and the Nation State. Oxford,
Elsevier-Pergamon for IAU.
Huitema, D., Jeliazkova, M., & Westerheijden, D. F. (2002). Phases, levels and circles in policy development: The cases of higher education and environmental quality assurance. Higher Education Policy,
15(2), 197–215.

--- [PDF Page 569 / Book Page 567] ---

The Evaluative State as Policy in Transition 567
HSV Rapport (2005). On looking forward to innovation, consolidation and progress: A short saga of organizational anticipation. Annex to the Final Report of the International Advisory Board. Rapport 2005:38R
The Evaluation Activities of the National Agency for Higher Education in Sweden. Final report by the
International Advisory Board. Stockholm: Högskoleverket (Xerox), 10 pp.
Jeliazkova, M. & Westerheijden, D. (2002). Systemic adaptation to a changing environment: Towards a next
generation of quality assurance models. Higher Education, 44(3–4), 433–448.
Kehm, B. & Lazendorff, U. (2006). Reforming University Governance: Changing Conditions for Research
in Four European Countries. Bonn: Lemmens.
Kogan, M. (2006). Review of Neave, Nybom & Blückert’s The European Research University: an historical
parenthesis? Higher Education Policy, 19(3).
Kwikkers, P. et al. (2005). Evenwicht zonder sturing: Wegen voor nieuw hoger onderwijs en wetenschap
(deel 1). den Haag: Sdu-Uitgevers.
Lindqvist, S. (2006). The R&D production model: A Breug(h)elesque alternative. In G. Neave, T. Nybom, &
K. Bluckert (Eds.), The European Research University: An Historical Parenthesis? New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, pp. 77–90.
Lub, A. (2003). Accreditation in Flanders and the Netherlands: A joint initiative, IAU Newsletter, April–
June, p. 5.
Maassen, P. & Neave, G. (2007) The Bologna Process: an intergovernmental policy perspective. In P.
Maassen & J. P. Olsen (Eds.), University Dynamics and European Integration. Dordrecht: Springer,
pp. 135–154.
Maassen, P. & Olsen, J. P. (Eds.) (2007). University Dynamics and European Integration. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Mungaray-Lagarda, A. (2002). Re-engineering Mexican higher education toward economic development
and quality: The XXI century challenge. Higher Education Policy, 15(4), 391–399.
Neave, G. (1996) The evaluation of the higher education system in France. In R. Cowen (Ed.), World
Yearbook of Education 1966: The Evaluation of Systems of Higher Education. London: Kogan Page,
pp. 66–81.
Neave, G. (2001) The European dimension in higher education: An excursion into the modern use of historical analogues. In M. Huisman & G. Neave (Eds.), Higher Education and the Nation State. Oxford:
Elsevier Pergamon, pp. 13–73.
Neave, G. (2002). The stakeholder perspective historically explored. In J. Enders & O. Fulton (Eds.), Higher
Education in a Globalising World: International Trends and Mutual Observations. Dordrecht: Kluwer,
pp. 17–38.
Neave (2003). “The Bologna Declaration: Some of the Historic Dilemmas posed by the Reconstruction of
the Community in Europe’s systems of Higher Education”, Educational Policy, vol. 17, No. 1, January
& March 2003, pp, 141–164.
Neave, G. (2004a). Higher education policy as orthodoxy: Being one tale of doxological drift, political
intention and changing circumstances. In D. Dill, B. Jongbloed, A. Amaral, & P. Teixeira (Eds.), Markets
in Higher Education: Rhetoric or Reality? Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Neave, G. (2004b). The temple and its guardians: An excursion into the rhetoric of evaluating higher education. The Journal of Finance and Management in Colleges and Universities, 1(1) (Tokyo), 212–227.
Neave, G. (2006a). Setting the estimated time of arrival: Goals, purposes and progress in making Europe
competitive and attractive. Keynote presentation to the Conference The Lisbon Agenda and the Way
Ahead, Lisbon, July 10–11, 2006, Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, 23pp.
Neave, G. (2006b). On incorporating the university. Higher Education Policy, 19(2), 129–134.
Neave, G. (2006c). The Evaluative State and Bologna: Old wine in new bottles or simply the ancient practice of ‘Coupage’? Higher Education Forum, 3, March 2006, Hiroshima (Japan), Hiroshima University
Research Institute for Higher Education, pp. 27–46.
Neave, G. & van Vught, F. (1994). Prometeo Encadenado: Estado y educación superior en Europa.
Barcelona: Gedisa,
Neave, G., Nybom, T., & Blückert, K. (Eds.) (2006). The European Research University: A Historical
Parenthesis? New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ovodenko, A. (2004). Private higher education in the Russian Federation. In N. V. Varghese (Ed.), Private
Higher Education. Paris: UNESCO/IIEP.

--- [PDF Page 570 / Book Page 568] ---

568 Neave
Pollitt, C. (2002). New public management in international perspective: An analysis of impacts and effects.
In K. McLaughlan, S. P. Osborne, & E. Ferlie (Eds.), New Public Management: Current Trends and
Future Prospects. London: Routledge.
Smale, W. & Gounko, T. (2006). Who chooses the tune? An analysis of the new initiatives in Russian higher
education. Higher Education Policy, 19(3), 319–342.
Scheele, J. P. Maassen, P. A. M., & Westerheijden, D. F (Eds.) (1998). To Be Continued.…Follow Up of
Quality Assurance in Higher Education. The Hague: Elsevier/De Tijdstroom.
Schwartz-Hahn, S. & Westerheijden, D. (2004). Accreditation and Evaluation in the European Higher
Education Area. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Staropoli, A. (1987) The Comite National d’Evaluation: Preliminary Results of a French Experiment.
European Journal of Education, 22(2), 123–131.
Teixeira, P., Jongbloed, B., Dill, D., & Amaral, A. (Eds.) (2004). Markets in Higher Education: Rhetoric or
Reality? Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Tomusk, V. (2005). Open World and Closed Societies: Essays on Higher Education Policies ‘In Transition’.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Tomusk, V. (2006). Creating the European area of higher education: voices from the periphery. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Trow, M. (1974). The Transition from Elite to Mass Higher Education, Paris, OECD 2 vols.
Trow, M. (1975). The public and private lives of higher education. Daedalus, 104(1), 113–127.
van Vught, F. (1989). Governmental strategies and innovation in higher education. (Higher Education Policy
Series. no.7.) London: Jessica Kingsley, 232 p.
de Weert, E. & Enders, J. (2004). The International Attractiveness of the Academic Workplace in Europe.
Frankfurt/Main: Gewerkschaft Erziehung und Wissenschaft GEW.
White Paper (2003). The Future of Higher Education. London: Department for Education and Skills.

