================================================================================
Chapter 37: Mammon, Markets, and Managerialism – Asia-Pacific Perspectives on Contemporary Educational Reforms
Author(s): Anthony Welch
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 4: Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Education
Book Pages: pp. 587–600
PDF Pages: pp. 588–601 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 588 / Book Page 587] ---

37
MAMMON, MARKETS, AND MANAGERIALISM –
ASIA-PACIFIC PERSPECTIVES ON
CONTEMPORARY EDUCATIONAL REFORMS
Anthony Welch

If the world in general has changed profoundly over recent decades, so too has the
world of education, in ways that reshape all who interact with it, whether educators,
students, or parents. Educational institutions too, have been re-fashioned substantially,
and all too often, it seems, by forces well outside education, and according to principles that have little to do with education.
Within the North, the ebullience of the post-war decades has largely gone, and the
post-war Keynesian settlement replaced by a much more austere and technicist world
of markets and managerialism (Clarke et al., 2000; Considine & Painter, 1997; Gee
et al., 1996; Yeatman, 1997). Within the South, including some socialist states transitioning to a market economy, markets and managerialism have been seen as key strategies with which to promote development, reform the rigidities of the state socialist
model, and leapfrog directly into a modern knowledge economy. Within education,
the determination that post-war capitalist, or post-revolutionary socialist generations,
would not be disfigured by structures and ideologies that created and sustained class,
ethnic, and gender inequalities, has now been largely overtaken by a fissiparous reform
programme, that often sets groups, institutions, teachers, parents, and students against
one another. (This is not to say that the former more egalitarian ideologies were always
successful in achieving their goals; rather that the goals were different, and equality
accorded a higher priority.)
This chapter sketches some of the main tenets of this renascent ideology, making
the point that it is not the first time that such ideologies have reformed (and arguably
deformed) education. Some of the mainsprings of markets and managerialism are
first outlined. A sketch of earlier episodes of the introduction of business efficiency
schemes into education, both in Britain and the colonies, and the effects on pedagogy, curriculum, and financing of education, as well as upon teachers, and pupils,
is followed by some select examples of contemporary reform programmes, within
schooling and higher education systems, from various contexts. The sketch of major
reform moments in education within the Asia-Pacific region, specifically in both
Australia and China, serves to illustrate the capacity of contemporary ideologies of
markets and managerialism to transcend political and cultural differences, and levels
of development.
587
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 587–600.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 589 / Book Page 588] ---

588 Welch

Mainsprings
After briefly tracing core assumptions underlying markets, and managerialism, some
of the likely ways in which each finds expression in education are outlined. Theories
of educational markets are understood in more theoretical terms, and seen to rest on
theories of choice, while managerialism is seen to offer a technology of implementation, including benchmarks with which to measure progress towards the attainment
of market goals. While in each case, contra to the claims of hyper-globalists such as
Ohmae (1991, 1995), state strategies do make a difference, (Weiss, 1998; Welch &
Mok, 2003), it is equally true that the agendas of major global agencies such as the
World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and the OECD have been significant in pressing, for example, ‘a less interventionist . . . state, . . . and a preference for market-like
mechanisms over bureaucratic methods of service delivery’ (World Bank, 1995: 12).

Markets
Markets in education are justified by an appeal to the notion of choice, and the argument that state-dominated systems denied much, if any, choice to families, parents,
and students. By contrast, it is argued, individuals should be free to select an education that they believe best caters to their interests and aspirations, and should also be
responsible for the outcomes of that choice. According to this argument, individuals
and families compete for advantage in education. Within market discourses, education
is seen as a positional good, in which those who have the knowledge and opportunity,
use education for purposes of achieving greater status, and a better position in the
socio-economic hierarchy (Gewirtz et al., 1995). Choices are often made more on the
status of an educational institution, whether school, college, or university, rather than
the quality of education it offers. Individuals gain advantage through gaining access to
prestige education, but (it is sometimes admitted) this is at a cost to others: ‘Positional
competition . . . is a zero-sum game. What winners win, losers lose’ (Hirsch, 1976: 52).
Despite substantial evidence that class effects mean that the more sophisticated
choosers can compound their social and educational advantages (Gewirtz et al., 1995;
Gilborn & Youdell, 2000; Campbell & Sherington, 2006), while those whose cultural
capital equips them less well in the competition stakes fare much less well, market
ideologies continue to thrive. As a result, a more fissiparous society eventuates, where
the gap between the ‘haves’ and ‘have-nots’ widens as a direct result of the extension
of educational markets.
This is not the whole story, of course: it is not just individuals who comprise the
market. Institutions, too, increasingly compete. It is now often said that rather than
students choosing schools, schools are often choosing students, in carefully orchestrated marketing campaigns (Ball, 2007; Campbell & Sherington, 2006). While more
advantaged schools (in terms of location, social class composition, or with low proportions of children whose first language is not that of the majority) are able to trade
on these attributes to forge further ahead, schools in poorer areas, rural environments,
or with high proportions of migrant children who must learn the majority language
as their second language) often fall further behind, becoming less and less attractive

--- [PDF Page 590 / Book Page 589] ---

Mammon, Markets, and Managerialism 589

both to parents and funding agencies. According to market ideologies, parents and
children frequenting such schools may then effectively be blamed for their own failure
to choose a better school.
In both Australia and China, the fostering of market ideologies in education, as in
other social policy arenas, has been a concomitant of a changed view of the shape and
role of the state. The two contexts were very different of course – while in China, the
ending of the private sector in education after 1949 followed from the principle that the
state was responsible for all provision of education, in Australia, there had long been
a significant private sector, most particularly at the secondary level (Campbell, 2007).
The rise of a more economistic ideology in the latter in the 1980s saw the increasing
subordination of education to the language and logic of economics, and the subsequent progressive extension of marketization to the public sector. In China, the
period of its opening, after the turbulence and retreat from the outside world of the
Cultural Revolution, also coincided with the decade of the 1980s, and heralded the end
of the iron rice bowl, whereby the state had guaranteed employment for life, and large
and often unwieldy state-owned enterprises (SOEs) delivered a full range of services,
including schooling, to their workforce.

Managerialism
Managerialism in education is arguably an outgrowth of wider neo-liberal reform programmes of the past decade or two – often termed ‘economically rational’ in Australia
(Pusey, 1991). Such programmes have not merely led to greater privatization and
decentralization (although as some have pointed out, the directed character of the latter means the process might be better characterized as centralized decentralization),
but have also – in an apparent paradox – led to increased regulation of educational
institutions. It is the latter process that interests us here. In an era in which funding per
student for public sector educational institutions has plateaued or declined in many
systems, in effect this means that education has come under increasing pressure, but
also paradoxically, under increasing scrutiny or surveillance (Cowen, 1996; Miller,
1995a and b; Sheehan, 1996). As much as a decade or more ago, the effects of this
ideology were being pointed out in countries such as Australia:
[W]hile hard-pressed staff in schools and universities must do more and more
with less and less, they are less free to engage in democratic action and resistance. They are increasingly beset by detailed external and internal demands
which affect both how they spend their time, and which increasingly impose
directly upon curricula, evaluation and pedagogy – all in the name of accountability or devolution. (Welch, 1997: 17)
The basis for managerialism rests on an appeal to technicist principles of efficiency
and economism (Habermas, 1971, 1974, 1976, 1978; Pusey, 1991; Welch, 1997, 1998,
2007a) that represent the historical triumph of a means-end, that is instrumentalist
rationality over older forms of reason that enshrined ethical concerns about the social
good (such as that of the ancient Greeks, for example, whose maxim ‘Man is the

--- [PDF Page 591 / Book Page 590] ---

590 Welch

measure of all things’ was effectively countered by the new logic of efficiency and
economism). An alternative account was offered by Lyotard, whose notion of performativity critiqued the historical process whereby knowledge has become commodified
and transformed into one of the principal productive forces in society. Under such
conditions he argued, notions of productivity like ‘optimising the system’s performance’ (Lyotard, 1984: xxiv) become the ultimate goal, and the relevant system technology is drawn from the discourse of business and management. Enhancing worker
productivity, including by the use of new technologies such as ICTs, forms the new
techno-logic of performativity. Performance targets are set, and individual workers
compete against each other for rewards and punishments. This new regimen means
that questions drawn from the discourse of business efficiency come to dominate: ‘Is
it efficient?’ or ‘Is it saleable?’ become more important and more common questions
than ‘Is it true?’ (Lyotard, 1984: 51).

Historical Antecedents
As argued above, a key technology of managerialism is the idea of rewarding workers
according to quantitative performance targets. While this provides a starting point for
understanding why they were introduced, and what influence they have on educational
policy, it remains to chart their effects in practice. In the Anglo-American democracies described above (countries such as New Zealand, Canada, the UK, and Australia),
performance indicators have flourished in recent decades, to the point where they have
become an integral weapon in the managerialist armoury – within education, just as in
health, welfare, and other public policy arenas. But not for the first time: before managerialism, there was efficiency. A brief review of one or two examples of efficiency
movements in education, from the nineteenth and early twentieth century, serves not
merely to show the principal effects of this ideology, but also provides an excellent
reminder of the lessons of history, at least for those who still wish to learn.

Payment by Results
The first example, drawn from the mid nineteenth century, was, like much educational baggage of the time, imported by numerous colonies from England. Among
other things, it also serves as a timely warning to current hyper-globalists, such as
Ohmae or Greider (1997) who insist that the impact of globalization effects on current
policy agendas is an entirely novel phenomenon. Importing policies from the UK, or
elsewhere, is by no means new.
The Revised Code, or payment by results as it came to be widely known, was introduced into British education around the 1860s, its rationale encapsulated in the proud
boast of its proponent to the British parliament: ‘If it is not cheap it shall be efficient; if it is not efficient it shall be cheap’ (Maclure, 1974: 79–82). Its legitimacy
stemmed from the strong prevailing current of business accountability, and efficiency,
that informed education inquiries of the time, in particular arising from the report of
the Newcastle Commission: ‘The Commissioners held the common view of the period,
that the notion of accountability, so vital to a well-run business, should be applied

--- [PDF Page 592 / Book Page 591] ---

Mammon, Markets, and Managerialism 591

vigorously to all forms of government expenditure’ (Musgrave, 1968: 35). Within
years, it had been introduced into several of the Australian colonies (Turney, 1969:
229–32; Miller, 1986; Rodwell, 1992), and to India (D’Souza, 1976; Allender, 2006).
The original British scheme was largely inspired by middle-class fears of rising calls
upon state funds for elementary schools (provided for the working class), at a time of
swelling demand for education by and for that group. In an effort to rein in justified
rises in expenditure, the needs of a ‘business age’ specified that a ‘standard’ be established which each child had to attain to pass at that level (Musgrave, 1968: 36). This
standard was based upon the assumed needs of industry for a literate workforce and
bourgeois assumptions about a curriculum appropriate to the working class: the three
Rs, suffused by Christianity.
The effects of the scheme were swift and dramatic – in the face of rising demand,
the state grant for primary education promptly fell by more than a quarter, and a
sharp decline ensued in numbers of pupil teachers and teachers’ college trainees. The
teacher/pupil ratio worsened profoundly: from 1:36 in 1861 to 1:54 five years later
(Maclure, 1973: 81).
Other perverse effects included inducing teachers, whose annual salaries were now
tied to the numbers of pupils in their classes and to their performance at particular
exams, to cheat. Teachers drilled their pupils mercilessly on test items (Hyndman,
1978: 34) once the inspector’s visit was imminent. Some secretly trained their pupils
in classroom tricks that would create a more favourable impression. Yet others falsified enrolment registers, to keep numbers artificially high. Sick children were dragged
along to school to satisfy attendance requirements, upon which teachers’ salaries were
dependent (Hyndman, 1978: 37), while teachers now had to negotiate their salaries
directly with school managers (Welch, 2007a).
Cramming, rather than teaching, became the means to ensure a teacher’s livelihood –
weakening pupils, teachers, and pedagogy. Hence, a further product of the Revised
Code was a narrowing of the curriculum and a narrow instrumentalism with respect to
educational aims. Overall, while the scheme was justified by appeals to the principle of
‘efficiency’, it was in fact introduced largely as a means of curbing justifiable growth
in state expenditure on education.
As with the Indian experience (D’Souza, 1976; Allender, 2006), and at much the
same time, the Australian schemes inherited all the weaknesses of the British. The
introduction of the so-called Standards of Proficiency into New South Wales for
example, insisted that teachers follow set requirements scrupulously, and a similarly detailed examination of requirements by inspectors. The effects on each was
to mechanize the labour process. Teachers, whose promotional prospects were
directly tied to their pupils’ results in the test, were led to implement ‘rote learning
and . . . mechanical modes of instruction’ (Turney, 1969: 230), while ‘[t]he work of
the inspector largely became one of mechanical examining and his reports became
mainly based on statistical analysis of results’ (Turney, 1969: 231). In the colony of
Victoria, for example, payment by results was acknowledged to have achieved ‘the
encouragement (of) . . . memorization rather than reasoning (of) formal, mechanical
teaching methods, and . . . keeping the curriculum narrow’ (Barcan, 1980: 107; see
also Rodwell, 1992).

--- [PDF Page 593 / Book Page 592] ---

592 Welch

Taylorism or Scientific Management
The ‘payment by results’ scheme in England, India, and various Australian colonies
in the 1860s were not the only ones to use business efficiency to promote ideological reforms in education. Taylorism, or scientific management, cut a swathe through
American schools and universities in the period around the First World War. Originally
introduced into manufacturing industry in an attempt to boost productivity (the amount
produced per worker), the success of scientific management in extracting more output per input attracted those concerned to hold back or reduce spending on education. Business interests were particularly concerned, under the banner of efficiency,
to reduce state educational costs (termed ‘wastage’), while also shifting the financial
burden of apprenticeships away from industry, which had been their traditional training ground.
The imposition of this cult of efficiency as it was dubbed (Callahan, 1962; Welch,
1998), impoverished education. But not just costs were reduced: the curriculum was
narrowed to become more like vocational training, while the education system’s capacity to respond to diversity – African Americans (then called Negros or blacks), rural
dwellers, poor whites, and the growing ranks of American immigrants – was equally
attenuated.
The rationale for implementing scientific management in schools and universities
was based squarely on an argument that:
consisted of making unfavourable comparisons between the schools and business
enterprise, of applying business–industrial criteria (e.g. economy and efficiency)
to education, and of suggesting that business and industrial practices be adopted
by educators. (Callahan, 1962: 6)
Within years, not merely had the Atlantic Monthly championed its introduction into
education, but even The National Education Association. By 1907, popular books on
education argued that classroom management could be seen as a ‘business problem’.
By 1910, it could be claimed that:
Our universities are beginning to be run as business colleges. They advertise,
they compete with one another, they pretend to give good value to their customers. They desire to increase their trade, they offer social advantages and business
openings to their patrons. (Callahan, 1962: 7)
School boards were made smaller, sometimes considerably, and became dominated by
businessmen interested in reforming school administration along financial lines. This
represented a profound retreat from earlier reforms of some of the best-known school
administrators such as William T. Harris, Horace Mann, and Henry Barnard, whose
reforms were motivated by broader and deeper interests in education, and a stronger
background in the field, rather than the field of business.
A final change provoked by the rising tide of business ideology in American education at this time was curriculum reform, where the principal push was to make

--- [PDF Page 594 / Book Page 593] ---

Mammon, Markets, and Managerialism 593

the curriculum ‘more practical’. Major business moguls, such as Andrew Carnegie,
Cornelius Vanderbilt, and John D. Rockefeller, argued that their success had nothing to
do with ‘book learning’ but was based on good old-fashioned common sense married
to the kind of business acumen that could not be taught in schools. Carnegie was particularly scornful of college study: ‘In my own experience I can say that I have known
few young men intended for business who were not injured by a collegiate education’
(Callahan, 1962: 9).
According to this ideology, Business English should be substituted for composition, and business principles, contracts and bookkeeping be introduced into schools.
At least for those not proceeding to high school, and arguably for all pupils, the ‘love
of learning’ should be subordinated to the ‘love of earning’ (Callahan, 1962: 10), a
view that also licensed the proliferation of vocational courses in schools.
The preceding historical examples of the implementation of ‘efficiency’ policies in
education serve as useful pointers to more modern ideologies of markets and managerialism in education. Among principal effects of earlier episodes were the following:
A narrowing of the curriculum, and heightened emphasis upon vocationalism
(see also Kliebard, 1999)
● Lower quality teaching, caused by cramming and ‘teaching to the test’
● Significant cost reductions in real terms, leading to much higher class sizes, and
fewer teaching recruits and
● Less effective capacity to respond to cultural diversity and working class pupils.
●

Markets and Managerialism in Australian Education
Notwithstanding the above, we should not be too surprised that the results of earlier
episodes, when education came to be dominated by ideologies of business efficiency,
have little influenced populist politicians, selected educational critics, and media
hacks, who peddle similar principles in modern guise. The following select examples
from Australia, and China, underline not merely the easy popularity of such schemes,
but also the failure of the policy process to attend to the lessons of earlier episodes.
Notwithstanding the corrosive critiques of the incorporation of business efficiency
models into the world of social policy by figures such as Habermas and Lyotard, managerialism has been widely implemented in the Australian state (Painter, 1997), and its
reform agenda widely touted, including within education (Miller, 1995a, b). Entire
management technologies such as Total Quality Management, borrowed from the
commercial world, have been used to regulate educational institutions. A recent variant to be incorporated into some schools and universities is the ‘Balanced Scorecard’
management technology, replete with Key Performance Indicators, and coloured flags
that indicate progress towards goals. Red indicates danger, of course.
The rise of markets in education has had a profound effect on Australian universities, technical and further education (TAFE), and schools in recent years, as institutions (both private and public) increasingly compete for students, or at least for a
greater share of certain kinds of students. Hence the birth or expansion of performing
arts high schools, academically selective high schools, sports high schools, technology

--- [PDF Page 595 / Book Page 594] ---

594 Welch

high schools, schools that offer an international curriculum such as the International
Baccalaureate, and institutions that market a curriculum based on a particular religion
(various Christian or Muslim schools, for example). Universities are also enmeshed
in this market, competing vigorously for both local and international enrolments
(Welch, 2003).
Justified by an appeal to choice, the Australian strategy was twofold. The first was,
since choice entailed more than choice within the public sector, to expand the private sector in education. While most of the energy here has been expended on shifting resources from public schools to the private sector (Welch, 2003, 2007a; Sydney
Morning Herald, 2000a, b, c), the beginnings of such moves in higher education (which
has in Australia traditionally been entirely public), may now be discerned.
In the process, whereas marketing was formerly restricted to the private sector, the
principle and practice has now become firmly ensconced within the public sector, with
vigorous competition for the best students. In some states (like Canada, the USA,
Germany, and Australia), the process of competition within the public sector has been
deliberately intensified by the creation of selective high schools, at least in some states,
which now often attract many more applicants than they could conceivably accommodate. The effects on the mainstream neighbourhood high school of this retreat from the
former idea of a common school have been predictable, with research revealing their
progressive residualization (Campbell & Sherington, 2006; Campbell, 2007). Within
the Australian university system, the former fiction that all universities were much the
same has now been exploded by the formation of various splinter groups within the
sector. Examples include the Group of Eight (Go8), which (like the Russell Group
in the UK) collectively dominate the race for research income; the New Generation
Universities, Innovative Research Universities, and other such groupings.
The second strategy was to induce a climate of market competition within the public sector, whose schools were to be encouraged to compete vigorously, not merely
with other state schools, but also with private sector institutions. Hence, the successful academically selective state high schools in New South Wales, most of which are
creations of the past 20 years, now tout their academic results, which now often outshine those of wealthy private sector academies, whose parents pay fees of as much
as A$20,000 per annum, while mainstream state high schools are now encouraged to
compete against low-fee denominational high schools, which have proliferated over
the last decade, as seen below.
A further example of marketization in Australian education is evident in specific
attempts by state and federal governments to foster the private schooling sector. In
an effort to promote ‘choice’, state and federal governments have made more public
funds available for the purpose of extending the private sector, something that has
resulted in a plethora of new, largely low-fee Christian, schools being founded over
the past decade, since the Howard Federal Liberal government came to power. (In
Australia, the Liberal Party is of conservative persuasion, and can be compared with
the Conservatives in the UK or the Republicans in the USA).
The changes indicated in Table 1 were underpinned by specific funding mechanisms, such as the now-notorious Enrolment Benchmark Adjustment (EBA) formula,
introduced by the Howard federal government, soon after coming to power in 1996.

--- [PDF Page 596 / Book Page 595] ---

Mammon, Markets, and Managerialism 595
Table 1.
223)
Year

1984
1994
2004

Number of schools by sector, and percent change, Australia 1984–2004 (From Campbell, 2007:

Government

Catholic

Independent

N

% change

N

% change

N

% change

7,544
7,159
6,938

–
−5.3
−3.2

1,705
1,699
1,695

–
−0.4
−0.2

776
821
982

–
+5.5
+16.4

Note: In Australia, the Independent sector embraces a small number of Catholic, non-systemic schools
as well as those run by other religious sects (mostly Christian, but also Jewish, Muslim, etc.), and some
progressive schools (such as Steiner or Montessori). In fact, the term Independent is something of a
misnomer, and might be better termed ‘state subsidized’. Fees range from moderate to highly exclusive.

The formula transferred significant federal government funds to any private school,
from a public school, for each pupil that transferred his or her enrolment from the latter to the former. The parallel deregulation of the establishment of new private schools
(that previously had to establish a case based on need, and insufficient educational
resources existing in the area) allowed 76 new schools to be established within four
years, in the most populous state alone (Welch, 2007a: 27). In the face of widespread
criticism, the EBA was abandoned, in favour of the so-called Socio-Economic Status
(SES) formula, introduced in 2000, that has also been widely criticized for failing to
take into account the actual wealth of parents who subscribe to such schools, but just
depending on the blind law of SES averages for that community (Welch, 2003). In this
way, for example, wealthy rural parents, may well have the enrolments of their children
at high-fee, socially exclusive private secondary schools, effectively subsidized.
The actual logic behind this creation of an educational market by the federal government is illustrated in a revealing comment by the federal minister of education
of the time:
We have to realize . . . that parents who send their children to non-government
schools are saving taxpayers a vast amount of money – about two billion dollars a year, more than that . . . and that money is then available for the funding of
government schools. (Welch, 2003: 276)
The parallel introduction of the federal schemes sketched above to divert funds from
public schools to private ones, without increasing the size of the budget in real terms,
ensured that the monies ‘saved’ by the taxpayers, did not extend support of public
schools.
An example of the insistent use of managerialist performance indicators was seen
in the actions of an Australian Federal Minister of Education, who, in 2005, used the
threat of withholding funding to state governments as a means to introduce compulsory reports on performance by schools across the country. At the same time, the same
federal minister pushed strongly for teacher attendance and productivity records, and
the return to an ‘A, B. C, D, E’ grading system. Three billion dollars was at risk in

--- [PDF Page 597 / Book Page 596] ---

596 Welch

the most populous state (New South Wales) alone, until the state government finally
relented, demanding that their schools ‘tell it like it is’ (Sydney Morning Herald, 2005a, b).
While parents may well appreciate more information from schools about their children’s performance, the introduction of the machinery of testing, and grading, can end
up distorting, rather than strengthening, the core education and mission of better quality teaching and learning, as was seen in the historical examples illustrated above. The
arbitrary use of such indicators as the number of pupils at a school that achieve in the
top 10% of literacy or numeracy tests, represents another example (Welch, 2007a: 14).
Assumed in this ideology of managerialism is that success in meeting such performance targets, equates to improved quality of education, something that the historical
examples treated above show to be at best dubious. Nonetheless, by such measures
is the performance of educational managers (school principals, heads of department,
Faculty Deans) often now measured.

Markets and Managerialism in Chinese Education
While profound differences exist between Chinese culture, society, and polity, and
that of Australia, China has not proved immune to the effects of marketization and
managerialism, including in education. While the effects can be seen at school level,
the contemporary world of Chinese higher education presents clear illustration of
its effects.
In China, too, the last decade or two has seen the development of educational markets. Once again, governments have driven this reform, as part of a wider agenda to
reform education, and use it to bolster economic growth and scientific development.
While Chinese families have, since Confucian times, valued education highly, and
sacrificed a good deal to provide the best possible educational opportunities for their
children, now families are increasingly becoming enmeshed in an often intense competition to get their child into a more selective school, that will in turn assist transition
into a more reputable university, among the 1,600 or more degree-granting institutions across China. The result is a widening of the gap between ‘haves’ (those in the
wealthier East of China, especially in major cities such as Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin,
Hangzhou, and Guangzhou), and the ‘have-nots’ (those in China’s West, minorities,
rural peasantry) (Welch & Yang, 2007) This has been deliberately fostered by government policies, notably the 211 Project that selected certain universities for substantial additional funding, and the 985 Project, which was even more selective, and was
scheduled to invest a total of some US$4 billion, particularly in the nation’s leading
universities, such as Peking University, Tsinghua, Fudan, and others.
Stimulated both by the effects of the regional economic crisis of the late 1990s,
internal advice by key economists, and external advice by the World Bank (1999),
which argued that ongoing restrictions to higher education access would pose a threat
to the continuation of China’s high economic growth rates (almost 10% per annum
during the 1990s), the emergence of a new market in Chinese higher education is seen
in specific reforms of the past two decades (Mok, 1999, 2001, 2007). These notably
included the creation of university-related companies (somewhat similar to the corporate

--- [PDF Page 598 / Book Page 597] ---

Mammon, Markets, and Managerialism 597

entities established by universities in the West, that are designed to commercialize
specific products or technologies, based on research discoveries at that institution).
Other examples include the development of a vigorous private sector of minban (the
preferred term, within a socialist market economy is ‘people’s colleges’), that are
rarely associated with a major public university, and that charge substantial fees, with
lower entry criteria. This growth of the private sector was enabled by the passage of
key pieces of legislation, titled ‘The Law on the Promulgation of Non-Governmental
Education’, and regulations that governed forms of cooperation between Chinese and
foreign interests in education (OECD, 2003; Huang, 2003a, 2003b). The latter arm of
the market strategies in higher education insisted, for example, on reputable partners,
detailed documentation, a Board comprised at least 50% by Chinese citizens, and a
Chinese director (Huang, 2003a, b).
Erji xueyuan (second-tier colleges, always associated with a ‘mother’ university),
duli xueyuan (independent colleges), and fenxiao (branch campuses) are other initiatives that are further segmenting the market. Supported by government, they are effectively profit-making arms of public universities (Yang, 2007), sometimes in association
with local business personalities, who for the use of the public university’s name return
part of the profits to the university. In some cases, the deals are part of a much larger
exercise in land speculation, with the business person acquiring substantial land for
development purposes.
Managerialism became part of a wider agenda aimed at promoting rapid expansion
of higher education, which as early as the Fifteenth Party Congress (1997), was seen
as critical to the development of China’s science and technology capacity. Influenced
also by World Bank research that showed that restrictions to higher education acted as
a brake on economic development, the Chinese government acted to rapidly expand
higher education enrolments, but without commensurate increases in levels of staff
or other resources. Table 2 shows the dramatic rise of enrolments, in absolute and
percentage terms.
The effects of this massive tide of enrolments were predictable, of course – a substantial rise in the productivity of universities, as measured in strictly economic terms.
Clearly, many more students were entering and proceeding to graduation, but with
much-reduced levels of staff and other resources than had been available previously.
Table 2. Number of Public HEIs and Enrolments, China, 1990–2002 (Partly adapted from Yang and Ngok,
1990 to 1999 figures China Statistical Yearbook 2000; 2000 to 2002 figures from http://www.moe.edu.
cn/stat/tjgongbao/4.htm)
Year

1990
1995
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Number of
institutions

New
students

Graduates

Student
enrolments

Percent
increase

1,075
1,054
1,022
1,071
1,041
1,225
1,396

609,000
926,000
1,084,000
1,597,000
2,206,072
2,682,800
3,205, 800

614,000
805,000
930,000
848,000
949,767
1,036,300
1,337,300

1,206,300
2,906,000
3,409,000
4,134,000
5,560,900
7,190,700
9,033,600

–
140.9
17.3
21.2
34.5
29.3
25.6

--- [PDF Page 599 / Book Page 598] ---

598 Welch

One index of decline consisted of staff/student ratios, which worsened dramatically
in the late 1990s and early part of the new century. From 1:5.22 in 1990, the ratio
had reached 1:13.5 by 2001. (It should be pointed out that it is customary in China
to include the rather numerous university administrative staff in such calculations.)
Ongoing laments about declining quality and increased work-related stress by Chinese
colleagues are paralleled by reported difficulties of accommodating students in dormitories and the lack of other resources with which to teach this huge swell of students
effectively.

Conclusion: A New Cult of Efficiency in Education?
What is evident from the previous analysis? Perhaps the first point is that little has
changed. A depressing failure to pay heed to the evidence of earlier instances that
show that attempts to foist educational markets and business concepts of administrative efficiency upon educational institutions, in the mid nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, led to a decline in both quality and morale within the institutions, as well as
a reduced capacity to deal with difference effectively, has meant that much the same
mistakes are being repeated at the end of the twentieth century, and the beginning of
the next.
Secondly, despite profound differences between China and Australia, markets and
managerialism have triumphed in each at the end of the twentieth century, underlining
the capacity of this ideology to transcend political and cultural differences. Indeed,
the rise of these ideologies parallels wider trends in the Asia-Pacific region (Welch,
2005; Welch, 2007b), notwithstanding significant differences in the responses to this
agenda, by individual states (Weiss, 1998; Welch & Mok, 2003). While the diversity
of response forms a useful cautionary tale for the hyper-globalists, the widespread rise
of current ideologies of markets and managerialism is both impressive, and worrying.
The coalescence of mammon, markets, and managerialism has been shown, above, to
have reduced the quality and effectiveness of education, as well as the morale of educationists, in institutions that are increasingly subjected to associated technologies of
regulation. The underlying goal of increasing productivity, as measured in economic
terms, leaves education poorer in every sense.

References
Allender, T. (2006). Ruling through education. The politics of schooling in the colonial Punjab. (Asian
Studies Association of Australia. South Asian Studies Publications Series No. 14). Delhi: Sterling
Press.
Ball, S. (2007). Education PLC. London: Routledge.
Barcan, A. (1980). A history of Australian education. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Callahan, R. (1962). Education and the cult of efficiency. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Campbell, C. (2007). Schools and school choice. In R. Connell, et al., Education, change and society
(pp. 211–238). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, C., & Sherington, G. (2006). The comprehensive public high school: Historical perspectives.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. China Statistical Yearbook 2000, from www.stats.gov.cn
Clarke, J., Gewirtz, S., & McLaughlin, E. (Eds.) (2000). New managerialism, new welfare. London: Sage.

--- [PDF Page 600 / Book Page 599] ---

Mammon, Markets, and Managerialism 599
Considine, M., & Painter, M. (Eds.) (1997). Managerialism: The great debate. Melbourne: Melbourne
University Press.
Cowen, R. (Ed.) (1996). World yearbook of education 1996 evaluation of higher education systems. London:
Routledge.
D’Souza, A. (1976). Anglo Indian education: A study of its origins and growth in Bengal up to 1960. Delhi:
Oxford University Press.
Gee, J., Hull, G. & Lankshear, C. (1996). The new work order: Behind the language of the new capitalism.
Sydney: Allen & Unwin.
Gewirtz, S., Ball, S., & Bowe, R. (1995). Markets, choice and equity in education. Milton Keynes: Open
University Press.
Gilborn, D., & Youdell, D. (2000). Rationing education: Policy, practice, reform, and equity. Philadelphia:
Open University Press.
Greider, W. (1997). One world, ready or not: The manic logic of global capitalism. New York: Simon &
Schuster.
Habermas, J. (1971). Technology and science as ideology: Toward a rational society. London: Heinemann.
Habermas, J. (1974). Theory and practice. London: Heinemann.
Habermas, J. (1976). Legitimation crisis. Boston: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1978). Knowledge and human interests. London: Heinemann.
Hirsch, F. (1976). Social limits to growth. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Huang, F. (2003a). Transnational higher education: A perspective from china. Higher Education Research
and Development 22(3), 193–203.
Huang, F. (2003b). Policy and practice of the internationalisation of higher education in China. Journal of
Studies in International Education 7(3), 225–240.
Hyndman, M. (1978). Schools and schooling in England and Wales: A documentary history. London:
Harper & Row.
Kliebard, H. (1999). Schooled to work: Vocationalism and the American curriculum, 1876–1946. New York:
Teachers College Press.
Lyotard, J. -F. (1984). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Maclure, J. (1973). Educational documents: England and Wales, 1816–1967. London: Chapman & Hall.
Miller, H. (1995a). States, economies and the changing labour process of academics: Australia, Canada and
the UK. In J. Smyth Academic work: The changing labour process in higher education. Buckingham:
Society for Research in Higher Education, Open University Press.
Miller, H. (1995b). The management of change in universities: Universities, state and economy in Australia,
Canada and the UK. Buckingham: Society for Research in Higher Education, Open University Press.
Miller, P. (1986). Long division: State schooling in South Australian society. Adelaide: Wakefield Press.
Mok, K. H. (1999). Education and the market place in Hong Kong and mainland China. Higher Education
37, 133–158.
Mok, K. H. (2001). From state control to governance: Decentralization and higher education in Guangdong,
China. International Review of Education 47(1), 123–149.
Mok, K. -H. (2007). One country, diverse systems: Politics of educational decentralization and challenges
for the regulatory state in post-Mao China (unpublished MS).
Musgrave, P. (1968). Society and the Curriculum in Australia. Sydney, Allen and Unwin.
Ohmae, K. (1991). The borderless world: Power and strategy in the interlinked economy. London:
Fontana.
Ohmae, K. (1995). The end of the nation state: The rise of regional economies. London: HarperCollins.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD] (2003). Cross border post secondary
education in the Asia Pacific region. In Internationalisation and Trade in Higher Education. Paris:
OECD.
Painter, M. (1997). Public management: Fad or fallacy? In M. Considine & M. Painter (Eds.), Managerialism:
The great debate (pp. 39–43). Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
Pusey, M. (1991). Economic rationalism in Canberra: A nation-building state changes its mind. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

--- [PDF Page 601 / Book Page 600] ---

600 Welch
Rodwell, G. (1992). With zealous efficiency: Progressivism and Tasmanian state primary education
1900–1922. Darwin: William Michael Press.
Sydney Morning Herald (SMH) (2000a). ‘Richest schools to reap rewards of Federal Law’. 23rd August.
Sydney Morning Herald (SMH) (2000b). ‘Kemp finds new formula to give more to richest schools’. 29th
September.
Sydney Morning Herald (SMH) (2000c). ‘37,000 to choose private schools’. 19th October.
Sydney Morning Herald (2005a). ‘Order to all state schools: Tell it like it is’. 29th June.
Sydney Morning Herald (2005b). ‘Reports required from all schools’. 1st July.
Turney, C. (1969). Pioneers of Australian Education. Sydney, Sydney University Press.
Weiss, L. (1998). The myth of the powerless state: Governing the economy in a global era. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Welch, A. (1997). ‘Reform or crisis in Australian education?’, Class, culture and the state in Australian
education: Reform or crisis? (pp. 1–31). New York/Berlin: Peter Lang.
Welch, A. (1998). Education and the cult of efficiency: Comparative reflections on the reality and the rhetoric. Comparative Education 34(3), 157–176.
Welch, A. (2003). Globalization, structural adjustment and contemporary educational reforms in Australia:
The politics of reform or the reform of politics. In Mok, K. -H. & Welch, A. (Eds.), Globalisation and
the RE-structuring of education in the Asia Pacific (pp. 262–301). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Welch, A. (2005). Korean higher education in international perspective: Internationalised or globalised? In
K. -H. Mok & R. James (Eds.), Globalization and higher education in East Asia (pp. 99–136). London:
Marshall Cavendish.
Welch, A. (2007a). Making educational policy. In R. Connell, C. Campbell, M. Vickers, A. Welch, &
N. Bagnall (Eds.), Education, change and society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Welch, A. (2007b). Governance issues in SE Asia: Finance, quality and transparency, Asia Pacific Journal of
Education (Special Issue on University Governance) 27(3), 237–253.
Welch, A., & Mok, K.-H. (2003). Conclusion: Deep development or deepening division? In K. -H. Mok &
A. Welch (Eds.), Globalisation and the RE-structuring of education in the Asia Pacific (pp. 333–356).
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Welch, A., & Yang, R. (2007). A pearl on the silk road. Internationalising a regional Chinese university
(unpublished MS).
World Bank (1995). Higher education: The lessons of experience. Washington: World Bank.
World Bank (1999). Higher Education Reform. www.worldbank.org.cn/English/content
Yang, R. (2007). Incorporation and university governance: The Chinese experience, Using University
Enrolment Expansion Policy as an Example, Asia Pacific Journal of Education, vol. 27, No. 3, 2007,
pp. 255–269.
Yeatman, A. (1997). The concept of public management and the Australian state in the 1980s. In M. Considine
& M. Painter (Eds.), Managerialism: The great debate. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.

