================================================================================
Chapter 38: Lifelong Learning and Globalisation: Towards a Structural Comparative Model
Author(s): Peter Jarvis
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 4: Industrialisation, Knowledge Economies and Education
Book Pages: pp. 601–617
PDF Pages: pp. 602–618 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 602 / Book Page 601] ---

38
LIFELONG LEARNING AND GLOBALISATION:
TOWARDS A STRUCTURAL
COMPARATIVE MODEL1
Peter Jarvis

Any comparative study of lifelong learning in a globalised world runs into a number
of major problems since lifelong learning is not a structural system like other sectors
of education but once we raise this question it follows naturally that we can ask to
what extent is it possible to study lifelong learning comparatively. Before that question can be answered, however, it is necessary to clarify what precisely is lifelong
learning and so that constitutes the first part of this chapter. In this section we will
argue that a major element of lifelong learning occurs, in its present form, as a result
of the process of globalisation and so the second part explores the idea of globalisation and we will endeavour to show that the dominant social forces that are exerted
on all aspects of most societies stem from this process, but we will argue in the third
section that there are social forces that reinforce these social pressures whilst others
seek to mitigate them so that the effects of globalisation do not necessarily result in
standardisation. Finally, we will produce a model that allows us to understand how
different manifestations of lifelong learning occur and this might form the basis of
comparative studies of lifelong learning policies, if not of lifelong learning itself.

Lifelong Learning
Adult educators had long advocated systems of lifelong education (Yeaxlee, 1929)
but it only became a dominant issue when the substructures of society needed new
knowledge to produce more commodities cheaply and efficiently for the capitalist
market. This dominant need has led to the global knowledge economy: countries
have been forced to introduce lifelong learning policies and, as a result, there have
been massive changes in their education systems. Lifelong learning arrived. Many
countries have been forced to change their approach to education which have also
been colonised by the global capitalist system – even the most traditional of educational institutions – the universities – have had to change (Bok, 2003; Lucas, 1996;
Slaughter & Leslie, 1997).
In analysing lifelong learning, however, we are confronted with a conceptual problem: learning is both an individual process and an institutional provision. Consequently,
601
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 601–617.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 603 / Book Page 602] ---

602 Jarvis

we see two different approaches to lifelong learning emerging. Field and Leicester
(2000: xvi–xix) pose this issue quite nicely when they ask the question about whether
we are dealing with the question of lifelong learning or permanent schooling, although
the idea of recurrent might be more accurate than permanent schooling. However, they
do not go on to develop the ambiguity that they focus upon in the title of their paper
since their chapter is the introduction to their edited book, but other chapters do so.
But, it is also a question hidden from the debate by the traditional definition of the
concept, such as the one given by the European Commission (2001: 9):
all learning activity undertaken throughout life, with the aim of improving knowledge, skills and competences within a personal, civic, social and/or
employment-related perspective.
This is an individualistic definition which is open to question on its instrumental aims,
amongst other things. But it is an individualistic interpretation of learning itself and
infers the lifelong learner. In this sense, learning is an existential phenomenon which
is almost co-terminal with conscious living, i.e. learning is lifelong because it occurs
whenever we are conscious and it needs to have no aim in itself, although it frequently
does have a purpose. In a sense it is neither incidental to living nor instrumental in
itself, it is an intrinsic part of the process of living. It can be defined as:
The combination of processes throughout a life time whereby the whole person
– body (genetic, physical and biological) and mind (knowledge, skills, attitudes,
values, emotions, beliefs and senses) – experiences social situations, the perceived
content of which is then transformed cognitively, emotively or practically (or through
any combination) and integrated into the individual person’s biography resulting in a
continually changing (or more experienced) person. (Jarvis, 2006:134)
This definition has been fully discussed elsewhere (Jarvis, 2006) and so it requires no
further elaboration here. However, lifelong learning has a second meaning as indicated
above – it is also institutional, a form of recurrent education, which was a popular
concept with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
and other institutions in the 1970s. But the EU definition also goes beyond this because
it allows for the inclusion of initial education, although EC policy documents never
really included schooling within its lifelong learning policies. Lifelong learning, therefore, includes formal and non-formal, as well as informal learning. Consequently, we
need to recognise this combination of learning and recurrent schooling is another way
of understanding lifelong learning and so it may also be defined as:
Every opportunity made available by any social institution for, and every process
by which, an individual can acquire knowledge, skills, attitudes, values, emotions, beliefs and senses within global society. (Jarvis, 2007: 99)
Both definitions refer to different approaches to lifelong learning and in a sense they are
two sides of the same coin. Learning is always personal but is broader than education

--- [PDF Page 604 / Book Page 603] ---

Lifelong Learning and Globalisation 603

since some of the opportunities to learn throughout our lifetime are provided by social
institutions, such as the State and employers in the form of recurrent education. However,
one of the major problems with much of the literature on lifelong learning is that it
generally refers to work-life learning and it omits all forms of formal and non-formal
learning which occur after retirement since they are leisure time pursuits. However, seniors learning is itself a major element in lifelong learning and, significantly, it also began
at about the same time that work-life learning was becoming a significant issue.
The first form of institutional provision for seniors began in 1962 in New York,
but in 1972 the University of the Third Age was founded in France and by 1982 it
was established in the UK but with a different structural form to that on the continent
of Europe. By 1988 the Elderhostel Institute Network was formed which included
lifelong learning institutes. Consequently, this one non-vocational element of lifelong
learning which is large and growing rapidly as the world ages, is open to comparative
analyses, and this has grown because of demographics rather than market needs.
In contrast, vocational lifelong learning developed during the same period under a
number of different guises such as adult education, continuing education, continuing
professional development and human development. It was not until the 1990s that
the term lifelong learning came to the fore and this was facilitated by the European
White Paper on teaching and learning (European Commission, 1995). The European
paper both reflected ideas that were already occurring in some countries in Europe
but which were not occurring in less developed countries. Indeed, it was the matter of
development that made this change in education so significant, as we will show below,
but significantly, work-life lifelong learning did not assume the same terminology in
the USA because it had for many years practised a form of adult education which was
both vocational and non-vocational, whereas in UK and many other countries adult
education was regarded as a leisure time pursuit – which, interesting enough lifelong
learning has become in the USA!
However, our concern here is with vocal education for adults, called lifelong learning in Europe but called adult education is the USA, although it is very interesting to
note that at about the same time as this chapter was being written a European policy
document on adult learning, as opposed to lifelong learning, appeared (European
Commission, 2006). Consequently, we now have three different terms: lifelong learning, adult learning and adult education and they each refer to the vocational education
of adults. It is the first of these that still has predominance in many countries of the
world but it is the phenomenon that, it is argued, has occurred as a result of globalisation and it is to this phenomenon that we now turn.

Globalisation
Many theories of globalisation exist; Sklair (1991: 27–36), for instance, classified the
theories of globalisation into five:
Imperialist and neo-imperialist
Modernization and neo-evolutionalist
● Neo-Marxist (including dependency theories)
●
●

--- [PDF Page 605 / Book Page 604] ---

604 Jarvis
●
●

World system (and the new international division of labour theory)
Modes of production theory

Basically, the imperialist theory argues that the major powers have struggled for new
markets and opportunities to extend their political, cultural and economic influence
(see Galtung, 1971). The modernisation approach suggests that those underdeveloped societies are constrained by their traditions whereas modern societies are able
to reach beyond the tradition; consequently, the modern societies are able to grow and
develop since they are led by innovators, usually those whose cultural heritage stems
from the Protestant ethic (see Weber, 1930). The most prominent form of neo-Marxist
theory is dependency theory. Sklair suggests that there are also theories of dependent
underdevelopment, dependent development and dependency reversal, and the work
of Bornschier (1980) reflects this position: these theories are closely linked to the
imperialist theories. However, other neo-Marxist perspectives would not lay quite so
much emphasis on dependency. In Wallenstein’s (1974) world system he argued for
an international division of labour based upon a centre–periphery model of the world,
but like the modernisation theory the significance of power is played down. Finally,
the mode of production theories argue that the reasons for underdevelopment lie in
the countries themselves rather than the position that the countries are in relation to
the global structures. All these recognise the centrality of the economic institution of
society although it is only the imperialist and Marxist models that focus on the power
in any major way. In themselves all the theories throw some light on globalisation but
none explain it fully and only by combining and modifying them can globalisation in
contemporary society be explained.
In classical Marxist analysis, the substructure of society was the economic institution – that
is, the foundation and framework upon which everything else in society is constructed.
In Marx’s analysis the economic institution was distinct, but dominant, in each society
and so its activities, to some extent, influenced the remainder of society, but they were
curtailed by the territorial boundaries of individual states. However, three major
things have occurred since that analysis which, while in my opinion does not invalidate the structural approach, actually changes the detail. First, this substructure has
now incorporated technology, especially information technology, which has enabled
the realignment of space and time, so that, when this is combined with rapid transport systems, the world has been changed into a global village, although the term
‘village’ is also a little misleading since the world cultures are far less homogeneous
than those of a single village, although some theorists are beginning to see it in this
manner – a process of standardisation (Beck, 1992) or McDonaldisation (Ritzer,
1993). But secondly, the global village now has this common substructure rather than
individual states, so that while the countries still remain separate the substructure is
united and its elements can act as single entities across the globe. But this means
that the imperialist approach has even more validity. Thirdly, since the fall of the
Berlin Wall, there is now only one superpower – the USA – which has exerted itself
as the single global imperial power and which has supported the global substructure
to such an extent that it is often difficult to distinguish its influence from that of the
substructure itself, so that it might be regarded as an element in the substructure at

--- [PDF Page 606 / Book Page 605] ---

Lifelong Learning and Globalisation 605

this moment in time (Pilger, 2003). Since the substructure is supported and defended
by the political and military might of the USA, it is predominantly Western so that it is
hardly surprising that the idea of Americanisation is often closely associated with that
of globalisation. However, this might be only a temporary phase in the development
of the world since China and India might soon be the major players. Nevertheless, the
capitalist system and the international division of labour do affect a great many of the
countries of the world and, therefore, their educational systems. Consequently, the
concept of globalisation might best be understood as a socio-economic and political
phenomenon having profound cultural implications throughout the globe.
Globalisation has at least two main elements: the first is the way that those who have
control of the substructure in the countries of the dominant West, especially America,
have been enabled to extend their control over the substructures of almost all the other
countries in the world and consequently over their structures and resources; the second
is the effects that these substructural changes are having on the superstructure of each
society since the common substructure means that similar forces are being exerted on
each people and society despite each having different histories, cultures, languages,
and so on, but these forces do not exist unopposed since different cultural groups seek
to retain their own ways of life. In addition, individual States and national governments
are still powerful and they also seek to oppose or modify the forces of globalisation.
I have called this mitigation while Habermas (2006: 81) refers to it as cushioning, but
the fact that governmental policies can mitigate the effects of globalisation gives rise
to both convergence and difference, and this is as true for lifelong learning policies and
practices as it is for other social phenomena.
Globalisation can thus be depicted by Figures 1 and 2.
The significance of this model is that there is a global substructure represented
here by the core running through all the different countries – it exercises a centralised power over each of the countries and, in this sense, it is a force for convergence
between the different countries of the world. The large downward pointing arrows
illustrate that there is a relationship of power between the 203 countries of the
world (this is the number recorded by UNESCO, 2006), while the two small black
upward pointing arrows depict the resistance to the forces of globalisation. In the
above diagram each stratum represents a country which is penetrated through the
centre by the substructure, and each country can now be represented in the following manner.
The concept of a multilayered society was first utilised by Held et al. (1999: 62–77)
and the layers are depicted hierarchically in order to illustrate that it is not merely a
geographical matter but that it is also one of power stemming from the core to the
periphery, although it has to be recognised that power is not a one-way process since,
by the nature of democracy the ‘lower orders’ can and should be proactive as well,
but there is for a variety of reasons a degree of passivity amongst individuals to the
pressures coming from the hierarchy since many enjoy comfortable lifestyles. Neither
individuals nor organisations are depicted here but they can exercise influence and
power in any one of the layers of society.
The first thing to note about Figures 1 and 2 is that the substructure is united and runs
through all the different countries, and so the two layers in Figure 1 depict only two

--- [PDF Page 607 / Book Page 606] ---

606 Jarvis
Sub- structure
Multi- layered superstructure

Multi- layered superstructure

Sub- structure
Figure 1.

A global model of societies

Economic /technological/American political sub-structure

International
Figure 2.

National

A multilayered model of society

Regional

Local

--- [PDF Page 608 / Book Page 607] ---

Lifelong Learning and Globalisation 607

of the many countries that we could have included and they have to negotiate between
themselves in order to cooperate. The development of information technology, rapid
travel, and so on means that people throughout the world are much more aware of
what occurs elsewhere and are much more able to affect it. It is possible, therefore, for
people at different levels in the hierarchy to communicate across national boundaries
electronically, to travel rapidly and cheaply between different countries, so that there is
intercultural sharing, but they are still separate politically and culturally. The external
arrows represent the unequal relationships between each country; for instance, the
dominant downwardly pointing arrow represents trade, aid, consultations, and so on.
There is certainly more giving by the more powerful to the less powerful countries, so
that the arrows still depict a hegemonic relationship in which the dominant cultures of
the West still export their culture and commodities but though a different mechanism.
By contrast, the united substructure runs through each country making similar
demands on each, as Beck (2000) suggests, it criss-crosses national boundaries since
its constituent members agree on the aims and functions of the centre, but there is
also internal competition within the core since each constituent company is competing
with many others in order to produce commodities that can be marketed throughout
the world more successfully than their rivals. The fact that there is internal competition means that the speed of change within the core is fast, driven by the demands of
the market, which it is both a creating force and one to which all strands of the core
are seeking to respond. It is, therefore, changing faster than those aspects of the global
system that are not so market-driven and so it produces a force for change in each country. Additionally, it is necessary to recognise that change is neither gradual nor even,
since new discoveries tend to generate change unevenly. The significance of this fact
is that for new commodities to be produced and marketed, both new knowledge and
an educated workforce are necessary and so the educational system has to change to
keep abreast with these changes, including the fact that in some ways education has to
be skewed towards the workforce and so vocational education has to become lifelong.
The last thing that is necessary to note here is that there are in both diagrams arrows
indicating that there are forces opposing the dominant globalising forces and that these
influence different states and their policies differently, so that standardisation is not
the outcome of globalisation although there are strong pressures towards it. There are
many other effects of globalisation and these have been elaborated elsewhere (Jarvis,
2007) but discussion about them is unnecessary to the argument of this chapter.
The substructure (or core), then, is the driving force of each society, but within the
national and local cultures there are both wider interests and concerns than those to be
found in the core and also in some instances a degree of resistance to the changes that
are occurring and these are to be found at every level, including the international. It is
the substructure of global society that not only drives change but also creates change
in the educational system. Education has been incorporated into the wider political and
economic system, and as early as 1973, Kerr et al. (1973: 47) noted that education was
the handmaiden to industry and that:
The higher educational of industrial society stresses the natural sciences,
engineering, medicine, managerial training – whether private or public – and

--- [PDF Page 609 / Book Page 608] ---

608 Jarvis

administrative law. It must steadily adapt to new disciplines and new fields of
specialization. There is a relatively smaller place for the humanities and the
arts, while the social sciences are strongly related to the training of managerial
groups and technicians for the enterprise and the government. The increased
leisure time of industrialism, however, can afford a broader public appreciation
of the humanities and the arts.
Of course, they were wrong about the nature of society but they were right about the
emphasis being placed on scientific and useful subjects, albeit in the post-industrial
society. Stehr (1994: 10–11) suggests that there has been an advance of science in the
knowledge economy. Naturally, the dominant educational discourse in the knowledge
societies is about the precedence of practical, scientific and relevant social science
knowledge. Other forms of knowledge can be relegated to leisure time pursuits and so
lifelong learning became equated with work-life learning in Europe but with leisure
time pursuits in the USA! But in the latter work-life learning is included within adult
education. It must be made clear here that the European concept of lifelong learning is
used hereafter, and especially the distinction that I have drawn between lifelong learning and lifelong (or recurrent) education.
However the forces of change have not gone unchallenged and lifelong learning
does not appear in every country in the same form: it is this that is important for comparative education.

Towards a Model for Comparative Lifelong Learning
From the argument presented above, we are in a position to see that the dominant
forces are the ones which have shaped lifelong education in most countries of the
world – but that there are other forces at international, national and even regional and
local levels that either reinforce, seek to modify or even oppose these dominant forces
and Figure 3 below depicts the argument thus far.
If the above model has validity, it should provide a theoretical framework for understanding the different pressures being exerted on the state and other providers of education
generated by the forces of globalisation. It should therefore be indicative of the form that
lifelong learning takes in different societies of the world. It should be noted, however, that
since the core has no power of state that it can only generate pressures while the international can both generate pressures and formulate policies; the national and regional can
generate pressures, formulate policies and initiate practices. In this way it is possible for
all the layers to cushion the population from the harshest pressures of global capitalism
or to reinforce them. There are, therefore, five brief subsections to this part: global and
international pressures, national and regional policies and resistors to change.

Global Pressures
Emanating from the centre, the global pressures are the forces for change. For instance,
the aims of global capitalism are to produce new commodities as cheaply and efficiently
as possible and to sell them at the maximum profit on the market. In order to produce

--- [PDF Page 610 / Book Page 609] ---

Lifelong Learning and Globalisation 609
Global Forces

Modifying
Forces
(Policies)
Recurrent
Educational Institution/
Lifelong Learning
(Practices)

Modifying
Forces
(Policies)

Resistance to Globalisation
(Opposing forces)
(Policies and Action)
Key
Supporting global forces

Figure 3.

Resisting global forces

The educational institution in social context in a globalising world

new commodities or even to produce old ones more efficiently, it is necessary to have
new knowledge which is practically orientated and an employable workforce, i.e. an
educated one. Consequently, some forms of knowledge take precedence over others:
Scheler (1980), as early as 1926, argued that some forms of knowledge – scientific
and technological – are artificial since they change so quickly that they never become
incorporated in culture whereas cultural knowledge changes very slowly. These forms
of knowledge change as rapidly as the market demands and so workers and potential
employees need first an initial education that makes them employable and then continuing occupational development so that they can remain employable. If they do not
have it, then they are excluded from the workplace, so that the global forces demand
certain emphases in the curriculum and lifelong learning and if they do not get it, then
the corporations either relocate their production to cheaper and more malleable places
and/or they start their own corporate universities (Meister, 2000; Jarvis, 2001). These
forces operate in each country of the world but to varying degrees.

--- [PDF Page 611 / Book Page 610] ---

610 Jarvis

International
The international agencies also exert pressures throughout the world in a variable manner: all three forms – support, modification and resistance are noted here. There is also
an almost complete spectrum of approaches to lifelong learning at this level – we will
briefly refer to four – World Bank, UNESCO, OECD, and the European Union.
Within the framework, therefore, the World Bank, and the International Monetary
Fund, as neo-liberal economic institutions, exert social pressures on governments
that reinforce the pressures of the substructure and therefore serve to reproduce
the social and cultural conditions of global society (see Pilger, 2003). This pressure is even greater on those countries to which the World Bank has loaned or supported the loan of money, since it can place conditions on the developing countries
to conform to its own understanding of global economics, even if such economics
do not appear beneficial to the countries concerned: they are certainly beneficial to
the developed world, and the large corporations, which invest in them the corporations’ profit. Indeed, Joseph Stiglitz (2002) the World Bank’s former chief economist
and Nobel Laureate in Economics has recently claimed that the time has come for
major changes in the World Bank’s economic policy and the values – he (2002: 252)
writes that ‘development is not about helping a few rich people get rich . . . it is about
transforming societies, improving the lives of the poor, enabling everyone to have
a chance at success and access to health care and education’ (cited from Bawden,
2006: 113). He makes the same criticism of the International Monetary Fund. At
the same time, it has to be acknowledged that in many instances loans are a way of
kick-starting an initiative for some of those who are autonomous, strong-willed and
entrepreneurial.
In contrast, we find in UNESCO a completely different picture: a champion of
lifelong education having adopted the term long before it gained popularity, it has
both led the way in developing the concept but, at the same time, always presenting it
within a humanistic perspective. From its first major report, Faure Report (UNESCO,
1972) and the publication of the background papers (OISE-UNESCO, 1973) to the
present day we see the same concerns. Produced before global capitalism became such
a dominant force, the Faure Report is the outcome of a UNESCO Commission on the
Development of Education, and yet its conclusions are still relevant today. In order to
give a flavour of this report, we find a different emphasis since the whole of the person
is constantly emphasised:
The physical, intellectual, emotional and ethical integration of the individual
into the complete man is a broad definition of the fundamental aim of education.
(italics in original; Faure, 1972: 156)
In Faure’s Preamble (pp. xix–xxxiv) the nature of the human being is clearly
specified:
Uniting Homo sapiens and Homo faber is not enough – such a man must also feel
in harmony with himself and with others: Homo concors.
● This is the age total man: that is to say, man entire and all of man.
●

--- [PDF Page 612 / Book Page 611] ---

Lifelong Learning and Globalisation 611

This was a far-sighted and radical Report which has left its mark on the world of
education but the extent to which its concerns have been taken on board is another
matter. But UNESCO has been consistent as some of its later publications demonstrate
(UNESCO, 1990; 2000; 2005, inter alia)
Unlike the World Bank, these UNESCO documents are liberal utopian, full of the significance of humankind, and how humankind as a whole needs to enjoy the fruits of the
world in which we live. It is liberal utopian, ethical but also political seeking to modify
and redirect the forces of social change emanating from the substructure of global society.
But there are many other important organisations offering their own solutions to these
problems and we need to examine some of these. We will now examine the OECD.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development was established in
December 1960 to achieve the highest possible economic growth and employment and
increase the standard of living in member countries, to contribute to economic expansion in both member and non-member countries and to increase world trade. Whilst
the reference to non-member countries occurs here, it is perhaps notable throughout
the OECD literature, naturally enough, that the focus is upon OECD member countries
so that many of the major issues of globalisation are not addressed since most of the
member countries are wealthy, industrialised societies but there is a major concern for
equality of opportunity within these societies running through all the documents.
The OECD’s establishment preceded the widespread acceptance of neo-liberal
economics a few years later, although its establishment was perhaps an early sign
of economic globalisation. From its earliest days it was concerned with the place of
education and it pioneered the concept of recurrent education as a strategy for lifelong
learning (OECD, 1973) which it claimed to be a different approach to education since
it argued that ‘education opportunities should be spread over the individual’s lifetime,
as an alternative (underlining in origin) to the ever-lengthening period of continuing
education for youth (OECD, 1973: 5). It is significant that from the outset OECD did
not propose a system of formal education that was parallel to adult education since
that would create another binary system. There was a genuine concern for equality
of opportunity behind the OECD proposals since it focused from the outset on lower
skilled people having the right to paid educational leave, as well as those who were
more highly skilled.
By 1977, however, the term ‘recurrent education’ had disappeared: this maybe
because there was a growing sense that it would be very costly to implement systems
of paid educational leave as an entitlement, or even to see post-school education as an
educational system, but the idea of the ‘education of adults’ assumed some prominence
(OECD, 1977: 5). Moreover, the key concept became learning and it was suggested
that there are five sets of learning needs: (1) remedial; (2) vocational, technical and
professional competences; (3) health, welfare and family life; (4) civic, political and
community competence; (5) self-fulfilment (OECD, 1977 vol. 1: 23–24). Thereafter
there were further four volumes examining new structures, programmes and methods;
non-participation; participation; and widening access for the disadvantaged (OECD,
1977–1981). Consequently, it can be seen that while the early publications of OECD
on lifelong learning were work-orientated, they were genuinely engaged in all the
issues of general adult education and many of the authors of specific chapters in these

--- [PDF Page 613 / Book Page 612] ---

612 Jarvis

volumes were well-known adult educators. As globalisation became more significant,
so the concerns of OECD became more focused on the knowledge economy, and yet
there was recognition that globalisation itself brought vulnerability (OECD, 1996: 30).
Indeed, lifelong learning for all was the theme of an OECD Ministers’ Conference and
while the broader adult education issues are still apparent in the discussion documents,
it is clear that the relationship between learning and work is the prevalent issue. Indeed,
the first argument for lifelong learning provided is the learning economy. Both in placing this as the prime reason for lifelong learning and the introduction of the language
of the global capitalism indicate how OECD has been affected by, and has in turn
affected, the dominant economic policies of the period. Thereafter, the speed of change
due to technology is considered as the second reason for lifelong learning, followed by
discussion about education throughout the life cycle; the formation of human capital
and social well-being of individuals is the fourth reason given and, finally, the issues
of social cohesion are addressed as it is recognised that the wealth gap is widening
(OECD, 1996: 90–92).
The European Union has deliberately responded to the social forces of globalisation in all three of its educational branches: education and training, higher education
and lifelong (adult) learning. The policies in each can be seen both as a response to
the global pressures and as a deliberate attempt to modify them. Enshrined in the
Maastricht Treaty are Articles 149 and 150: the first seeks to develop a European
dimension of education and the second focuses on the need for a vocational training
policy. Without analysing the vast array of policy documents that have appeared since
then, we can see that in EC 1995 White Paper on education and training appeared
as Teaching and Learning: Towards the Learning Society (European Commission,
1995) specified three aims:
Social integration
Enhancement of employability
● Personal fulfilment
●
●

The latest document on lifelong learning (European Commission, 2001) specified four:
Active citizenship
Personal fulfilment
● Social inclusion
● Employment related aspects
●
●

In these cases the international pressures on European countries are modifying forces
since they are as concerned with the integration of Europe as they are with the success
of global capitalism. An example of this is the Bologna Declaration (2005) of 19th
June, 1999, which indicates how European higher education should develop in order
to make it compatible across the whole of Europe – this is part of the Europeanisation
process, and lifelong in as much as it is still a response to the vocational demands on
education and both education and training.
Two types of social pressure emanate from international agencies – those which
would modify the global forces to some degree or other and those which reinforce the

--- [PDF Page 614 / Book Page 613] ---

Lifelong Learning and Globalisation 613

global pressures. Significantly, those countries least able to fend for themselves are the
most exposed to the international agencies that reinforce global pressures.

National
Two types of national responses to the global situation can be detected: those which
seek to modify the global forces and those which seek to prevent them having any
effect in their countries. However, differences can be found in national policy documents and using lifelong learning as an example, policy documents can be compared. In the UK, for example, The Learning Age (DfEE, 1998) was quite orientated
to the economic needs of the nation and proposed such innovations as the University
for Industry and Learn Direct – a national information service. This report certainly
reflected the neo-liberal principles of the New Labour government and with it its desire
to introduce lifelong learning, although in the first instance it made little reference to
those other EU-specified aims of lifelong learning, although there is the one reference in the Minister’s Foreword that says ‘leaning offers excitement and the opportunity for discovery. It stimulates enquiring minds and nourishes our souls’ (DfEE,
1998: 10). A neo-liberal agenda had been set, and the UK became a leading country in
Europe in implementing this agenda that is in accord with the demands of the global
substructure. Significantly, citizenship does not play quite such a leading role in the
UK as it does in the European documents, but the UK has been less concerned with
Europeanisation than the Commission, although British citizenship – and the learning
required from it – has become an issue as a result of the problems of migration which
itself, in many cases can be traced back to the globalising forces and the wealth of the
West. Economic migration is perfectly understandable in an unequal world.
One reason why the UK policies are more orientated to the global forces is because
it the 1980s, during Mrs Thatcher’s time as prime minister, it adopted a minimal
state neo-liberal approach to government whereas most other EU countries did not.
However, it is significant that as more countries are being forced to adopt more of the
global pressures, many countries in Europe now appear to regard UK as a country that
is leading the way.
In contrast to the emphasis of the UK government, similar documents from two
other industrialised societies – one inside the European Community and the other in
South-East Asia – reveal different emphases. The Finnish government’s policy document had its own vision:
By the year 2004 Finland will be one of the leading knowledge and interaction
societies. Success will be based on citizens’ equal opportunities to study and
develop their own knowledge and extensively utilise information resources and
educational opportunities. A high-quality, ethically and economically sustainable mode of operation in network-based teaching and research will have been
established. (Ministry of Education, 1999: 29)
As the Finnish vision is based on the citizens’ opportunities rather than economic success
and Hong Kong’s vision is based on the learner’s all-round development, and so the aims

--- [PDF Page 615 / Book Page 614] ---

614 Jarvis

of education in the twenty-first century are threefold: enabling students to enjoy learning; enhancing student’s effectiveness and communication and developing a sense of
creativity and commitment (Education Commission, 2000: 30). This will be achieved by
following the following principles: student focused, ‘no-losers’; quality; life-long learning; society-wide mobilisation (Education Commission, 2000: 36–42). While the UK
vision has been driven much more by neo-liberal economic policies from both the global
substructure and the political ideology of New Labour, more humanistic approaches are
evident from both Finland and Hong Kong. These also reflect the prevailing culture of
the countries. This brief comment on three countries’ policies on lifelong learning does
indicate one way that comparative studies of lifelong learning might develop and certainly one way in which comparative policy analysis might be conducted.
In contrast to these statements, national policies in Muslim countries are in varying degrees opposed to the global forces, with societies such as Turkey being more
exposed to the West and therefore much more likely to be affected by the global pressures than is Iran which is much more resistant to such forces.

Regional
At the local level, it is more possible to examine practices that occur within education,
at all levels, and to see the extent to which the private–public partnership has emerged:
the following are but examples. Increasingly, locally based state education is being
influenced by business and industry – this occurs not only in the way that the curriculum is devised and implemented, but in sponsorship of school activities and even
to sponsoring whole schools. Businessmen are frequently appointed to governorships
and advisory boards and schools arrange business placements, and so on, for their
students. The extent to which this occurs throughout the world is an interesting and
important research question.
In the same way, the development of learning regions/cities/towns is another example of the way that public and private are brought together in anticipation of enriching
the community. Learning community policies and networks exist throughout the world
(Longworth, 2006) with the interaction of formal and non-formal learning. Since many,
but not all, policy statements on learning regions are as much concerned with the cultural
factors as economic ones, they also tend to cushion the global pressures at local levels.
At organisational level the emphasis, naturally, is on the job, on the learning organisation and human resource development (Pedlar et al., 1997), so that workplace learning is growing in significance throughout the world. Having said this, a number of
employing organisations do release staff for other forms of education.

Resistance to Globalisation
Social pressure does not all operate in the one direction as the reference to the Muslim
religion shows. In precisely the same way other non-Christian faiths, such as the Hindu
religion in some countries such as Nepal (Laksamba, 2005), also operate in a similar
manner. But resistance to globalisation is being seen more widely, not only through
open demonstrations against it but also in such things as environmental education
(O’Sullivan, 1999), wider political and academic debate, and lifestyle.

--- [PDF Page 616 / Book Page 615] ---

Lifelong Learning and Globalisation 615
Modifying Forces
(Laws /Policies)
World Bank

Global Forces

OECD
Different
NGOs
Different
Governments’
Policies and Practices

Policy and Practice of
Lifelong Learning
European
Union

Learning
Regions

UNESCO

Some Islamic States,
NGOs and Protest Movements

Key
Figure 4.

Supporting global forces

Modifying Forces
(Laws/Policies)

Resisting global forces

Forces of national institutions in the social context in a globalising world

It is possible, therefore, to detect three types of pressure operating on educational
practice as a result of globalisation: the globalising forces seeking to create the form
of lifelong learning that makes it the handmaiden of industry, those forces which seek
through policies and practices to mitigate those forces and to produce forms of lifelong
learning that are more balanced between the global capitalist and the humanistic seeking
to enrich human life and preserve the environment and those which seek to resist globalisation which are currently embodied in social movements, non-governmental organisations and some religious movements. This is depicted in Figure 4 above.

Conclusion
Lifelong learning, then, presents a challenge to comparative education because it
occurs in almost every country of the world as a result of similar pressures from the
global core but it manifests itself in different ways. At the one end of the spectrum,
both the policy and practice of lifelong learning can be seen as both the handmaiden
of the global substructure as also seeking to reproduce its culture throughout the
world (Bourdieu, 1973) whereas at the other is might be seen as having diametrically
opposed aims.

--- [PDF Page 617 / Book Page 616] ---

616 Jarvis

As we pointed out earlier, the corporations that control the substructure are extremely
powerful but they do not have the power to create international policies or laws and so
they cannot enforce their agenda by this means. Nevertheless, some scholars (Korten,
1995; Pilger, 2003 inter alia) consider their power so great that they perceive them as
ruling the world and if this were the case, then lifelong learning would be entirely vocational. In contrast, we are suggesting that while international, state and regional governments are exposed to these global pressures, they are in varying degrees seeking
to cushion these effects and to use lifelong learning as one instrument in this process.
Consequently, both the policy and practice of lifelong learning throughout the world has
many similarities and considerable differences based upon the way in which they are
able to respond to these global forces. For instance, the European Union has two distinct
agendas: the first, of creating of competitive Europe within the global economy and so
a great deal of support is given to foster the neo-liberal processes and in this sense it
might be argued that its lifelong learning policy is supportive of the global pressures,
but with its agenda of creating a united Europe a great deal of support is being given to
lifelong learning and citizenship education, and this might ultimately be seen as a form
of education that will undermine the capitalist global forces. Consequently, we can see
ambivalence to the global forces in the European policy documents and practices which
has its knock-on effects on the policies and practices of all twenty-seven member states
– although each of these is individual, and so on. The comparative study of these policies
is one approach to the comparative study of lifelong learning but it is not a comparison
of its practices in different countries of the world. But without a single major provider
or national structure in each country for what is generally called lifelong learning, the
comparative study of its practice becomes much more problematic. Paradoxically, the
less significant in national and international terms non-vocational lifelong learning of
older people is much more conducive to comparative study because of its international
and national structures and similar aims.

Note
1.

Democracy, Lifelong Learning and the Learning Society: active citizenship in a late modern age by
Peter Jarvis – published by Routledge 2008.

References
Bawden, R. (2006). Educating for capability for inclusive well-being. In W. Campbell, N. Baikaloff, and
C. Power (Eds.), Towards a global community. Dordrecht: Springer.
Beck, U. (1992). Risk society. London: Sage.
Beck, U. (2000). What is globalization? Cambridge: Polity.
Bok, D. (2003). Universities in the market place. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bologna Declaration. (2005). http://www.hefce.ac.uk/Partners/world/bol/
Bornschier, V. (1980). Multinational corporations and economic growth. Journal of Development Economics,
7, 191–210.
Bourdieu, P. (1973). Cultural reproduction and social reproduction. In M. Brown (Ed.), Reproduction in
education, society and culture. London: Sage.
Department for Education and Employment. (1998). The learning age. London: Department for Education
and Employment Cm 3790.

--- [PDF Page 618 / Book Page 617] ---

Lifelong Learning and Globalisation 617
Education Commission. (2000). Learning for life learning through life. Hong Kong: Education Commission.
European Commission. (1995). Teaching and learning: Towards the learning society. Brussels: European
Commission (White Paper on Education and Training).
European Commission. (2001). Making a European area of lifelong learning a reality. Brussels: European
Commission COM (2001) 678 final.
European Commission. (2006). Adult learning: It is never too late to learn. Brussels: European Commission
COM(2006) 614 Final.
Faure, E. (1972). (Chair) Learning to be. Paris: UNESCO.
Field, J. & Leicester, M. (Eds.) (2000). Lifelong learning: Education across the lifespan. London: Routledge.
Galtung, I. (1971). A structural theory of imperialism. Journal of Peace Studies, 8, 81–117.
Habermas, J. (2006). Time of transitions. Cambridge: Polity.
Held, D., McGrew, A., Goldblatt, D., & Perraton, J. (1999). Global transformations. Cambridge: Polity.
Jarvis, P. (2001). Universities and corporate universities. London: Kogan Page.
Jarvis, P. (2006). Towards a comprehensive theory of human learning. London: Routledge.
Jarvis. P. (2007). Globalisation, lifelong learning and the learning society: sociological perspectives.
London: Routledge.
Kerr, C., Dunlop, J., Harbison, F., & Myers, C. (1973). Industrialism and industrial man. Harmondsworth:
Penguin (2nd edition).
Korten, D. C. (1995). When corporations rule the world. London: Earthscan.
Laksamba, C. (2005). Policies and practices of lifelong learning in Nepal. Surrey: Department of Political,
International and Policy Studies. Unpublished PhD.
Longworth, N. (2006). Learning cities, learning regions, learning communities. London: Routledge.
Lucas, C. (1996). Crisis in the academy. London: Macmillan.
Meister, L. (2000). Corporate universities. New York: McGraw-Hill (2nd edition).
Ministry of Education. (1999). Education, training and research in an information society: A national strategy for 2000–2004. Helsinki: Ministry of Education.
OISE-UNESCO. (1973). Education on the move. Paris: UNESCO.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (1973). Recurrent education: A strategy for lifelong learning. Paris: OECD.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (1996). Lifelong learning for all. Paris: OECD.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (1997). Learning opportunities for all (2 vols).
Paris.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2001). Cities and regions in the new learning
economy. Paris: OECD.
O’Sullivan, E. (1999). Transformative learning. London: Zed Books.
Pedlar, M., Burgoyne, J., & Boydell, T. (1997). The learning company. London: McGraw-Hill (Second edition).
Pilger, J. (2003). The new rulers of the world. London: Verso (Updated Edition).
Ritzer, G. (1993). The McDonaldization of society. Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge.
Scheler, M. (1980 [1926]). Problems of a sociology of knowledge. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Sklair, L. (1991). Sociology of the global system. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Slaughter, S., & Leslie, L. (1997). Academic capitalism. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Stehr, N. (1994). Knowledge societies. London: Sage.
Stiglitz, J. (2002). Globalization and its discontents. New York: W.W. Norton.
UNESCO. (1990). World declaration on education for all. Paris: UNESCO http://unesco.org/education/efa/
ed_for_all/backgroung/jomtiem_declaration.shtml
UNESCO. (2000a). NGO declaration on education for all Paris: UNESCO http://unesco.org/education/efa/
wef_2000/cov_ngo_declaration.shtml
UNESCO. (2000b). Education for all: Meeting our collective commitments – expanded commentary on the
Dakar Framework for action. Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO. (2005). Towards knowledge societies. Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO. (2006). Education for all global monitoring report. Paris: UNESCO.
Wallenstein, I. (1974). The modern world system. New York: Academic Press.
Weber, M. (1930). The protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. London: Unwin.
Yeaxlee, B. (1929). Lifelong education. London: Cassell.

