================================================================================
Chapter 42: Reflecting on Postcolonialism and Education: Tensions and Dilemmas of an Insider
Author(s): Vinathe Sharma-Brymer
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 655–668
PDF Pages: pp. 651–664 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 651 / Book Page 655] ---

42
REFLECTING ON POSTCOLONIALISM
AND EDUCATION: TENSIONS AND DILEMMAS
OF AN INSIDER
Vinathe Sharma-Brymer

Introduction
We were not using English language anywhere around us except for school. So
I faced this dilemma – why were they forcing us to learn this language which
was not practically used in my life. I was told that English would be the medium
of instruction in college. But I asked myself can’t we continue our education
in our own language? Why are these people forcing us to learn this language?
I developed an aversion towards English language from the beginning. I also had
this inferiority complex about this language. Even today I hesitate to speak in
English. (Nirmala, 38-year-old Indian woman)
Two very different perspectives are evident in contemporary educational goals. One
focuses on creating a trained workforce to adapt to the needs of industrialisation; here
education links with economy. Another seeks to enrich a learner’s quest in relation
to self and identity. Both create tensions and dilemmas in a learner in a postcolonial
society. Understanding and addressing the educational experiences of these learners
in present times demand a particular sensitivity towards ‘educated hybrids’ and ‘dislocated migrants’. With particular reference to gender and feminism, Chandra Talpade
Mohanty (2003) places the onus on creating sensitivity through pedagogy to understand these complexities:
My recurring question is how pedagogies can supplement, consolidate, or resist
the dominant logic of globalization. How do students learn about the inequities
among women and men around the world? For instance, traditional liberal and
liberal feminist pedagogies disallow historical and comparative thinking, radical
feminist pedagogies often singularize gender, and Marxist pedagogy silences
race and gender in its focus on capitalism. I look to create pedagogies that allow
students to see the complexities, singularities, and interconnections between
communities of women such that power, privilege, agency, and dissent can be
made visible and engaged with. (Mohanty, 2003, p. 523)

655
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 655–668.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 652 / Book Page 656] ---

656 Sharma-Brymer

Her views have resonance for thinking about education and postcoloniality generally,
reaching beyond questions of gender.
Postcolonial approaches to education have an emphasis on exploring complexity,
dissent and hybrid strands of the learner’s experiences. They encourage educational
theorists and practitioners to view a wide canvas and urge them to pay particular
attention to the nuances. The theorist and practitioner must thus use a different set of
lenses to expose diversities in the learner’s experience of power, control, identity, selfawareness and the complexities involved.
In this chapter, firstly, I discuss postcolonial theory and education considering
how to address, approach, study and understand the voice of the learner as the Other.
The Other is all around us – she is an educated, university graduate from Sri Lanka
struggling to express her thoughts in English language in an Australian university;
he is an Indian IT consultant living in California, making his best effort to find a
‘place’ in the white community; he may be an African youth struggling with a dilemma
about following his parents’ cultural habits at home. In my discussion I illuminate
some of the tensions showing how they are woven in with any approach to considering postcolonialism and education. These tensions are heightened by the diverse effects
of globalisation. My main focus throughout this chapter is on presenting the voice of the
Other. In my concern to reveal the ‘postcolonial’ Other (Tikly, 1999), I present ideas about
what is lost and what is gained in the process of becoming a hybrid in globalised times; how
‘hybrids’ are trying to relocate themselves (or maybe have already had it done for them)
in a third space at ‘home’ and ‘abroad’ where neither is stable or given; the tensions and
contradictions in experiencing that third space of dislocation and search for connection is a
challenging education project (Bhabha, 1994; Das Gupta, 1999).
In the next section I narrate the story of a marginalised person whose lived experience is etched with the influences of postcolonialism and globalisation. This is an
insider’s story that registers the achievements, yet also the anguish, of educated transition. It is the achievement and anguish of a third-world, middle-class woman who has
benefited from her formal education, yet is aware of the conflicts and contradictions
intertwined with this and its impact upon her identity. This narration is concerned with
commenting on the continuing impact of issues of culture and language in Eurocentric
educational systems. I will draw on narratives from Indian educated women’s experiences of education collected in Sharma-Brymer (2007).

An Insider’s Understanding on Postcolonialism
Postcolonialism “addresses the effects of colonization” (Hickling-Hudson, Matthews
& Woods, 2004, p. 2); it is a process that reviews and explores the “structure of inequality” (Loomba, 1998, p. 18), also implying that the effects of colonialism that are
continuing even in the present could be explained by pointing out the dilemmas and conflicts involved. Exclusion, domination and resistance have shaped the relationship of
power and knowledge and influenced understandings and representations of the world
(Bhabha, 1994; Said, 1978). Postcolonialism is deeply engaged with reflecting on the
work entailed in the construction of the Orient as discussed by Edward Said (1978).

--- [PDF Page 653 / Book Page 657] ---

Reflecting on Postcolonialism and Education 657

He showed how the Orient was constituted by Orientalist knowledge systems which
entailed political and economic supremacy. The construction and representation of the
Orient maintained Western ideas, imagery and words, thus reflecting a particular set of
beliefs associated with a particular formation of power.
The new formations of power associated with globalisation generate contrasting
assessments. Some researchers mention many positive aspects of new technologies
(Crossley & Watson, 2003; Tikly, 2001). Writers on adult education report that international adult educators are “comfortable in transcending boundaries of race and class
… knowing that their identities are never stable” (English, 2003, p. 68). But critics of
globalisation point out negative effects including the dislocation of peoples through
migration, exclusion and discrimination, misinformation, and the way in which capitalist empires are selectively ignorant of cultures (e.g., Roy, 2004). Development of
dams, bridges and the expansion of cities lead to mass dislocation of people. The owners of giant corporations often ignore the existing cultural wealth of people and distort
their rich local knowledge. In ‘developing’ populations using Eurocentric education
seems to silence their inner voice. Gayatri Spivak (1996, p. 293) states:
It seems to me that finding subaltern is not so hard, but actually entering into a
responsibility structure with the subaltern, with responses flowing both ways:
learning to learn without this quick-fix frenzy of doing good with an implicit
assumption of cultural supremacy which is legitimized by unexamined romanticisation, that’s the hard part.
A postcolonial approach to education considers how aspects of education, irrespective of levels of literacy and outcome, affect the learner’s self-awareness and
growth. It illuminates an individual’s lived experience. This offers a rich arena
to analyse the location of the individual in a past and present social, historical
and cultural context. It allows the theorist/practitioner to reflect critically on such
phenomena and to interrogate the dilemmas that power and empowerment webs
create. Interrogating critical aspects allows the theorist/practitioner to illuminate
voices. In conditions of globalisation commitment is needed to listen to marginalised voices (Spivak, 1999).
For a person like me, experiencing both the positive and negative effects of
postcolonialism and globalisation, these processes are both an anguish and an
achievement. I affirm the importance of listening to the Other and responding to
increasing complexities. The contexts of economic exploitation, social marginalisation and cultural domination have undergone huge changes in the last decade.
For some, change has been positive, enabling them to realise dreams that were
suppressed in their parents’ generation. For others, dreams have led to dilemmas and conflicts. An analysis of postcolonialism is enriched by stories of many
Others. Stories register their anguish and achievement; they reveal contradictions
in being an educated citizen and a participant in a traditional system. Addressing
this moves a researcher beyond boundaries and borders, dichotomies and preconceptions (Parekh, 2000). Postcolonial analysis no longer needs to be restricted
only to exploitation and powerlessness (Hall, 1996), rather it needs to unravel how

--- [PDF Page 654 / Book Page 658] ---

658 Sharma-Brymer

economic, political, social and cultural processes of exploitation are perpetuated
alongside efforts striving to dismantle colonialism (Loomba, 1998).
A number of critiques hold that colonisation is not solely Western or the outcome
of imperialism (Ashcroft, Griffiths & Tiffin, 1995). For example the numerous political and cultural invasions which have taken place in the Indian subcontinent have
repeatedly colonised indigenous communities. India, although at present, politically
unified and democratic, is still a boiling pot of many internal conflicts. For example,
the tribal communities in the north-east Indian states experience exclusion, separation
and acute exploitation of many forms (Devi, 1995). A postcolonial analysis probes
into issues of dominance, power and control among and within non-European elites.
It looks at how they discriminate against other groups, deploying caste, class, gender
and ethnicity. Dominance and power are often related to control over education systems. But postcolonial analysis is also concerned with Western domination, its global
spread, complexity and capitalist influences on the value systems of colonised societies. However, once again, the dilemma of a postcolonial insider is whether to keep
traditional values or to compromise and adapt to the changing ways of the contemporary, multicultural world (Parekh, 2000).
These dilemmas point at another critique sometimes levelled at postcolonial
theorising: how can generalisations that arise from discourse analysis do justice to
the experiences associated with different cultures, geographical regions and different languages? For example, can India, Africa and Australia be approached using
the same analytical lens? Any attempt to classify these very different postcolonial
countries will be inaccurate. The experiences of peoples from postcolonial countries
are as diverse as the effects of postcolonialism. Thus, researching effects, exploring
commonalities and engaging with specific stories are a more generative approach
for a postcolonial researcher than developing generalisations. The effects of postcolonialism in African countries in terms of inequities of power, poverty, geographical
dislocations and disruptions in social relations are widespread, as are the effects
of modern education on local cultures in India, Sri Lanka, Australia, Africa and
Southeast Asia. Yet, despite these similarities there is a need to listen to the Other in
each country. Stories of complex experiences may be unique but they reveal deeper
layers and give voice to hidden concerns with class, caste, gender and race (Pieterse
& Parekh, 1995).
A postcolonial perspective takes interest in studying socio-economic divisions and
inequities associated with control over knowledge, constraint on access to education,
and the dominance/power resulting from such controls. Thus dissemination of work
where science is written as the history of Western advance and history is seen as an
account of the successful rise of capitalism and colonialism is associated with discrimination and oppression of the Other (Said, 1978). This is evident in recent writing on
environmental conservation and awareness where indigenous communities’ multiple
literacies and concepts of harmonious living have been little understood (Devi, 1995;
Sharma, 2002; Smith, 1999). Postcolonial approaches suggest we have to examine
diverse factors in the past and the present to analyse how knowledge is appropriated
and denied. Thus a postcolonial researcher exposes tensions, dilemmas and contradictions with regard to education and change.

--- [PDF Page 655 / Book Page 659] ---

Reflecting on Postcolonialism and Education 659

Postcolonialism and Education: Tensions,
Contradictions and Dilemmas
One dilemma for a person from a third-world country is finding the ‘proper’ ethical way of
appropriating the knowledge acquired from the Western educational model. Is he or she to
celebrate formal educational qualifications and an upward mobility or to reflect on what has
been lost in that process? If they reject the Western model what other choice is available?
How good is this choice for a person who wants to cross the border of states, provinces and
nations or even to move beyond the language boundary of their local language to access
information presented in the global language of English? Do we need to feel enraged about
the injustices committed by the colonial rulers against our country or do we swim with
modern education and its benefits? Must we respond to the internationalisation of education or remain excluded from better material opportunities that modern Western education
leads to? Dilemmas are intertwined with everyday life for educated people in low-income
countries leading to several layers of contradiction.
The framework of social power relations and resource control mechanisms which colonialism reinforced has resulted in continued discrimination against people of certain classes,
caste, ethnicity and women with the denial of their basic rights. Researchers have analysed
racial dominance and gender issues, illuminating the postcolonial voice, with observations on globalisation and internationalisation and considerations of how to interrogate and
respond to ‘development’ (e.g., Mohanty, 1990, 2003; Sharpe, 2003; Spivak, 1999).
Women within patriarchal structures have been subjected to multiple layers of
subjugation. Their struggles, inner tensions, conformity and resistance, conflicts and
contradictions are related to multiple identities. Their experiences, when interpreted
through a postcolonial lens, reveal the movement of minds, person, self and identities.
The ‘in-between’ moment reveals the influence of modern education on tradition and
culture. The struggle of a person receiving education, standing at the confluence of a
colonial education system, their own culture and globalisation illuminates how hybridity is
created and how identity migrates from local to global.
In the following section I elaborate on educated women’s experiences, taking these as the
focal point to discuss aspects of education in postcolonial times. I draw on educated Indian
women’s narratives taken from a broader phenomenological study I conducted (SharmaBrymer, 2007). My intention is to use the lens of a postcolonial ‘insider’ to interpret the
hybrid educated woman, expected to receive an education and thereby become ‘eyes for
her family’. There are positive shifts in her movement to the public sphere. However, a shift
in her location does not mean she is empowered, an effective decision-maker or a person in
control of her life. What is evident is the nature of her multilayered experience associated
both with improvements in material conditions and increased conflicts.

Women, Education and Participation
in Postcolonial Societies
While many argue that modern, Western education is needed for women’s voices to be
heard, often linking this with calls for concerted work on women’s and human rights

--- [PDF Page 656 / Book Page 660] ---

660 Sharma-Brymer

(e.g., Afshar, 1998; Fox, 1999; Ghosh & Talbani, 1996; Heward & Bunwaree, 1998;
Howell, Carter & Schied, 2002; Kabeer, 1999; Stromquist, 1998; Unterhalter, 2000;
Wazir, 2000), the claim is also made that education makes no difference, to change
women’s life conditions (e.g., Bhasin, 1994; Longwe, 2001). Sarah Longwe (2001) is
a strong voice from Africa discussing the outcomes of modern education in women’s
lives. She observes that educated women conform to and benefit from patriarchal systems. In taking senior positions in government they reinforce female subordination.
She calls them the ‘honorary members of a male club’, showing how they discriminate
against grassroots women activists:
The purpose of schooling is to inculcate girls’ acceptance of the ‘normality’
of male supremacy … to believe it is ‘traditional’ and ‘natural’ for their role to
be confined to rearing children, looking after the home, and supporting their
husbands. (Longwe, 2001, p. 68)
The striking demarcation between schooling and education, as Longwe notes from her
studies of adult education in Zambia, is what is believed and practised. Calling for a
change, Longwe underlines that “women’s education for democratic governance needs
to be concerned with unlearning (my italics) all the undemocratic and oppressive messages that were implicit within the beliefs and attitudes inculcated during schooling”
(Longwe, 2001, p. 71). This call for unlearning contrasts with demands for an expansion
of education.
Two questions flow from Longwe’s critique. First, are there forms of education that
have the potential to raise awareness and knowledge levels, even if this is not always
realised in practice? Second, can basic literacy or basic education empower women to
participate better and be equal citizens? There is no agreement on these points. Thus
Nelly Stromquist (1990, 1996, 2005) emphasises the outcome of literacy in advancing awareness and knowledge levels; but many activists such as Bhasin (1994) show
this is not uniformly the case. Further research is needed to explore what knowledge
educated women gain from their schooling and what meaning they are making from
their education as adults. This exploration coincides with Elaine Unterhalter’s concern
to listen to the personal accounts of individual women (Unterhalter, 2005).
Two educated Indian women’s accounts show up these contrasts. One woman
supported the view that education has enhanced her life. Another pointed out the influential role of tradition and limitations on her agency:
We can do everything, whatever we want to … we have the courage, confidence
… this courage comes from education. If you don’t have education, you don’t go
out, you sit indoors all the time. (Rani, 36-year-old lecturer in Physics)
So I was a bit over-conscious of our life, hardships.
There was contentment, satisfaction … I was proud, happy.
I became determined to do something more in my life and alter my life style, get
education, get a job, become somebody noticeable…
Yes, I did oppose. I opposed, said I didn’t want this marriage. I didn’t want to
marry my own brother-in-law. But I had to respect elders.

--- [PDF Page 657 / Book Page 661] ---

Reflecting on Postcolonialism and Education 661

You know, the saying is why worry about spilt milk?
I am not demanding, don’t expect him to fulfil any of my desires … I have learnt
to laugh away my miseries. (Vinoda old high school teacher)
The outcomes of education are very diverse and aspirations from education are
not uniform. In an earlier study looking at mothers in a rural area in India it
was evident that most felt their daughters needed to be educated. However for
various personal, economic and social reasons these girls could not go beyond
upper primary or secondary school leaving certificate level (Sharma, 2001). Their
interest in schooling their daughters was linked with gaining social prestige or
negotiating a groom from a better-placed family. But economically disadvantaged
families, living in semi-urban and urban areas, encouraged their girls to achieve
at least the secondary school leaving certificate in order to get jobs in factories
with better payment compared to the low daily wages that people receive in rural
areas. Economically more prosperous families tend to encourage further education, including university degrees, to enhance their girls’ status in society and to
widen their opportunities, particularly with regard to marriage (Chanana, 2001).
Thus urban and semi-urban people tend to view education for girls as positive for
employment and marriage prospects, rather than for empowerment in psychological or cognitive areas of development as discussed by Stromquist (1996).
But examining what is gained through schooling and what is internalised as opposed
to the proclaimed outcomes of education (personal development, formal subject knowledge, world view and equality) seems to be necessary for any studies that interrogate
women’s experiences of being educated.
Some of the voices of postcolonial educated women confirm this. Nirmala reveals
how conflicted her own educational experience was, and how she is now trying to
ensure a better learning experience for her daughter. Contrastingly, Rani and Vinoda
talk about the positive outcomes from their own education:
Whatever was lacking in my education, in my life, I am trying to fill those gaps,
improve myself and give my daughter whatever she needs for her development.
What I came to know in my degree days, she knows all that even in her Class 2
and 3. (Nirmala)
… whatever you read you learn something from that … I am satisfied that I am
using what I studied for the good of my life. (Rani)
See, all this knowledge, awareness about women’s condition, history … all this
came from my education. (Vinoda)
But Rani in another extract narrates her subjugated position:
If a woman is unmarried that becomes the biggest failure in her life. My own
brothers don’t give me respect because I am not married yet. When I bought
my two wheeler they said why did I want a vehicle, what would I do with it …
I didn’t have a husband or children. These are the only times when I feel very sad
and think why did I get so much education. (Rani)

--- [PDF Page 658 / Book Page 662] ---

662 Sharma-Brymer

There is not a consensus on how women’s knowledge has or has not been addressed
through education. Extracts from two narratives reveal different perspectives:
I think of my children and husband first and go according to their needs; hardly
an hour or so I keep for myself, for my own things. That is life’s reality. (Nirmala,
non-working woman)
He said, ‘Do whatever you want to. I will give you complete freedom. But only
after you have fulfilled your duties at home. Look after my parents well, you
don’t need to go to a job.’ I have learnt a lot from him. I am happy that with my
education I can stand up to his expectations. (Deepa, non-working woman)
These different perspectives are echoed in the literature. A group of writers reviewing
women’s and gender studies in English-speaking sub-Saharan Africa, Ampofo, BeokuBetts, Nijambi and Osirim (2004) state that African feminist scholars and activists
are sensitive to the impact of imposed formal educational systems under colonialism. However, they also note the effects of gender discrimination at various levels
of schooling in current times such as access, retention and completion; curriculum
content; the feminisation of certain fields of employment; and issues of sexual harassment. They point out that some researchers studying women and gender issues
“argue that with the development of state-coordinated initiatives to promote gender
and development, these programs might lose their political force and end up servicing
mainstream or conservative gender training and advocacy” (p. 698). Even with affirmative programmes, “education does not translate into equitable positions for women in
the labour market” (p. 698). In other words, education does not necessarily improve
women’s chances in the public sphere.
On the other hand, writing about the Universal Basic Education programme in
Nigeria, Okiy (2004) emphasises the positive link between education and greater
female participation in national development. She states that the poor attitude of
society to the educational development of female children is the causal factor of
their poor participation in national development. She concludes, “the programme
will produce educated women who have imbibed the reading culture through their
use of school libraries … thereby creating the necessary vehicle for accelerated
national development” (p. 48). This statement seems to support the widely used
public slogan in India, that an educated woman enhances a country’s well-being.
An interesting issue that emerges from reading the above observations is the confusion between what girls and women are expected to experience and what they
actually experience.
To make women’s experiences important and significant and to retain their distinctiveness in postcolonial societies is a challenging task. Gail Kelly (1992, 1980)
stressed the need to explore the particularities of women’s educational experiences
rather than generalisations. Researchers such as Mohanty (1991, 2003) have questioned the hegemony of Western feminist scholarship with regard to the lives of
third-world women (also see Afshar, 1998; Heward & Bunwaree, 1998; Jayawardena,
1986; Thiruchandran, 1999), while Bell Hooks stresses the significance of the intersections of race, gender and class in researching women’s lives (Hooks, 1994).

--- [PDF Page 659 / Book Page 663] ---

Reflecting on Postcolonialism and Education 663

While education in postcolonial times is seen to bring reforms in public life, there are
arguments that education does not change women’s second-class status (Bhasin, 1994;
Ghosh & Talbani, 1996; Ghosh & Zachariah, 1987; Longwe, 2001; Reddy, 1991; Singh,
2002; Talbani, 2001). Yet an educated woman, when she is employed, is viewed as an
asset to a family. An educated woman’s multiple roles as a wife, mother, employee, good
family manager/builder can be appreciated. This image of an educated woman is contradictory, which raises critical questions about agency and self expression:
They wanted a girl to be a housewife. If a wife is good, if she is educated, adjustable, peace is maintained, harmony is there. These are important. Something for
a job, a lot for our family, children, very less for us … that is what I am as an
educated woman! (Kanaka, 42-year-old school teacher)
In contemporary India, a promotional slogan related to girls’ and women’s education
is ‘a learned woman is the community’s eyes’; she is a wealth for her family and
nation. National educational policies have introduced positive changes for enhanced
participation of girls and women. Nevertheless, it is commonly argued that female
education which contributes to national progress has still not been achieved (Guha,
1974; PROBE, 1999; Sen, 1999, 2005; Wazir, 2000). Gender equality in education
remains elusive; even educated women occupying high positions in universities have
less power than their male counterparts, and they operate in an environment that
restricts their authority (Chanana, 2001, 2003). Deepa’s narrative points out some of
the problem and suggests the remedies:
However much the girl learns, gets educated, or performs equally with boys in
education and work area with equal talents, there is this feeling that she is a girl
so she is second. See, she may be earning better or more than him or be more
intelligent than him, she is always the second.
This preference for boys has come a long way. In a family this girl child is doing
100% well in everything like curriculum, other activities everything, and that
boy is achieving low compared to this 100%. People say that he should perform
like the girl and more than her, they don’t encourage her anymore. Even if she
gets an admission to an engineering course, parents say that their son must be
enrolled in engineering. They don’t have plans for their girl.
I am trying to create better gender sensitivity in my son. That he should respect
girls. There should be an overall change in education from the beginning. Like
for example making her economically independent … I want to say here it is
not just education, totally there should be a change in the attitude. (Deepa, nonworking woman)
Indian women are uniquely positioned in an intersection of class, caste, gender, race,
ethnicity and nationality (Jeffery & Basu, 1998; Mankekar, 1999; Mohanty, 1991, 2003).
Middle-class women are often expected to be the preservers of their tradition and culture (Tharu & Lalita, 1993). Although cultural influences are still strong, democratisation,
modernisation, women’s participation and educational inclusiveness affect women’s lives

--- [PDF Page 660 / Book Page 664] ---

664 Sharma-Brymer

in many ways (Cranney, 2001; Ganguly-Scrase, 2002; Hancock, 1999; Taber, 2007). Thus
education and citizenship in a postcolonial environment poses many challenges. In India,
where a decentralised local governance system (the local village panchayat) is in operation,
there has been only a limited change in women’s involvement and expression of agency
(Vijayalakshmi & Chandrashekar, 2001). A study conducted by Sooryamoorthy & Renjini
(2000) found that at the village level women are enthusiastic about holding the reins of
power in local, decentralised, administrative organisations. However, men tend to intervene and act as decision-makers. Vijayalakshmi and Chandrashekar (2002) observe that
although women representatives in local governance possess authority, it has not resulted in
a shift in power. They emphasise that “an alternative conception of power which is centred
not on the position but on the individual” is required (Vijayalakshmi & Chandrashekar,
2002, p. 1). Kanaka’s narrative aptly illuminates how tradition suppresses the intentions of
formal education for a girl:
She can achieve something only if her husband, children, family members share
her dreams … if they don’t cooperate she is at a loss. Even if there is a slight
lapse somewhere, then it is her lapse, she cannot achieve.
In our society a girl has boundaries from her birth. She is under her father’s
control as a girl, she belongs to her husband on being married and later she is a
subordinate to her son. We women construct our lives within four walls.
Issues of power and control are strongly visible even in an educated woman’s life irrespective of her being employed. Modern formal education and a career do not result in
equity and control. Kanaka makes this clear:
One of my classes has about 15 girls and 25 boys and there is this boy. His parents come to me and say, ‘look madam, my daughter is ok. She is in that class.
All we have to do is pay some dowry and get her married off. But my boy here, in
his case we are particularly attentive. He has to be educated highly and sent off to
America. So pay more attention to my boy.’ But the reality I know as a teacher is
that boy is lacking capacity to perform well, but the girl is very sharp, intelligent.
She is performing well. But our management forces us teachers, to pass these
boys compulsorily to higher classes even though they lack the ability. See, with
management pressurising us, even though we have all the awareness, we cannot
say anything. We cannot practise our awareness.
Empowering women with literacy that makes them better negotiators in the maledominated world is very important and needful (Ramachandran, 2000). However, has
education enabled women to negotiate equity and achieve agency? Educated women’s
image of their private life reflects that of their public life. The “housekeepers of the
emotions” (Benhabib, 1987) may not be positioned as “critical knowledge-keepers”
in a traditional society. Is education in these conditions transforming the learner’s life
circumstances through critical conscientisation? Or is the reality of the social expectations of women’s subordination a greater influence? Are the two diametrically opposed?
Or can women find a third space?

--- [PDF Page 661 / Book Page 665] ---

Reflecting on Postcolonialism and Education 665

Conclusion: An Insider’s Tensions and Contradictions
Educated women in postcolonial countries seem to live on the border between the
world of formal educational goals, achievements and professional identities, and an
‘under the surface’ confusion as to ‘why did I get so much education?’ or ‘what is the
purpose of being an educated woman in this traditional society?’ Without having any
support from a male family member, Vinathe had to leave her family and their traditional lifestyle after her bachelor’s degree and struggle to make use of her education
and find an alternative life quality. In the course of those changes she underwent a
series of personal conflicts and experiences of being torn apart with shifts in her cultural locations and a clash between tradition and modernity. Hers was a struggle that
strengthened individual agency in choosing alternatives.
Girls’ and women’s education has been a contentious topic within the local cultures of many postcolonial countries. Sen (1999) observes that only through greater
achievement in female education can a country progress. Questions arise around this
progress: Progress in terms of what? Is progress economic or social? These questions
reflect the everyday tensions and conflicts of ‘being an educated woman’. Being educated also means being informed, being a more participative citizen and being more
empowered to take decisions in everyday life. However, in the present times an educated and informed person is pushed towards becoming suitable for a job and career
market. A woman getting work “outside the home” and “standing on her own” does
not guarantee that she expresses herself as a “free human mind” (Sen, 2005; Tagore,
c1961) celebrating her individual agency and identity. In everyday life, in most postcolonial societies, people tend to place a significant amount of importance on formal
education, but separate education from everyday culture. The in-between location created from being educated is a postcolonial space of many conflicts, constant tensions
and contradictions. It will remain so amidst the effects of globalisation.
Acknowledgements I wish to acknowledge and thank Dr. Christine Fox for her involvement
in brainstorming the ideas for this chapter and Dr. Eric Brymer for his continued support and
encouragement.

References
Afshar, H. (1998). Introduction: Women and empowerment – some illustrative studies. In H. Afshar (Ed.),
Women and empowerment – Illustrations from the Third World. London: Macmillan.
Agnihotri, S. B. (2001). Declining infant and child mortality in India – How do girl children fare? Economic
and Political Weekly, 228–233.
Ampofo, A. A., Beoku-Betts, J., Nijambi, W. N., & Osirim, M. J. (2004). Women’s and gender studies in
English-speaking sub-Saharan Africa: A review of research in the social sciences. Gender & Society,
18(6), 685–714.
Ashcroft, B., Griffiths, G., & Tiffin, H. (Eds.). (1995). The postcolonial studies reader. London: Routledge.
Benhabib, S. (1987). The generalized and the concrete other: The Kohlberg-Gilligan controversy and feminist theory. In S. Benhabib & D. Cornell (Eds.), Feminism as critique: Essays on the politics of gender
in late-capitalist societies. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Bhabha, H. (1994). The location of culture. London: Routledge.
Bhasin, K. (1994). Let us look again at development, education and women. Convergence, 27(4), 5–13.

--- [PDF Page 662 / Book Page 666] ---

666 Sharma-Brymer
Chanana, K. (2001). Interrogating women’s education: Bounded visions, expanding horizons. Jaipur: Rawat
Publications.
Chanana, K. (2003). Visibility, gender, and the careers of women faculty in an Indian University. McGill
Journal of Education, 38(3), 381–389.
Cranney, B. (2001). Local environment and lived experience: The mountain women of Himachal Pradesh.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Crossley, M., & Watson, K. (2003). Comparative and international research in education: Globalisation,
context and difference. London: Routledge Falmer.
DasGupta, K. (1999). Negotiating the “in between” space: Third World women in American higher education. Transformations, 10(2).
Devi, M. (1995). Imaginary maps: Three stories. Translated and introduced by Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak.
New York: Routledge.
English, L. (2003). Identity, hybridity, and third space: Complicating the lives of international adult educators. Convergence, 36(2), 67–80.
Fox, C. (1999). Girls, education and development in Papua New Guinea. In C. Heward & S. Bunwaree
(Eds.), Gender, education and development for girls in Less Industrialised Countries. London:
Zed.
Ganguly-Scrase, R. (2002). Renegotiating boundaries: Self perception and public debate on globalization
and gender equality in India. Asian Journal of Women’s Studies, 8(4), 58–100.
Ghosh, R., & Talbani, A. (1996). India. In G. C. L. Mak (Ed.), Women, education, and development in Asia:
Cross-national perspectives. New York: Garland.
Ghosh, R., & Zachariah, M. (Eds.). (1987). Education and the process of change. New Delhi: Sage.
Guha, P. (chair) (1974) Towards Equality: Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in India,
Government of India Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, Department of Social Welfare New
Delhi, 1974.
Hall, S. (1996). When was the post-colonial? In I. Chambers & L. Curti (Eds.), The post-colonial question:
Common skies, divided horizons. London: Routledge.
Hancock, M. (1999). Womanhood in the making: Domestic ritual and public culture in urban South India.
Boulder, CO: Westview.
Heward, C., & Bunwaree, S. (Eds.). (1998). Gender education and development: Beyond access to empowerment. London: Zed.
Hickling-Hudson, A., Matthews, J., & Woods, A. (2004). Education, postcolonialism and disruptions. In
A. Hickling-Hudson, J. Matthews & A. Woods (Eds.), Disrupting preconceptions: Postcolonialism and
education (pp. 1–16). Brisbane: Post Pressed.
Hooks, B. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. New York: Routledge.
Howell, S. L., Carter, V. K., & Schied, F. M. (2002). Gender and women’s experience at work: A critical and
feminist perspective on human resource development. Adult Education Quarterly, 52(2), 112–127.
Jayawardena, K. (1986). Feminism and nationalism in the Third World. London: Zed.
Jeffery, P., & Basu, A. (1998). Appropriating gender: Women’s activism and politicized religion in South
Asia. New York: Routledge.
Kabeer, N. (1999). Resources, agency, achievements: Reflections on the measurement of women’s empowErment. Development and Change, 30, 435–464.
Kelly, G. P. (1992). Education, women and change. In R. F. Arnove, P. G. Altbach, & G. P. Kelly (Eds.),
emergent issues in education: comparative perspectives, NY, State University of New York Press. pp.
267–282.
Kelly, G. P., & Lulat, Y. Women and Schooling in the Third World: A Bibliography Comparative Education
Review, Vol. 24, No. 2, Part 2, Women and Education in the Third World (Jun., 1980), pp. S224–S263.
Longwe, S. H. (2001). Women’s right to unlearn. Convergence, 34(2–3), 65–72.
Loomba, A. (1998). Colonialism/postcolonialism: New critical idiom. London: Routledge.
Mankekar, P. (1999). Screening culture, viewing politics: An ethnography of television, womanhood, and
nation in postcolonial India. Durham: Duke University Press.
Mohanty, C. T. (1990). On race and voice: Challenges for liberal education in the 1990s. Cultural Critique,
5(3), 179–208.

--- [PDF Page 663 / Book Page 667] ---

Reflecting on Postcolonialism and Education 667
Mohanty, C. T. (1991). Introduction: Cartographies of struggle: Third world women and the politics of feminism. In C. T. Mohanty, A. Russo & L. Torres (Eds.), Third world women and the politics of feminism.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Mohanty, C. T. (2003). “Under Western Eyes” revisited: Feminist solidarity through anticapitalist struggles.
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(2), 499–535.
Okiy, R. B. (2004). The Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme and the development of school
libraries in Nigeria: A catalyst for greater female participation in national development. Information
Development, 20(1), 43–50.
Parekh, B. (2000). Rethinking multiculturalism: Cultural diversity and political theory. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Pieterse, J. N., & Parekh, B. (1995). The decolonisation of the imagination: Culture, knowledge and power.
London: Zed.
PROBE. (1999). Public report on basic education in India. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Ramachandran, V. (2000). Literacy, development and empowerment: Conceptual issues. In R. Wazir (Ed.),
The gender gap in basic education: NGOs as change agents (pp. 115–149). New Delhi: Sage.
Reddy, M. C. R. (1991). Women’s education in India: Problems and prospects. Convergence, 24(4), 35–42.
Roy, A. (2004). The ordinary person’s guide to empire. London: Flamingo.
Said, E. (1978). Orientalism. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Sen, A. (1999). Development as freedom. New York: Anchor.
Sen, A. (2005). The argumentative Indian. London: Penguin.
Sharma-Brymer, V. (2007). Being an educated woman: A phenomenological exploration. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Wollongong, Wollongong.
Sharma, V. (2001). Gender inequalities in India: The need for education for emancipation. Unpublished
Masters by Research, Honours Dissertation, University of Wollongong, Wollongong.
Sharma, V. (2002). Education, global citizen and further research on ecological literacy. Paper presented at
the “Ecology and Outdoor Education” – ORIC Conference on outdoor education and research, Sydney.
Sharpe, J. Spivak, G. C. (2003). A conversation with Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak: Politics and the imagination. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(2), 609–627.
Singh, J. P. (2002). Social and cultural aspects of gender inequality and discrimination in India. Asian
Profile, 30(2), 163–176.
Smith, L. T. (1999). Decolonising methodologies: Research and indigenous peoples. New York: Zed.
Sooryamoorthy, R., & Renjini, D. (2000). Political participation of women: The case of women councillors
in Kerala, India. Journal of Third World Studies, 17(1), 45–61.
Spivak, G. (1996). Subaltern studies: Deconstructing historiography. In D. Landry & G. MacLean (Eds.),
The Spivak reader: The selected works of Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. New York: Routledge.
Spivak, G. (1999). A critique of postcolonial reason. London: Harvard University Press.
Stromquist, N. (1990). Women and illiteracy: The interplay of gender subordination and poverty. Comparative
Education Review, 34(1), 95–111.
Stromquist, N. (1996). Women’s education in developing countries: Barriers, benefits and policies.
Comparative Education Review, 450–453.
Stromquist, N. (2005, 23 March). A social cartography of gender in education: Reflections on an uncertain
emancipatory project. Paper presented at the keynote address during Comparative and International
Education Society Annual Conference, Stanford University.
Stromquist, N. P. (1998). The impact of structural adjustment programmes in Africa and Latin America. In
C. Heward & S. Bunwaree (Eds.), Gender, education and development: Beyond access to empowerment. London: Zed.
Taber, P. K. (2007). Possible selves: Globalization, middle-class women and entrepreneurship in South
India. In K. Kapila & A. Gupta (Eds.), Making a living: Globalization, imagination and livelihoods in
contemporary India. Duke University Press.
Tagore, R. (c1961). Rabindranath Tagore, pioneer in education: Essays and exchanges between Rabindranath
Tagore and L. K. Elmhirst. London: Distributed by Murray.
Talbani, A. (2001). The more things change, the more they stay the same: Women’s education in India and
Pakistan. Education and Society, 19(1), 5–22.

--- [PDF Page 664 / Book Page 668] ---

668 Sharma-Brymer
Tharu, S., & Lalita, R. (Eds.) (1993). Women writing in India: 600 BC to the early 20th century. (Vol. II).
London: Pandora Press.
Thiruchandran S. (Ed.). (1999). Women, narration and nation: Collective images and multiple identities.
New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
Tikly, L. (1999). Postcolonialism and comparative education. International Review of Education, 45,
603–621.
Tikly, L. (2001). Globalisation and education in a postcolonial world: A conceptual framework. Comparative
Education Review, 37(2), 151–171.
Unterhalter, E. (2000). Transnational visions of the 1990s: Contrasting views of women, education and
citizenship. In M. Arnot & J. Dillabough (Eds.), Challenging democracy: International perspectives on
gender, education and citizenship. London: Routledge.
Unterhalter, E. (2005). Fragmented frameworks? Researching women, gender, education and development.
In S. Aikman & E. Unterhalter (Eds.), Beyond access: Transforming policy and practice for gender
equality in education (pp. 15–35). Oxford: Oxfam GB.
Vijayalakshmi, V., & Chandrashekar, B. K. (2001). Gender inequality, differences, and identities: Women
and local governance in Karnataka. Bangalore: Institute for Social and Economic Change.
Vijayalakshmi, V., & Chandrashekar, B. K. (2002). Authority, powerlessness and dependence: Women and
political participation. Bangalore: Institute for Social and Economic Change.
Wazir, R. (2000). Profiling the problem. In R. Wazir (Ed.), The gender gap in basic education: NGOs as
change agents (pp. 15–37). New Delhi: Sage.

