================================================================================
Chapter 43: Democratic Inequalities: The Dilemma of Elementary Education in India
Author(s): Vimala Ramachandran
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 669–683
PDF Pages: pp. 665–679 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 665 / Book Page 669] ---

43
DEMOCRATIC INEQUALITIES: THE DILEMMA
OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION IN INDIA
Vimala Ramachandran1

Citizenship, Participation and Education
When asked to write a paper on democracy and education in India, I started off by
speculating about the link between the two. India has witnessed over 20 national
general elections and innumerable state and local government elections. Women and
men come out in large numbers to cast their vote. Every few years the largely semiliterate and illiterate electorate votes governments out of power and makes its voice
heard. This is no mean achievement. If this is indeed the case, what is the relationship between education and democracy? Philosopher John Dewey posits a positive
correlation between the two and argues that education is a central requirement for a
democratic and inclusive polity. But India’s experience with electoral politics could
lead one to argue that the classic doctrine does not apply to India. Is this really so?
How does education or the lack of it and inherent inequality in quality and access
impact on democratic practice? I begin with a personal journey and move on to explore
the twists and turns in the discourse of education, equity and democracy.
I started working with women convinced that women as individuals have little voice
in our democracy and that coming together as a group, a collective, would enable them
to negotiate the world around them from a position of strength – whether they are
literate or illiterate, educated or uneducated. So I worked with like-minded people in
a government programme (Mahila Samakhya: Education for Women’s Equality) that
facilitated the formation of women’s groups, engaged them in processes that helped
them reflect on their life experience, share personal struggles and discern patterns of
oppression. This, I believed would create opportunities to transcend their personal life
situation and look at oppression, discrimination and violence as a social phenomenon as
a product of social and gender relations in society, caste and class dynamics that frame
the lives of people. I was convinced this would initiate a process of real education –
develop ability for critical thinking, the confidence to articulate problems and issues
and make more informed choices.
Yet, as we went ahead with our agenda of empowerment, we came to a roadblock.
The very fact that most women we worked with were either illiterate or barely literate
inhibited their ability to take control of the institutions that they had created, affecting
their ability to participate as equals. Leadership of groups and federation of women’s
groups invariably passed on to people who were educated – those who could deal with
669
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 669–683.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 666 / Book Page 670] ---

670 Ramachandran

the written word, read and write and comprehend the complex matrix of social and
political institutions – whether it was the self-help groups working towards sustainable
livelihoods or social groups striving for participation in local self-government institutions or development groups trying to access resources for their community. The very
fact that poor women did not attend school or went to schools that taught them little
emerged as a barrier to participation in institutional processes. This phenomenon was
palpable where women fought and won Panchayat elections – illiteracy or being semiliterate was clearly a barrier to effective functioning. Even more disturbing was that
their children and grandchildren were also being denied access to meaningful education. The inter-generational cycle of poor education/illiteracy and poverty kept them
at the bottom of the layer. Their caste, location, community and economic situation
determined whether they participated.

What Has All This to Do with Democracy?
We all know that Indian voters vote in large numbers and throw out governments that
do not meet their expectations. We also know that literacy and education has little to
do with people’s ability to exercise their right to vote (except in places where they are
prevented from casting it). Also that given the nature of the political system, they have
few choices. Yet, they exercise their choice, however limited.
At a formal level democracy is about exercising choices. It is about franchise and it
is about one-person one-vote and one-vote one-value. At a little deeper level we also
associate democracy with rule of law and institutions. We expect democratic societies
to respect civil liberties and human rights, place great value in an impartial judicial
process – a mechanism through which people can aspire for justice. We take great
pride in a legislature that makes laws and an executive and administrative system that
follows these laws. We give importance to the right to free speech and a media that
functions within a competitive environment. Most importantly, we value our right to
equality and want to be treated as equals. We recognise that existence of democratic
institutions is a prerequisite for a vibrant democracy.
Subsequent stages get a little more complex. The mere existence of democratic institutions does not ensure democratic practice. The Constituent Assembly understood
that rights could be realised only if we created a level playing field. Acknowledging the
centuries of discrimination based on caste we initiated policies of affirmative action
and to counter the historical baggage of social exclusion and economic exploitation,
introduced reservations in educational institutions and in government jobs. There was
consensus that – at least at the formal level – affirmative action was in keeping with
the spirit of democracy and equal opportunity. In this, education was positioned as a
central tool for the realisation of the constitutional obligation of equal opportunity. The
debates in constitutional assembly dealt with this issue at some length and there was
a national consensus on using affirmative action as an effective mechanism to counter
centuries of discrimination and exclusion.
An early twist in our tale of democracy and equality came in the failure to make Universal
Elementary Education (UEE) a fundamental right of children, instead of relegating it to the
Directive Principles – non-justiciable guidelines rather than a judicially enforceable right.
Making universal elementary education a fundamental right would have had far-reaching

--- [PDF Page 667 / Book Page 671] ---

Democratic Inequalities: The Dilemma of Elementary Education in India 671

implications. Firstly (from the point of view of the government at that time), it would have
involved enormous investment in schooling infrastructure. Secondly, making it a justiciable right would mean that citizens could take the government to court if access to school
was not made available.2 As a result, even as UEE was accepted as the minimal non-negotiable requirement for ensuring a substantive practice of democracy, the founding fathers of
democratic India did not make it a fundamental right. As a result, five and a half decades
after we declared ourselves a sovereign democratic republic, we have still to redeem the
pledge made in 1950.
Education may have no direct one-to-one relationship with the formal democracy;
however, experience over the last six decades has shown that lack of education has
affected the ability of citizens to engage with the institutions associated with the practice of democracy. It affects the ability of people to transcend the situation in which
they find themselves at birth, impairs their ability to negotiate the maze of institutions
that surround them, robs them of self-esteem and confidence, and silences the voice of
the marginalised and the dispossessed. Ultimately, its absence pushes “people without
voice” into ghettos – resurrects caste, community, religious and linguistic identities,
and creates new forms of social exclusion and social segregation. Education, despite
the power to work as an agent of change, to “neutralize the accumulated distortions of
the past” (Chapter IV, Page 6, Paragraph 4.2 and 4.3; NPE-1986, Government of India)
could not play this role. India today has different kinds of schools catering to different groups of the population. Schools come in different shapes and sizes – vernacular
medium vs. English medium; government schools vs. private schools; formal schools
vs. transitional schools; single teacher schools vs. schools where each class has one
teacher; and so on. Unfortunately this has reinforced existing social and community
identities. India’s educational trajectory in many ways seems to confirm Professor
Partha Chatterjee’s apprehension about the nature of postcolonial societies – wherein
the colonial system of inequality is perpetuated.3
A personal journey that started with women’s mobilisation and empowerment
has over time taken me into the arena of primary education – the battleground
where the politics of inclusion and exclusion is played out from one generation to
the next, reducing those at the margins as silent spectators of the grand theatre of
periodic elections that bring about little change in the basic structure of oppression
and exclusion.
The relationship between education and democracy is like an invisible spiral that
helps those in control remain there and those at the bottom alienated and voiceless. As
it has manifested itself in Independent India, education impacts through its potential of
enhancing the capability of people, the substantive practice of democracy more than the
formal system of elections. Education has the potential of enhancing the capability of
people. As Dreze and Sen (2002) convincingly argue: “ ‘Capability’ refers to the alternative combinations of functioning from which a person can choose. Thus the notion
of capability is essentially one of freedom – a range of options a person has in deciding what kind of life to lead. Poverty, in this view, lies not merely in the impoverished
state in which the person actually lives, but also in the lack of real opportunities –
given by social constraints as well as personal circumstances – to choose other types
of living” (Dreze & Sen, 2002, pp. 35–36). Lack of access to education of acceptable

--- [PDF Page 668 / Book Page 672] ---

672 Ramachandran

quality actively inhibits the development of the capability of citizens to engage with
democratic institutions, thereby denuding the practice of democracy.
This paper explores how our education system has created new hierarchies and
forms of social exclusion and inclusion – thereby challenging the very foundations of
equality and equal opportunity and leaving an indelible mark on the practice of democracy. As noted in the prophetic words of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar:
On the 26th of January 1950, we are going to enter a life of contradictions.
In politics we will have equality and in social and economic life we will have
inequality. In politics we will be recognising the principle of one man one vote
and one vote one value. In our social and economic life, we shall, by reason of
our social and economic structure, continue to deny the principle of one man one
value. How long shall we continue to deny equality in our social and economic
life? If we continue to deny it for long, we will do so only by putting our political
democracy in peril.
(Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 1949, quoted in Khilnani, 1997, p. 35)

The Cumulative Burden of Exclusion
In 2003 I was engaged in an interesting multi-sectoral qualitative research project. The
object: to explore factors that facilitate or impede successful primary school completion among the lowest economic quartile of the population in Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh
and Andhra Pradesh. This study explored different domains – the child, family, community and institutions (specifically the primary school, Integrated Child Development
Services (ICDS) and other health-related services) that impact on child health, nutrition
and education and their interlinkages, both positive and negative (Ramachandran,
2004). We spent considerable time in villages and urban slums, talking to women,
interacting with children, observing schools and early childcare centres and interviewing
teachers and care givers.
The story was the same everywhere – poor and weak mothers giving birth to children
growing up in an environment of extreme deprivation. Given the veritable absence of
institutional support, an inter-generational cycle of poor health, nutrition and education is set in motion. Endemic malnutrition, partial or no immunisation, poor sanitation
and hygiene, and frequent bouts of illness sap children of energy and affect intellectual
development. When children from the poorest communities reach preschool age, their
caste, location and economic situation become the defining variables framing their
chances to access services such as supplementary nutrition and preschool education.
As they reach school-going age, all that they are assured of is that their name will be
recorded in a school register as proof of formal enrolment. Their access to a “formal”
or “transitional” school is determined by their economic status, place of residence, their
caste, community or religion. However, what is not assured is whether they will be able
to attend school uninterrupted – not merely because of ill health but also because very
little happens in the schools meant for the very poor. Teacher attitudes towards such
children are, at best, indifferent, and compounding the problem is the fact that most

--- [PDF Page 669 / Book Page 673] ---

Democratic Inequalities: The Dilemma of Elementary Education in India 673

of the children, especially girls, work before and after school. There is no guarantee
that they will learn to read and write – especially as they go to overcrowded singleteacher schools or where the teacher/pupil ratio is high (reaching up to 1:120). If they
live in a remote habitation or come from an impoverished community, the chances are
that a local person with little qualification (popularly known as “contract teacher” or
“parateachers”) may teach them.
Nevertheless, parents were still eager to send their children to school and the children
themselves were full of hope. Their aspirations, however, were tempered by opportunities as they exist or as they do not. The initial enthusiasm to participate gradually turns
to resignation and apathy – children become irregular, hang around at home or on the
streets and often start pitching into the work of their families – in most cases dropping
out without learning anything. A few who can afford it may shift their children to a private school or send them to a tuition class. The inter-generational cycle is perpetuated,
with the new generation being (at best) semi-literate, weak and apathetic or in many
instances angry at a system that has treated them with such indifference. Some of
our more disturbing findings related to the abysmal state of government programmes
designed to provide a social safety net for the poorest of the poor.
The cycle of deprivation starts with early marriage. The mean age of marriage is
13 (Uttar Pradesh) and 15 (Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh).4 Most young women are
anaemic and weak. Most babies from 6 months onwards to about 36 months receive
little supplementary nutrition – and an overwhelming proportion of children show
signs of severe or moderate malnourishment. They are constantly on the breast, cry a
lot and are given a few pieces of roti (Indian bread) or some rice to nibble on. Frequent
illness, even if only cold and cough, affects the ability of the child to access food on
his or her own, feed and absorb the food. Rarely is cooking oil or fat used in most of
these households, even for children. A shocking finding in Uttar Pradesh was that most
of the children from the poorest households had received only partial immunisation
– meaning polio drops. The situation in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh was somewhat
better. While nearly all children had received polio drops and approximately 40%,
BCG shots, other vaccine-preventable diseases (DPT, Measles) did not seem to be on
the priority list of service providers.
Though the flagship ICDS programme is designed to prevent child malnutrition
among the poor families, discussions with Aanganwadi workers revealed that there
was no system for identifying the severely malnourished for providing double rations.
Access was determined by the worker’s caste and location of the centre. As a result
most of the families surveyed in Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh did not avail of
supplementary nutrition provided by the government. In fact, in Uttar Pradesh the
fortified nutrition supplement was supplied to ICDS centres for only about 5 months a
year, much of it siphoned off for sale in local shops.
Given such odds, children who do survive and reach the age of 6 are weak, malnourished and listless. Boys and girls, even those as young as 6 years, are engaged in a wide
range of chores – grazing, collection of fodder and fuel, domestic work, sibling care and
filling water. It may not be possible to make a tangible link between endemic poverty,
malnutrition and educational attainment/achievements, but the very fact that children
do not receive adequate nutrition and have little access to health care is worrisome.

--- [PDF Page 670 / Book Page 674] ---

674 Ramachandran

Health, nutrition and education have a decisive impact on a child’s development.
The health and nutrition status of both mother and child is clearly more significant in
the early years since it affects later cognitive development. Persistent and cumulative
neglect ensures a non-attainment of appropriate developmental milestones. Health and
nutritional outcomes at each stage are carried on to the next, an inter-generational
transfer of handicaps resulting in a downward spiral of poverty, ill health, malnutrition
and poor learning outcomes for children.
The point is not about the persistence of abject poverty, but that government schemes
meant for the poor rarely reach those who need it the most. Children starting life with a
handicap does not auger well for a democracy. It is the cumulative character of social,
political and economic exclusion that frames the lives of poor children, influencing
their ability to participate in schooling and social and political life in later years.
Children experiencing a cumulative burden of failure on all fronts (health, nutrition
and education) enter adulthood with little self-esteem or confidence. They are the ones
who end up as daily-wage earners, are often forced to migrate in search of work and
continue to live in poverty. They are, for all practical purposes, disenfranchised, not
from casting their vote, but from most other aspects of social and political life. They
are the ones with no voice.

Unequal Access and New Hierarchies
The 1990s are often hailed as the happening decade – at least in terms of primary
education. This decade witnessed an unprecedented jump in literacy levels and in
enrolment rates especially among the socially disadvantaged social groups. Female literacy went up from 32.17% in 1991 to 45.84% in 2001 – a 13.67% jump in the decade
of the 1990s. Gross Enrolment Ratio at the elementary level for Scheduled Tribes (ST)
went up from an abysmal 40.7% in 1991 to 75.76% in 2004 and for Scheduled Castes
from 52.3% to 71.86%. The flip side of the scenario is that 53.7% of enrolled children
(57.7% for girls) drop out before they reach grade 7. This essentially implies that
while a very large number of children enrol in schools, a disturbingly high proportion
drop out before they can complete the elementary level. An overwhelming majority of
children who drop out are poor (rural and urban), come from socially disadvantaged
communities and are first-generation school-goers.
Despite 67,000 new primary schools – this decade also saw the institutionalisation of different categories of schools designed for (catering to) different population
groups. As mentioned earlier there are different kinds of government schools – the
regular government school essentially services the poor in urban and rural areas, education guarantee scheme schools cater to children who cannot access formal schools
either because of physical or social distance, the alternative schools are expected to
cater to children who cannot access formal school (e.g., night schools of Rajasthan),
residential schools for tribal children and the private and private-aided schools to urban
and rural middle class. Recent studies (PROBE, 1999; Ramachandran, 2002, 2004)
reveal that schools in different localities in the same village are endowed differently
with respect to infrastructure, teacher/pupil ratio and trained teachers. There is also a

--- [PDF Page 671 / Book Page 675] ---

Democratic Inequalities: The Dilemma of Elementary Education in India 675

significant difference in the quality of schools that come directly under the education
department and those managed by the social or tribal welfare departments.
Another important dimension of inequality has to do with teachers. It is common
knowledge that remote and inaccessible schools are dysfunctional because of nonavailability or rampant absenteeism of teachers. Teachers are a highly organised group
and wield considerable political clout – after all they are the returning officers during
elections. Appointment, transfer and posting of teachers are highly politicised. So what
has the government done to address this problem?
Rajasthan pioneered a new strategy in 1987. The Rajasthan Shiksha Karmi Project
(SKP) was designed to address teacher non-availability in remote rural areas. The
project provided for local recruitment of a teacher – known as shiksha karmi (education worker) – albeit with lower formal educational qualifications. The accent was on
local recruitment in consultation with the village community. She/he was given intensive training for 2 months. This new “teacher” – subsequently renamed “parateacher”
– was paid a fraction of the salary of formal government teachers. Though designed to
meet specific requirements of dysfunctional schools in remote areas, the model itself
caught the imagination of administrators. Here was a low-cost and effective model
that could solve two problems in one stroke – reduce the cost of providing additional
teachers in an expanding education system (reducing recurring financial liability) and
ensure availability of teachers in hitherto dysfunctional schools. This scheme provided
an opportunity for career advancement for teachers by enabling shiksha karmis to be
regularised as formal teachers if they fulfilled some academic standards.
Madhya Pradesh is credited with the next big innovation – the Education Guarantee
Scheme (EGS). Panchayats could petition the government demanding a school in a
village or habitation provided there were 25 children who did not have access to a
primary school within 1 km. The government in turn guaranteed a school within 90
days of receipt of the petition. The panchayat was expected to provide the space for an
EGS school and identify a local person who could be appointed “Guruji” – after an
interview and intensive training by the education department of the state government.
While it is important to acknowledge that SKP and EGS did enhance access and
that remote rural areas finally saw a functioning school – the level of investment in
infrastructure, teacher development and teaching learning material varied greatly. In
keeping with the spirit of affirmative action enshrined in the Constitution the government should in fact invest far more resources in the education of the most disadvantaged
communities. What happened was to the contrary – the per capita investment on education went down in remote rural and tribal areas and even new slum settlements in
urban areas. Low-cost models were scaled up and adopted where greater investments
were necessary.
A new kind of segregation is clearly discernible at different levels. Children from
clearly different social and economic groups attend different types of school. Even
within government primary schools, there is evidence of sharp differences in quality –
physical facilities, community participation, allocation of funds – as illustrated in the
micro-studies as well as other reports and research papers. (Ramachandran & Sethi,
2001; Mazumdar, 2001; Nambissan, 2001). Poorer areas have a higher proportion of
single-teacher schools and multi-grade classrooms. Even where different models were

--- [PDF Page 672 / Book Page 676] ---

676 Ramachandran

not in operation till recently the rural and remote schools got a larger number of poorly
trained contract teachers. As a result, children from disadvantaged groups and from
very poor families who have no other options (private schools, tuitions) make do with
whatever schooling they get.
This reinforces existing stratification – giving rise to new hierarchies of access.
Paradoxically, those who need the support of the state (the most deprived) are the ones
who get the least. While the number of schools has definitely gone up, the more remote
and difficult areas have a high proportion of single-teacher schools, single-classroom
schools and they also have many more parateachers and contract teachers. The democratisation of access to schools is accompanied by a reaffirmation of a child’s caste,
community and gender in defining which school she or he attends.
Does this augur well for a democracy? At one level we are concerned about an increasingly polarised society where caste, religion and language identities are reinforced in
politics. Political parties mobilise along caste and community lines – pitting one group
against the other in order to capture votes. At another level, government schools no longer
provide a common meeting ground for children of different communities; children today
grow up without getting an opportunity to mix with children from other social groups.
While this may not be the case in fee-paying private schools – children from middle-class and affluent families have greater access to world media and are thus exposed
to different viewpoints – the majority of poor children not only go to schools where they
mix with their own kind but also have little access to the media (print and visual). They
are the ones who are doubly disadvantaged – poverty and poor quality education.

Inside the School, Evidence of Discrimination
Savitri’s family is anything but well off. But when she dropped out of school here
in Viraatnagar, it wasn’t because of poverty. Her own classmates and teacher
made it impossible for the 15-year-old to continue. “The moment I enter the
room in school, the other children make faces. They start singing ‘bhangi aayee
hai, aayee hai, bhangi aayee hai!’ (the bhangi has come). The words of the song
are foul and insulting.” Savitri is from a family of manual scavengers. A group
that’s among the most vulnerable within Dalits. The official label for them is
‘bhangi’. Many here are from the Mehter caste. And quite a few of these groups
now call themselves Balmikis. With even other scheduled castes practising
untouchability towards them, they end up pretty close to the bottom of the social
heap. Women scavengers cleaning dry latrines tend to draw their pallu over the
noses and grip it in their teeth. That offers them some protection in their unsanitary work. The children at the school mimic this when Savitri enters. “They bite
a side of their collar, push their noses up. Sometimes put a hanky on their faces.
I would start crying, but it didn’t matter to them”.
(Sainath, 1999)
The year was 1999. Well before the bone-chilling Godhara incident and the communal riots that followed in Gujarat I was travelling in Gujarat with members of a Dalit
organisation documenting their experience. We interacted with the most disadvantaged

--- [PDF Page 673 / Book Page 677] ---

Democratic Inequalities: The Dilemma of Elementary Education in India 677

among the Dalits – the Valmiki community engaged as sweepers, to dispose dead animals, clean open toilets and carry the night soil on their heads. During field visits
we encountered many situations where the laws of the land were violated. The land
adjacent to Dalit localities in many villages was used for dumping cow dung and other
garbage. The environment was unhygienic. We encountered social boycott, violence
and intimidation. We spoke to people who were forced to work as bonded labour due
to indebtedness. We visited areas where the land allocated to Dalits was controlled and
cultivated by Patels and Durbars.
The most subtle, yet most devastating blow to the self-esteem of Dalits was visible
in primary schools. We met a large number of children who were formally enrolled
in the government school but did not attend. When asked why, they talked about the
behaviour of the teachers, the physical distance maintained by other children and
how they had to sit separately in one corner of the classroom. Girls talked about how
their fellow students covered their noses with cloth when they were in close proximity. Children who braved all odds to continue in school talked about how they were
invariably asked to sweep the floor or clean up but never asked to fetch water. The
relatively better-off Dalits manage to escape to nearby urban areas or to private feepaying schools where they may be assured of some degree of anonymity. The poor who
depend on government schools just stop attending, even if they are formally enrolled.
A young man in his early twenties asked what was the use of affirmative action by way
of job reservations when majority of Dalit children are denied basic education and
when an overwhelming proportion of the poor are those who are at the bottom of the
caste hierarchy. Another young man asked what the meaning of democracy was: does
it only mean voting every 5 years? He asked us whether democracy could genuinely
thrive in an unequal society and one that is “racist”. And most troubling of all, he asked
if people like him are citizens of the country (Ramachandran & Prasad, 2000).
This situation is not confined to Gujarat alone but is, unfortunately, an all-India
phenomenon. The socio-economic profile is a barrier to participation in education.
It is well known that Dalit families live in settlements that are distant from the main
village. A school or for that matter an ICDS centre is not readily accessible – physical
and social distance acts as a deterrent, especially in a situation of heightened social
tension. This is more than obvious when we examine macro data on enrolment, retention and completion. Over 50% of Dalit children who enter primary school leave by
class 5, with a majority dropping out before they reach class 3 (Nambissan, 2001). The
situation in tribal areas is much worse given a large number of single-teacher schools,
rampant teacher absenteeism and, worse still, teachers who are posted are unfamiliar
with the language spoken by tribal children. The data are quite disturbing – 48.7% of
tribal girls and 49%of tribal boys drop out before completing the primary cycle.
Even more tragic – those who brave it and continue learn very little. In the years
2005 and 2006 an independent non-governmental organization (Pratham) facilitated a
nationwide sample survey on learning outcomes of children. The results were shocking.
In 2005 close to 35% of children in the 7–14 age group could not read a simple paragraph (grade 1 level) and almost 60% of children could not read a simple story (grade
2 level), 65.5% of children in the 7–14 age group could not tackle simple arithmetic
problems and more worrying was that 47% of children in the 11–14 age group could

--- [PDF Page 674 / Book Page 678] ---

678 Ramachandran

not solve grade 2 level arithmetic problems. In 2006 the survey found that the situation
was not very different. Almost half of standard 5 children could not read a standard
2 text. Suman Bhattacharjea points out: “[T]his early inability to ensure that children
gain grade-appropriate reading skills obviously intensifies the subsequent burden on
both children and teachers … ASER 2006 data confirms that this is losing battle: in
standard VI, after having completed the recommended minimum of 5 years of education fully, one third of all students cannot read at the level established for Standard
II.” It is therefore not surprising that over half the children who enter grade 1 drop out
before they reach grade 8, with children from the most deprived communities and from
rural and remote areas constituting an overwhelming majority of dropouts. Education
has meant little to these children – they acquire few skills and little confidence.
The dominant perceptions about mental abilities of Dalit or tribal children coupled
with stereotypes about certain communities lead to subtle and sometimes even blatant
discrimination against some children, leading to higher dropout rate and incidence of
failure.5 At one level we recognise that Dalit or tribal or Muslim children studying in
“mixed schools” face discrimination, affecting their self-esteem and confidence and
more importantly their ability to learn. At another level, we are uncomfortable with
the idea of segregated schools not the least because schools meant for tribal or Dalit
children are invariably mismanaged.
The answer may lie in ensuring neighbourhood schools which are closely monitored – in particular, to prevent blatant caste, community or gender discrimination.
The unfortunate reality is that the majority of our school teachers and educational
administrators are upper caste, urban and non-tribal. They do not identify or empathise with their students; most, in fact, send their own children to fee-paying private
or private-aided schools. Pre-service and in-service training does not deal with the
impact of social prejudices and attitudes of teachers on the self-esteem of children and
their ability to learn. Teacher educators are themselves blind to the existential reality
of very poor children and are often hostile to issues of gender and social equity. Given
this situation Dalit and tribal leaders argue that their children are better off in separate
schools – provided the government ensures equal investment and equal quality.
Not all teachers are insensitive and prejudiced. As a researcher who has travelled
across the country visiting schools and interacting with teachers, one must admit that
there are wide regional variations. At one end of the spectrum are states where the
majority of teachers are from politically powerful castes – upper caste and OBC. It is
not uncommon to come across administrators and teachers who are hostile to issues of
gender and social equity – in particular, to most disadvantaged among Dalit (erstwhile
untouchable groups, scavengers), tribal and Muslim communities. Caste- and community-based discrimination is not uncommon – even in urban areas.
The situation in tribal-dominated areas and in predominantly tribal states is different. While such prejudices are not immediately palpable (especially among non-tribal
teachers or those from dominant tribal groups) the teachers admit that they lack the
skills to manage a multi-grade classroom with children from very diverse backgrounds.
Sustained enrolment drives and the introduction of midday meals have brought a large
number of children into schools – most of whom are first-generation school-goers
speaking several languages/dialects. Absenteeism is endemic and teachers take turns

--- [PDF Page 675 / Book Page 679] ---

Democratic Inequalities: The Dilemma of Elementary Education in India 679

to come to school. As a result a teacher can end up managing over 75–100 children.
Teachers admit that they are perennially lobbying to be transferred to more accessible
schools – investing a lot of time and money. The basic problems remain of low motivation, absenteeism and indifferent teacher management.
Rural and urban schools in several educationally forward states tell a similar story.
Increased enrolment has changed the texture of the classroom: children from diverse
social and educational background come to school. The problem is compounded when
they speak different languages or dialects. Teachers complain that they have not been
trained to manage so much diversity – that too in a multi-grade situation (where one
teacher holding two or three classes simultaneously in the same classroom). And as
above, they do not understand the family circumstances of their students. They are at a
loss to cope with long absenteeism of children during peak agricultural season or when
their families migrate for short periods. We face an overburdened teacher with neither
requisite skills nor a reliable academic support structure.
There are no simple or straightforward answers – each state and even each district
merits context-specific strategies. The larger point is that while schools could counter
social prejudices and become agents of change, they end up doing just the opposite.
In India, democracy was constructed against the grain, both of a society founded
upon inequality of the caste order, and of an imperial and authoritarian state.
If the initial conditions were unlikely, democracy has had to exist in circumstances
that conventional political theories identify as being equally unpropitious: amidst
a poor, illiterate and staggeringly diverse citizenry. Not only has it survived, it
has succeeded in energizing Indian society in unprecedented ways. Introduced
initially by a menacingly legalistic nationalist elite as a form of government,
democracy has been extended and deepened to become a principle of society,
transforming the possibilities available to Indian. They have embraced it, learning about it not from textbooks but by extemporary practice. Yet the very success
of India’s democracy also threatens its continued institutional survival. The idea
of political equality has engendered the menace of a tyranny of the religious
majority, a threat traumatically manifested in 1992 by the destruction of the
Babri Masjid at Ayodhya. (Khilnani, 1997, pp. 9–10)
We discussed three scenarios in the previous sections – first, of children from poor
families and disadvantaged social groups who start life with a cumulative burden of
exclusion; second, when school entry and quality of education they receive is framed
by their social, economic and geographic status; and third, the post-enrolment experience of discrimination and limited learning – both by way of reading and writing skills
and content. Schools often reinforce social segregation – thereby extending the burden of exclusion right through schooling till they are adults. This does not stop here.
There are few educational opportunities for young adults who may have dropped out
of school – they cannot access skill or vocational training (minimum qualification for
enrolment being class 10) further constraining choice.
“Human development is the process of widening choices for people to do and be
what they value in life” (HDR, 2004). What impact does systematic exclusion from

--- [PDF Page 676 / Book Page 680] ---

680 Ramachandran

health, nutrition and education services have on people who live on the margins? Can
they overcome the odds and participate as equals in democratic processes? It is well
known that it is the very poor who feel most alienated from institutions – be it the
local hospital expected to provide basic health care or the panchayat where they can
access developmental schemes meant for them (drought relief, food-for-work), child
development centres that provide supplementary nutrition and immunisation, schools –
the list is fairly long.
Affirmative action in the form of job reservation could make a difference – provided
they are able to complete 10 years of schooling with satisfactory skills and cognitive abilities. This is how the cookie crumbles – almost every socially disadvantaged
social group has a small number of families that have broken out of the cycle of
poverty and exclusion. This group is often referred to as the creamy layer. It is this
small, yet vocal and organised group that benefits from affirmative action, leaving the
majority out of the loop. Better management of affirmative action by linking social
status with economic situation has met with resistance. More and more social groups
(including religious minorities) – even those that are not socially disadvantaged – are
today demanding reservations in jobs and in institutions of higher education. As a
result the constitutional instruments for correcting centuries of social exclusion have
become a source of patronage. They have thrown up a manipulative leadership that
uses the rhetoric of affirmative action to perpetuate social, economic and educational
exclusion.
The more baffling paradox is why leaders of social movements of Dalits, tribal communities, Muslim minorities and most ironically the women’s movement have not raised
their voice against iniquitous strategies and poor quality education. Dysfunctional
rural schools rarely attract the attention of leaders today.
The Government of India made free and compulsory education a fundamental right
of all children in the 6–14 age group through the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act
of 2002. The new Article 21A reads as follows: “Right to Education – The State shall
provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen
years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.” A corresponding “Free and
Compulsory Education Bill, 2004” was drafted by the Ministry of Human Resources
Development– but it was not tabled in parliament. Instead the central government circulated the draft to all the states asking them to introduce appropriate bills/ordinances
for effective implementation of the 86th Constitutional amendment.
While the draft circulated provides safeguards to ensure that formal schools cater
to all children and that the transitional arrangements are strictly short-term – the situation on
the ground tells a different story. Given the financial situation of most state governments,
transitional strategies are becoming the preferred option. Many state governments
have also opted for contract teachers to meet the demands of an expanding elementary
education system.
While schools managed and controlled by local self-government institutions (panchayats) is a step in the right direction, the question remains why the formal school
system – especially teacher cadre management (transfers and posting of teachers) –
continues to remain outside the purview of panchayats. The answer does not lie in
institutionalising a poor quality and low-cost model for the most disadvantaged – when

--- [PDF Page 677 / Book Page 681] ---

Democratic Inequalities: The Dilemma of Elementary Education in India 681

they actually merit greater investment of funds, human resources, teaching-learning
material and lower teacher/pupil ratios to ensure greater care.
Here is the final twist to the tale! Can all children who enter primary schools actually
go up to class 8 or class 10. The most recent data released by Government of India tell
a startling story. According to Government of India (2007) there are 7,12,239 recognised primary schools, 2,62,286 upper primary schools, 1,45,962 secondary schools.
This implies that out of every 100 children who enter primary schools, only two thirds
of them can move on to upper primary and only 20% to secondary school. The education system is so designed that all children cannot access elementary education, leave
alone secondary education. The ratio of primary to upper primary schools and sections
is 2.57 for India – the worst ratio is in West Bengal (5.28) followed by Jharkhand
(3.97), Meghalaya (3.73) and Bihar 3.24). (NUEPA and MRHD, GOI, 2007)
Who are the children who make it through the system? The answer is obvious – children
who attend poor quality primary schools and alternative schools are the ones who drop out
of the system. An attrition policy – both in terms of numbers as well as in terms of quality is
built into the very structure. Only an exceptionally gifted child from a rural remote primary
school can hope to make it to secondary school. Inequality is inherent in the system – right
from the time a child is born till she/he becomes an adult.
What implication does this have for a democratic society in India? Do growing
differences threaten the democratic fabric of our society? Evidence from different parts
of the country is extremely disturbing. While the top 20–25% of the population (that
too in the industrialised regions of the country) is gung-ho about globalisation and the
India growth story – the bottom 25%is struggling to eke out an existence. The social,
cultural, regional (location specific), community and the occupation profile of those
at the bottom of the pyramid is yet another marker – pushing them from the margins
to the wild. Increasing social strife coupled with electoral politics that reaffirms social
identifies is a cause for concern. Yes, there is a global demand for skilled work force –
yet only a small fraction of our children can even dream of accessing education that
will enable them to take advantage of the growing demand for skilled people. There is
an urgent need to go back to the drawing board and re-image education afresh.

India in the South Asian Region
Most discourses on India invariably start with an invocation of the democratic tradition.
After all, India just celebrated 60 years of Independence as a vibrant democracy.
Notwithstanding this one fact, India is not very different from the rest of the countries in this region. Poverty, uneven development and historical colonial legacy are not
unique to this region. But it is widely acknowledged that South Asia is culturally different, particularly with respect to gender relations. This region has a high population
density and per capita income is only higher than sub-Saharan Africa.
Another significant characteristic of this region is that it has an estimated 400 million
young people aged 12–24 – accounting for close to 30% of all young people in the
developing world. This “demographic dividend” is said to have accounted for a third of
East Asia’s economic miracle. “The recent success stories of East and Southeast Asia
and Ireland suggest that development requires a combination of factors… Interactions

--- [PDF Page 678 / Book Page 682] ---

682 Ramachandran

among the many relevant factors have the potential to set off virtuous development
spirals and to halt vicious spirals” (Bloom, 2005). The potential of this dividend is
even greater in South Asia. The World Development Report (WDR) of 2007 predicts
that this cohort will grow slowly (except in Pakistan) and will peak in the next 25
years. Close to more than 45% of these young people are girls and women. Women’s
participation in decision-making is limited not only because of the unique cultural
characterises of this region but also because of high dropout rates after primary school
among girls.
In the last few decades rapid economic growth in South Asia has infused a sense of
optimism – it could be compared with the economic boom witnessed in East Asia in the
1990s. East Asia has been relatively more stable for several decades now and has experienced rapid economic development as well as good progress in human development
indicators. This region has also been seen as being relatively more forward-looking –
especially with respect to gender relations, women’s participation in workforce and
girls’ participation in education. South Asia, on the other hand, has experienced social
and political conflict, natural disasters and internal strife. What places South Asia apart
from East Asia is the persistence of gender inequality. Yet, the potential of exponential economic growth and the promise of accelerated educational development have
instilled a sense of optimism and hope. However, as compared to Southeast Asia, this
sub-region has a long way to go before attaining higher human development goals as
well as greater gender equality.
Clearly, the region faces formidable challenges. But it also holds out the promise
of rapid progress and development. Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen has pointed out time
and again that gender inequality is keeping the region back. He believes that if the
countries are able to prioritise education, health, nutrition and overall well-being of
girls, the region may see unprecedented change. The big question is whether – given
the sociocultural milieu – can the region rise above narrow communal and domestic
walls and think big?

Notes
1.

2.
3.

4.
5.

This paper was originally prepared under the aegis of the project “State of democracy in South Asia” of
Lok Niti Institute for Comparative Democracy, Centre for Studies in Developing Societies, New Delhi
in 2005. I would like to thank Peter de Souza and Yogendra Yadav of Lok Niti for giving me a chance to
think through this issue and write about it.
It is indeed very interesting that these issues continue to dog us in 2007! The bill detailing the implications of making education a fundamental right is yet to be enacted.
See Partha Chatterji books – The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial Histories. New
Jersey: Princeton UP, 1993 and Nationalist Thought in the Colonial World: A Derivative Discourse?
1986. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1998.
The mean age of marriage for the population as a whole is 19 (Uttar Pradesh), 20 (Karnataka) and 18
(Andhra Pradesh) – NFHS, 1998.
P. Sainath has documented the situation of Dalits across the country from 1999 onwards. Articles
appearing in The Hindu reveal persistent social discrimination inside the school. Certain specific groups
among the Dalits, like Valmiki, Rohit, Thoti, Chamar and in tribal areas the non-dominant tribes and
denotified tribes (classified as criminal tribes by the British) are not only discriminated against by the
forward castes, but by other Dalits, who consider them untouchable.

--- [PDF Page 679 / Book Page 683] ---

Democratic Inequalities: The Dilemma of Elementary Education in India 683

References
Bloom, D. E. (2005). Education and public health: Mutual challenges worldwide. Comparative Education
Review, 4(4).
Dreze, J., & Sen, A. (2002). India: development and participation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Government of India (1986). National policy of education. New Delhi: Ministry of Human Resource
development.
Government of India (2006). Select Educational Statistics 2003–04. New Delhi.
Government of India (2004). Free and Compulsory Education Bill, 2003 (Revised). Posted for comments in
the official website of Ministry of Human Resource Development. New Delhi.
Khilnani, S. (1997). The idea of India. London: Hamish Hamilton.
Mazumbar, M. (2001). Educational opportunities in Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu: Despair and Hope. In A.
Vaidyanathan & P. R. Gopinathan Nair (Eds.), Elementary education in rural India – A grassroots view.
New Delhi: Sage.
Nambissan, G. (2001). Social diversity and regional disparity in schooling: A study of rural Rajasthan.
In A. Vaidyanathan & P. R. Gopinathan Nair (Eds.), Elementary Education in rural India – A grassroots
view. New Delhi: Sage.
NUEPA & MRHD, GOI (2007). Elementary Education in India – Progress towards UEE. New Delhi.
PROBE Report (1999). Public report on basic education in India. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Ramachandran, V. (Ed.) (2004). Hierarchies of access: Gender and equity in primary education. New Delhi:
Sage.
Ramachandran, V., & Prasad, E. (2000). Discovering and harnessing the treasure within: Empowering Dalit
and the poor in Gujarat. Report of an external evaluation of Navsarjan Trust. (Unpublished Mimeo).
Ahmedabad.
Ramachandran, V., & Sethi, H. (2001). Shiksha Karmi Project of Rajasthan – An overall appraisal. New
Education Division Document No. 7. Stockholm: Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency.
Ramachandran, V., & Educational Resource Unit Team (2004). Snakes and Ladders: Factors Influencing
Successful Primary School Completion for Children in Poverty Contexts. South Asian Human
Development Sector Report No. 6. New Delhi: World Bank.
Sainath, P. (1999, 28 November). This is the way they go to school. The Hindu Sunday Magazine.
UNDP. (2004). The human development report. New York: Oxford University Press.
World Bank. (2004). World development report. Washington D.C.

