================================================================================
Chapter 44: Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global
Author(s): Linda Chisholm and Ramon Leyendecker
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 685–702
PDF Pages: pp. 680–697 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 680 / Book Page 685] ---

44
CURRICULUM REFORM IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA:
WHEN LOCAL MEETS GLOBAL
Linda Chisholm and Ramon Leyendecker

Introduction
Educational change in sub-Saharan Africa since the 1990s is a diverse and complex issue.
Not only are the societies, their socio-economic and political profiles extremely varied,
but heterogeneous external and internal forces have also influenced their trajectories of
educational change. If anything can be said to bind such diverse contexts, it must include
the history and impact of colonial and postcolonial endeavours. On the one hand, the
legacies of colonialism continue to hold great power over the imaginary and real lives of
states and citizens. On the other hand, the political transitions that swept over many parts
of sub-Saharan Africa from the 1960s were accompanied over the successive decades
by growing political instability, debt and poverty. The region’s real GDP per head fell
by 42.5% between 1980 and 1990; its income distribution has become more unequal.
Although the growth rate has improved since the mid-1990s, “sub-Saharan Africa has
found itself retreating economically while other developing areas of the world are advancing strongly” (Sparks, 2006). The causes are both external and internal and economic and
political (see Williams, 2006; Jennings, 2006; Sparks, 2006). New education systems and
especially higher education institutions were established in the immediate postcolonial
period as key projects of national pride, aspiration and affirmation. These also experienced increasingly serious difficulties as political crisis combined with economic crisis.
In the early 1990s, the seemingly distant event of the fall of the Berlin Wall and
gathering pace of globalisation also had distinct implications for Africa. Not immune
from world currents, many countries in Africa held multiparty elections in the early to
mid-1990s to signal commitment to liberal democracy and market openness consistent
with world developments even though authoritarianism remained part of many political
systems. These elections legitimated the new market orientation that had begun to take
hold in the 1980s and paved the way for educational and curriculum reform, including
demands for greater accountability with regard to the spending of development aid on
education. They ushered in new processes for educational and curriculum reform. This
article examines curricular reform, and specifically learner-centredness, outcomesand competency-based education and the National Qualifications Framework. The
analysis encompasses evidence for sub-Saharan Africa, but provides a specific focus
on Southern Africa.

685
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 685–702.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2008

--- [PDF Page 681 / Book Page 686] ---

686 Chisholm and Leyendecker

A considerable literature has emerged over the past decade and a half exploring
the impact of these new developments through an examination of the relationship
between policy and practice. Policy sociology has shown that policy and curriculum
implementation does not follow the predictable path of formulation–adoption–
implementation–reformulation, but is recontextualised through multiple processes
(Ball, 1990, 1994; see also Bernstein, 2004) and mechanisms (Dale, 1999); that
most implementation happens with little regard for available capacities or resources
(Elmore, 2001); that local, and especially teachers’ values, practices and beliefs
shape the outcomes of implementation (McLaughlin, 1991, 1998); and that the way
to understand implementation is to start with an examination of practice (Sutton &
Levinson, 2001). Comparative education has also emphasised the role of globalisation (Carnoy, 2000), processes of discourse formation (Schriewer, 2003) and impact
of local contexts in producing asymmetrical patterns (Steiner-Khamsi, 2004).
Not much of this literature takes account of African contexts, or their considerable diversity. Indeed, they are, for the most part, largely invisible. Here two main
approaches to the problem of the relationship between policy and practice can be identified. The first emphasises mainly external and the other mainly internal reasons for
policy failure, although neither ignores the other. There are also significant differences
within each approach. The first focuses on political economy and the overwhelming
and decisive role of donors and multilateral agencies in shaping policy goals in the
majority of contexts (Samoff, 1999a, b, 2001, 2005; Tabulawa, 2003; Vavrus, 2003).
The second focuses, on the one hand, on the resilience of distinctively African
forms of social organisation, and on the other hand, on the nature of policy and the
politics of education. Stambach, for example, has shown how schools on Mount
Kilimanjaro mediate collective and individual notions of and identifications with
modernity while hardly altering dominant, ritualised call-and-response styles of
teaching; these show strong resonances with patrilineal values and hierarchies, and
age and gender relations that reinforce male authority. And Tabulawa has argued that
failure in attempts to introduce learner-centred education in Botswana has much to
do with the strength of agreement between traditional and colonial approaches to
learning (Stambach, 2000; Tabulawa, 1997). A sophisticated variation on this theme,
which examines the complexity of local educational practices in Ghana, has demonstrated how different international, national and local discourses jostle alongside one
another in the same school, where teaching can remain lacklustre and rote-learningcentred, but opportunities can nonetheless be created where students do actually
learn from one another (Coe, 2005).
Authors in the South African context have likewise focused on contradictory outcomes. Here, however, policy failure has not been linked specifically or mainly to the
imposition of policy from the outside, or to specifically ‘African’, ‘traditional’ features. Rather, they have focused on internal politics and contradictions. Thus Jansen
(2002) has emphasised the symbolic role of policy in political transition to explain
non-change, Harley and Wedekind (2004) and Jansen (2005a) have highlighted the
contradictions between pedagogical and political ideals and the great diversity in the
context of practice, and Hoadley, Reeves and Muller have underscored the socially
reproductive role of schools and the centrality of variations in teacher knowledge and

--- [PDF Page 682 / Book Page 687] ---

Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global 687

pedagogy in reproducing historical fault lines of inequality (Hoadley, 2007, 2008;
Reeves & Muller, 2005).
These approaches are not mutually exclusive, as the work of Tabulawa illustrates. He
(Tabulawa, 2003) has argued that the ascendancy of neo-liberalism as a development
paradigm in the 1980s and 1990s elevated political democratisation as a prerequisite
for economic development and with it, learner-centred pedagogy. For him, the pedagogy is part of “an ideological outlook, a worldview intended to develop a preferred
kind of society and people … representing a process of Westernisation disguised as
quality and effective teaching” (2003, p. 7). The argument here does not however
explain the favourable reception of the idea at the local level. In attempting to explain
why learner-centred education has been both accepted so easily and implemented with
such difficulty, this paper argues that both external and internal reasons need to be
taken into account.
The chapter focuses less, however, on African culture as a cause of implementation failure, than on the combined non-relationship of international and national-level
discourse to local realities and practices. In so doing, it draws on much existing work.
But it argues in addition that local histories of resistance to colonialism incorporated
educational ideas that reverberated with learner-centred education. Learner-centred
and outcomes-based education found local favour because they were not entirely new
ideas, and were ambiguous enough to be seen as key vehicles for achieving not so
much educational, as economic, social and political goals. Learner-centred and outcomes-based education, when they emerged in the post-1990s period, appeared to be
a (democratic educational) rose by another name. But its implementation faltered in
contexts where capacities and requirements for its realisation varied enormously not
only amongst one another but also from the contexts in which they were originally
developed. The chapter argues for a complex understanding of external and internal dynamics that takes account of the diversity and differences between contexts of
implementation.
The chapter begins with a discussion of the ambiguities and differences between
learner-centred, child-centred and competency-based education. It then examines the
international pressures on sub-Saharan Africa for curriculum change and the local
Southern African historical context and alternative educational experience that, it
argues, predisposed Southern Africa to adoption of such ideas. It shows how these
have not been realised in practice. It attempts to explain this on the basis that reforms
have focused less on what is feasible in contexts of implementation than on the economic, social and political goals to be achieved and concludes with implications for
research. In so doing, the article is concerned with how history and context shape
goals and ideals of reform and contexts of implementation. The article focuses mainly
on curriculum reform based on learner-centred education, but also outcomes-based
education and the National Qualifications Framework. Although conceptually distinct,
learner-centred education, outcomes-based education and the National Qualifications
Framework all represent an interrelated set of ideas that have diffused via curriculum
reform across sub-Saharan Africa in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
The article draws on secondary and primary sources relating to a variety of different
sub-Saharan African countries.

--- [PDF Page 683 / Book Page 688] ---

688 Chisholm and Leyendecker

Learner-Centred and Outcomes-Based Education
Learner-centred education is one of the most pervasive educational ideas in contemporary sub-Saharan Africa and elsewhere. It is often accompanied by competency-based
discourses and official shifts in curriculum and assessment policy designed to lessen
the significance of examinations and enhance the importance of continuous assessment
as a means of stimulating learner-centred pedagogies. And yet there is overwhelming evidence from very different kinds of sources, that the idea has not taken root in
classrooms.
Country profiles developed for sub-Saharan African countries by the Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam, as part of a larger study on Science, Maths and ICTs in secondary education in sub-Saharan Africa (SMICT, 2005) indicate the prevalence of “traditional” and
“outmoded” styles of teaching. “Chalk and talk” teaching strategies, largely aimed at
verbal recall of factual information and definitions, are described as characterising
pedagogies in Tanzania (Ibid, Country profile, United Republic of Tanzania, p. 13).
The modus operandi in Uganda is said to revolve around a traditional (predominantly
behaviourist) model of curriculum and instruction rather than, for example, one based
on the development of meaning. Inquiry-based teaching and practical applications
of science to real life are all seen as missing from teachers’ pedagogical strategies,
rendering teaching and learning mainly “theoretical” (Ibid, Country profile, Uganda,
p. 25). In Botswana, “the read-regurgitate-recite learning cycle” prevails despite a formally sophisticated competency-based and learning-centred curriculum (Ibid, Country
profile, Botswana, p. 34). In Ghana, as in other countries, “lessons … are almost exclusively teacher-centred, and content-driven” (Ibid, Country profile, Ghana, p. 19), even
though many educators feel that not even the potential of teacher-centred education is
fulfilled. Despite Namibia’s learner-centred curriculum, “a learner-centred pedagogy
… is frequently operationally absent” (Ibid, Country profile, Namibia, p. 31). Nigeria
also promotes the learner-centred ideal, “but the implementation … has often been far
from the … ideal” (Ibid, Country profile, Nigeria, p. 31). Assessment in Senegal, as
in the majority of countries, is still examination-driven and led, and focused on recall
and memorisation rather than learning and understanding. The gap between policy
and practice, as in these West, East and Southern African contexts, are familiar also
in South Africa, where the learner-centred goals of outcomes-based education – the
educational philosophy here – are proving far harder to achieve in practice than in
policy (see, e.g., Harley & Wedekind, 2004).
In order to understand this gap between policy and practice, it is necessary to backtrack briefly and understand how learner-centred education has been understood.
The idea of learner-centred education derives from the works of mainly Jean Piaget
(although Piaget is sometimes interpreted as a stage theorist only), John Dewey (1938)
and Lev Vygotsky (1978). Contemporary understandings of learner-centred education
are based mainly on Vygotskian cognitive psychology, and differ from pedagogies
based on behaviourist psychologies. In constructivism, knowledge about the structure
and processes of learning is relevant for learning in general. Learning is understood
as a permanent and lifelong process occurring in a variety of social settings, of which
formal schooling is just one aspect. Learner-centred education is more specific about

--- [PDF Page 684 / Book Page 689] ---

Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global 689

the understanding of the nature of learning, and less specific on the pedagogies and
detailed provision of outcomes in formal schooling. Its origin and ambiguities also
allow a variety of different understandings that go beyond the classroom.
In spite of the apparent similarities, there are differences between learner-centred,
child-centred and outcome-based education. For some writers, child-centred education was a reaction to, and development from, strong behaviourist pedagogies and
is based on a different epistemology from learner-centred education (van Harmelen,
1998). In terms of learner-centred and outcome-based education, learner-centred
education can be argued to be input-related, whereas outcomes-based education is
output-related. Learner-centred education is more focused on teaching and instructional quality, whereas outcomes-based education is more focused on the quality of
assessment. Learner-centred education is a pedagogical philosophy about teaching
and learning, applicable to learning in general but academic education more specifically. Outcomes-based education primarily provides a framework of outcomes and an
approach to knowledge-integration, and is only secondarily concerned with curriculum
knowledge, pedagogies and learning-support materials. Outcomes can be behaviourist
and achieved by child-centred education. Important for the purposes of this article is
the essential ambiguity in the concept and between the different meanings, despite the
fundamental differences that are said to underlie them.
The contested meanings of learner-centred education as expressed in outcomesbased education can be illustrated through its application in South Africa’s post-1994
curriculum 2005. Outcomes-based education as a philosophy has been differently
interpreted by different writers. There are few educationists in South Africa who have
not taken a stance either for or against outcomes-based education. Writers such as
Mohamed (1998), Malcolm (2000) and Odora-Hoppers (2002) have defended outcomes-based education, whereas others such as Kraak (2001) have been moderately
critical, and yet others such as Jansen (1997, 1998, 1999, 2002, 2004), Jansen and
Christie (1999), Muller (1998, n.d. c2001), Muller and Taylor (1998) and Unterhalter
(1998a) have questioned its foundations. The nature of the debate has also shifted over
time. The debate has polarised people who, to all intents and purposes, see themselves
as, in one way or another, ‘educational progressives’. Thus, it has been possible for
some to see outcomes-based education as a narrowing and de-radicalisation of educational goals, and for others to see it as expanding and revolutionising them; for some
to see it as permitting the play of difference, and allowing local, hidden knowledges to
surface; for others to see it as yet another form of universal knowledge which stamps
upon these; for some to see its learner-centred focus as allowing greater possibilities
to the poor and others to see it as an educational romanticism which has the effect of
denying the poor real learning opportunities (see above).
Its effect in international and comparative context has also been seen, in some cases,
as integral to competency-driven, marketised forms of knowledge, and in others as promoting forms of knowing which contest these. For some, outcomes-based education has
‘worked’; in others, it has not. Its centrality to South Africa’s National Qualifications
Framework has been less often debated. Early on, however, the NQF was identified as
constraining educational goals to serve narrowly economic ends (Samson & Vally, 1996;
Unterhalter, 1998b; Muller, 1998) rather than, as claimed, integrating education and

--- [PDF Page 685 / Book Page 690] ---

690 Chisholm and Leyendecker

training. Outcomes-based education is thus the ultimate ‘floating signifier’, meaning different things to different people, who invest it with diametrically opposed qualities. As
a construct of social possibility and/or limitation, it speaks to public and private desires
and relationships to the emerging social order. But seeing it as this purely symbolic
social construct also militates against an understanding of the material effects of the
multiple social dynamics, processes and struggles of which it is a part and in which it is
finely imbricated (see Chisholm, 2003, for further discussion of this aspect).

External Pressures and Conditions
Learner-centredness, outcomes-based education and the idea of the National Qualifications
Framework have both international and local historical roots. We will first examine the
international pressures and conditions ensuring take-up in policy discourse and then go
on to explore the specific Namibian and South African contexts in more detail.
Since 1990, the goals and purposes of education in sub-Saharan African have been
reshaped by four interconnected developments: globalisation; the changed focus of
international aid agencies towards development assistance; the adaptation of subSaharan African countries to the new world order with its new political emphases; and
the spilling over of new pedagogical ideas from the USA and Europe into sub-Saharan
Africa. The latter resulted from development-export on the part of the Western world,
development import from sub-Saharan African countries as well as increased international communications. Independently of the origin, the implementation of both
learner-centered and outcomes-based education has, to all intents and purposes, not
occurred in the ways intended.
Despite differences between them, learner-centred and outcomes-based education is
part of a discursive repertoire of international rights and quality education. This amalgam of ideas is broadly shared amongst multilateral and donor agencies. UNICEF,
in particular, has vigorously promoted rights-based and child-centred approaches for
several decades, as have UNESCO, donor-agencies and international NGOs (see also
Tabulawa, 2003). National Qualifications Frameworks are not explicitly part of this
body of curriculum ideas, but are nonetheless part of an international discourse that
has been appropriated in the African context and that has implications for curriculum
and education systems. The majority of sub-Saharan African countries are signatories
to a number of conventions on education, including the Convention on the Rights of
the Child (1989), the World Declaration on Education For All (Jomtien, 1990), the
Dakar Accord and Millenium Development Goals (April 2000). These spell out collective commitments by nation states and international agencies on the achievement of
education development goals and bind sub-Saharan African countries to changing educational policy and practice in order to realise them. In so far as sub-Saharan African
countries are bound to quality education, amongst other things, by the Convention of
the Rights of the Child, the Jomtien Declaration, the Dakar Accord and Millenium
Development Goals, attention is focused on curricular policy and practice.
The Jomtien call for access, equity, quality and democracy in education was accepted
with little resistance in sub-Saharan Africa (Chisholm et al., 1998). Its egalitarian thrust

--- [PDF Page 686 / Book Page 691] ---

Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global 691

was appealing and its achievement appeared to promise both social and economic
development: the undoing of previous social injustices, and the achievement of economic growth that would bring benefits to citizens. Social and economic development,
it was believed and continues to be so, requires educational change, and educational
change is necessary for social and economic development. Educational change, in
turn, is perceived to depend on, amongst other things, changing classroom practices
through learner-centred education. The willing adoption of these ideas through topdown pressures and bottom-up desires account in part for the appropriation of ideas
current within the international arena. In Southern Africa countries such as Namibia
and South Africa in particular, the Jomtien call for equity chimed with the social,
political and economic goals of post-apartheid governments.
Improved quality in education was widely perceived on the one hand as a necessary adaptation to the new knowledge requirements of globalisation and on the other,
as meeting popular needs for improved schooling (ANC, 1994; Namibia Ministry of
Education and Culture, 1993). On the one hand, the progressive appeal of the epistemological idea of learner-centredness seemed to fit well with development ambitions, and
found favour amongst a broad array of social-educational interests. On the other hand,
the National Qualifications Framework, first implemented in South Africa (1995) and
Namibia (1996), appealed because it was thought it would bring social and systemic
benefits: A National Qualifications Framework would form the educational ‘ladder’
out of poverty, low skill and unemployment, and open doors into prosperity, high
skill and full employment. The route to this would be the integration of education and
training through competency and unit-standards-based curricula (see ANC/COSATU,
1993; ANC, 1994).
In almost all sub-Saharan countries, however, curriculum reform is also mandated
through the social sectoral education components of Enhanced Structural Adjustment
Facilities’ loan conditions. In general, the focus of structural adjustment packages is
on cost-containment, reform of the public sector, privatisation and removal of tariff
barriers. Poverty reduction strategies are a vital means by which structural adjustment
packages are implemented. Educational reform is part of poverty reduction strategies,
and entails measures intended to improve access and quality of education. Curriculum
reform becomes part of the educational component of the structural adjustment package through the implementation of Universal Primary Education, as in Uganda (IMF,
1998); the Basic Education Master Plan and Secondary Education Master Plan, as
in Tanzania (IMF, 1999); the 5-year Education Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP) for primary and secondary education for 1999–2003, as in Mozambique (IMF, 1999) and
the improvement of the quality of schooling, as in Malawi (IMF, 1998/99). Malawi’s
Second Development Plan 1985–1995, for example, stipulated a number of reforms
aimed at renewal and reorganisation of the public sector; its educational proposal
included a requirement for a shift to ‘methodology-centred and competency-based
instruction’. Its Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Policy Framework Paper for
1998/99–2000/01 specifies the review and revision of the curriculum and establishment of exit points from the system (IMF, 1998/99). Significantly, these proposed
shifts and changes occurred shortly after similar reforms were introduced in South
Africa. Joint IMF-government teams arrive at agreements on the components of the

--- [PDF Page 687 / Book Page 692] ---

692 Chisholm and Leyendecker

loans. All major donor agencies and international organisations are centrally involved
in implementation of the range of activities for which loans are granted and on which
agreement has been achieved.

Internal and External Processes and Conditions
In the southern and eastern African region, new learner-centred ideas were to some
extent also a repackaging of ideas that had been in circulation in previous decades,
caught up as the region had been in various national liberation and anti-colonial
struggles. On the assumption of power, national liberation movements initially made
strenuous efforts to overcome the legacies of colonialism. Independence was achieved
at different times in the region: Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland, Zambia, Tanzania,
Malawi and Mauritius in the early and mid-1960s, Angola and Mozambique in 1975,
Zimbabwe in 1980, Namibia in 1990 and South Africa in 1994. This staggered process of achieving independence influenced the nature of the regional political economy
considerably throughout the 1970s and 1980s.
Before the early 1990s and independence in Southern Africa, Namibian and South
African liberation movements found homes in neighbouring states such as Botswana,
Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe and Angola. Here, in anticipation of future
liberation, there was some experimentation with alternative ideas to forms of education developed under colonialism and apartheid. Originating in Botswana, the idea of
Education with Production spread through interaction between independent African
countries, SWAPO, the ANC, Frelimo. In Tanzania, the ANC’s Solomon Mahlangu
Freedom College wrestled with similar ideas. Educational ideas that were to inform
post-1990s approaches thus took shape in contexts where “strands of Africanism,
social-democratic and various forms of Marxist socialism, and non-racialism” interacted in a complex mix (Morrow et al., 2002, p. 156).
Probably spilling over from international pedagogical discussions, learner-centred
education emerged as the driving pedagogical ideal for contemporary curriculum
reform in the early 1990s. Learner-centred education was officially adopted in many
African countries in the 1990s, and, in spite of national differences in stronger or
weaker attachment to reform attempts, implementation (or rather lack of it) has shown
similarities in the challenges experienced. In the following we attempt to trace the
emergence of learner-centred education in Namibia (and outcomes-based education in
South Africa) as the most prominent and widely favoured educational ideal. In tracing
the origins, actors and processes of implementation in one specific context, we can
begin to understand some of the reasons for the gap between policy and practice.
Learner-centered education as official part of curriculum reform in sub-Saharan
Africa seems to have first started with the introduction of the subject of Life Science
in the newly independent Namibia in 1990. Although learner-centredness was in hindsight explicitly identified only in 1998 and not at the beginning of the large-scale
implementation process in 1991 as the theoretical base of Life Science, it was the
vehicle chosen to drive the process of political reform to achieve access to education
for all, equity, education for democracy and democracy in education (Leyendecker,

--- [PDF Page 688 / Book Page 693] ---

Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global 693

2002; MEC Namibia, 1993, pp. 32–42). The subject Life Science itself was meant to
spearhead not only the educational reform process, but also the social reform intended
to eliminate the racial inequalities characterising pre-independence education. Life
Science in Namibia was based on concepts of social constructivism, or the pedagogical
translation of it – learner-centred education.
Historically linked to pre-independence SWAPO exile education in Loudima,
Zambia, Danish development aid drove the development and implementation of
Life Science in Namibia. The idea of Life Science was strongly influenced by the
social-democratic values and philosophies of the Danish advisers, and was based on
experiences with Education with Production (EwP) in Zambian schools. It strongly
supported the political goals of post-independence SWAPO. The Danish programme
advisers and the progressive ideals of the newly developed subject Life Science had an
open ear from the then Minister of Education, Nahas Angula.
The idea of Education with Production was popularised in the region by Patrick
van Rensburg, a former South African diplomat who renounced his allegiance to
apartheid, became a Botswana citizen in 1973, founded the Swaneng Hill School and
subsequently two others in association with the Botswana government, as well as the
Swaneng Consumers Cooperative and Brigades Movement. Van Rensburg’s approach
drew on then-popular socialist ideas that aimed to combine Education with Production
in order to more effectively link theory with practice, and in so doing, to ensure more
effective learning, doing and understanding of production in its social context. As such,
it also aimed to break down the social division between mental and manual labour that
was seen as characteristic of all elitist, class-based and colonial forms of education.
The brigades curriculum included practical as well as academic subjects such as
Development Studies, which encouraged students to apply their knowledge and skills
in socially useful productive work. The Brigades were self-help education and training
organisations producing goods and services both for themselves and for public sale
to help finance teaching and training. The success of the experiment resulted in the
establishment of the Foundation for Education with Production in 1980 which sought
to spread the idea regionally and internationally through publications and conferences
that drew together Ministry officials, liberation movements, non-governmental organisations, teachers’ institutions and the “world of work” (http://www.rightlivelihood.
org/recip/van-rensburg.htm as at 12/12/2005; van Rensburg, 1978; Seidmann, 1985).
The Zimbabwe Foundation for Education with Production (ZIMFEP) was founded in
Zimbabwe shortly after its independence in 1980, and followed the same principles
(see McLaughlin et al., 2002). After 1994, the Foundation initiated activities in South
Africa, but in the new climate of reform, the pedagogical ideas were very much under
the shadow of the National Qualifications Framework with its emphasis on competencies and qualifications.
Throughout the 1980s there was a rich exchange of ideas across regional and international boundaries on the concept and its implementation. The journal, Education
with Production, edited by John Conradie, Patrick van Rensburg and Frank Youngman,
and published in Botswana, provided a focus for this critical debate over the decade.
It examined the historical, comparative and international dimensions, as well as the
theoretical and practical problems involved in its implementation in both capitalist

--- [PDF Page 689 / Book Page 694] ---

694 Chisholm and Leyendecker

and socialist countries across the developed and developing worlds. The journal drew
contributions on production in schools, education and employment, technical and
vocational education and training, and adult education from as far afield as the Soviet
Union, Latin America, Africa, Europe and the USA. Authors comprised a ‘Who’s Who’
of the comparative education field: Kazim Bacchus, Joan Simon, Manning Marable,
Kenneth King, Wim Hoppers, Fay Chung, Claudio de Mouro Castro and Antonio
Cabral de Andrade, Stephen Heyneman, John Middleton, Alan Fowler, Daniel Sifuna,
Neil Parsons, David Stern and Julius Nyerere, all appeared in its pages at one time
or another. The journal self-consciously promoted articles that drew on conceptual
approaches to teaching and learning that were based in the work of Luria and Vygotksy
to critique dominant behaviourist approaches to ‘learning theory’ (see, e.g., Simon,
1986). The approach emphasised the relationship between consciousness and activity,
learning and doing, context and practice.
Education with Production or polytechnical education in the African contexts of
Zimbabwe, Tanzania and Botswana was “seen as a means of bringing about radical or
socialist transformation” (Botha, 1991, p. 207). In none of these countries, however, was
EwP universally implemented. As Botha shows, in Zimbabwe there were only eight EwP
or ZIMFEP schools, largely based in the rural areas (p. 207). Nonetheless, its conception
“assumed considerable importance as the point of departure for education policies in
many African countries and, indeed, also in South Africa” (amongst those intellectuals
and activists in exile and inside the country striving for an alternative to Bantu Education).
EwP was a philosophy “permeating the curriculum”. In his critical analysis in 1991 of
its prospects for South Africa, Botha contrasts the EwP approach which sees education as an instrument of social transformation with one that recognises the constraints
on its ability to achieve such transformation: “curriculum changes in themselves”, he
says, “cannot play the role that the advocates … suggest. The social conditions in which
these changes are made determine the extent to which they can advance the process of
transformation” (Botha, 1991, p. 210). In Zimbabwe, itself, there seems to have been
some awareness that “the declaration of the policy does not necessarily go hand in hand
with the definition of the fine details needed for implementation”. (ZIMFEP, n.d.) It is
interesting that despite this awareness amongst analysts and implementors, curriculum
still, in the post-1994 Southern African context, came to carry the weight of achieving
broader social transformation goals (see, e.g., Harley & Wedekind, 2004).
The trajectory of implementation of learner-centred ideas in Namibia in the early
1990s provides an example of how the EwP ideas altered over time. It also further
illustrates the distance between the ideas and their realisation in practice. In the 1980s,
notions of EwP were taken up in SWAPO’s exile school in Loudima, Zambia. Loudima
was influenced by the idea of the Zimbabwe Science (ZimSci) syllabus (see, e.g.,
CDU, 1987), ZimSci having borrowed the initial idea from the van Rensburg brigades
in Botswana. In Zimbabwe, European teachers (and probably NGOs) sympathetic to
Zimbabwean independence, like many others, were attracted by the notion of self-help
and the idea of EwP. The very idea of EwP is close to ideas of contextualised and
culturally relevant learning. Although learner-centredness was only later consciously
spelled out as the pedagogy underlying Life Science in Namibia, the link to learnercentredness was a relatively organic one.

--- [PDF Page 690 / Book Page 695] ---

Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global 695

The Danish-guided implementation of Life Science in independent Namibia was
clearly structured and planned. The implementation process was well resourced and
supported over a period of 8 years. In addition, and what probably counted the most
during this period, the dedication and motivation of the NGO, the Danish advisers,
and Namibian staff was infectious to many in the educational system – that is, if they
were supporting the political goals. Those opposed to the political goals in the education system (and who probably still dominated the system) resisted Life Science
and learner-centred education because of its close link to the political aims of social
transformation. However, when signs emerged that learner-centred education in
Namibia was failing, it was not due to this resistance. Nor did it fail because of lack
of resources, and probably not even because of capacity shortages. The main obstacle
seems to have been the unclear nature of the understanding and the actual application
of learner-centred education, and the scope of the intended change that focused on the
high pedagogical ideal. As sound as the implementation process was in many places, it
failed to transport the understanding of learner-centred education into classrooms.
The signs of poor understanding, subject content and methodological knowledge
amongst teachers were many. The idea of contextualised biology teaching was often
reduced to gardening, and real-life dissections were conducted at the blackboard, away
from where students could see what was going on. When chickens were not available
for dissection, no alternatives were found, although they were available. Dissection
simply did not happen. Supplies such as chicken mesh and garden tools started to disappear or boxes of chemicals simply remained unpacked in storerooms or were lost,
their uses not properly understood. Overlaps in the curriculum were not recognised,
and the curriculum consequently modified or built upon; the same thing was simply
taught twice. Whether this was culture or context or both, there was little understanding of what was expected to be implemented.
The reasons for its failure to take root were varied. Researchers have argued that
instructional methodologies (and partly the syllabus content of Life Science) were
not consonant with local, culturally determined classroom practices (Geckler, 1999;
Leyendecker, 2003). The gaps that had to be bridged between existing classroom realities, social expectations of education and learner-centred education were simply too
wide to be achieved in one step. To a certain extent, the implementation of learnercentred education seems to have been restricted because the Danish ideology of
liberated education did not fit the Namibian version of it. In the end, little of the wellmeant classroom intentions (and development goals) materialised in practice (IBIS,
2000; Geckler, 1999).
In South Africa, learner-centred education as a pedagogical ideal had already
existed during the apartheid years in some progressive independent schools such as
Sacred Heart College in Johannesburg, in non-governmental organisations such as
SACHED (the South African College of Higher Education), and in the practices of
new teacher organisations such as NEUSA (the National Education Union of South
Africa), one of the predecessors of the South African Democratic Teachers’ Union.
Harley and Wedekind argue that it was also promoted in the White Natal Education
Department before 1994 (Harley & Wedekind, 2004). In the new South Africa after
1994, learner-centred education together with outcomes-based education and the

--- [PDF Page 691 / Book Page 696] ---

696 Chisholm and Leyendecker

National Qualifications Framework was meant to undo the injustices of apartheid
education once and for all.
The borrowing and indigenisation process in South Africa followed a different trajectory from that of Namibia. This has been so extensively researched and analysed
elsewhere, that only the main outlines will be provided here (see Jansen, 2004, pp.
206, 207; see also Spreen, 2004; Govender, 2004). Close links between the trade union
movement, COSATU, the National Training Board and individual curriculum developers in the run-up to elections in 1994 ensured that a mix of ideas linked to integration,
competency and outcomes-based education were adopted from Australia and translated
into the schooling terrain. Although there was little, if any, initial discussion or consultation with teachers, the South African Democratic Teachers’ Union subsequently
became advocates of outcomes-based education as the philosophy of a post-apartheid
educational dispensation. Although teachers strongly supported the intended direction
and goals of curriculum change, mounting criticism led to its review and revision in
2000 and 2002 respectively (Chisholm et al., 2000). This first implementation attempt
of the curriculum based on the NQF, OBE, and learner-centred education, encountered so many problems that the curriculum was considered not-implemented (Jansen,
1999). Similarly, the National Qualifications Framework of South Africa was increasingly criticised for not fulfilling its mandate. It, too, was reviewed in 2002. As with
the curriculum, there has been some scaling back of ambition, if not the intended
goals (McGrath, 2005). As with the curriculum, resistance and criticism has come
from intellectuals; amongst implementers and practitioners, there has been resistance,
compliance and mimicry (Harley et al., 2000).
In South Africa, the main reasons for the problems faced in indigenising learnercentred education (and OBE) appear to be comparable to those in Namibia: confusion
about the meaning and content of the concepts and intended changes, and the consequences of the intended instructional practices not being of-a-piece with local classroom
cultures and realities. In the case of the National Qualifications Framework, there
also appears to be an incompatibility between goals and realities. In South Africa
(as elsewhere), further implementation problems arose with outcomes-based education because of lack of resources and capacity, and shortcomings in the curriculum
design. Ironically, former White schools, although probably opposed to the political
agenda, initially had fewer problems in implementing learner-centred education since
they felt they had been teaching close to the intended instructional methodologies
for some years, although many were also adept at giving the appearance of change
while maintaining the status quo. Former Black schools, although supporting the
political agenda, appeared unable to implement learner-centred education. Where they
attempted to do so, the meaning of what was to be achieved in some cases led to a
travesty of the intended meaning of it (Jansen, 1998, 1999; Jansen & Christie, 1999;
DOE, 2000). This reduction of the understanding of what learner-centred education is
and does has also been associated with extremely poor literacy and numeracy achievements in those grades where outcomes-based and learner-centred education have been
implemented (Taylor & Vinjevold, 1999; Muller, 2000). A sharp reaction to constructivism and learner-centred education has accordingly characterised many responses to
outcomes-based education.

--- [PDF Page 692 / Book Page 697] ---

Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global 697

It is clear from the above that one of the legacies of the pre-1990 period and context
is a degree of educational and pedagogical experimentation. This did not, however,
post-apartheid, appear to have entered the formal schooling systems. One of the possible
reasons must be that these experiments of changing practice in classrooms through
learner-centred education barely touched the majority of schools. Here the main concerns lay elsewhere.
Both the fact that these ideas are not new and in some isolated instances may even
predate independence in sub-Saharan African countries, and that they have seldom
penetrated the broader educational system in any significant way, echoes US scholarship on the lack of impact of successive waves of reform on classroom practices
over the past century (Cuban, 1990). In sub-Saharan Africa as much as in the USA,
as Cuban has shown, dominant social groups have again and again turned to schools
and education to solve intractable social and national problems, rather than directly
addressing those major social problems themselves. In sub-Saharan Africa, as much as
in the USA and probably Western Europe as well, there is also an enduring belief in the
ability of schools to promote social mobility, create national harmony and responsible
citizenship, a belief that is harnessed during all major periods of social change to the
reform of education, despite evidence that schools seldom achieve these goals (Cuban,
1990, p. 9; Vavrus, 2003). The problems of taking progressive educational ideas to
scale also appear to be as much an African as an American or European challenge
(Elmore, 1996).
In both the Namibian and South African contexts, it has been easier to identify
what needs to change and attempt to mandate this change from above, than to identify
and ensure the conditions necessary for their successful implementation. Research on
these issues is however sparse for sub-Saharan Africa. Much more research is needed
on the gap between policy and practice, implementation and what has changed over
time, how and why.

Understanding the Challenge
Outside South Africa and Namibia, learner-centred education has dominated
contemporary official curriculum reform attempts across sub-Saharan Africa.
Learner-centred education is considered to be one of the principal vehicles to drive
societies and economies from mainly agricultural bases into modern and knowledge-based societies with attendant economic benefits. Advised and supported by
multilateral organisations advocating the need for different and better learning outcomes, learner-centred education is accepted as the pedagogical ideal to facilitate
this change.
While the need for different and better learning outcomes are undisputed in all subSaharan African educational systems, evidence from Namibia and South Africa suggests
that the scope of the change is as underestimated as the differences of understanding
of concepts. Local cultural and contextual realities and capacities as much as implementation requirements influence understanding and possibilities. Often learner-centred

--- [PDF Page 693 / Book Page 698] ---

698 Chisholm and Leyendecker

education is attractive to policy-makers because of the appeal and promises of the
social goals attached. African policy-makers can prescribe learner-centred and competency-based education and invest it with particular meanings that vary from those
of their international counterparts. (Samoff, 2005; Leyendecker, 2005) These differing meanings are contested, accounting in part for challenges in implementation. To
understand the problems experienced with learner-centred education, it is important to
distinguish between the idea of learner-centred education as panacea (see also Vavrus,
2003), and the interlinked approach to implementation. It is also important to note that
implementation challenges are not necessarily restricted to learner-centred education,
but that they are a general feature of other curricular developments as well. In the case
of learner-centred education, OBE and NQF, problems are aggravated by conflicts over
meaning.
Two approaches can be identified in understanding what needs to be done. From
one perspective, teachers need to understand the underlying idea, be motivated to
change practice, adapt and apply appropriate pedagogies, and have the capacity to do it.
(Elmore, 2001, p. 16) A sense of ownership is important but on its own, as shown in the
South African case, it may not be enough to change practice (see McLaughlin, 1991,
for discussion of the idea). From another perspective, more attention needs to be paid
to ensuring opportunity to learn in classrooms, especially in working-class and poor
schools, through addressing teacher knowledge and pedagogies that militate against
learning (Hoadley, 2007, 2008; Reeves & Muller, 2005) or, as Jansen (2005b) has proposed, placing “teachers, texts and time” at the forefront of any strategy for change.
In conclusion, this article has attempted to examine the gap between policy and practice in curriculum change efforts in sub-Saharan Africa and paid specific attention to the
Namibian and South African experiences. Far from learner-centredness being imposed,
it has shown that the ambiguities of the idea, international pressures and local histories
all help to account for local receptiveness to the idea. The article shows that while there
is convergence around the ideas and purposes they are intended to serve, there is also
evidence of divergence in practice in the extent to which they are able to meet the goals
attributed to them. In practice there is considerable convergence in the divergence: ideas
are recontextualised and displaced, unable in the majority of instances to meet the social
development goals demanded of them. In most instances, dominant modes of teaching
and learning in practice appear to converge in ways that affirm complex cultural practices
as well as multifaceted contexts (Stambach, 2000; Vavrus, 2003; Crossley & Watson,
2003; Watson, 2001; Carnoy, 2000; Samoff 1999a, b, 2001; Steiner-Khamsi, 2004; Tikly,
2004; Coe, 2005). What this suggests is the need for a great deal more research on the
local responses and sources of receptiveness and resistance to global ideas.

References
African National Congress (ANC). Education Department. (1994). A policy framework for education and
training. January.
ANC/COSATU. (1993). A framework for lifelong learning. ANC/COSATU Draft Discussion document as
amended by the National Training Policy Workshop, 13–15 August, Johannesburg.
Atchoarena, D. (2002). Revisiting technical and vocational education in sub-Saharan Africa: An update on
trends, innovations and challenges. Paris: IIEP, UNESCO.

--- [PDF Page 694 / Book Page 699] ---

Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global 699
Ball, S. (1990). Politics and policymaking in education: Exploration in policy sociology. London: Routledge.
Ball, S. (1994). What is Policy? Texts, trajectories and toolboxes. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), Education reform:
A critical and poststructural approach. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Bernstein, B. (2004). Social class and pedagogic practice. In S. J. Ball (Ed.), The Routledge Falmer reader
in sociology of education. London and New York: Routledge Falmer.
Botha, T. (1991). Education with production in Zimbabwe: A model for post-apartheid South Africa. In
E. Unterhalter, H. Wolpe, T. Botha, S. Badat, T. Dlamini & B. Khotseng (Eds.), Apartheid education and
populat struggles. Johannesburg: Ravan Press.
Carnoy, M. (2000). Globalization and educational reform. In N. P. Stromquist & K. Monkman (Eds.),
Globalization and education: Integration and contestation across cultures. Oxford: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Chisholm, L., Makwati, G., Marope P., & Dumba-Safuli, S. (1998). SADC initiative in education policy
development, planning and management: Report of a needs assessment study. Harare: Canon Press.
Chisholm, L., et al. (2000). A South African curriculum for the twenty first century: Report of the review
committee on curriculum 2005. Retrieved January 2006, www.pwv.gov.za.
Chisholm, L. (2003). The State of curriculum reform in South Africa: The issue of curriculum 2005. In
J. Daniel, A. Habib & R. Southall (Eds.), State of the Nation 2003–4. Pretoria: HSRC Press.
Chisholm, L. (2007). Diffusion of the National Qualifications Framework and outcomes-based education in
Southern and Eastern Africa. Comparative Education, 43(2), 295–309.
Chisholm, L., Motala, S., & Vally, S. 2003. South African education policy review. Johannesburg:
Heinemann.
Coe, C. (2005). Dilemmas of culture in African schools. Youth, nationalism, and the transformation of
knowledge. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Crossley, M. & Watson, K. (2003). Comparative and international research in education: globalisation,
context and difference. London and New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Cuban, L. (1990). Reforming again, again, and again. Educational Researcher, January 1990, 415–425.
Curriculum Development Unit (CDU). (1987). ‘O’ level teacher’s guide: Science in energy uses. Module
1 energy sources. Harare: Ministry of Education.
Dale, R. (1999). Specifying globalization effects on national policy: A focus on the mechanisms. Journal of
Education Policy, 1(14), 1–17.
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and education. New York: Macmillan.
Elmore, Richard F. (1996). Getting to scale with good educational practice. Harvard Educational Review, 66, 1.
Elmore, Richard F. (2001). Professional development and large-scale improvement in education. Report
prepared for the Albert Shanker Institute.
Geckler, P. (2000). Impacts of basic education reform in independent Namibia. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
University of Copenhagen.
Guskey, T. R. (2000). Evaluating professional development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Govender, L. (2004). Teacher unions, policy struggles and educational change, 1994–2004. In Linda
Chisholm (Ed.), Changing class: Education and social change in post-apartheid South Africa. Cape
Town: HSRC Press.
Harley, K., Barasa, F., Bertram, C., Mattson, E., & Pillay, K. (2000). “The real and the ideal”: Teacher
roles and competences in South African policy and practice. International Journal of Educational
Development, 20 (4), 287–304.
Harley, K., & Wedekind. V. (2004). Political change, curriculum change and social formation, 1990–2002.
In L. Chisholm (Ed.), Changing class: education and social change in post-apartheid South Africa.
Cape Town: HSRC Press.
Hoadley, U. (2008). Pedagogy and social class: a model for the analysis of pedagogic variation. British
Journal of Sociology of Education, 29(1), 63–78.
Ibis. (2001). Evaluating change. An impact study of the Life Science project, Namibia, 1991–2000. ISBN
99916-745-7-8.
International Monetary Fund (1998). Uganda enhanced structural adjustment facility policy framework
paper, 1998/99–2000/01. Retrieved 6/1/2006 http://www.img.org/external/np/pfp/uganda/102998.htm.
International Monetary Fund (1999). Tanzania enhanced structural adjustment facility policy framework paper
for 1998/99–2000/01. Retrieved 6/1/2006 http://www.imf.org/external/np/pfp/1999/tanzania/taztab.htm.

--- [PDF Page 695 / Book Page 700] ---

700 Chisholm and Leyendecker
International Monetary Fund (1998/99). Malawi enhanced structural adjustment facility policy framework
paper, 1998/99–2000/01: Policy matrix and tables. Retrieved 6/1/2006 http://www.imf.org/external/np/
pfp/malawi/tables.htm.
International Monetary Fund (1999). Republic of Mozambique enhanced structural adjustment facility
policy framework paper for April 1999–March 2002. Retrieved 6/1/2006 http://www.imf.org/external/
NP/PFP/1999/Mozam/Index.htm.
Jansen J. (1997). “Essential alterations?” A critical analysis of the states syllabus revision process.
Perspectives in Education, 17(2), 1–11.
Jansen, J. (1998). Curriculum reform in South Africa: A critical assessment of outcomes-based education.
Cambridge Journal of Education, 28(3), 321–331.
Jansen, J. & Christie, P. (Eds.) (1999). Changing curriculum: Studies on outcomes-based education in South
Africa (pp. 3–21). South Africa: Juta, Academic.
Jansen, J. (1999).“A very noisy OBE”: The implementation of OBE in grade 1 classrooms. In J. Jansen &
P. Christie (Eds), Changing the curriculum: Studies on outcomes-based education in South Africa. Cape
Town: Juta.
Jansen, J. (2002). Political symbolism as policy craft: Explaining non-reform in South African education
after apartheid. Journal of Educational Policy, 17(2), 199–215.
Jansen, J. (2004). Importing outcomes-based education into South Africa: Policy borrowing in a post-communist world. In D. Phillips & K. Ochs (Eds.), Educational policy borrowing: Historical perspectives.
Oxford: Symposium Books.
Jansen, J. (2005a). The seduction of sameness: The globalisation of pedagogies and impacts on developing
countries. In T. Townsend & R. Bates (Eds.), Globalization, standards and professionalism: Teacher
education in times of change. The Netherlands: Kluwer Press.
Jansen, J. (2005b). Targeting education: The politics of performance and the prospects of ‘Education for
All’. In International Journal of Educational Development, 25(4), 368–380.
Jennings, M. (2006). A century of development: Policy and process in sub-Saharan Africa. In I. Frame (Ed.),
Africa south of the Sahara: European regional surveys of the world. London: RKP.
Kraak, A. (n.d.) Policy ambiguity and slippage: Higher education under the new State, 1994–2001. In M.
Young & A. Kraak (Eds.), Education policy and implementation in South Africa. Cape Town: HSRC
Press.
Leyendecker, R. (2002). In search of promising practices in science, mathematics and ICT education in subSaharan Africa. Unpublished Master thesis. University of Twente, The Netherlands.
Leyendecker, R. (2005). Curricula, examination and assessment in sub-Saharan secondary education. Draft
research report. Presented at Windhoek conference on secondary education in Africa, July.
Malcolm, C. (2000) Implementation of outcomes-based approaches to education in Australia and South Africa:
A comparative study (RADMASTE, Wits).
McGrath, S. (2005). The multiple contexts of vocational education and training in southern Africa. In
S. Akoojee, A. Gewer & S. McGrath (Eds.), Vocational education and training in Southern Africa: A
comparative study. Pretoria: HSRC research monograph.
McLaughlin, J. et al. (2002). Education with production in Zimbabwe: The story of ZIMFEP. Harare and
Gaborone: ZIMFEP and FEP.
McLaughlin, M. (1991). The Rand change agent study: Ten years later. In A. R. Odden (Ed.), Education
policy implementation. New York: SUNY.
McLaughlin, M. (1998). Listening and learning from the field: tales of implementation and situated practice.
In A. Hargreaves, A. Lieberman, M. Gullan, & S. Hopkins (Eds.), International handbook of educational change. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Ministry of Education and Culture, Namibia (1993). Toward education for all: a development brief for education, culture and training. Windhoek: Government Printers.
Mohamed, H. (1998). The implementation of OBET in South Africa: Pathway to success or recipe for failure. Education Practice, 1, 3–16.
Morrow, S. et al. (2002). Education in exile: The African National Congress’s Solomon Mahlangu College
(SOMAFCO) and Dakawa Development Centre, Tanzania 1978–1992. In P. Kallaway (Ed.), The history
of education under apartheid, 1948–1994. Cape Town: Maskew Millar Longman.

--- [PDF Page 696 / Book Page 701] ---

Curriculum Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa: When Local Meets Global 701
Muller, J. (1998). NQF and outcomes-based education: Pedagogic models and hard choices. Centre for
education policy development. (Comp.) Reconstruction, development and the National Qualifications
Framework: Conference proceedings. Johannesburg: CEPD.
Muller, J. & Taylor, N. (1995). Schooling and everyday life: Knowledges sacred and profane. Social
Epistemology, 9, 257–275.
Muller, J. (2001). Progressivism redux: Ethos, policy, pathos. In A. Kraak & M. Young (Eds.), Education in
retrospect: Policy and implementation since 1990. HSRC and Institute of Education, n.d., c2001.
Muller, J. (2000). Reclaiming knowledge: Social theory, curriculum and education olicy. London: Routledge.
Namibia Ministry of Education and Culture (1993). Toward education for all: A development brief for education, culture and training. Windhoek.
Odora-Hoppers, C. (2002). Higher education, sustainable development and the imperative of social responsiveness, Mimeo, University of Pretoria.
Reeves, C. & Muller, J. (2005). Picking up the pace: Variation in the structure and organization of learning
school mathematics. Journal of Education, 37, 103–130.
Rogan, J. (2000). Strawberries, cream and the implementation of curriculum 2005: Towards a research
agenda. South African Journal of Education, 2(20), 118–125.
Samoff, J. (1999a). Institutionalizing international influence. In R. F. Arnove & Carlos Alberto Torres
(Eds), Comparative education: The dialectic of the global and the local (pp. 51–89). Boulder, CO:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Samoff, J. (1999b). No teacher guide, no textbooks, no chairs: Contending with crisis in African education.
In R. F. Arnove & C. A. Torres (Eds.), Comparative education: The dialectic of the global and the local
(pp. 393–431). Boulder, CO: Rowman & Littlefield.
Samoff, J. (2001). “Education for all” in Africa but education systems that serve few well. Perspectives in
Education, 19(1), 5–28.
Samoff, J. (2005). Education quality: Difficult choices. Paper prepared for the expert meeting on Researching
Quality of Education for All in the South: Main Issues and Current Gaps. University of Amsterdam,
29–30 August 2005.
Samson, M., & Vally, S. (1996). Snakes and ladders: Promises and potential pitfalls of the NQF. South
African Labour Bulletin, 20(4).
Schriewer, J. (Ed.) (2003). Discourse formation in comparative education. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Seidmann, G. (1985). Working for the future. Gaborone, Botswana: Foundation for Education with Production.
Simon, J. (1986). Psychology in the service of education – the work of AR Luria. Education with Production,
4(2): 104–130.
SMICT study. Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. Retrieved 12/12/2005 at http://www.cis.vu.nl/Projects.
Sparks, D. L. (2006). Economic trends in Africa south of the Sahara, 2006. In I. Frame (Ed.), Africa south
of the Sahara: Europea regional surveys of the world. London: RKP.
Spreen, C. (2004). Appropriating borrowed policies: Outcomes-based education in South Africa. In G.
Steiner-Khamsi (Ed.), The global politics of educational borrowing and lending. Columbia, New York
and London, Teachers’ College.
Stambach, A. (2000). Lessons from Mount Kilimanjaro: Schooling, community and gender in East Africa.
New York and London: Routledge.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2003). Transferring education, displacing reforms. In J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse
formation in comparative education. Berlin: Peter Lang.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (Ed.) (2004). The global politics of educational borrowing and lending. Columbia, New
York and London, Teachers’ College.
Sutton, M., & Levinson, B. (Eds.) (2001). Policy as practice: Towards a comparative socio-cultural analysis
of educational policy. Westport, CN: ABLEX Publishing.
Tabulawa, R. (1997). Pedagogical classroom practice and social context: The case of Botswana. International
Journal of Educational Development, 17(2).
Tabulawa, R. (2003). International aid agencies, learner-centred pedagogy and political democratisation:
A critique. Comparative Education, 39(1), 7–26.
Taylor, N., & Vinjevold P. (1999). Getting learning right: Report of the President’s education initiative.
Johannesburg: Joint Education Trust.

--- [PDF Page 697 / Book Page 702] ---

702 Chisholm and Leyendecker
Tikly, L. (2004). Education and the new imperialism. Comparative Education, 40(2), 173–198.
Tyack, D., & Cuban, L. (1995). Tinkering toward Utopia: A century of public school reform. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Unterhalter E. (1998a). Citizenship, difference and education: Reflections on the South African transition. In
P. Werbner & N. Yuval-Davis (Eds.), Women, citizenship and difference. London: Zed.
Unterhalter E. (1998b). Economic rationality or social justice? Gender, the National Qualifications
Framework and educational reform in South Africa 1989–1996, Cambridge Journal of Education,
28(3).
Van Harmelen, U. (1998). Is learner centred education child centred? Journal for Educational Reform in
Namibia, (8), 1–10.
Van Rensburg, P. (1978). The Serowe brigades: Alternative education in Botswana. Published by the Bernard
van Leer Foundation for MacMillan.
Vavrus, F. (2003). Desire and decline: Schooling amid crisis in Tanzania. New York: Peter Lang.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind and society: Development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Watson, K. (Ed.) (2001). Doing comparative education research: Issues and problems. Oxford: Symposium
Books.
Williams, G. (2006). Reforming Africa: Continuities and changes. In I. Frame (Ed.), Africa south of the
Sahara: Europea regional surveys of the world. London: RKP.
Kraak, A., & Young, M. (Eds.) (c 2001). Education in retrospect: Policy and implementation since 1990.
HSRC and Institute of Education.
ZIMFEP (n.d.). Nkululeko – A Step Ahead. Harare: Zimbabwe Foundation for Education with Production.

