================================================================================
Chapter 45: Gender and Education in Developing Contexts: Postcolonial Reflections on Africa
Author(s): Deevia Bhana, Robert Morrell, and Rob Pattman
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 703–713
PDF Pages: pp. 698–708 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 698 / Book Page 703] ---

45
GENDER AND EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING
CONTEXTS: POSTCOLONIAL REFLECTIONS
ON AFRICA
Deevia Bhana, Robert Morrell, and Rob Pattman

Introduction
Two of the most pressing educational concerns in sub-Saharan Africa – violence and
HIV/AIDS – are directly related to the ways in which gender is socially constructed. In
developing contexts gender has stubbornly remained a one-sided topic with the focus
firmly (and justifiably) on the plight of girls in schools. In the African context where
girls have often been marginalized, the benefits of education including increased economic opportunities, smaller families and its role as a “social vaccine” against HIV are
well documented. Yet, in many African countries, access to education is curtailed by
lack of resources and the question of quality of education has been raised as an important reason why girls continually lack the skills and confidence to make appropriate
choices in environments that are plagued by unemployment, poverty, violence, conflict
and HIV/AIDS. Schools are not safe places for girls and most of the gender analyses
focus on the ways in which sexual violence manifests in school sites hindering and
harming the education of girls. The focus on boys on the other hand and the construction of masculinities as a gendered construct has been largely absent from the literature
on gender and education in development discourse. Where the focus has been present
the construction of violent masculinities has received attention (Morrell, 2001). In
industrialized and developed economies, research on gender and education has focused
on boys, with a great deal of attention being given to the crisis of masculinity and feminist gains at the expense of boys. In this writing, boys have been presented as gendered
victims who need support. This is in contrast to writings about boys and men in Africa
who have often been demonized and seen as potentially dangerous. Recently though,
an approach in gender and education in sub-Saharan Africa trying to shed light on the
construction of masculinities and their complex relationship to socially and materially
impoverished contexts ravaged by HIV/AIDS is emerging. These analyses generally
conclude that violent and hegemonic forms of masculinities within resource-poor contexts nurture unequal gender relations and it is usually boys and male teachers that use
violence. Girls mainly suffer the consequences of violence in school. Similarly, most
reports on HIV/AIDS focus on how girls are made vulnerable to the disease by a rampant
heterosexual masculinity. Girls account for nearly 60% of HIV infections in sub-Saharan
703
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 703–713.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 699 / Book Page 704] ---

704 Bhana, Morrell, and Pattman

Africa (UNAIDS, 2004). Given that gender identities and processes are related to high
rates of violence and HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa, educational approaches have
begun to focus on the meanings that boys and girls give to their gendered identities in
the attempt to address the problems associated with rigid definitions of masculinity and
femininity and to find ways of increasing the possibilities of upholding peaceful gender
identities. To this end sex and HIV/AIDS education is now premised on working with
the lives and identities of children and youth in schools to create alternate possibilities of doing gender analyses. This chapter argues that in the context of violence and
HIV/AIDS a more sophisticated gender analysis is beginning to emerge in sub-Saharan
Africa that requires us to understand how both boys and girls are made vulnerable to
rigid notions of masculine and feminine hierarchies. It seeks to explore two key questions. First, how does a focus on masculinities help better to understand school boys in
sub-Saharan Africa? And second, in terms of HIV/AIDS, what are the implications of
gender-specific realities and vulnerabilities of boys and girls and how might these shifting and changing gender identities be used to enable education to embrace and promote
gender equity.
In this chapter, we take the perspective that gender is socially constructed, fluid and
open to change across different social settings. Whilst there is no single version of
masculinity and femininity, a version of masculinity which has great currency in the
sub-Saharan African context is one that demands respect, fosters gender violence and
increases girls’ vulnerability to HIV/AIDS. Material impoverishment is a key contextual
factor for working with boys and girls in developing contexts, limiting the opportunities
to create better gender relations. However, gender is fluid, and changing means that education is critical in working with boys and girls to change ascendant versions of gender.

Boys, Masculinities and Schooling:
Violence as an Issue of Schooling
Studies of masculinity and education in developed contexts have been dominated for
the last decade by a debate about a “crisis of masculinity”. Before asking the question
“does this framing have relevance in developing contexts?” it is important to identify
various elements of the “crisis of masculinity” literature.
In the first instance, the debate is essentially about gender politics. One position
holds that feminist successes in schools have led to the improvement in the fortunes
of girls to the detriment of boys. Schooling has been feminized and boys emasculated.
A backlash politics has emerged which demands an increase in the numbers of male
teachers, a review of the curriculum and other remedial steps to assist boys at school.
The backlash is often explicitly anti-feminist. An opposing position argues that there
is no crisis of masculinity, and that boys are still well treated and are doing well in
schools. They note that in terms of resources and facilities, boys still tend to get preference at schools and that even if some girls have overtaken boys in terms of academic
performance, overall most boys are still doing well. Feminists point out that girls still
battle to convert improved academic performance into labour market benefits where
women continue to earn less than men in comparative situations.

--- [PDF Page 700 / Book Page 705] ---

Gender And Education In Developing Contexts: Postcolonial Reflections On Africa 705

In the second instance, there are debates about the gendered state of education.
While the media have seized on stories of school violence, suicide, attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder and the relative decline in the academic performance of boys,
to construct an impression of a “crisis of masculinity” there have been studies to try
and assess the relative fortunes of boys and girls in education. In a very careful study
of teaching and teachers in the UK, for example, Thornton and Bricheno (2006) argue
that there is no evidence that increasing the number of male teachers would improve
the performance of boys and in fact point to evidence that suggests that boys are well
served by female teachers. In a very careful assessment, again of the UK, Arnot, David
and Weiner (1999) show that while state-led gender reform has helped to improve the
performance of girls (especially in subjects such as science and maths), no gender revolution has occurred and the educational fortunes of boys have not been jeopardized.
The third feature of the “crisis of masculinity” debate has been the recognition that
there are some boys who are doing worse. These are generally working-class boys or
those belonging to ethnic and racial minorities (Sewell, 1997). Changes in the labour
market have undermined access to jobs especially amongst the working-class youth
and this has contributed to a variety of problems for the young men themselves and for
society more widely. These include laddism, forms of violence, involvement in crime
and anti-social behaviours (McDowell, 2000; Nayak, 2003).

How Do These Debates Transfer into Developing Contexts?
The major educational challenge in developing countries remains to provide access to
education for young people. Such goals generally involve recognizing current inequalities where boys are favoured to the detriment of girls. With very few exceptions, the
percentage of boys in primary school in the developing world exceeds that of girls
(Seager, 2003, pp. 112–119). The quality of education offered to boys and girls is also by
and large biased in favour of boys with some of the most obvious indicators being levels
of dropout due to pregnancy and the increasing gap between the attendance and performance of males and females as one ascends the education ladder. In most developing
countries, male university attendance exceeds that of females. These inequalities provide
justification for countries to pursue girl-promoting gender policies in education, yet at
the same time, these policies are seldom pursued energetically and generally not to the
point where men could argue that school-going boys are being discriminated against.
In societies that are embracing human rights agendas which in turn contain traces of
feminist agendas, policies to promote the academic interests and educational fortunes
of girls are being made. In some cases such as in South Africa these are being generated by the state, in other cases, they have their origin in the work of NGOs (such as
Camfed which in countries like Zimbabwe have been promoting schooling for girls)
and in initiatives such as the DfID Beyond Access programme which has sought to
improve retention rates for girls in countries like Bangladesh. Have these programmes
had a deleterious impact on boys and contributed to a “crisis of masculinity”? There
seems little evidence of this. However, there are a number of reasons why the issue of
boys and education in developing contexts should be taken seriously.

--- [PDF Page 701 / Book Page 706] ---

706 Bhana, Morrell, and Pattman

The example of South Africa can illustrate some of these points. Possessing the biggest and most dynamic economy of the region and fresh from the triumph of ending
the racially discriminatory system of apartheid, the country has passed a constitution
and bill of rights that prohibit discrimination on grounds of gender and sexual orientation. At the same time it has committed itself to attacking poverty, a goal that critics
believe is jeopardized by policies that are more concerned with tackling inflation and
attracting overseas investment than with creating jobs. Unemployment thus remains
at very high levels (officially around 25% but in reality higher). Since the turn of the
millennium, women’s share of the formal labour market has risen. The performance
of girls in schools has improved. On the other hand, for the first time, the number of
boys dropping out of school exceeds that of girls. Crime levels are exceedingly
high (on average there are 19,000–20,000 murders a year in national population of just
over 40 million) and much of the crime is committed by young African men. Levels of
domestic violence and rape are amongst the highest in the world.
The effects of globalization (e.g., the collapse of the labour market) on third-world
economies has created conditions for the emergence of marginalized masculinities
around the world (Barker, 2005; Guttman, 2003; Morrell, 2001; Ouzgane 2006). With
little prospect of work and apparently unwilling or unable to enter subsistence (second)
economies, many men abandon families and other support structures and surrender to
alcoholic despair, drugs and sexually risky lifestyles (Silberschmidt, 2001).
Men on the margins pose dangers for national peace and security. Their access to
weapons increases the risks of war and strengthens hierarchical value systems which
rest on and perpetuate gender inequality. These value systems also legitimate violent
practices such as the killing of women in parts of the Islamic world where they are held
to have shamed the family and honour codes.
Men who feel excluded are also a threat to development. This danger was not always
appreciated. Development projects which specifically tried to promote women’s interests often viewed patriarchy as the cause of women’s subordination and therefore
consciously attempted to exclude men, citing them as the “cause” of women’s exploitation. But the limitations of women’s upliftment and the Women in Development (WID)
approach led to later Gender and Development (GAD) approaches which recognized
the strategic danger of keeping men out of development work while also acknowledging the importance of thinking about men in gendered ways, which effectively meant
problematizing masculinity (Cornwall, 1997; Cornwall & White, 2000).
Thinking about men in development contexts has not been uncomplicated. It has
on the one hand generated inclusive gendered approaches towards issues such as violence, fatherhood and peace, all of which have been designed to get men to see beyond
a narrow male-centred agenda that protects and promotes their power and to embrace
values that contribute to gender equity (and the interests of community, women, children, the aged and so on). They have also encouraged men to engage in reconstructive,
introspective identity work as part of a process to fashion “new men”. These developments have, however, been complicated by material circumstances (joblessness and
poverty) and struggles over resources within communities and families that have all
too often ended in violence and have shown how precarious (and potentially recidivist)
newly reconstructed masculinities can be.

--- [PDF Page 702 / Book Page 707] ---

Gender And Education In Developing Contexts: Postcolonial Reflections On Africa 707

Two questions have therefore been raised: if we are not to consider men and boys
either as “a problem” or as “in crisis”, what should we consider them to be? And what
should boys and men aspire to in order to fit into and contribute to society?
An answer to the former question lies tangled in questions about masculinity: Are
there positive models of masculinity available in developing and postcolonial contexts?
If so, what do they look like? (cf. Cleaver, 2002). But increasingly the interdependence
of men and women and the importance of promoting gender harmony and cooperation
are encouraging the inclusion of men and the consideration of issues of masculinity
and undermining pathologizing discourses. Put another way, the destiny of women and
men are tied together and it is important to theorize gender solutions in ways that pay
attention to both men and women, their needs, their interdependence and the inequalities that may separate them and bring them into conflict.
There is also recognition that boys (and men) are not inherently violent even as
it is recognized that violence is a serious and widespread problem in many schools
(Leach, 2003). The focus has shifted from trying to protect girls from boys to understanding which groups of boys are most at risk of being involved in violence: which
models of masculinity contribute to the legitimation of violence and how to intervene
to prevent violence.
The correlation of poverty with violence is strong although the causal connections
remain unclear. Where race, ethnicity, social class and age intersect we find young
black males who are likely from an early age to become involved in violence (Barker,
2005). The violence takes many forms which include involvement in gang wars, crime,
ethnic or national armed conflicts and intimate partner and domestic violence. In this
latter regard, the violent masculinity has become a source of interest among those
attempting to better understand and prevent HIV transmission which does occur in
situations of gender inequality and sexual violence (see Pattman’s section below).
Educational work with young men has concentrated heavily on addressing the issue
of violence. Whereas a fear of “a crisis of masculinity” in developed contexts has
fueled attempts to improve the academic performance of boys and to make schools
more boy-friendly, boys in developing contexts are not being treated as a group
deserving of rescue. Rather, they are considered as a constituent part of the problems besetting education in the developing world, as well as potential beneficiaries of
attempts successfully to address these problems (including violence, HIV infections,
school dropout).
An unresolved issue that underpins ongoing concerns about boys and masculinity in
schools is the lack of a clear connection between schooling and the world of work, the
consequent poor prospects of employment juxtaposed with the enduring expectation
that men should be providers. The history of men in the Third World is filled with their
efforts to either enter the wage economy or to remain productively independent of it.
Both efforts were generally predicated on the acceptance that it was their responsibility
to provide for families. In most developing contexts, men find it difficult to fulfil the
provider role. In South Africa this has led to huge numbers of men living away from
their families and many seeking to escape their legal obligation to support their children
(Wilson, 2006). As Mark Hunter (2006) has put it, in South Africa, there are many
fathers who lack “amandla” (power). Some seek to meet their familial obligations by

--- [PDF Page 703 / Book Page 708] ---

708 Bhana, Morrell, and Pattman

turning to crime. What this situation reveals is a tension between what R. W. Connell
has termed the patriarchal dividend and the structural weakness of men in developing
contexts. Men may have power (physically or collectively) in relation to younger and
older men and in relation to some women, disabled people, ethnic minorities and other
marginal groupings, but their inability to secure their own reproduction costs means
that they are also powerless in certain contexts.
A lack of material security is likely to remain a key contextual factor for boys and
men in developing contexts and in a sense there is little they can do about the materiality
of their situation. But they can and do have some control over the ways in which they
construct their masculine identities and the school is a critical location of this work.
The incidence of HIV/AIDS and the efforts to contain and stop the spread of the
disease in sub-Saharan Africa has made the argument of the school as a powerful location for addressing and changing behaviour compelling. The gender dimension of the
disease is critical for understanding its impact and to the successful implementation
of prevention programmes. The ways in which boys and girls construct their gendered
identities and the ways in which education can address these constructions as well as
focus on new ways of constructions are important to consider. We focus upon the work
conducted in gendering of AIDS and how these issues might be addressed in schools
in the next section.

AIDS and Gender, Gender and AIDS
Because of the coincidence between lower rates of HIV infection and higher levels
of educational participation, education has been described in Southern Africa as a
“vaccine” against AIDS (Coombe & Kelly, 2000). This would seem to be particularly
true for girls. According to UNICEF (2004) more than two out of three newly infected
15–24-year-olds in sub-Saharan Africa are female, and this largely reflects tendencies
for females to enter into (often coercive) sexual relations with older and more sexually
experienced males. Girls who drop out of school early (and generally in sub-Saharan
Africa girls drop out earlier than boys in part to take on domestic and caring obligations at home – made more pressing as a result of AIDS) are particularly vulnerable
because they are more dependent on older, richer men than “more educated women”
with better job prospects and greater value outside the home (UNESCO, 2003). Yet
interview and ethnographic studies in schools in South Africa (e.g., Morrell, 1998,
2000; Human Rights Watch, 2001; Jewkes et al., 2002; Bhana, 2005; Mitchell et al.,
2005; Kent 2004) and also in Botswana, Zambia and Kenya (Pattman & Chege, 2003),
and Ghana, Malawi and Zimbabwe, (Leach et al., 2003) have shown that schools are
not safe places for girls and sexual harassment and violence are major and habitual
problems many girls face at school. Not only do these studies point to the routine
propositioning of girls by older male students as well as by male teachers, but also to
the failure of school authorities to recognize and address this as a problem.
Much faith has been placed in developing sex educational initiatives in schools to
provide young people with relevant knowledge and life skills to help them avoid
HIV/AIDS. But if schools are places where girls are subordinated in relation to sexuality

--- [PDF Page 704 / Book Page 709] ---

Gender And Education In Developing Contexts: Postcolonial Reflections On Africa 709

it has to be questioned whether they are “appropriate places upon which to pin hopes
of change”. This is the view of Alex Kent (2004) based on her detailed ethnography of
a Durban school and the polarization of gender identities (heterosexual), subordination
of girls through school beauty contests, sexual harassment, gendered forms of punishment and the unequal gendering of spaces.
Indeed there is evidence that sex education, as it is being taught in schools, may
yet be another vehicle through which gender inequalities may be produced (either
overtly promoted or implicitly reinforced) in relation to sexuality. Interview research
with various schoolchildren and teachers in Kenya and Zimbabwe has suggested that
sex education may be quite moralistic and didactic, blaming “promiscuous” people
and especially women for AIDS, and working with the assumption that sexuality is
reducible to a biological drive located mainly in males, and that young people ought
to control this and young women ought not to “provoke” this. And observation of
HIV/AIDS and life skills lessons in Kenya and Botswana revealed that girls were
quiet, looked shy and uncomfortable and boys participated much more and received
more teachers’ attention. (Pattman & Chege, 2003) While the popular “ABC” campaigns in many African countries, with the emphasis in schools on A, may not advocate
sexual double standards, these have been criticized for their gender insensitivity and
for lumping together males and females as if they are free individuals not caught up in
gender power relations. Mitchell and Smith, for example, critique the ABC campaign
for assuming girls have choice on whether to abstain or not or how many partners they
and their sexual partners may have or whether to carry condoms, and ignoring the
pressures emanating from structured gender and age inequalities for girls to enter into
risky heterosexual relations.
But schools, as Mannah (2002) has argued, are potentially vital sites in the fight
against HIV/AIDS partly because of young people’s daily contact with them and the
availability of skilled staff, (or, we would add in relation to HIV/AIDS education,
potentially skilled staff.) Pattman (2006) argues that it is precisely because schools
are so implicated in producing gender power relations that school sex educational and
teacher training programmes must be developed which are student-centred and gendersensitive. They must make the lives and identities of students the key resources, and
encourage students and teachers to reflect on the gender dynamics and power relations
at school and in class and other contexts outside school and their own identifications
and practices.
Indeed many sex educational initiatives targeting schoolchildren and teachers are
informed by these concerns. Such initiatives are influenced by assumptions that gender
identities are not fixed by “culture” or biology but are negotiated in everyday interactions, though also constrained by popular and long-standing discourses or narratives
about gender and sexuality, and that there are different ways of being masculine or
feminine (Connell, 1995). As Walsh, Mitchell and Smith (2003) argue, sex educators
need to engage with young people as both producers and consumers of popular culture
and constructions of gender, sexuality and HIV/AIDS. Activities using comics, photos
and photography, drama and role-play have been developed with students and teachers
to explore their and alternative constructions of gender, sexuality, violence, harassment
and HIV/AIDS, and to encourage critical voices to emerge. For example: Storytelling

--- [PDF Page 705 / Book Page 710] ---

710 Bhana, Morrell, and Pattman

for a Change (2004), a project using and developing “comic stories” with students in
South Africa; photo voice research conducted with girls on unsafe spaces in schools in
South Africa (Mitchell et al., 2005); “Opening our Eyes”, a module aimed at teachers
and drawing, in part, on the photo voice work with the schoolgirls (Mitchell, 2004);
developing and performing plays “designed to raise HIV/AIDS and gender awareness”
in schools in South Africa (Morrell, 2004); making routine gendered performances
(Butler, 1990) and bodily practices the topics of self-reflexive inquiry through role
play in schools in Mozambique, Thorpe (2002); agony aunt role-playing games in
Zimbabwe, Kaim, (2002). When used in sex educational programmes in schools,
drama and role-playing may enable pupils to explore their (gendered and sexual) identities in a range of imaginary contexts outside the classroom where they may be used
to presenting themselves in quite different and even contradictory ways. (Pattman &
Chege, 2003).
In developing gender-sensitive forms of sex education, Pattman (2005) argues that
we need to address masculinity and femininity in relation to each other precisely
because these are not essences boys and girls possess which exist in isolation but are
always constructed relationally. Sex education aimed at empowering girls and women
but targeted only at them tends to reinforce assumptions that reproductive health is
primarily their responsibility (Bujra, 2000) and males are more sexual or more sexually irresponsible. An alternative way of empowering girls is to encourage both boys
and girls to reflect critically on the problems that arise for them and for the other sex
as a result of enacting stereotypical constructions of masculinity and femininity. This
assumes that females are not less sexual than males and that sexual abuse comprises
not only, as Carol Vance (1984) argued so powerfully, sexual harassment and violence
but also the policing and regulation of female sexuality. This may make it difficult for
girls, constructed as responsible, to carry condoms (Campbell, 2003) or to stay out at
night or wear certain kinds of clothes or even talk about their sexual desires (Pattman,
2005). It also assumes that it is in the interests of both boys and girls to develop
less polarized and more egalitarian relationships – sexual and non-sexual – with the
opposite sex. This is a position which draws on Bob Connell’s (1995) contention that
hegemonic constructions of males as emotionally and physically tough and as possessors of a huge sex drive incur costs not only for girls, but for boys, generally, who try to
live up to these: for example, anxieties about girlfriends rejecting them for older, richer
and more sexually experienced boys and men, being unable to publicly express feelings of love and intimacy and fears about getting into fights with, and being bullied by,
other boys. Such anxieties were expressed by boys in South Africa and Zimbabwe in
individual diaries though not publicly in group interviews (Pattman & Chege, 2003).
In response to a “crisis of masculinity” in the West, centring around constructions of
boys as sexually irresponsible, violent and anti-academic (see previous section), calls
have been made by academics and politicians for stronger male role models as teachers
and fathers (e.g., Biddulph, 1998) to encourage boys to develop a sense of self-control
and responsibility (a position challenged by Thornton’s and Bricheno’s (2006) study
in the UK, mentioned in the previous section). The problem with this view is that
it assumes an essential masculinity which only male authority figures can model in
a responsible way, a view very much at odds with the idea of gender as relational

--- [PDF Page 706 / Book Page 711] ---

Gender And Education In Developing Contexts: Postcolonial Reflections On Africa 711

advanced above. Taking gender as relational, Pattman (2006) has argued that male sex
education teachers can act as very positive role models, not, however, by exemplifying
conventional tough and authoritarian modes of masculinity but by subverting these. He
draws on research (Pattman & Chege, 2003) which shows that male and female teachers in South Africa and Botswana, tended to be constructed by pupils in quite polarized
ways as, respectively, authoritarian and caring, (see also Kent, 2004) and argues for the
importance of male sex educators (trained to be gender-sensitive and student-centred)
demonstrating how males can be sensitive, approachable and non-aggressive and
develop close and caring relations with girls which are non-sexual and non-harassing.
Whether to address boys and girls separately or together is a contentious issue
among those committed to gender-sensitive forms of sex education. Responding to the
research findings which present schools as places where girls are subject to forms of
sexual harassment and subordination, Morrell (2000) has argued for more single-sex
schools to provide safe and supportive environments for girls. In contrast, Pattman
(2005) has suggested that a key aim of sex education should be to encourage boys
and girls to identify less in opposition to each other and to promote possibilities of
cross-gender friendships, and that this is only feasible when boys and girls are given
opportunities to work together and learn from each other, (even if single-sex group
work may need to be used in sex education, in conjunction with mixed groups, as a
way of enabling girls, initially, to talk openly about issues relating to sexuality and
gender). However single-sex schools may be particularly important for empowering
girls, Unterhalter and others (2004) argue in regions, such as Northern Kenya, where
gender-segregated relations are sanctioned on religious grounds and girls tend to be
withdrawn from (mixed) schools as they reach puberty.

Conclusion
The specific needs of boys and girls and their vulnerabilities in sub-Saharan Africa have
not received adequate attention in educational research and policy. Too many gender analyses in education focus on the percentage of males and females in primary and secondary
schooling. Girls are often seen to be victims without much voice whereas boys are constructed as sexual predators and as violent. While we have made a strong case for showing
how violence and HIV/AIDS links to boys’ and girls’ vulnerabilities in schools, the use
of demonizing terms to construct boys as violent and aggressive is unhelpful particularly as these homogenizing categories fail to consider the plurality of boys’ experiences.
Similarly most reports on HIV/AIDS show how girls are made vulnerable by the sexual
behaviour of boys. In this chapter, we have argued that many of the negative behaviour
patterns exhibited by boys are often part of public display of male identity defined within
rigid social constructs of what it means to be a boy and man in sub-Saharan Africa.
However, in sub-Saharan Africa there is evidence of changing gender norms especially
as a result of women and girls’ greater access to labour markets which is eroding men’s
sense of entitlement to economic advantage. At the same time there is recognition of the
importance of men and women working together and the positive impact of education
on income and on the health of the family. In South Africa, for example, the constitution

--- [PDF Page 707 / Book Page 712] ---

712 Bhana, Morrell, and Pattman

and the calamitous effects of HIV/AIDS, are changing how some men see themselves in
relation to women, whilst others continue to hold on to traditional views.
Working with boys and girls to change the normative constructions of gender is
critical and HIV/AIDS education as we have shown provides a fertile ground for this
to happen. However, change is slow and in the sub-Saharan context, material impoverishment and the vulnerabilities created for boys and girls as a result impact heavily
on what change is possible. We have, in this chapter argued nevertheless, that the challenge for education in the light of violence and the massive work needed to stop the
spread of the disease, is to tap into the voices of boys and girls and for boys and girls
to set the agenda in locating the pathways of change.

References
Arnot, M., David, M., & Weiner, G. (1999). Closing the gender gap: Postwar education and social change.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Barker, G. (2005). Dying to be a man: Youth, masculinity and social exclusion. London: Routledge.
Bhana, D. (2005). Violence and the gendered negotiation of masculinity among young black boys in South Africa.
In L. Ouzgane & R. Morrell (Eds.), African Masculinities (pp. 205–220). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Biddulph, S. (1998). Raising boys. London: Harper Collins.
Bujra, J. (2000). Targeting men for a change: AIDS discourse and activism in Africa. Agenda, 44, 6–23.
Campbell, C. (2003). Letting them die: Why HIV/AIDS intervention programmes fail. Oxford: James Curry Press.
Chant, S., & Gutmann, M. C. (2002). ‘Men-streaming’ gender? Questions for gender and development
policy in the twenty-first century. Progress in Development Studies, 2(4), 269–282.
Cleaver, F. (Ed.). (2002). Masculinities matter! men, gender and development. London and Cape Town: Zed
and David Philip.
Connell, R. W. (1995). Masculinities. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Coombe, C., & Kelly, M. J. (2000). Education as a vehicle for combating HIV/AIDs. Uganda: UNESCO.
Cornwall, A. (1997). Men, masculinity, and gender in development. Gender and Development, 5(2), 8–13.
Cornwall, A., & White, S. (Eds.) (2000). Men, masculinities and development: Politics, policies and practice. IDS Bulletin, 31(2), 1–6.
Guttman, M. C. (Ed.) (2003). Changing men and masculinities in Latin America. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Human Rights Watch (2001). Scared at school: Sexual violence against girls in South African Schools. New York:
Human Rights Watch.
Hunter, M. (2006). Fathers without amandla? In L. Richter and R. Morrell (Eds.), Baba? Fathers and
Fatherhood in South Africa (pp. 99–107). Pretoria: HSRC.
Jewkes, R., Levin, J., Mbananga, N., & Bradshaw, D. (2002). Rape of girls in South Africa. Lancet, 359(26),
319–320.
Kaim, B. (2002). Their reproductive health: A case study from Zimbabwe. In A. Cornwall & A. Welbourn
(Eds.), Realising rights (pp. 181–188). London: Zed.
Kent, A. (2004). Living life on the edge: Examining space and sexualities within a township high school
in greater Durban in the context of the HIV epidemic. Transformation: Critical perspectives in
South Africa, 54, 59–75.
Leach, F. (2003). Learning to be violent: The role of the school in developing adolescent gendered behaviour.
Compare, 33(3), 385–400.
Leach, F., Fiscian, V., Kadzamira, E., Lenani, W., & Machakanja, P. (2003). An investigative study of the
abuse of girls in African schools (DfID Education Research Report No. 54). London: DfID.
Mannah, S. (2002). South Africa: The complex role of teaching about HIV/AIDS in schools. Prospect,
32(2), 155–170.
McDowell, L. (2000). The trouble with men? Young people, gender transformations and the crisis of masculinity. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 24(1), 201–209.

--- [PDF Page 708 / Book Page 713] ---

Gender And Education In Developing Contexts: Postcolonial Reflections On Africa 713
Mitchell, C. & Smith, A. (2001). Changing the picture: Youth, gender and HIV/AIDS prevention campaigns
in South Africa. Retrieved October 2007 from http://hivaidsclearinghouse.unesco.org/ev.php?ID =
1311_201&ID2 = DO_TOPIC.
Mitchell, C. (2004). Opening our eyes. Gender violence in schools: What can be done? Gender violence in
schools newsletter no. 2. Retrieved October 2007 from http://www.sussex.ac.uk/education/documents/
gvschools2.pdf.
Mitchell, C., Moletsane, R., Stuart, J., Buthelezi, T., & De Lange, N. (2005). Taking pictures, taking action!
Children First, 9(60), 27–31.
Morrell, R. (1998). Gender and education: The place of masculinity in South African schools. South African
Journal of Education, 18(4), 218–225.
Morrell, R. (2000). Considering the case for single-sex schools for girls in South Africa. McGill Journal of
Education, 35(3), 221–244.
Morrell, R. (Ed.) (2001). Changing men in Southern Africa. Pietermaritzburg and London: University of
Natal Press and Zed.
Morrell, R. (2004). Drama for self reflection. Gender violence in schools: What can be done? Gender
violence in schools newsletter no. 2. Retrieved October 2007 from http://www.sussex.ac.uk/education/
documents/gvschools2.pdf.
Nayak, A. (2003). “Boyz to men”: Masculinities, schooling and labour transitions in de-industrial times.
Educational Review, 55(2), 147–159.
Ouzgane, L. (Ed.) (2006). Islamic masculinities. London: Zed.
Pattman, R. (2005). Boys and girls should not get too close: Sexuality, the identities of African boys and girls
and HIV/AIDS education. Sexuality, 8(4), 501–520.
Pattman, R. (2006). Making pupils the resources and promoting gender equality in HIV/AIDS education.
Journal of Education, 38, 89–116.
Pattman, R., & Chege, F. (2003). Finding our voices: Gendered and sexual identities and HIV/AIDS in
education. Nairobi: UNICEF.
Seager, J. (2003). The Penguin atlas of women in the world (3rd edn.). New York: Penguin.
Sewell, T. (1997). Black masculinity and schooling: How black boys survive modern schooling. Stoke-onTrent: Falmer Press.
Silberschmidt, M. (2001). Disempowerment of men in rural and urban east Africa: Implications for male
identity and sexual behavior. World Development, 29(4), 657–671.
Storytelling for Change. (2004). Gender violence in schools: What can be done? Gender violence in
schools newsletter no. 2. Retrieved October 2007 from http://www.sussex.ac.uk/education/documents/
gvschools2.pdf.
Thornton, M., & Bricheno, P. (2006). Missing men in education. Stoke-on-Trent, UK and Sterling, USA:
Trentham Books.
Thorpe, M. (2002). Masculinity in an HIV intervention. Agenda, 53, 61–68.
UNAIDS (2004). Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic. Retrieved October 2007 from http://www.unaids.
org/bangkok2004/GAR2004_pdf/UNAIDSGlobalReport2004_en.pdf.
UNESCO (2003). EFA global monitoring report: Gender and education for all, The leap to equality. Paris:
UNESCO.
UNICEF (2004). The state of the world’s children. Retrieved October 2007 from http://www.unicef.org/
sowc04/files/SOWC_O4_eng.pdf.
Unterhalter, E., Kioko-Echessa, E., Pattman, R., Rajagopalan, R., & N’Jai, F. (2004). Scaling up girls’
education: Towards a scorecard on girls’ education in the Commonwealth (Paper commissioned by
the Commonwealth Secretariat). Retrieved October 2007 from http://k1.ioe.ac.uk/schools/efps/
GenderEducDev/Where%20are%20we%20scaling%20up%20from%20FINAL%20FINAL.pdf.
Vance, C. (1984). Pleasure and danger: Towards a politics of sexuality. In C. Vance (Ed.), Pleasure and
danger, exploring female sexuality. London: Pandora.
Walker, L., & Reid, G. (Eds.) (2004). Waiting to happen: HIV/AIDS in South Africa. Colorado: Lynne Reiner
Publishers.
Walsh, S., Mitchell, C., & Smith, A. (2003). The soft cover project: Youth African participation in HIV/
AIDS interventions. Agenda, 53, 106–112.
Wilson, F. (2006). On being a father and poor in Southern Africa today. In L. Richter & R. Morrell (Eds.),
Baba? Fathers and fatherhood in South Africa (pp. 26–37). Pretoria: HSRC.

