================================================================================
Chapter 46: Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship: Two Brazilian Experiences
Author(s): Tristan McCowan and Luís Armando Gandin
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 715–732
PDF Pages: pp. 709–726 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 709 / Book Page 715] ---

46
REINVENTING EDUCATIONAL SPACES,
BUILDING ACTIVE CITIZENSHIP:
TWO BRAZILIAN EXPERIENCES
Tristan McCowan and Luís Armando Gandin

Introduction
When Leslie Bethell (2000) states that, “Brazil is a democracy of voters, not yet a
democracy of citizens”, he is highlighting two significant aspects of the country.
Firstly, the fact that all people can vote in Brazil, and nearly all do (it is obligatory
for those aged 18–70), is indicative of a range of advances in the twentieth-century that
ensured universal formal rights. The Constitution of 1988 and the Statute of the Child
and the Adolescent of 1990 form part of an edifice of official guarantees to the people, including that of compulsory education from 7 to 14 years. Yet the progressive
and enlightened nature of much Brazilian legislation and institutional structures is
matched by the ineffectiveness and incompleteness of their implementation. Civil
rights are generally upheld only in proportion to the wealth of the individuals involved,
and the poorest have next to no social rights. In the political sphere, there is formal,
but not effective, participation.
In general terms, it is possible to see citizenship as consisting of two strands: the
passive, relating to the set of rights that the State guarantees to uphold for the individual, and the active, relating to the participation of the individual in the functioning
of the State. The two major paradigms of citizenship – liberal and civic republican
– each focus principally on one of these two elements, the former on rights and the
latter on active participation (Heater, 1999; Kymlicka, 2002). Yet it can be argued that
citizenship will only be effective if attention is paid to both, with citizens ensured of
their civil, political and social rights (in T. H. Marshall’s [1950] conception) and taking
an active part in decision-making, whether at the local or national level.
Education is related to both these strands of citizenship. Firstly, it is itself a right
(though the nature and extent of that right may be strongly contested) and as such,
citizenship makes necessary the provision of at least basic education for all. Yet education is also a means to ensuring the second strand. Effective participation cannot be
‘granted’ to citizens (even though the State can make efforts to remove formal barriers).
It depends on knowledge, skills and dispositions that must be developed internally and
thus will occur largely through formal or informal education. Importantly, therefore,
effective citizenship raises questions over the quantity and quality of schooling, the
access to educational provision and its nature or orientation.
715
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 715–732.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 710 / Book Page 716] ---

716 McCowan and Gandin

In addition, we can distinguish between weak and strong forms of political
participation (McCowan, 2006a). Current democratic systems for the most part allow
citizens freedom of choice among candidates and policies. Yet these political options
are embedded in a deeper framework of social, economic and political structures and
relations which are fundamental to the running of the polity but which are rarely questioned. Strong forms of citizenship (truly critical forms) will allow these underlying
orientations of society, the questioning of which is often taboo, to be open for rethinking
and reinvention.
The above analysis, however, shows a certain universalist tendency, one which
Unterhalter (1999, pp. 102–103) calls, “an appeal to an abstract concept of the citizen, stripped of all qualities save subjective rationality and morality”, and which can
“maintain and perpetuate social divisions based on gender, race ethnicity, sexuality
and disability”. Discussion of citizenship must balance the need for universal rights
and participation with the claims of particular groups for recognition of difference.
Formal equality may mask inequalities and discrimination in practice. People with
disabilities, for example, may have specific requirements to enable them to participate on an equal footing in the political sphere. Policies may be needed to address
histories of discrimination on the basis of gender and race. This provision may not be
easy to achieve: identity has an uneasy relationship with citizenship, since the latter
unavoidably entails some abstraction from specific characteristics towards the general
characteristics of membership of a polity.
The history of Brazil has not provided fertile ground for the flowering of citizenship.
Each of its periods – successively characterized by colonization, authoritarianism and
neo-liberalism – has limited both the aspects of extending rights and equipping people
for active participation. After independence in 1821, it was well over half a century
before slavery was abolished in 1888. Since then, there have been two periods of dictatorship, from 1937–1945 and 1964–1985, and stuttering advances towards democracy
in between. Despite significant democratization since 1985, social inequalities remain
acute. Brazil in 2006 was ranked 10th most unequal country on the Gini scale, with
the top 10% of society having a 58 times greater share of wealth than the bottom 10%
(UNDP, 2006).
This historical background is important in understanding the current educational context in Brazil. The country’s unique scenario is a product of long-lasting
battles between progressives and traditionalists on the one hand and between the
elites and working classes on the other. In the colonial period, opportunities were
few and far between, even for the wealthy, who as a general rule sent their children
to be educated in Europe. After a slow expansion of provision in the nineteenth
century, a new momentum came with the formation of the Republic, as faith grew
in the importance of universal schooling and the role of formal education in promoting technological advances (Havighurst & Moreira, 1965). Yet it was only with
the rapid economic growth of the years after the Second World War that significant
quantitative gains were made, and these continued until near universal primary
enrolment was achieved by the end of the century (secondary and higher education
gross enrolments are less impressive, standing at 75% and 20% respectively –
UNESCO, 2004; INEP, 20031).

--- [PDF Page 711 / Book Page 717] ---

Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship 717

However, while these quantitative gains are welcome, they hide deep and widespread
problems of quality. Curriculum in Brazil has traditionally been characterized by an
allegiance to inert academic learning with little relevance to the local context. The
Escola Nova (new school) movement in the first half of the twentieth century, led
by Anísio Teixeira, consequently attempted to inject new life into schools, promoting expression, investigation and problem-solving relating to current issues. These
reforms, however, did not affect the majority of educational provision (Louro, 1986).
Moreover, in addition to these ‘soft’ elements, the movement had a ‘hard’ side of
pragmatic instrumentalism, paving the way for the later technicist approaches of the
military dictatorship. Ironically, it was during the two periods of the twentieth century
in which direct elections were suspended – first the Vargas period from 1937 and later
after the military coup of 1964 – that citizenship became an explicit part of the curriculum. Yet this was a form of citizenship education that fostered neither rights nor
critical participation. Educação Moral e Cívica (Moral and Civic Education) became
a compulsory subject, promoting a conservative patriotism, one which valued duties
over rights and the glory of the nation over justice for all its members.
After 1985, direct elections returned and the country experienced a considerable
opening of democratic spaces and emergence of social movements. This period coincides with the worldwide rise of an economic policy framework commonly termed
‘neo-liberalism’, which, while to a lesser extent than in other Latin American countries
such as Chile, brought significant changes in Brazilian society. During the administration of Fernando Henrique Cardoso (1994–2002) public spending in education was
focused increasingly on the primary level, in accordance with the recommendations
of the World Bank and other international agencies, with private providers increasing
their share at post-compulsory levels. This succeeded in bringing high levels of commercialization in higher education, and despite steady gains in primary enrolments,
did not resolve problems of quality, with severe lack of resources and high levels of
unqualified teachers in the poorer regions of the country (Gentili, 1995; Gentili &
Frigotto, 2000).
A new paradigm of citizenship emerges in this final period. The political sphere
appears to be subordinated to the economic, with the free market becoming the model
system of public services. The citizen is thereby identified with the consumer, making
choices among a number of competing services, but limited, of course, by purchasing
power. While the citizen of the authoritarian regime was disempowered by repression
and a lack of political rights, the consumer-citizen is disempowered in more subtle
ways. Having been granted the semblance of power through choice (the ‘parent power’
of UK government discourse) the consumer-citizen surrenders the potential power of
collective organization, democratic deliberation and peaceful protest.
Effective citizenship in Brazil today is threatened by both the paradigms of authoritarianism and neo-liberalism. This chapter explores two educational initiatives, which,
in different ways, aim to challenge these frameworks and form new conceptions
of citizenship in their place. The first is the Movement of Landless Rural Workers
(MST2), a social movement that has campaigned for agrarian reform since its founding
in 1984, and which has established a nationwide network of schools in its cooperative settlements. The second is the Citizen School, an initiative implemented by the

--- [PDF Page 712 / Book Page 718] ---

718 McCowan and Gandin

municipal government of Porto Alegre, aiming to combat educational exclusion. These
are distinct in significant ways: the MST is a social movement and one working in
rural areas, while the Citizen School is an urban government-led programme. Yet they
share the feature of belonging to a broad popular movement of social and educational
reform that emerged towards the end of the military dictatorship. In the process of
re-democratization, the establishment of the Constitution and the National Educational
Plan, sections of Brazilian civil society experienced high levels of mobilization and
created a number of spaces for participatory democracy (Gentili & McCowan, 2003).
Numerous trade unions and social movements were formed to represent the interests of particular groups which had been marginalized in previous decades. Forums
such as the CONEDs (National Congresses of Education) and the World Social and
Education Forums in Porto Alegre created national and international focal points for
campaigns. Local governments around the country developed new forms of participatory policy (e.g., Gandin & Apple, 2002; McCowan, 2006b): in this the Workers’
Party (PT) has been particularly influential, its achievements at the local level being in
many ways more noteworthy than those at the national level. Underlying many of these
new initiatives in the educational sphere is the thought of Paulo Freire (1972, 1985,
1994), whose vision of transformatory pedagogy has built faith in the possibility of
change in adverse contexts. Freire himself participated actively in this transformation
as Secretary of Education of the municipality of São Paulo from 1989 to 1991.
The following sections will explore the two initiatives in turn, and assess their possibilities and limitations in challenging authoritarian and market-based conceptions of
citizenship, and for building new forms in their place, ones which can ensure both the
guarantee of rights and active participation. The final section will discuss some broader
questions arising from the analysis concerning the relationship between education and
democratic citizenship in the context of the extreme political marginalization characteristic of many countries of the global South.

Education in the Movement of Landless
Rural Workers (MST)
The MST is widely recognized as the largest and most influential social movement in
Latin America. It grew out of the actions of scattered peasant uprisings and progressive wings of the Catholic Church responding to the urgent need for agrarian reform.
In Brazil, approximately 1% of landowners control 50% of farmland, while there are
as many as 4.5 million landless peasants (Brandford & Rocha, 2002; Caldart, 2000).
Many of those forced off the land have migrated towards a new form of poverty in the
growing urban favelas. The movement was officially founded in 1984 and functioned initially in the south of the country, although now it has spread to 23 of Brazil’s 273 states.
Central to the movement’s activities is land occupation, whereby a group of families
squats on unused agricultural land in one of the large estates. An acampamento (camp)
is formed, in which high levels of organization and cooperation are required to sustain the itinerant community. The Brazilian Constitution states that idle farmland must
be allocated for land reform, and after long struggles with the government, the

--- [PDF Page 713 / Book Page 719] ---

Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship 719

families will often win the right to stay. The acampamento then becomes an assentamento
(settlement) and the families can begin to farm the land, which they do either individually
or collectively.
The aims of the MST, however, go beyond the winning of land for those without it. The
movement is strongly committed to the transformation of society as a whole, replacing
the unjust capitalist system with one in which all people can live and work in dignity,
solidarity and equality (MST, 1995, 2001a). With time, the focus has moved from the
local to the national level, and even to global issues such as world trade agreements
and genetically modified organisms (Caldart, 2000). Soon after the first settlements
were established it became clear that some form of educational provision would be
necessary for the children of the landless. Furthermore, a large proportion of the adults
were themselves illiterate and needed to develop basic skills to improve their agricultural work and enable effective political participation. Networks of primary schools
slowly grew, along with adult literacy classes, staffed mainly by those few members of
the community who had completed school. After struggles with local authorities, communities managed to have their schools officially recognized, and thereby gain state
funding and provision of teachers and materials. Education soon became a key priority
for the movement, and a network has been built up of 1,500 schools which over the
years have provided for 160,000 children, and 28,000 in youth and adult education,
as well as provision in infant education, technical secondary courses, teacher education and other HE courses in partnership with established universities (MST, 2005).
Children with a similar socio-economic background in other contexts could expect no
more than a few years of poor quality primary education.
These quantitative gains are an achievement in themselves. Yet the aim of the MST
is to transform the fundamental nature of education as well:
Faced with the tradition of an elitist, authoritarian, bureaucratic, content-heavy,
‘banking’4 school, with a narrow and pragmatist conception of education, [we
have] the challenge of constructing a popular, democratic, flexible, dialogical
school, a space for a holistic human development in movement. (MST, 2004)
Firstly, for the MST there is a need to make schooling relevant to the rural population. This
involves developing knowledge and skills relating to agricultural work, but also building pride in rural culture in the context of the predominantly urban values promoted
by the media. An example of new approaches to knowledge is the ethnomathematics
described by Knijnik (1996, 1998), in which local calculation methods – such as those
of land area and the weight of agricultural produce – are integrated into the curriculum.
The movement is also strongly influenced by the ideas of Paulo Freire, and attempts to
maintain pedagogical relations based on dialogue, in which both students and teachers
are engaged in a common process of learning and human development. Processes of
Freirean dialogue are also means to the construction of democracy, since they embody
respect for persons, the valuing of the knowledge and opinions of all and the provision
of a site for expression. There is also an explicitly political element in MST education.
The movement follows Freire (1972, 1994) in understanding that education cannot be
neutral, and so as not to support the unjust status quo must actively promote justice and

--- [PDF Page 714 / Book Page 720] ---

720 McCowan and Gandin

oppose oppression. While adult education allows for more developed forms of political
discussion, the movement aims to promote a sense of justice and understanding of
societal dynamics from the earliest phases of schooling. Another essential element is
that education in the MST is organically linked to the social movement. Education,
both formal and informal, is integral to achieving the goals of the individual communities and the movement as a whole. Beyond this, the movement itself can be seen as a
school, and participation in the struggle for social justice the most important learning
experience the landless people engage in.
This final idea is best expressed by Roseli Caldart (2000, 1999), perhaps the most
influential education theorist in the movement. In her work she explores the rich dialectic of the school in the movement and the movement as a school. One of her key
motifs is pedagogy in movement in which she sees the educational work of the MST
as one that is constantly being created and recreated by the practical experience of
educators in acampamentos and assentamentos, in dialogue with theoretical influences. Another is the importance of the sem terra (landless) identity, which, following
Thompson’s (1980) analysis of the English working class, she sees as fundamental to
the development of the social movement as a political actor.
Another distinctive aspect of MST education is the ‘mística’, referring to those
activities designed to develop allegiance to the movement and its principles (MST,
1999). Rituals enacting episodes in the movement’s history, anthem singing and
use of the symbolic flag, among other activities, are encouraged to develop the
emotional aspects of participating in the struggle for land reform. Tied to this is
the importance given to history, in terms of world history in general in order to
understand the root causes of social inequalities and specifically the history of the
movement.
In relation to the understanding of citizenship sketched above, therefore, the
movement acts both to ensure the right of citizens to an education of quality, and
also to empower citizens to participate fully in the political sphere. It is perhaps in this latter
function that the movement is most distinctive, with political elements strongly integrated into the school curriculum, and with a wider context (the activities of the
movement itself) in which these skills can be exercised. In relation to the weak and
strong forms identified above, political participation is understood to involve challenging the core structures of society rather than simply exercising electoral choice
within a given system. Citizenship is seen to depend on conscientization, the development of political consciousness together with action. One of the stated aims of
education the movement is:
[t]o awaken the organizational consciousness and spirit of leadership of the children, adolescents, educators and community, with political clarity in order to
exercise citizenship. (MST, 2001b)
Students develop this political consciousness and capacity for action through the participatory structures of the school itself. Pupils’ collectives and self-organizing work
groups serve to give students an opportunity to develop deliberation and organizational
skills, and have a real voice in the running of the school:

--- [PDF Page 715 / Book Page 721] ---

Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship 721

We understand by self-organization the right of pupils to organise themselves
into collectives, with their own space and time, to analyse and discuss their own
issues, to elaborate proposals and make their own decisions with a view to participating as subjects in the democratic management of the educative process,
and of the school as a whole. (MST, 1999)
Elsewhere it is stated:
When people are given everything, dependence is reinforced and the person
never becomes a subject. It is part of the process that people wanting to become
literate organise themselves to achieve this objective. (MST, 1994)
This self-organization is particularly evident in the movement’s teacher education
provision, where the students are effectively required to construct and run their own
courses (Caldart, 1997). The first formal courses were run in 1990, and in 1998 a
higher education programme in teacher education was established, using a distinctive
approach termed pedagogy of the land, responding to the specific political and environmental needs of the movement.
In schools, participatory structures are also present for teachers, who, like the students, are themselves engaged in a process of collective transformation. Some schools,
therefore, have horizontal management structures with the responsibilities of head
teacher rotating among the members of staff. Participatory bodies also extend to the
members of the community, who are involved in general assemblies, to determine the
overall directions of the school, and are represented in the school council (or education
team), where the details of the implementation are discussed. These structures serve
to facilitate the running of the school, to integrate it more effectively in the life of the
community and to provide a space for all community members, including the children,
to develop skills of political participation (McCowan, 2003).
Assessments of the achievements of the MST’s educational programmes vary. The sociologist José de Souza Martins has identified what he sees to be a fatal contradiction in the
MST between the belief systems of the vanguard, mostly with a revolutionary Marxist
vision, and the body of the landless people, rooted in traditional conservative and religious
values (Martins, 2000). While this distinction may be an oversimplification, there certainly
exist significant tensions between progressive and traditional values in the movement. One
area in which this is apparent is gender. On the one hand, the movement has taken considerable strides to give women equal footing in decision-making. One of the movement’s six
principal goals is “to combat all forms of social discrimination and seek the equal participation of women”. The National Sector of Gender has consequently been established to
help achieve this aim within the movement. One structural manifestation of this goal is the
requirement that one of the two delegates representing each community (and each state)
must be a woman. By the year 2000, 9 of the 18 elected members of the national leadership
were women, a considerable achievement in a country where less than 10% of the representatives in the Lower House and the Senate are female.
Nevertheless, the traditional machista attitudes and practices of the wider society
can still be seen within the movement, and women can struggle to be accepted in roles

--- [PDF Page 716 / Book Page 722] ---

722 McCowan and Gandin

other than those of the home and child rearing. Education is seen by most as key to
changing these deep-seated attitudes:
Why should men’s work be valued more? There’s a great difference in the job
market.… So we work with these issues in the camp, women and men being
valued equally for going out to the fields. So in this way we break what the
media has been giving us since the time of our ancestors. (Interview with Olga,
educational coordinator)5
The MST as yet has not paid great attention to other factors of wider social division
such as race, disability and sexuality. While adopting a generally inclusive approach,
it has yet to develop an effective strategy to ensure this in practice. As a whole,
the movement tends towards universalist conceptions of citizenship, focusing on
the ‘human’ as the fundamental underlying value (although it does recognize the
specificities of the rural context). The struggle for land reform is seen as part of the
wider class struggle, to which other forms of oppression, such as race and gender,
are subordinated (MST, 2001a).
The MST’s efforts in promoting effective citizenship are not, therefore, without
problems. Another issue concerns the development of criticality, primarily conceived
in terms of Freire’s conception of conscientization. Previous research (McCowan,
2003) has shown that while the movement is successful in developing critical understanding and attitudes towards the government and State structures, it is less successful
at doing so towards the movement itself. Given the extreme external threats facing
the MST (particularly from landowners and their militias) and the need for internal
unity for effective coordination, it is no surprise that critical attitudes can become a
secondary priority. Some commentators (e.g., Navarro, 2001) have argued that uncritical political education is not uncommon in the movement, particularly in relation to
young activists moving into positions of responsibility. At the school level, this is less
common, though use of the mística may be problematic in this respect. The right-wing
press (e.g., Weinberg, 2004), however, aiming to undermine the MST as a whole, has
undoubtedly exaggerated the extent of ‘brainwashing’ in the movement. Moreover, as
stated before, the MST adopts a Freirean approach to neutrality, and would consider any
more ‘balanced’ approach to political education to be supportive of the status quo.
Another issue concerns the running of its state-funded (mostly primary) schools. For
the movement, this is problematic since the local authorities can impose teachers unfavourable to its aims and thereby undermine the distinctive philosophy of the school.
Yet the MST resists running its schools privately, partly because it lacks the funds to
do so and also because it is strongly in favour of the idea of public schooling. From the
point of view of the State, MST schools are problematic as they have a specific ideology which may not be sufficiently ‘lay’ to justify state school status. Nevertheless, state
and municipal governments recognize that the MST is playing a fundamental role in
providing basic schooling in many rural areas, and thus tolerate it.
These contradictions and tensions are real and cannot be explained away. Yet they
do not negate the remarkable achievements of the MST in going beyond critiques
of conventional schooling to create a viable alternative, and moreover maintain this

--- [PDF Page 717 / Book Page 723] ---

Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship 723

at a number of levels across a nation as large as Brazil. The MST’s approach is well
summed up in the following passage:
With time these children gain a greater consciousness of the struggle: this happens
… where they have the right to speak, to sing. They have a strong desire to participate, they have pleasure in contributing to the assemblies, meetings, celebrations,
building toys and the school tent.… It is this space for participation that makes the
children critical, so they don’t accept things as they are. (MST, 2001b)
The MST experience is undoubtedly highly specific to the Brazilian context. Yet can
it speak to other contexts of political marginalization in the global South? Before
addressing this question we will turn to the second case of innovation in relation to
education for citizenship: the Citizen School initiative.

The Citizen School in Porto Alegre
The Citizen School6 is an educational initiative of the municipal government of
Porto Alegre, the largest city in southern Brazil, with a population of approximately
1,400,000. In 1989, a coalition of left-wing parties (the Popular Administration),
under the leadership of the PT, won the municipal elections and started a new plan
for the city. The basic premise was a radical idea of democracy, one that entailed a
real involvement of the citizens in the governance of the city. According to one of the
former mayors of Porto Alegre, the purpose of the Popular Administration is to:
recuperate the utopian energies, (…) [to] create a movement which contains, as
a real social process, the origins of a new way of life, constructing a ‘new moral
life’ (Gramsci) and a new articulation between state and society (…) that could
lead social activity and citizenship consciousness to a new order. (Genro, 1999)
In order to materialize such a complex ideal, the Popular Administration envisioned
several macro mechanisms that would allow the implementation of the articulation
described by Genro. One of these elements is the Citizen School.
The Citizen School is the project of involving all the municipal schools of Porto
Alegre in a radical idea of education for citizenship. Fighting against the idea of an
individualized citizen, the Citizen School claims that the whole educational institution
has to embody citizenship. The main goals of the Citizen School can be summarized
in a quotation from the one of the Secretaries of Education. He says that the project
wanted to create a school:
where everyone has guaranteed access, that is not limited to transmission of content; a school that is able to articulate the popular knowledge with the scientific
knowledge. A school that is a public space for the construction and experience
of citizenship, that goes beyond merely delivering knowledge and transforms
itself into a social-cultural space, with a pedagogical policy oriented toward

--- [PDF Page 718 / Book Page 724] ---

724 McCowan and Gandin

social transformation, where the student is the subject of the knowledge and
where the pedagogy takes place in an interdisciplinary perspective, overcoming
the curricular fragmentation present in schools. A school that has the necessary
material resources to implement this policy, where the participation of the whole
community can lead to the construction of an autonomous school, with a real
democratic management, where all segments of the community have their participation guaranteed. (Azevedo, 1999b)
From these guidelines, the basic goals of the project were created in the ‘Constituent
Assembly’. This was a democratic, deliberative and participatory forum created in
order to mobilize the school communities and generate the principles that would guide
the policy for the municipal schools in Porto Alegre. The process of organization of the
Constituent lasted 18 months and involved thematic meetings in the schools, regional
meetings, the Assembly itself, and the elaboration of the schools’ internal regulation.
The process of deciding the principles through such structure is itself worth noting.
The Citizen School project was created under the principle of not separating the determination of the goals from the creation of the mechanisms to implement these goals.
Rather, the process of generating the practical goals should represent in itself an innovative mechanism that is able to produce transformations in the relationships between
the schools and the community. The normative goals that guide the practice in the
schools are collectively created, through a participatory process. The idea was to foster
a government that creates channels for real development of collectively constructed
normative goals and that replaces the traditional relationship of distant government
officials managing schools that they know little about.
The Constituent Assembly elected the radical democratization of education in the
municipal schools as the main normative goal of the Citizen School project. It was decided
that this radical democratization would have to occur in three dimensions: democratization
of access to school, democratization of knowledge and democratization of governance.
These three principles were to guide every action in the municipal system of Porto Alegre.
These three principles changed the structure of the schools and the relationship between
schools and the Municipal Department of Education (SMED).
In order to democratize the access to the school and to the knowledge, the SMED
implemented a new organization for the municipal schools. Instead of keeping the traditional structure of grades with the duration of one year (1–8 in primary education),
the idea was to adopt a new structure called cycles. The administrators at the SMED
were convinced that the issue of access to schools could be dealt with in a much better
way using cycles. According to the SMED,
the cycle structure offers a better way of dealing seriously with student failure,
because its educational perspective respects, understands, and investigates the
socio-cognitive processes that the students go through. (SMED, 1999a).
The idea is that by using a different conception of learning/time, the Citizen School
would put an end to the punishment of the so-called ‘slow’ students. In this new
configuration, the traditional deadline – the end of each academic year – when the

--- [PDF Page 719 / Book Page 725] ---

Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship 725

students had to ‘prove’ that they had ‘learned’ was eliminated in favour of a different time organization. The democratization of knowledge was to be addressed by the
adoption of cycles: “[T]he cycles contribute to the respect of the rhythm, the timing, and the experiences of each student, enhancing the collective organization and
interdisciplinarity in the schools” (SMED, 1999a). The establishment of cycles was
a conscious attempt to eliminate the mechanisms in schools believed to perpetuate
exclusion, failure, and dropouts, as well as the blaming of the victim that generally
accompanies these.
In the Citizen School, there are three cycles of 3 years each, a change that adds
one year at the start of primary education (expanding it to 9 years). This makes the
municipal schools responsible for the education of children from 6 to 14 years of age.
The three cycles are based on the cycles of life: each one corresponds to one phase of
development, that is, childhood, pre-adolescence and adolescence. The idea is to group
together students of the same age in each of the years of the three cycles. This aims at
changing the reality (one that is present in the majority of public schools that serve the
working class in Brazil) that confronted the SMED when the Popular Administration
started to govern the city: students with multiple failures were in classes intended for
much younger children. Through organizing the education by age, having students of
the same age in the same year of the cycle, the SMED aimed to re-motivate children
who had failed multiple times. Its goal was to challenge the common sense idea that
learning must be sequenced. As the Secretary says, the institution using the cycles is:
the redesigned school, with space and time that are geared towards the development of the students. Children and adolescents are beings in permanent
development that should not be ruled by the school calendar or the school year.
(…) The school using the cycles sees learning as a process in which preparatory
periods or steps do not exist; instead there is a permanent process of development. Instead of punishing the student because he/she did not learn, the Citizen
School aims at valorizing the already acquired knowledge. (Azevedo, 2000)
In schools using these cycles, students progress from one year to another within one
cycle, and the notion of ‘failure’ is eliminated.
Despite this victory, the SMED understood that the elimination of exclusion mechanisms was not enough to achieve the goal of democratization of knowledge. Because
of this, the Citizen School created several mechanisms that aimed at guaranteeing the
inclusion of students: Progression Groups for students who had discrepancies between
their age and what they have learned, Learning Laboratories for students who, despite
the changes in methodology and curriculum were still not learning, Itinerant Teachers
to aid teachers by being a second educator in the classroom, when one is needed, and
Formative Evaluation to help students understand their own pace of learning without
merely classifying them through grades.
Curriculum transformation has been a crucial part of Porto Alegre’s project to
build ‘thick democracy’ and effective citizenship. This is actually what can make the
democratization of knowledge possible. It is important to say that this dimension is
not limited to access to traditional knowledge. What is being constructed is a new

--- [PDF Page 720 / Book Page 726] ---

726 McCowan and Gandin

epistemological understanding about what counts as knowledge as well. It is not based
on a mere incorporation of new knowledge within the margins of an intact ‘core of
humankind’s wisdom’, but a radical transformation. The Citizen School goes beyond
the mere episodic mentioning of cultural manifestations or class, racial, sexual and
gender-based oppression. It includes these themes as an essential part of the process
of construction of knowledge.
In the Citizen School, the notion of ‘core’ and ‘periphery’ in knowledge is made
problematic. The starting point for the construction of curricular knowledge is the
culture(s) of the communities themselves, not only in terms of content, but in terms
of perspective as well. The whole educational process is aimed at inverting previous
priorities and instead serving the historically oppressed and excluded groups. The starting point for this new process of knowledge construction is the idea of the Thematic
Complex. This organization of the curriculum is a way of having the whole school
working on a central generative theme, from which the disciplines and areas of knowledge, in an interdisciplinary effort, will structure the focus of their content.
In the Citizen School, the idea of the Thematic Complex emphasizes that the disciplines or areas of knowledge are not all collapsed in all the levels of the curriculum;
what happens is that all knowledge areas become subordinate to a global idea, to a
thematic core that is rather complex because it represents the centre of the preoccupations and/or interests of the community where the school is situated. All the areas or,
in fact, the entire school, are guided by the discussion and problematization around
the thematic complex. This thematic complex provides the whole school with a central
focus that guides the curriculum of that school for a period of time that can be one
semester or an entire academic year.
After having determined the principles, the larger contribution of each knowledge area
for the discussion of the thematic complex, and the conceptual matrix – a web of concepts
from the knowledge area, rather than isolated facts or information that the teachers understand are essential to use when dealing with the thematic complex – the teachers have
meetings organized by their knowledge areas and by each year in the cycles, to elaborate
and plan the curriculum.
Each school is autonomous and able to elaborate its own curriculum. This curriculum
has to meet the following criteria: no student should have to ‘unlearn’ his/her knowledge,
culture and practices in order to learn ‘scientific’ knowledge and no student should leave
school without being exposed to formal ‘school knowledge’. The idea is that no knowledge
should be left unquestioned and considered above critique. The idea of starting with their
own experiences should not mean that students have to stop there.
To give a concrete example of how this works, here is the description of how the
socio-historic knowledge area proceeded, in one school of Porto Alegre, to organize
its curriculum. After the phase of carrying out research in the community, the school
elected “the quality of life in the favela” as its thematic complex. The socio-historic
knowledge area had to construct the principle of that area, that is, the contribution of
this area to deal with the elected thematic complex. This area expressed its possible
contribution as “the individual and collective transformation of the citizen, in his/her
time and space, recuperating his/her origins, aiming at improving the quality of life,
taking into account the ideas of the community where this individual is situated”.

--- [PDF Page 721 / Book Page 727] ---

Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship 727

From the major thematic complex – the quality of life – three sub-themes were listed
by the teachers in the socio-historic area: rural exodus, social organization and property.
In the rural exodus sub-theme, the issues reflected the origin of the community – living
now in a favela, but originally from the rural areas. In this sub-theme, the issues discussed were migration movements, overpopulation of the cities, “disqualification” of
the working force, and marginalization. In the sub-theme social organization, the issues
were distributed in terms of temporal, political, spatial and sociocultural relations. The
issues, again, represent important questions in the organization of the community: the
excessive and uncritical pragmatism of some in the neighbourhood associations, and
cultural issues such as religiosity, body expression, African origins, dance groups and
samba schools. In the third sub-theme – property – the issues were directly linked to
the situation of the families in the favela, living in illegal lots with no title, having to
cope with the lack of running water, basic sanitation and other infrastructure problems,
the history of this situation and of the struggles for lots legalization, and their rights
(of having basic public goods in the neighbourhood) and duties (of understanding the
importance and the social function of taxation) as citizens.
The governance structure of the citizen school was also radically changed. The
School Councils, established by a municipal law in December of 1992 and implemented in 1993, became the most important institutions in schools. They were formed
by elected teachers, school staff, parents, students, and by one member of the administration, and they had consultative, deliberative and monitoring functions. As such they
expressed key ideas of the Popular Administration and the demands of social movements involved in education in the city.
It is important to mention that, before the Popular Administration took office, there
was a practice (common in Brazil) of a very centralized budget. Every expense (even
the daily ones) had to be sent to the central administration before it was approved,
and then, either the money was sent to the school, or a central agency would purchase
the product or the service necessary. In such a system, the school council would have
“their hands tied”, with no autonomy at all. The SMED changed this structure and
established a new policy to make the amount of money available to each school every
3 months. According to the SMED, this measure instituted the financial autonomy for
the schools, and allowed the schools to manage their expenditures according to the
goals and priorities established by the school council. At the same time that this measure creates autonomy, it gives parents, students, teachers and staff who are present
in the council a notion of social responsibility in administering public money, and it
teaches them to prioritize the investments with solidarity in mind (SMED, 1999b).
In the municipal schools of Porto Alegre, the whole school community elects the
principal by direct vote. The one responsible for the implementation of the decisions
of the school council, that is, the principal, is herself/himself elected defending a particular
project of administration for the school. There is a legitimacy that comes from this.
The principal is not someone who necessarily represents the interests of the central
administration inside the school councils, but someone with a majority of supporters inside that particular educational community. Principals thus have a great degree
of embeddedness, and, because of this, the SMED feels that it is possible to avoid
the potential problem of having someone responsible for the concretization of the

--- [PDF Page 722 / Book Page 728] ---

728 McCowan and Gandin

deliberations occurring in the school councils who is not connected with the project.
But the responsibility of the community does not stop there: through the school council, the school community has a way of monitoring the activities of the principal and
holding her/him responsible for implementing its democratic decisions.
These new mechanisms created to implement the democratization of access, knowledge
and governance would not meet this goal without large investments in school buildings and
in teachers’ conditions of work. The municipal schools are almost all situated in the most
impoverished areas of the city and unlike other public schools in these conditions, are in
very good shape. Many of these buildings were constructed recently, have excellent layouts
and are very well kept. This sends a clear message: a school in a poor neighbourhood has
to make the education that is supposed to happen in its interior possible and the school staff
should not have to worry about building conditions. The other aspect is teachers’ salaries
and training: in Porto Alegre a municipal school teacher earns three times as much as a
state school teacher. There is also a policy of continuous in-service education both in the
knowledge area of the teachers and in general educational issues, like the relationship of
education and society, for example.
Despite all these successes, there are real challenging issues in the implementation
of the Citizen School. Although the SMED is sensitive to issues of race and gender,
this does not seem always to translate into a sustained support for the schools as they
face the challenge of constructing a curriculum that deals with racism and gender
discrimination. Certainly because of its Marxist roots, the emphasis of the SMED has
been on issues of class. These are clearly central issues for students who live in slums,
but reducing all oppression to class can certainly represent a problem in a country like
Brazil, with such blatant racial and gender issues.
Another potential problem is the fact that teachers’ knowledge is not always considered and sometimes even shunned in the Citizen School. If it is true that school
curriculum revolves around the knowledge of the communities, the same cannot be
said about the previous experiences and practices of teachers. Many times, the SMED
sees teachers as the ones responsible for the problems it faces. A simplified description of this problem is the following: “the proposal is good, but conservative teachers
do not implement it as it should be”. The idea of characterizing every teacher that
criticizes elements of the proposal as conservative shows how problematic the implementation of the proposal can be in some instances: teachers are the ones who make
a proposal real in a school. As several studies have shown, teachers’ knowledge must
always be taken into consideration when the goal is to enact progressive reforms (see
Page, 2001; Gitlin, 2001).
Finally it is essential to discuss the sustainability of the initiative. When the city of
Porto Alegre faced budget constraints, cuts were made in key elements of the project,
such as the itinerant teacher and places in the Learning Laboratories. But the biggest
challenge is certainly the fact that, after 16 years in power, the PT and the Popular
Administration lost the municipal election in 2004. The core mechanisms of the
Citizen School have not been touched so far and continue in place, even though the
name given to the educational experience of the city is a different one. But it might be
too early to say. It will be important to follow the subtle changes that can occur and
possibly undermine the project.

--- [PDF Page 723 / Book Page 729] ---

Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship 729

The Citizen School is an alternative to neo-liberal solutions in education, based
on the introduction of market schemes inside schools. It has been important not only
as a way of giving an impoverished population a quality education that will enable
them to have better chances in the paid labour market and at the same time operate as
empowered citizens, but also because it has generated structured forms of ‘educating’
the communities both for organizing around and discussing their problems, and for
acting on their own behalf through the channels of participation and deliberation. In
the process, it has ‘educated’ the state agencies as well.

Conclusions
Some common themes emerge from these two cases. Both represent attempts to address
both the ‘participation’ and ‘rights’ strands of citizenship. On the one hand, the two initiatives aim to provide access to education for marginalized populations, both in terms of
making places available in schools, and taking steps to ensure inclusion in the learning
environment and avoiding early dropout. They are therefore attempting to go beyond the
formal right of all Brazilians to basic education and to take action to make it a reality. Yet
they are also aiming to equip learners to be effective citizens in the active sense, by involving students, teachers and the community in decision-making and providing the knowledge
and skills for them to extend that participation to the wider political sphere. Emerging
from the dual influences of authoritarianism and neo-liberalism, the two cases are creating
a new understanding of citizenship, one based in participatory democracy and a Freirean
conception of conscientization, by which social transformation is brought about through a
dialectic of reflection and political action.
However, the cases also show some of the difficulties of implementing this type of
programme. As in many other contexts, there is a tendency to see teachers as ‘obstacles’ to change and reform. Neither of these two cases has been fully successful in
resolving the dilemma of implementing a normative scheme through teachers, while
at the same time respecting their autonomy, their knowledge and their experience.
Teacher education is key here (as long as it is not simply an attempt to reconstruct
the teachers in the initiative’s mould), but so is the authentic involvement of teachers
in the construction of policy. Another limitation evident in the cases concerns efforts
to address difference, particularly that of race and of gender. In dealing with social
exclusion in a general way, the initiatives have not fully acknowledged the specificities
of race and gender, the distinct historical oppressions of women, African Brazilians
and indigenous peoples, and the need for explicit responses to them. Lastly, there is a
simple problem of sustainability and viability: in the case of the Citizen School, this
concerns the survival of the initiative in the face of a change of government, and in
the case of the MST, the incorporation of its project in the state sector. The necessarily
political nature of the two projects threatens their continued existence.
Brazilian history has certain unique aspects – such as its mixing of peoples, its spectacular concentration of wealth and the combination of centralizing and decentralizing
impulses – and the cases explored in this chapter are without doubt responses to the
specificities of this context. Yet the successes and challenges of the two in the face of
severe social and political exclusion do have implications for other countries. A first

--- [PDF Page 724 / Book Page 730] ---

730 McCowan and Gandin

issue concerns the importance of participation. The cases show the benefit gained from
involving the whole school and the wider community, not in the implementation of
policy created by a distant government, but in the formulation of goals and methods
themselves. Secondly, the two initiatives have both grappled with the problems faced
by schools all around the world of whether to teach ‘universal’ academic knowledge,
and risk marginalizing the students’ own culture, or to teach the local knowledge of the
community and risk confining students to their own context without the possibility of
looking beyond. Both cases here show that it is possible to combine the two, drawing
on local knowledge and skills relevant to the lives of the community, but at the same
time equipping students to pursue a life beyond it and to understand and engage with
wider forms of knowledge and processes of social change.
A further implication of these cases is the importance of maintaining a holistic vision of
citizenship. Conceptions based purely on the guarantee of rights of the individual are not
sufficient, and yet these rights must be guaranteed before active forms of participation can
be fostered. In addition, education must address citizenship as identity – acknowledging
differences that may challenge the “abstract concept of the citizen, stripped of all qualities save subjective rationality and morality” (Unterhalter, 1999) – as well as citizenship
as equality in the polity. Lastly, in a spirit captured by the World Social Forum slogan
“another world is possible”, these cases show that, even within the established state system,
it is possible to create alternatives in education. Steering a course through both traditional
hierarchical forms of schooling and contemporary consumerist ones, radical democratic
alternatives are a possibility, albeit one facing considerable challenges.
In the midst of an overwhelming global wave of reforms where market control,
devolution with fewer resources, tight control of outcomes, steering at a distance,
and accountability that only looks at quantitative results are the central impulses, it
is important to reaffirm, that to encounter experiences like the Movement of Landless
Rural Workers or the Citizen School is certainly a novelty. What is even more striking
in these projects is the fact that, unlike other progressive initiatives around the world,
where individual teachers or schools promote radical changes, this is an organic transformation of a whole school system, in the Citizen School case, or the conception of
education in the case of the Landless Movement.
The change in structures has energized schools and produced spaces where education for social justice is being pursued. If it is true that there are serious limits to what
has been done so far, it is also true that real spaces have been created to challenge these
same limitations.

Notes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Figures for secondary enrolment are from 2002 to 2003, and for tertiary are for 2002.
Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra.
This figure includes the Federal District.
Freire’s conception of ‘banking education’.
This interview is taken from research undertaken in 2002 in the states of Espírito Santo, Bahia and Rio
de Janeiro (McCowan 2003). Pseudonyms were used for participants.
In this chapter only an initial idea of the experience can be offered. For more on the Citizen School see
Gandin (2005).

--- [PDF Page 725 / Book Page 731] ---

Reinventing Educational Spaces, Building Active Citizenship 731

References
Azevedo, J. C. (1999b). Escola, democracia e cidadania. In C. Simon, D. D. Busetti, E. Viero, & L. W.
Ferreira (Eds.), Escola cidadã: Trajetórias (pp. 11–33). Porto Alegre, Brazil: Prefeitura Municipal de
Porto Alegre – Secretaria Municipal de Educação.
Azevedo, J. C. (2000). Escola cidadã: Desafios, diálogos e travessias. Petrópolis, Brazil: Vozes.
Bethell, L. (2000). Politics in Brazil: From elections without democracy to democracy without citizenship.
Daedalus, 129(2), 1–27.
Brandford, S. & Rocha, J. (2002). Cutting the wire. London: Latin American Bureau.
Caldart, R. S. (2000). O MST e a formação dos sem terra: O movimento social como princípio educativo.
In P. Gentili & G. Frigotto (Eds.), Cidadania negada: Políticas de Exclusão na Educação e no Trabalho.
São Paulo: Cortez.
Caldart, R. S. (1997). Educação em Movimento: Formação de Educadoras e Educadores no MST. Petropolis,
Editora Vozes.
Caldart, R. S. (1999). Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra: a Escola é Mais que Escola. Petropolis: Editora
Vozes.
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the oppressed. London: Sheed & Ward.
Freire, P. (1985). The politics of education. Massachusetts: Bergin and Garvey.
Freire, P. (1994). Pedagogy of hope: Reliving pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Gandin, L. A. (2006). Creating real alternatives to neo-liberal policies in education: The citizen school
project. In M. W. Apple and K. Buras (Eds.), The subaltern speak: Curriculum, power, and educational
struggles. New York: Routledge.
Gandin, L., & Apple, M. W. (2002). Challenging neo-liberalism, building democracy: Creating the citizen
school in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Journal of Education Policy, 17(2), 259–279.
Genro, T. (1999). Cidadania, emancipação e cidade. In L. H. Silva (Ed.), Escola cidadã: Teoria e prática
(pp. 7–11). Petrópolis, Brazil: Vozes.
Gentili, P. (Ed.) (1995). Pedagogia da Exclusão: Critica ao neoliberalismo em educação. Petropolis:
Vozes.
Gentili, P., & Frigotto, G. (Eds.) (2000). A cidadania negada: Políticas de exclusão na educação e no trabalho. Buenos Aires: CLACSO.
Gentili, P., & McCowan, T. (Eds.) (2003). Reinventar a Escola Publica: Politica educacional para um novo
Brasil. Petropolis: Vozes.
Gitlin, A. (2001). Bounding teacher decision making: The threat of intensification. Educational Policy,
15(2), 227–257.
Havighurst, R. J. & Moreira, J. R. (1965). Society and education in Brazil. Pittsburgh, PA: University of
Pittsburgh Press.
Heater, D. (1999). What is citizenship? Cambridge: Polity Press.
INEP (2003). Censo da educação superior 2002. Brasília: INEP.
Knijnik, G. (1996). Exclusão e Resistencia: Educação Matemática e Legitimidade. Porto Alegre: Artes
Médicas Sul.
Knijnik, G. (1998). Ethnomathematics and the Brazilian landless people education. Paper presented at the
first international conference on ethnomathematics, University of Granada.
Kymlicka, W. (2002). Contemporary political philosophy: An introduction (2nd edn.). Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Louro, G. L. (1986). História, Educação e Sociedade no Rio Grande do Sul. Porto Alegre: Educação e
Realidade Edições.
Marshall, T. H. (1950). Citizenship and social class and other essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Martins, J. de S. (2000). Reforma agrária: O Impossível Diálogo. São Paulo: Editora da Universidade de
São Paulo.
McCowan, T. (2006a). The foundations of critical questioning in citizenship education. Currículo Sem
Fronteiras [Curriculum Without Borders], 6(2), online at http://www.curriculosemfronteiras.org/vol6iss2articles/
mccowanen.htm, accessed 2 April 2007.

--- [PDF Page 726 / Book Page 732] ---

732 McCowan and Gandin
McCowan, T. (2006b). Educating citizens for participatory democracy: A case study of local government education policy in pelotas, Brazil. International Journal of Educational Development, 26(5),
456–470.
McCowan, T. (2003). Participation and Education in the Landless People’s Movement of Brazil. Journal for
Critical Education Policy Studies, 1(1), available online at http://www.jceps.com/index.php?pageID=ar
ticle&articleID=6. Accessed 15 June, 2004.
MST (2005). MST, Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra. Online at www.mst.org.uk, accessed
on 15 November 2005.
MST (2004). Educação no MST: Balanço 20 Anos (Boletim da Educação no. 9). São Paulo, MST Setor de
Educação.
MST (2001a). A historia da luta pela terra e o MST. São Paulo: Expressão Popular.
MST (2001b). Escola Itinerante: uma Pratica Pedagógica em Acampamentos (Coleção Fazendo Escola).
São Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (1999). Como Fazemos a Escola de Educação Fundamental (Caderno de Educação no. 9). Veranópolis,
ITERRA.
MST (1995). Como Fazer a Escola que Queremos: o Planejamento (Caderno de Educação no. 6). São
Paulo: MST Setor de Educação.
MST (1994). Alfabetização de Jovens e Adultos: Como Organizar (Caderno de Educação no. 3). São Paulo:
MST Setor de Educação.
Navarro, Z. (2001). “Mobilização sem emancipação” — As lutas sociais dos sem-terra no Brasil. In B. de
Sousa Santos (Ed.), Reinventando a Emancipação Social. São Paulo: Record.
Page, R. N. (2001). Common sense: A form of teacher knowledge. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 33(5),
525–533.
SMED (1999a). Ciclos de formação – Proposta político-pedagógica da Escola Cidadã. Cadernos
Pedagogicos, 9(1), 1–111
SMED (1999b). Official Homepage of the SMED. Retrieved December 15, 1999, from http://www.portoalegre.rs.gov.br/smed
Thompson, E. (1980) The making of the English working class. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
UNDP (2006). Human development report 2006. Beyond scarcity: Power, poverty and the global water
crisis. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
UNESCO (2004). Statistical tables: Education. Available online at http://www.uis.unesco.org/TEMPLATE/
html/Exceltables/education/ger_tertiary.xls, accessed 14 December 2004.
Unterhalter, E. (1999). Citizenship, difference and education: Reflections inspired by the South African
transition. In P. Werbner & N. Yuval-Davis (Eds.), Women, citizenship and difference. London: Zed.
Weinberg, M. (2004). Madraçais do MST. Veja, April 2004.

