================================================================================
Chapter 47: Perspectives on Children and Violence
Author(s): Jenny Parkes
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 733–747
PDF Pages: pp. 727–741 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 727 / Book Page 733] ---

47
PERSPECTIVES ON CHILDREN AND VIOLENCE
Jenny Parkes

There can be no compromise in challenging violence against children. Children’s
uniqueness – their human potential, their initial fragility and vulnerability, their
dependence on adults for their growth and development – make an unassailable
case for more, not less, investment in prevention and protection from violence.
(Pinheiro, 2006)
The UN World Report on Violence against Children draws attention to how, across the
globe, young people experience multiple forms of violence in their daily lives: in homes,
schools and care institutions, in places of work and in the community (Pinheiro, 2006).
Violence for many children is not an exceptional but an everyday event, particularly
in countries where there has been recent or ongoing political conflict, often low- and
middle-income countries, where the legacy of this is a coalescence of multiple forms
of violence (Glanz & Spiegel, 1996; Knox & Monaghan, 2003; Muldoon, 2004; WHO,
2002; WHO, 2002). The focus of this chapter is on the consequences of living with
such violence for children’s psychological and social well-being. The chapter explores
a diverse literature from psychology, sociology, anthropology and education, asking
what we can learn from this literature to respond to Pinheiro’s challenge to protect
children from violence.
There is an extensive literature highlighting the devastating consequences of violence on children’s educational, health and social opportunities and outcomes, and
Pinheiro makes a strong plea for action to address these consequences. However, while
the importance of challenging violence against children cannot be underestimated,
taken-for-granted assumptions in the literature need to be interrogated. In particular,
universalising understandings of childhood stemming from the West underpin research
across the globe, producing particular forms of action and intervention which, it has
been claimed, may not always be in the best interests of the child (Boyden, 2003). As
evident in Pinheiro’s words, childhood is viewed as a natural, universal and distinct
phase, characterised by innocence and vulnerability, a perspective which can be traced
back to the Romantic and Reform movements in Europe in the nineteenth century
(Boyden, 2003; James, Jenks & Prout, 1998; Woodhead, 1999). In much of the literature discussed in this chapter, children, living in high-violence neighbourhoods, are
viewed as innocent victims of violence, in need of protection or rescue, or as caught up
in cycles of violence, socialised to become the perpetrators of the future. As Western
feminist researchers have been criticised for the colonising, homogenising representation
733
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 733–747.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 728 / Book Page 734] ---

734 Parkes

of “a composite, singular ‘third world woman’ ”(Mohanty, 1991), research on children
living with violence in (post-)conflict settings may construct a homogenised ‘third
world child’, both victim of and perpetrator of violence. The diversity of childhoods is
neglected, and the active ways in which children engage with and act upon their social
worlds ignored (Boyden, 2003).
With this critical lens, this chapter considers studies on children’s experiences of
living in areas where violence takes many forms, in neighbourhoods, families and
schools, often in countries where there has been recent or ongoing political conflict,
including South Africa, Palestine and Ireland, as well as drawing on studies in urban
neighbourhoods of the USA. The first section considers psychological research, mainly
within a positivist tradition of inquiry. The second section explores research associated
with sociological and anthropological studies which draw on qualitative and interpretive paradigms. I have structured the chapter this way to reflect the mainstream
literature on children and violence and some of its critics, but the distinction is a little
misleading, as there are many overlaps and increasingly psychologists are engaging with
a social and interpretive approach. In the final section of the chapter I will consider
recent research which addresses some critical concepts, and conceptualises children as
actively engaging with their social worlds. My intention is not to privilege one form of
research, but to attempt to synthesise these diverse bodies of literature in ways which
may contribute to the goal of preventing and contesting violence.

Psychological Perspectives on Children and Violence
Much of the literature on children and violence stems from the field of psychology.
This literature comes mainly from a positivist tradition, with studies attempting to
identify measurable effects of violence on children. These effects include emotional
consequences, such as post-traumatic stress disorder and effects on child development and socialisation. Finally, in this section I will consider the growing awareness in
psychology of the importance of context, which has generated research into risk and
resilience factors.

Emotional Consequences and the Concept of Post-Traumatic Stress
Distress, anxiety and depression are frequent responses to violence, and studies have
found that following exposure to violence, young people may try to avoid thoughts
and feelings, places or people associated with the trauma; they may become angry
and irritable, or experience intense psychological distress at exposure to traumatic
reminders (Seedat, Nyamai, Njenga, Vythilingum & Stein, 2004). This constellation
of responses has been termed post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and has been
identified in studies in many post-conflict settings, including Palestine (Punamaki &
Suleiman, 1990; Thabet & Vostanis, 1999), South Africa (Barbarin & Richter, 2001;
Dawes & Tredoux, 1990; Seedat, van Nood, Vythilingum, Stein & Kaminer, 2000),
Cambodia (Hubbard, Realmuto, Northwood & Masten, 1995) and Kuwait following
the Gulf War (Nader, Pynoos, Fairbanks, Al-Ajeel, & Al-Asfour, 1993); as well as
in neighbourhoods with high rates of community violence in the USA (Jenkins &

--- [PDF Page 729 / Book Page 735] ---

Perspectives on Children and Violence 735

Bell, 1997; Martinez & Richters, 1993; Osofsky, Wewes, Hann & Fick, 1993). PTSD
symptoms increase with the level of and proximity to violence, and when there is a
close relationship with those engaged directly with violence (Jenkins & Bell, 1997;
Lorion and Saltzman, 1993; Seedat, van Nood, Vythilingum, Stein & Kaminer, 2000). In
some studies, symptoms have varied with age and gender, so girls, for example, have
been found more likely to exhibit depressive symptoms or to internalise pain, while
boys may be more likely to externalize pain and participate in aggressive acts (Lorion
& Saltzman, 1993; Seedat, Nyamai, Njenga, Vythilingum & Stein, 2004). Younger
children may exhibit more passive, regressive symptoms, like bed-wetting or delayed
language development, while older children may be more likely to engage in acting out
self-destructive behaviour (Jenkins & Bell, 1997).
These studies draw attention to the potential consequences of violence for children’s
mental health across international settings, and highlight the need for therapeutic interventions. However, frequently neglected is the finding that many children do not appear
to be measurably distressed by their exposure to violence. In studies in South Africa,
for example, approximately 10–20% of children exposed to a range of traumas experienced PTSD, with perhaps another 10–20% exhibiting some symptoms of emotional
distress (Cairns & Dawes, 1996; Dawes & Tredoux, 1990; Seedat, Nyamai, Njenga,
Vythilingum & Stein, 2004; Seedat, van Nood, Vythilingum, Stein & Kaminer, 2000).
The finding that, despite often horrific engagements with violence, many children do
not appear to suffer long-term psychological effects, has led to a shift towards the
question of how children cope (Cairns, 1996) and even whether there may be positive
effects. Case studies of children living in war zones have identified negative consequences, but also for some children the development of precocious moral sensibility
(Coles, 1986) and enhanced empathy (Garbarino, Kostelny & Dubrow, 1991). In South
Africa, an in-depth clinical study of a group of 60 young people who, over an extended
period, were exposed to and engaged with political violence found that when violence could be justified within an existing system of morality, such as ideology during
war, it created few psychological problems (Straker, Moosa, Becker & Nkwale, 1992).
Such findings point to the importance of context in anticipating possible emotional
consequences.
The diagnosis of PTSD is a psychiatric one, stemming from the West, usually
employed to assess the need for clinical support following single traumatic events.
A number of studies have pointed out that the effects of repeated exposure may be
quite different from those following single traumas, and exposure to chronic, daily
violence may generate longer-term developmental changes (Jenkins & Bell, 1997;
Perry, 1997; Zeanah & Scheeringa, 1997). An alternative label of “continuous traumatic stress syndrome” has been proposed to reflect the political context for many
people of repeated, expected traumas (Simpson, 1993). But, while such labels might
serve to highlight the problems of people living in violent communities, they simultaneously explain their behaviour within a medical model, suffering ‘symptoms’ of
a disease or illness within the individual rather than motivated by the features of
the situation. The emphasis on ‘disorder’ pathologises children’s reactions, when
emotions like fear, anxiety and aggression may in fact be functional for day-to-day
coping (Swartz & Levett, 1989). In these analyses, the conceptualisation of children

--- [PDF Page 730 / Book Page 736] ---

736 Parkes

as dependent and vulnerable is combined with and reinforced by a bio-medical model
which positions children as traumatised victims in need of therapeutic care (Boyden,
2003; Machel, 1996). Jo Boyden argues that in Rwanda, Bosnia and Kosovo, this has
had the dangerous consequence that aid packages have prioritised psychosocial interventions over meeting young people’s basic survival needs (Boyden, 2003). While it
is vital to be alert to possible stress reactions to violence, it is also important to recognise that these may be highly localised and variable, and that blanket approaches
to intervention following violent events do little to address the ongoing violence of
many young people’s lives.

Socialisation, Risk and Resilience
Paradoxically, at the same time as the psychological literature assumes childhood
innocence and vulnerability, there are allusions to the inevitability of child victims
becoming adult perpetrators, through a cycle of violence. Reproductive statements
abound in the literature, with comments like “it is a sociological fact that people
treated inhumanely can only treat others in the same way” (Malepa, 1990), or “these
children live in a ‘culture of violence’ and their view of the world is shaped by it. This
fact is tragic and extremely dangerous” (Oshako, 1999). Not just do such statements
pathologise children growing up in violent neighbourhoods, contributing to a version
of the ‘third world child’ discussed above, but the evidence for these assumptions is
weak and conflicting.
Studies report that exposure to violence in childhood affects moral development, with
young people learning to see violence as a way of solving problems (Reilly, Muldoon
& Byrne, 2004). Palestinian children involved in street confrontations with Israeli
troops, for example, were found more likely to use violence in schools and families as
a socially justified tool for solving problems (Abuateya, 2000). Clinical observations
have identified normalizing the violence, becoming desensitised, and dehumanising
the enemy (especially in wartime) as short-term coping strategies, which can also lead
to violence then being seen as an appropriate response to many everyday situations
(Garbarino, Kostelny & Dubrow, 1991).
However, in a review of the international literature on moral development and
political violence, Andrew Dawes concluded that evidence that violence is perpetuated through its effects on children’s moral reasoning and problem-solving was weak
(Dawes, 1994). While researchers have observed children’s play imitating violence
in the neighbourhood (Bundy, 1992; Jones, 1993), others have been surprised by the
absence of such re-enactments. For example, in her detailed study of children in a South
African township in the mid-1980s, Pamela Reynolds noted that there was remarkably
little violence in children’s play, either real or pretend, despite the violence to which the
children were exposed (Reynolds, 1989). Other South African studies have found that,
despite frequent exposure to violence, young people did not appear to become habituated (Straker, Mendelsohn, Moosa & Tudin, 1996; Straker, Moosa, Becker & Nkwale,
1992). And while in one South African study, direct exposure to violence was associated with aggression, opposition/defiance and deficits in self-regulation, witnessing
violence was not associated with antisocial behaviours, and gender (being male) was

--- [PDF Page 731 / Book Page 737] ---

Perspectives on Children and Violence 737

more predictive of antisocial behaviours than direct exposure to violence (van der
Merwe & Dawes, 2000).
These complex and contradictory findings challenge universalising assumptions
about the reproduction of violence, and increasingly researchers have turned their attention to identifying the range of factors that increase the risk of violence, or alternatively
those that increase young people’s resilience. This ecological model, which attempts to
understand the multifaceted nature of violence and its consequences, has been increasingly influential in research and policy development (WHO 2002; Pinheiro, 2006). It
attempts to measure how a combination of factors, relating to personal characteristics,
family and the immediate and broader social context combine to influence outcomes
for young people in high violence contexts (Cicchetti & Lynch, 1993; Dodge & Pettit,
2003; Matthews, Griggs & Caine, 1999; Tolan, Gorman-Smith & Henry, 2003). The
South African literature identifies key risk factors, which combine in ways which have
a multiple rather than additive effect on the likelihood of young people developing
future criminal behaviour, as being: poverty, race, age, location of residence, gender,
history of victimisation, coming from a dysfunctional family, poor school achievement
and substance abuse (Matthews, Griggs & Caine, 1999).
The repeated finding that despite the risk factors, many children do not appear to
suffer the predicted negative consequences, has led to a growing interest in resilience,
a construct which connotes the maintenance of positive adaptation by individuals
despite experiences of significant adversity (Garmezy, 1993; Luthar, Cicchetti &
Becker, 2000; Werner & Smith, 1983). In the context of community violence in the
USA, Garmezy identifies three sources of resilience: temperament factors (activity
level, reflectiveness, cognitive skills, positive responsiveness to others); warm cohesive families with the presence of a caring adult; and external support, such as teacher,
neighbour, parent of a peer or institutional structure like a school (Garmezy, 1993).
Very similar sources of resilience were identified in case studies of children growing
up in war zones (Garbarino & Kostelny, 1997; Garbarino, Kostelny & Dubrow, 1991).
Such factors interact with the nature of violence exposure, with predictability, social
and physical proximity also influencing children’s resilience (Fick, Osofsky & Lewis,
1997; Osofsky, 1997). Younger children experiencing violence may face more negative
consequences than older children, who have developed the reasoning and cognitive
capabilities to adapt (Garbarino, Dubrow, Kostelny & Pardo, 1992; Perry, 1997).
These studies extend the focus from a direct causal relationship between violence
and individual responses to a relationship mediated by a range of nested social systems.
The family, for example, may increase both risk and resilience. Violence which affects
early family relationships can create lasting problems of attachment, and potentially
violent relationships (Fonagy, Target, Steele & Steele, 1997). But maternal stability
and coping can also protect children from the harmful effects of community violence
(Barbarin & Richter, 2001). Local belief systems and ideologies have also been identified as sources of resilience. There is some evidence that when ideology, such as
religion, enables violence to be justified within the child’s existing system of morality
then this protects children from the negative consequences of violence (Garbarino,
1999; Straker, Moosa, Becker & Nkwale, 1992). In their analysis of growing up in war
zones in Mozambique, Nicaragua, Palestine and Cambodia, Garbarino and colleagues

--- [PDF Page 732 / Book Page 738] ---

738 Parkes

considered how an ideology can be “comforting”, and can enable children to be
supported by a community united by belief (Garbarino, Kostelny & Dubrow, 1991).
They contrast this with the experience of living in gang-controlled urban poverty in
Chicago, where weak cultural ties and lack of common goals undermine active coping
mechanisms.
A strength of the risk-resilience literature is the growing sensitivity to context (Dawes
& Donald, 2000). The argument that the different levels of the ecological system interact and influence each other is persuasive, with resilience compensating for, protecting
from or challenging the impact of risk factors. Moderate amounts of stress, for example, may strengthen children’s ability to cope in the longer term (Dawes and Donald,
2000). At the same time, however, the mechanistic approach of measuring relationships
between variables results in an oversimplification of the complex relationships between
the child and the social world. It relies for its data on pre-coded surveys and questionnaires, frequently imported or modified from instruments developed in the West. Such
instruments may distort local experiences and interpretations of violence. The language
of abuse used in the West, for example, has been found to make little sense to many
black, working-class women in South Africa (Levett et al., 1997). Diverse forms of
violence are lumped together into an explanatory variable, and the complex power relations which produce violence are ignored. The focus of interventions stemming from
this approach is on prevention, targeting particular high-risk groups. While this may be
important in channelling welfare support, at the same time it reinforces the tendency to
‘blame’ those risky individuals, those poor, black males identified in the South African
literature as at highest risk, labelling them as dangerous and in need of control, and
who, it is assumed, will become caught up in the inevitable cycle of violence. But
reviewing the psychological literature points to the variability and diversity in children’s
responses, and highlights the need to consider not just possible outcomes, but the processes by which young people make sense of and interpret violence.

Social Perspectives on Children and Violence
Sociological and anthropological studies of children and violence shift the focus from
individuals, or individuals within nested systems, to analysing the social systems
themselves. Rather than testing out hypotheses, ethnographic approaches facilitate
the creation of rich pictures of social phenomena. Psychological studies have been
hugely influential on policy and practice, perhaps because of developmental psychology’s historical hegemony in childhood research (Mayall, 2002), perhaps also because
the findings can be generalised across settings and offer practical ways forward.
Additionally, methods like questionnaires, surveys and clinical assessments may be
less challenging to conduct than ethnographies, which involve extensive time ‘in the
field’, often with personal risks to the safety of researchers and their participants.
Nonetheless, ethnographic studies have provided rich descriptions of young people’s
lives in adverse social contexts, documented the multiple forms of violence they experience and considered the multiple meanings, functions and consequences of violent
social relations (Bhana, 2002; Hecht, 1998; Henderson, 1999; Jones, 1993; Kilbride,

--- [PDF Page 733 / Book Page 739] ---

Perspectives on Children and Violence 739

Suda & Njeru, 2000; Reynolds, 1989; Wood, 2002). Through spending extensive time
living or working in these communities, and developing close relationships between
the researcher and the research participants, these studies are able to explore experiences of violence which are often taboo or private (Lee & Stanko, 2003).
Recurring through these studies is a multi-dimensional definition of violence, which
is inextricably connected with power, and generates a more nuanced analysis than the
narrower view of violence as an explanatory variable which dominates the positivist
psychological literature. This body of work illuminates complex historical and social
processes in the reproduction of violence. David Rosen’s study of child soldiers in
Sierra Leone, for example, traces the roots of children’s recent engagements in warfare
in pre-colonial and colonial slavery, and more recently in post-independence politics,
in which a patrimonial political system has created relationships in which young people are dependent on ‘big men’ for their livelihoods and social status:
Young men provided the big men with the physical strength, energy and fearlessness needed to intimidate and murder political rivals. In the despoiled
circumstances of Sierra Leone’s economy, the ties of dependence and violence
among big men, young men, children, and youth rippled through rural and urban
communities, disrupting and distorting ties of family and kinship. (Rosen, 2005)
Rosen’s analysis demonstrates how coercive social relations, supported by violent practices, provide the conditions for children to participate in horrific wartime atrocities.
Controversially however, he argues that, rather than passive victims of adult criminal
exploitation, child combatants more often make rational decisions that not fighting is
a worse option than fighting.
A rich body of work in South Africa has traced links between colonial and in particular apartheid policies, and the erosion of or breakdown of institutions like the family.
In his study of 10–15-year-old children growing up in migrant worker hostels near
Cape Town, Jones shows how the apartheid policy of forced labour migration disrupted
families, creating childhoods filled with domestic flux and upheaval (Jones, 1993). In
overcrowded living conditions, domestic violence was widespread and retributive violence was often socially sanctioned. Through violence in play, including fighting with
sharpened sticks, knives, screwdrivers and bottles, children mimicked violence they
had witnessed, thus providing practice for violent lifestyles. Violence then could function as a resource in the context of fragmented and uncertain childhoods.
In a longitudinal ethnographic study of 10–16-year-olds in a Cape Town township, Patricia Henderson also considered the functions of violence in children’s lives
(Henderson, 1999). Violence was viewed as re-moulding temporarily, social situations
– to commandeer scarce resources, to create new configurations of power or to express
dissatisfaction and frustration. She emphasises the importance of viewing violence
within its specific social location, since violence has so many layers, and different
consequences. So, for example, although violence plays a major part in the lives of two
boys, for one, a “comrade” (youth affiliated to political organisations), the violence
was socially sanctioned and therefore open for discussion and reflection, while for the
other, who was a gang member involved in crime, it was not sanctioned and he was

--- [PDF Page 734 / Book Page 740] ---

740 Parkes

therefore often silent about these locales of his life. Violence was often viewed by children with ambivalence, so, for example, fighting with gangs was seen as empowering,
but children also criticised excess – one child would fight with a brick but not with a
knife. Henderson views violence as a short-term solution, using a metaphor of a hall
of mirrors in which violence is not a solution but infinite reflections – of men beating
their sons to try to end gang violence, of boys joining gangs to protect themselves
from the violence of other gangs: “the practitioners of different forms of violence
jostled for claims to streets and attempted to fix particular kinds of relations of power
within them” (p. 102). For Henderson, the multi-layered violence has reverberations
for children’s social relationships at all levels, including the potential fragmentation
of identity: “the cultural repertoires they employed to ‘restitch’ the social fabric were
unable to effect an end point in the process” (p. iii).
The gendered dimensions of violent practices, remarkably underexplored in the
psychological literature, have been central in much of the social literature. Studies
in a range of post-conflict settings have traced how violence may be a means to commandeer scarce resources, which becomes incorporated within masculine identities
(Barker, 2005; Bhana, 2005b; Reilly, Muldoon & Byrne, 2004). Researchers have
traced how gendered violence may arise from ‘thwarted’ masculinities (Moore, 1994),
when men are unable to live up to the expectation of providing support and protection
for the family (Ramphele, 2000). Such gendered violence, together with harsh forms
of physical punishment, teach children that personal relationships may be shaped
by through force, in which the strong exert their will over the weak (Morrell, 2001;
Ramphele, 1996). In an ethnography of sexual health and violence among young black
men living in a working-class South African township, Katharine Wood traced how
gendered violence was both productive and unstable (Wood, 2002). For the young
men she studied, violent practices helped to impose inequality in sexual relationships,
producing a hierarchy of gender, but not altogether successfully:
For young men, the importance of women to their sense of masculinity, both in
terms of their own self-respect and esteem and in the eyes of others, was evident
in the energy they expended on acquiring girlfriends, gaining sexual access to
them (and seeking to establish exclusive sexual access), surveilling them and
attempting to control their behaviour. The vast majority of acts of violence
against young women emerged out of these practices (Wood, 2002).
In order to maintain their social status, constant vigilance was necessary, with violence a way to attempt to establish and maintain uneasy control. What is clear in all
these studies is that while violence may be functional in helping men to construct particular social identities, there are unforeseen and negative consequences – in the health
risks discussed by Wood, and in the breakdown or fragmentation of relations discussed
by Henderson, Ramphele or Rosen.
Many of these studies focus on young adults rather than on children, but there is
also a strand of the social literature which explores how violence seeps into children’s
everyday spaces. Studies investigate how schools, often viewed as safe havens may be
sites in which violence is reproduced (Bhana, 2005a; Chatty & Hundt, 2005; Davies,
2004; Dunne, Humphreys & Leach, 2006; Dunne & Leach, 2005; Harber, 2004;

--- [PDF Page 735 / Book Page 741] ---

Perspectives on Children and Violence 741

Leach, 2006). Through the gendered hierarchical relations, systems of punishment and
in playgrounds where force is a frequent means of negotiating relationships, researchers have traced the reproduction of the violence of the neighbourhood. There are also
ethnographic studies of children living and working in the streets, in spaces which are
not viewed as legitimate contexts for children. Stepping into these ‘prohibited’ spaces
may create risks for children. Children living and working on the streets of Brazil or
Kenya may be escaping from violence within their homes, to face physical assaults
and rape in the neighbourhood, from other children and from adults admonishing their
illegitimate movement (Hecht, 1998; Kilbride, Suda & Njeru, 2000).
Many of the ethnographic studies do not set out to study violence, but in exploring
children’s lives in adverse social contexts, find that children have to cope with multiple forms of violence. These studies describe the resourcefulness and resilience of
children. But there is also a sense that children are adopting survival strategies, often
employing violence, to cope with immense hardship and the prospects for the future
may be bleak.

Centring Children’s Perspectives
The literature shows how violence has many reverberations in children’s lives. The
psychological studies explore the consequences on children’s emotions, their development and family relationships. Children’s responses vary with age, gender and the
nature of and proximity to violence. It also shows that many children are resilient, that
they seem to be protected from some of the negative consequences, perhaps because
of the social support within families, or because of the ways in which they appraise or
make sense of violence. These ways of making sense though are not well understood.
The social literature offers a rich analysis of life in a context of violence, illustrating
the complex meanings attached to violence within the web of social relations in children’s lives and drawing close connections with experience, history and culture. These
studies show the importance of understanding violence as social interaction which has
multiple meanings. While they add considerable depth to our understandings about
children and violence, it is not difficult to see why they have had less influence than the
psychological literature on policy and practice. Most are small-scale, located within
specific social locations and the authors are cautious about making generalised claims.
The relationships they identify are complex, difficult to disentangle, with deep historical and social roots that do not lend themselves to quick fixes. Change implies
fundamental upheaval of power relations at the macro-level, as well as at the microlevel of beliefs and practices in local neighbourhoods.
As in the psychological literature, there is a sense in much of the social literature,
in which the child remains an object of the researchers’ gaze, vulnerable and innocent
and at the same time caught up in cycles of violence in which she/he is powerless.
Increasingly, however, these studies are reconceptualising children as active agents,
and are beginning to consider the psychosocial processes through which children
interpret and try to make sense of their social worlds. They engage theoretically with a
rights-based sociology of childhood (Boyden & de Berry, 2004; Christensen & James,
2000; Mayall, 2002), and with theoretical developments in psychology which stress

--- [PDF Page 736 / Book Page 742] ---

742 Parkes

the social construction of learning and identity construction (Bruner, 1990; Cole, 1996;
Goodnow, 1990; Stigler, Schweder & Herdt, 1990; Wetherell, Taylor & Yates, 2001). This
work, which utilises both ethnographic and participatory research approaches, examines how, as they construct their social identities, young people negotiate conflicts and
tensions.
Criticising the homogenising views of the ‘refugee’ child utilised by humanitarian
agencies, Jason Hart explored the fluidity of children’s identity formation in a Palestinian
refugee camp in Jordan. Discourses around age, gender, social class, personal history,
religious faith and political views collided and clashed with the perspectives of their
parents, in diverse ways which “may sprawl untidily across the neatly-drawn bounds
of collectivities suggested by older generations” (Hart, 2004). Another study of children in Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Gaza and the West Bank,
explored how children negotiated their identities as Palestinians, refugees, camp residents, and as Muslims or Christians (Chatty & Hundt, 2005). Political and military
conflict was mirrored in the relationships central to children’s lives, within families
and schools. Young people faced competing and conflicting discourses. For girls, for
example, marriage could be viewed as protective at times of instability or as a way to
escape the economic and social constraints of their homes, in which their movements
were circumscribed, but also as preventing them from completing education. And
while education was viewed as enabling them to lead more productive, fulfilling lives,
the curriculum was frequently viewed as inappropriate and irrelevant and violence was
common in the school setting (Chatty & Hundt, 2005).
In my own work with children in a working-class South African township, young
people grappled with conflicting and seemingly contradictory viewpoints as they negotiated their identities within a context of multiple forms of violence (Parkes, 2005). For
boys, for example, strength, fearlessness and fighting skill were sought-after attributes,
and in their accounts of crimes against their families, they discussed the importance
of men and boys protecting their homes, with violence if necessary. Yet at the same
time, they were highly critical of young people who joined gangs. As they talked, they
adopted uneasy subject positions, speaking proudly about their associations with local
gangs, and thus reaping social status from these connections, while adamant that they
would not adopt the violent practices of gangs themselves (Parkes, 2007). Boys and
girls talked of the need for harsh punishments to maintain law and order, yet were
cynical about the effectiveness of such punishments. Interestingly, over the course of
our discussions, which took place over several months in 2001, they appeared to shift
their views about possible solutions to problems of violence, increasingly proposing
verbal problem-solving and negotiation as ways of contesting violence. It appeared
that the subtle interplay of power and pleasure in the research relationship, in which
young people felt that their views were listened to and valued, may have generated the
perception of increased reflexive agency (Parkes, forthcoming).
Placing at the heart of psychological and social research the views of young people
may expand our understanding of the diverse ways in which girls and boys negotiate the
complex and contradictory discourses around violence. While this work is in its infancy, it
begins to identify recurring patterns in how children cope, often simultaneously contesting

--- [PDF Page 737 / Book Page 743] ---

Perspectives on Children and Violence 743

and perpetuating violence. It also alerts us to possibilities for change, while recognising
how children are deeply embedded within highly constraining social contexts.
This work, which synthesises psychological and social approaches, together with
a conceptualisation of children as active participants in their social worlds, points to
interventions which engage with young people’s perspectives (Daiute & Fine, 2003).
For some children, as indicated by the psychological literature on trauma, psychotherapeutic interventions designed with sensitivity to local contexts and traditions,
may be crucial to help cope with the horrific consequences, at the level of individual or
community, and to support the rebuilding of relations fractured in war and conflict. For
others, intervening early to support families in high risk settings may disrupt possible
cycles of violence. At the same time, as stressed in the social literature, it is critical
that interventions address and challenge the coercive social relations underpinning
conflict. Within schools, such interventions could focus on human rights, social justice
and peace. Across these multiple layers of intervention, it is important to avoid universalising, homogenising understandings of childhood, which marginalise children and
render them powerless. Instead, understanding that children act upon and influence
their social worlds, in ways that are not fixed but are diverse and fluid, we can develop
frameworks of negotiation and dialogic pedagogy in which young people are invited to
discuss, challenge and reconstruct perspectives and relationships, and to explore possibilities for changing violent social relations.

References
Abuateya, H. S. (2000). Adolescents’ behaviour within the context of political conflict: Case of Palestinian
Secondary School Students. American University in Cairo.
Barbarin, O. A., & Richter, L. M. (2001). Mandela’s children: Growing up in post-apartheid South Africa.
London: Routledge.
Barker, G. T. (2005). Dying to be men: Youth, masculinity and social exclusion. Abingdon: Routledge.
Bhana, D. (2002). Making Gender in Early Schooling: A multi-sited ethnography of power and discourse
from grade one to two in Durban. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Durban, University of Natal.
Bhana, D. (2005a). Violence and the gendered negotiation of young masculinities in South African schools.
In R. Morrell & L. Ouzgane (Eds.), African masculinities (pp. 205–220). New York: Palgrave.
Bhana, D. (2005b). What matters to girls and boys in a black primary school in South Africa. Early Child
Development and Care, 175(2), 99–111.
Boyden, J. (2003). Children under fire: Challenging assumptions about children’s resilience. Children, Youth
and Environments, 13(1).
Boyden, J., & de Berry, J. (Eds.) (2004). Children and Youth on the Front Line: Ethnography, Armed Conflict
and Displacement. London: Berghahn Books.
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bundy, C. (1992). Introduction. In D. Everatt & E. Sisulu (Eds.), Black youth in crisis: Facing the future.
Braamfontein: Ravan Press.
Cairns, E. (1996). Children and political violence. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cairns, E., & Dawes, A. (1996). Children: Ethnic and political violence – a commentary. Child Development,
67, 129–139.
Chatty, D., & Hundt, G. L. (Eds.) (2005). Children of Palestine: Experiencing forced migration in the Middle
East. Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Christensen, P., & James, A. (Eds.) (2000). Research with children: Perspectives and practices. London:
Falmer Press.

--- [PDF Page 738 / Book Page 744] ---

744 Parkes
Cicchetti, D., & Lynch, M. (1993). Towards an ecological/transactional model of community violence and
child maltreatment: consequences for children’s development. In D. Reiss, J. E. Richters, M. RadkeYarrow & D. Scharff (Eds.), Children and violence (pp. 96–118). New York: The Guilford Press.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.
Coles, R. (1986). The moral life of children. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Daiute, C., & Fine, M. (2003). Youth perspectives on violence and injustice. Journal of Social Issues, 59(1),
1–14.
Davies, L. (2004). Education and conflict: Complexity and chaos. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Dawes, A. (1994). The effects of political violence on socio-moral reasoning and conduct. In A. Dawes &
D. Donald (Eds.), Childhood and adversity: Psychological perspectives from South African research
(pp. 200–219). Cape Town and Johannesburg: David Philip.
Dawes, A., & Donald, D. (2000). Improving children’s chances: developmental theory and effective interventions in community contexts. In D. Donald, A. Dawes & J. Louw (Eds.), Addressing childhood adversity
(pp. 1–25). Cape Town: David Philip.
Dawes, A., & Tredoux, C. (1990). The impact of political violence on the children of K.T.C. In The influence of violence on children: Occasional paper no. 13 (pp. 67–86). Cape Town: Centre for Intergroup
Studies.
Dodge, K. A., & Pettit, G. S. (2003). A biopsychosocial model of the development of chronic conduct problems in adolescence. Developmental Psychology, 39(2), 349–371.
Dunne, M., Humphreys, S., & Leach, F. (2006). Gender violence in schools in the developing world. Gender
and Education, 18(1), 75–98.
Dunne, M., & Leach, F. (2005). Gendered school experiences: The impact on retention and achievement in
Botswana and Ghana. London: DFID.
Fick, A. C., Osofsky, J. D., & Lewis, M. L. (1997). Perceptions of violence: children, parents, and police
officers. In J. D. Osofsky (Ed.), Children in a violent society (pp. 261–276). New York and London: The
Guilford Press.
Fonagy, P., Target, M., Steele, M., & Steele, H. (1997). The development of violence and crime as it relates
to security of attachment. In J. D. Osofsky (Ed.), Children in a violent society (pp. 150–182). New York
and London: The Guilford Press.
Garbarino, J. (1999). Lost boys: Why our sons turn violent and how we can save them. New York: Anchor.
Garbarino, J., Dubrow, N., Kostelny, K., & Pardo, C. (1992). Children in danger: Coping with the consequences of community violence. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Garbarino, J., & Kostelny, K. (1997). What children can tell us about living in a war zone. In J. D. Osofsky
(Ed.), Children in a violent society (pp. 32–41). New York and London: The Guilford Press.
Garbarino, J., Kostelny, K., & Dubrow, N. (1991). No place to be a child: Growing up in a war zone. New
York: Lexington Books.
Garmezy, N. (1993). Children in poverty: resilience despite risk. In D. Reiss, J. E. Richters, M. RadkeYarrow & D. Scharff (Eds.), Children and violence (pp. 127–143). New York: The Guilford Press.
Glanz, L. E., & Spiegel, A. D. (Eds.). (1996). Violence and family life in a contemporary South Africa:
Research and policy issues. Pretoria: HSRC.
Goodnow, J. (1990). The socialization of cognition: What’s involved? In J. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder &
G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psychology: Essays on comparative human development (pp. 259–286).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harber, C. (2004). Schooling as violence: How schools harm pupils and societies. London: Routledge
Falmer.
Hart, J. (2004). Beyond struggle and aid: Children’s identities in a Palestinian refugee camp in Jordan. In
J. Boyden & J. de Berry (Eds.), Children and youth on the front line: Ethnography, armed conflict and
displacement (pp. 167–188). Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Hecht, T. (1998). At home in the street: Street children of northeast Brazil. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Henderson, P. (1999). Living with fragility: Children in new crossroads. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University
of Cape Town, Cape Town.

--- [PDF Page 739 / Book Page 745] ---

Perspectives on Children and Violence 745
Hubbard, J., Realmuto, G. M., Northwood, A. K., & Masten, A. S. (1995). Comorbidity of psychiatric
diagnosis wiht post-traumatic stress disorder in survivors of childhood trauma. Journal of the Academic
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 32, 697–708.
James, A., Jenks, C., & Prout, A. (1998). Theorizing childhood. Cambridge: Polity.
Jenkins, E. J., & Bell, C. C. (1997). Exposure and response to community violence among children and
adolescents. In J. D. Osofsky (Ed.), Children in a violent society (pp. 9–31). New York and London:
The Guilford Press.
Jones, S. (1993). Assaulting childhood: Children’s experiences of migrancy and hostel life in South Africa.
Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.
Kilbride, P., Suda, C., & Njeru, E. (2000). Street children in Kenya: Voices of children in search of a childhood. London: Bergin and Garvey.
Knox, C., & Monaghan, R. (2003). Violence in a changing political context: Northern Ireland and South
Africa. In E. Stanko (Ed.), The Meanings of Violence (pp. 184–202). London: Routledge.
Leach, F. (2006). Gender violence in schools in the developing world. In F. Leach & C. Mitchell (Eds.),
Combating gender violence in and around schools (pp. 23–30). Stoke-on-Trent: Trentham.
Lee, R., & Stanko, E. (Eds.) (2003). Researching violence: Essays on methodology and measurement.
London: Routledge.
Levett, A., Kottler, A., Walaza, N., Mabena, P., Leon, N., & Ngqakayi-Motaung, N. (1997). Pieces of mind:
traumatic effects of child sexual abuse among black South African women. In A. Levett, A. Kottler, E.
Burman & I. Parker (Eds.), Culture, power and difference: Discourse analysis in South Africa(pp. 125–138).
Cape Town: University of Cape Town Press.
Lorion, R. P., & Saltzman, W. (1993). Children’s exposure to community violence: Following a path from
concern to research to action. In D. Reiss, J. E. Richters, M. Radke-Yarrow & D. Scharff (Eds.), Children
and violence (pp. 55–65). New York: The Guilford Press.
Luthar, S. S., Cicchetti, D., & Becker, B. (2000). The construct of resilience: a critical evaluation and guidelines for future work. Child Development, 71(3), 543–562.
Machel, G. (1996). Impact of armed conflict on children. New York: United Nations, UNICEF.
Malepa, M. (1990). The effects of violence on the development of young children in Soweto. In The influence of violence on children: Occasional paper no. 13 (pp. 45–48). Cape Town: Centre for Intergroup
Studies.
Martinez, P., & Richters, J. E. (1993). The NIMH community project: II. Children’s distress symptoms
associated with violence exposure. In D. Reiss, J. E. Richters, M. Radke-Yarrow & D. Scharff (Eds.),
Children and violence (pp. 22–35). New York: The Guilford Press.
Matthews, I., Griggs, M., & Caine, G. (1999). The experience review of interventions and programmes dealing with youth violence in urban schools in South Africa. Durban: Independent Projects Trust.
Mayall, B. (2002). Towards a sociology for childhood: Thinking from children’s lives. Buckingham: Open
University Press.
Mohanty, C. T. (1991). Under Western eyes: feminist scholarship and colonial discourses. In C. T. Mohanty,
A. Russo & L. Torres (Eds.), Third World women and the politics of feminism (pp. 51–80). Bloomington
and Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press.
Moore, H. (1994). The problem of explaining violence in the social sciences. In P. Harvey & P. Gow (Eds.),
Sex and violence: Issues in representation and experience. London: Routledge.
Morrell, R. (2001). Corporal punishment and masculinity in South African schools. Men and masculinities,
4(2), 140–157.
Muldoon, O. T. (2004). Children of the troubles: The impact of political violence in Northern Ireland.
Journal of Social Issues, 60(3), 453–468.
Nader, K., Pynoos, R. S., Fairbanks, L., Al-Ajeel, M., & Al-Asfour, A. (1993). A preliminary study of
PTSD and grief among the children of Kuwait following the Gulf Crisis. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 32, 407–416.
Oshako, T. (1999). The developing world. In P. K. Smith, Y. Morita, J. Junger-Tas, D. Olweus, R. Catalano
& P. Slee (Eds.), The nature of school bullying: A cross-national perspective (pp. 359–375). London:
Routledge.
Osofsky, J. D. (Ed.) (1997). Children in a violent society. New York and London: The Guilford Press.

--- [PDF Page 740 / Book Page 746] ---

746 Parkes
Osofsky, J. D., Wewes, S., Hann, D. M., & Fick, A. C. (1993). Chronic community violence: What is happening to our children? In D. Reiss, J. E. Richters, M. Radke-Yarrow & D. Scharff (Eds.), Children and
violence (pp. 36–54). New York: The Guilford Press.
Parkes, J. (2005). Children’s engagements with violence: A study in a South African School. Unpublished
Ph.D., University of London Institute of Education, London.
Parkes, J. (2007). Tensions and troubles in young people’s talk about safety and danger in a violent neighbourhood. Journal of Youth Studies, 10(1), 117–137.
Parkes, J. (forthcoming). The power of talk: transformative possibilities in researching violence with children in South Africa. International Journal of Social Research Methodology.
Perry, B. D. (1997). Incubated in terror: neurodevelopmental factors in the “cycle of violence”. In J. D.
Osofsky (Ed.), Children in a Violent Society (pp. 124–149). New York and London: The Guilford Press.
Pinheiro, P. S. (2006). World report on violence against children. New York, United Nations Secretary
General’s Study on Violence against Children.
Punamaki, R., & Suleiman, R. (1990). Predictors of and effectiveness of coping with political violence
amongst Palestinian children. British Journal of Social Psychology, 29, 67–77.
Ramphele, M. (1996). How sweet is home? Family dynamics in new crossroads. In L. Glanz & A. D. Spiegel
(Eds.), Violence and family life in a contemporary South Africa: Research and policy issues (pp. 43–60).
Pretoria: HSRC.
Ramphele, M. (2000). Teach me how to be a man. In V. Das, A. Kleinman, M. Ramphele & P. Reynolds
(Eds.), Violence and subjectivity (pp. 102–119). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Reilly, J., Muldoon, O. T., & Byrne, C. (2004). Young men as victims and perpetrators of violence in Northern
Ireland: A qualitative analysis. Journal of Social Issues, 60(3), 469–484.
Reynolds, P. (1989). Children in crossroads: Cognition and society in South Africa. Cape Town and
Johannesburg: David Philip.
Rosen, D. M. (2005). Armies of the young: Child soldiers in war and terrorism. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
Seedat, S., Nyamai, C., Njenga, F., Vythilingum, B., & Stein, D. J. (2004). Trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress symptoms in urban African schools: Survey in Cape Town and Nairobi. British Journal
of Psychiatry, 184, 169–175.
Seedat, S., van Nood, E., Vythilingum, B., Stein, D. J., & Kaminer, D. (2000). School survey of exposure
to violence and posttraumatic stress symptoms in adolescents. Southern African Journal of Child and
Adolescent Mental Health, 12(1), 38–44.
Simpson, M. A. (1993). Bitter waters: Effects on children of the stresses of unrest and oppression. In J. P.
Wilson & B. Raphael (Eds.), International Handbook of Traumatic Stress Symptoms (pp. 601–624).
New York and London: Plenum Press.
Stigler, J. W., Schweder, R. A., & Herdt, G. (Eds.) (1990). Cultural psychology: Essays on comparative
human development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Straker, G., Mendelsohn, M., Moosa, F., & Tudin, P. (1996). Violent political contexts and the emotional
concerns of township youth. Child Development, 67, 46–54.
Straker, G., Moosa, F., Becker, R., & Nkwale, M. (1992). Faces in the revolution: The Psychological Effects
of Violence on Township Youth in South Africa. Cape Town: David Philip.
Swartz, L., & Levett, A. (1989). Political repression and children in South Africa: the social construction of
damaging effects. Social Science and Medicine, 28(7), 741–750.
Thabet, A., & Vostanis, P. (1999). Post-traumatic stess reactions in children of war. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 40, 385–391.
Tolan, P. H., Gorman-Smith, D., & Henry, D. B. (2003). The developmental ecology of urban males’ youth
violence. Developmental Psychology, 39(2), 274–291.
van der Merwe, A., & Dawes, A. (2000). Prosocial and antisocial tendencies in children exposed to community violence. Southern African Journal of Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 12(1), 19–37.
Werner, E., & Smith, R. (1983). Vulnerable but invincible: A longitudinal study of resilient children and
youth. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Wetherell, M., Taylor, S., & Yates, S. (Eds.) (2001). Discourse theory and practice: A reader. London:
Sage.

--- [PDF Page 741 / Book Page 747] ---

Perspectives on Children and Violence 747
WHO (2002). World report on violence and health. Geneva: World Health Organisation.
WHO (2002). World report on violence and health. Geneva: World Health Organisation.
Wood, K. (2002). An ethnography of sexual health and violence among township youth in South Africa.
Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London.
Woodhead, M. (1999). Reconstructing developmental psychology – some first steps. Children and Society,
13, 3–19.
Zeanah, C. H., & Scheeringa, M. S. (1997). The experiences and effects of violence in infancy. In J. D.
Osofsky (Ed.), Children in a violent society (pp. 97–123). New York and London: The Guilford Press.

