================================================================================
Chapter 48: An Indigenous Discourse to Cradle our Cognitive Heritage and Script our Aspirations: Reflections from India and Africa
Author(s): Anita Rampal
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 749–763
PDF Pages: pp. 742–756 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 742 / Book Page 749] ---

48
AN INDIGENOUS DISCOURSE TO CRADLE
OUR COGNITIVE HERITAGE AND SCRIPT
OUR ASPIRATIONS: REFLECTIONS FROM
INDIA AND AFRICA
Anita Rampal

The Modernisation–Indigenisation Dilemma
In a meeting of the Rural Schools Project (Nelson Mandela Foundation, 2005)
in South Africa in 2004, I inadvertently stirred a hornet’s nest. I had wondered
why plastic tables and chairs were considered such a priority in primary schools,
even at the cost of other pressing needs to ensure better learning. In South Africa
and India most children do not sit on such furniture as part of their home culture.
There was an expression of loud fist-thumping indignation by many black educators, declaring that things they had earlier been deprived of in schools should now
be ‘rightfully’ theirs. How can children write otherwise? It was demeaning and
inhuman ‘to sit on the floor and write’, they proclaimed. Well-meaning emotion,
perhaps, but somewhat misplaced. It refused to acknowledge the coherence of
culture and cognition. An interesting debate ensued, and at one point I went on to
demonstrate how most people in India still chose to sit on the floor cross-legged,
even in prestigious political meetings or musical gatherings. This is the basic posture many Westerners might pay substantial sums to emulate as part of their yoga
classes! However, the question remained. Why was Africa, the Cradle of Writing,
held in deference by the world for its ingenious initiation and imaginative use of
papyrus and quill, now finding it demeaning to write without tables and chairs?
Significantly, most black educators participating in the Rural Schools Project felt
that education has little to do with ‘culture’ or ‘identity’. These words, unfortunately,
still carry for them connotations of the colonial and apartheid past, when ‘culture’ was
used as the basic signifier of colour and ‘race’. Ironically, the present seems endangered with another kind of ‘culture’. This one chases the elusive ‘Western dream’
through schooling with a vengeance. ‘Equality of opportunity’ is sought, somewhat
superficially through unquestioning emulation, to somehow ‘catch up with them’, and
sadly, on ‘their’ terms not ‘ours’. Western dress, furniture and architecture, and teaching in the English language (often without comprehension, and mostly through rote)
are only some instances of this culture, vehemently demanded, as ‘our basic rights’
in school. A contemporary ‘indigenous’ discourse on education is urgently called
749
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 749–763.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 743 / Book Page 750] ---

750 Rampal

for, to reconstruct the social reality of people that has long been scripted elsewhere.
In the present globalising scenario there is a greater need to decolonise the mind of
plagiarised aspirations.
The ‘indigenous tradition’ of schooling had emerged out of alternative educational
ideas rooted in the anti-colonial struggles of low-income countries that challenged
‘imported’ knowledge, images, values and beliefs. For instance, Mahatma Gandhi and
Julius Nyere, both stressed education for self-reliance, equity and rural employment.
The indigenous tradition is therefore seen as one that:
Reasserts the importance of education’s relevance to the sociocultural circumstances of the nation and learner
● Assures that relevance implies local design of curriculum content, pedagogies
and assessment, using learners’ rich sources of prior knowledge
● Moves beyond the boundaries of the classroom/school through non-formal and
lifelong learning activities. (UNESCO, 2005, p. 34)
●

The Gandhian model of Basic Education (Hindustani Talimi Sangh, 1938) called for
‘education for life, through life’ and used a productive craft – weaving, carpentry,
agriculture or pottery – as the medium of interdisciplinary hands-on learning in the
primary curriculum, with the mother tongue as the medium of instruction. At the upper
primary stage the distinction between traditional ‘academic’ and ‘vocational’ streams
was sought to be reduced through flexible tracks, where science, home science or agricultural science could be placed at par. This radical move matched the agenda of the
anti-colonial freedom struggle for inclusive schools independent of government funding. It required an interrogation of the traditional caste system that stigmatised those
belonging to the low-castes and their vocations. Basic Education schools continued to
run in the 1950s, after India became independent, but did not receive sustained support from the government and the elites aspiring for white-collar employment through
‘modern’ education.
The decolonising discourse on education saw a historic debate (Bhattacharya, 1997)
between two major Indian thinkers – Gandhi and Tagore – whose respect for each other
refined their differences and also enriched the discussions on issues such as, development, nationalism, education, language, science and its domination. Gandhi led the
movement of ‘non-cooperation’, and supported the ‘swadeshi’ (the indigenous) with
the boycott of British goods, including British-run schools. Tagore ran his own indigenous school but felt, as he wrote in a letter to Gandhi in 1921, that the “struggle to
alienate our heart and mind from those of the West is an attempt at spiritual suicide …
[as indeed] for a long time we have been out of touch with our own culture” (ibid. p.
62). Gandhi maintained: “It is unbearable for me that the vernaculars should be crushed
and starved as they have been. I hope I am as great a believer in the free air as the great
Poet. … I want the cultures of all the lands to be blown about my house as freely as
possible. But I refuse to be blown off my feet by any” (ibid. p. 64). Both developed
distinct models of indigenous education. However, Tagore questioned the centrality of
manual work in Basic Education, at the cost of art and aesthetics, and wondered if it
amounted to a differentiated form of education “doled out in insufficient rations to the
poor” (ibid. p. 34), who thus get assigned to a limited place and vocation.

--- [PDF Page 744 / Book Page 751] ---

An Indigenous Discourse: Reflections From India and Africa 751

The historic Gandhi–Tagore engagement reconnects with several contemporary
educational debates. Indeed, the curriculum does manifest as an ongoing ‘complicated
conversation’ – and a ‘social and subjective reconstruction’, that allows an analysis of
“one’s experience of the past and fantasies of the future in order to understand more
fully, with more complexity and subtlety, one’s submergence in the present” (Pinar, 2004, p. 4).
The modernisation–indigenisation dilemma of the 1920s continues to reconfigure now
in several countries, around differently nuanced curricular dimensions, ranging from
the ‘developmental–ecological’ crisis, ‘rational–moral’ values, ‘academic–everyday’
knowledge, ‘intellectual–manual’ work, English or mother tongue as the medium, to
the material–cultural politics of identity (Rampal, forthcoming).
The first Education Commission of independent India (Government of India, 1966) had
advocated ‘non-violent science’ for development, so that India could engage in ‘reinterpretations and re-evaluations’ of its deep fissures of inequality and injustice, using ‘its own
cultural resources of compassion, tolerance and spirituality’, while it drew upon the new
liberalising forces that had emerged in the West. However, attempts to incorporate cultural or civilisational resources in education have been part of major political contestations,
especially in multicultural countries with complex colonial histories.
An indigenous discourse on schooling calls for new metaphors for the notion of a
‘national’ or ‘multicultural identity’. One metaphor for the dynamic and diverse society sought in post-apartheid South Africa is that of the ‘Garieb’ (The Great River),
proposed by Alexander (2002, p. 107). In this the mainstream is composed of a confluence of all the tributaries, which in their ever-changing forms continue to constitute
and reconstitute the river, such that no single current dominates, and there is no ‘main
stream’.
In the Indian context, independence came with partition and the formation of
Pakistan, which left a long trail of violence, communal frenzy and, subsequently, even
linguistic strife. This history marked the continually problematic process of carving a
national identity through the education system. A Committee for Emotional Integration,
set up by the Ministry of Education (1962, p. 3), had felt compelled to assert that:
[u]nity is not uniformity. No one is asked to give up his faith in the religion of
his fathers, his love for the language which the poets – who have inspired his life
and the life of thousands like him – chose as the medium of expression, for their
sense of truth and beauty. … Such loyalties do not detract from the loyalty to the
nation: rather they add depth to it and, in turn, derive meaning and significance
from that over-all loyalty which is the nation’s due.
However, a plurality of loyalties have continued to disturb the agenda of the nationalist-chauvinists, who strive to establish the hegemony of the culture and language of
the dominant ‘main stream’, carved out of a religious and caste identity. Education
has remained a politically contested site for the schooling of dominance – of caste,
class, religion and gender – despite radical committees and secular policies that have
challenged these divisive designs. For instance, through the National Curriculum
Framework (NCF) 2000, a right-wing party in power at the centre promoted a form
of cultural imperialism of the dominant religious identity, and textbooks presented a

--- [PDF Page 745 / Book Page 752] ---

752 Rampal

distorted and divisive view of history (SAHMAT and Sabrang, 2001). A change in
government recovered the secular space in the subsequent NCF 2005, but since school
curricula and textbooks are prepared by state governments, the right-wing ideology
continues to prevail in some states. Lall (forthcoming) analyses the increasing contestation over issues of national identity to argue that “fundamentalisation in general,
and curricular fundamentalisation in particular are state-controlled discursive mechanisms through which to contain and deflect potential dysfunctionalities produced by
the effects of globalization in societies”.
Language has been a particularly sensitive issue after India gained independence.
Religious chauvinism combined with the political hegemony of the Hindi-speaking
heartland demanded a highly classicised Hindi as the ‘national’ language. Through
much political debate the country refrained from declaring a ‘national’ language, but
instead termed Hindi the ‘official’ language, with English as an ‘associate additional
official language’, to serve as a link between the plurality of regional or state languages.
The Constitution (Article 351) also directed that:
it shall be the duty of the Union to develop the Hindi language so that it may
serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of the composite culture
of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating without interfering with
its genius, the forms, styles and expressions used in Hindustani and in the other
languages of India.
The Official Language Commission was set up and several committees deliberated upon
how the Indian languages needed to be developed. It recommended that new terminologies
should not be ‘concocted in a literary workshop’ but drawn from the vocational language
of crafts-persons, artisans, technicians and semi-skilled workers who are not familiar with
English but manage to devise their own hybrid forms of technical and scientific terminologies. However, the course of events that followed, unfortunately, went contrary to the wise
counsel of the Commission and even the Constitution. Not only were words not mined
from the quarries of artisanal ‘dialects’, but words from colloquial vocabularies were
even purged as ‘alien’ or ‘Islamic’, in favour of the often more contrived terms coined
from Sanskrit. Terms in this official form of Hindi were not carved from the dynamic
heteroglot and extensively used Hindustani, which had indeed grown out of the composite
culture of diverse communities, thus forging strong emotional bonds of shared memories.
Moreover, what emerged out of the violence of the struggle for what Rai (2001) calls
‘Hindi Nationalism’, was bereft of the creative genius of Hindustani. It was effectively a
regional language in opposition to other regional languages, invented by one ‘upper caste
local elite desperate to exercise national dominance’:
It has defined itself against a range of other contenders for so long – Urdu but not
only Urdu in the earlier phase, English later – that a kind of prickly defensiveness
has become one of its deepest characteristics. … For all its irrelevance to the real
world of literary practice, and to the world of everyday language use, this ‘Hindi’
continues to exert a poisonous influence through its continued dominance within
the education system. … This official ‘Hindi’ is primarily responsible for the

--- [PDF Page 746 / Book Page 753] ---

An Indigenous Discourse: Reflections From India and Africa 753

construction of cultural memory in the Hindi region; in classroom after classroom,
in childish essay and scholarly dissertation, the practice of this ‘Hindi’ is a ritual
re-enactment of the logic of partition. (Ibid. pp. 118–119)
An alienating discourse of education took root in most states, even where the medium
of schooling was chosen to be the state’s regional language. Terminologies and technical words were artificially foisted on learners without any consideration of their
processes of cognition and communication. However, in the state of Kerala in South
India, which has much higher levels of literacy than the rest of the country, a serious attempt was made to develop new terminologies from familiar existing words.
Several words were coined as derivatives from English but with a suitable Malayalam
suffix. A dictionary of 40,000 terms was compiled by the mass organisation ‘Kerala
Shastra Sahitya Parishad’, then a relatively small voluntary group of academics working for the popularisation of science. This was a landmark achievement and helped
the organisation in mobilising large-scale support from ordinary people, with which
it spearheaded the Silent Valley environmental campaign and its mass-based People’s
Science Movement. This example underscores the need for creative indigenous interventions which carve people’s ingenuity with their own languages and buttress the
cradle of educational expansion. Similar concerns have been voiced in South Africa,
where English still remains the dominant language of school, and efforts are on to
ensure the development and ‘intellectualisation’ of local languages (Odora Hoppers,
2002; Dlodlo, 1999).

Whose Knowledge Has Value?
In Africa, South America as well as South Asia there have been calls for a critical
re-appropriation of indigenous knowledge with an end to ‘extroversion’ of all forms,
including economic, scientific and technological. School history curricula have been
reviewed from the subaltern perspective, and October 12, the day Columbus reached
the ‘New World’, has now been declared as the ‘Indigenous Resistance Day’ in central
and South America. Social movements have called for an audit of the ‘ecological debt’
of the colonising countries, which through centuries of exploitation of mineral and
other natural resources of the Third World, have caused its deep economic debt. There
is a need to reassert and claim a similar acknowledgement of their ‘cognitive debt’ to
the indigenous knowledge of the oldest civilisations.
The development of modern science was based on several knowledge traditions,
which included the traditions of simple cultures that came in contact with the voyages
of discovery or were part of the colonies of Europe. However, in the course of the
spread of modern science these other traditions were either consciously delegitimised
or even ‘cognitively lost’ to science. Our cognitive heritage needs to be critically reexamined and reclaimed, not to be exploited in the global market, but to enrich our
indigenous systems of economic and knowledge production. For the latter, our schools
must serve not only as indigenous sites of production of new knowledge but, equally,
of relegitimisation and appraisal of some of these lost traditions.

--- [PDF Page 747 / Book Page 754] ---

754 Rampal

Some examples of such traditions being lost through formal education focus on
the question of whose knowledge is currently valued in schools. The tribal or rural
child is knowledgeable about the natural world, and does not need to look at ‘pictures’
to count the legs of a spider, to identify the eggs of a frog or the leaves of a neem
tree. She may learn from her community about metal casting, or gain knowledge to
identify medicinal herbs and the rich biodiversity of her forests, which foreign companies often aggressively vie to patent and commercially exploit, but, ironically, schools
do not value. Moreover, the structure of schooled knowledge makes the rural or tribal
child struggle with meaningless representations even in matters she knows much better
(Rampal, 2000). Such cultural dissonance between indigenous knowledge, language
and school science has also been noted in the case of Maori children (McKinley,
McPherson Waiti & Bell, 1992).
Goonatilake (1998, p. 67) stresses the need to consciously ‘mine civilisational
knowledge’ to change the traditions of modern science, through a rich array of techniques, metaphors and intellectual solutions:
Recent work of anthropologists on these small social groups, so called ‘primitive’ peoples, reveals that the impulse to be scientific is universally present. I
focus on these societies deliberately, because the Scientific Revolution began
after the voyages of discovery, and aspects of both projects interacted with
each other, namely, the search for science and the search of the Europeans’
“other”. The imperialist perspective that accompanied both events soon began
to assert the superiority and exclusivity of everything considered European.
Soon, these attitudes crystallized, to varying degrees, into a view that other
cultures were inherently incapable of the intellectual work that goes today
under the rubric of ‘science’. And this perspective has coloured subsequent
views on knowledge, views that only over the last two decades or so are
being gradually rethought.
Curiosity about nature was not only kindled but systematically formalised and nurtured
in every major civilizational area, with significant cross-transmission and crossfertilisation of ideas between them. For instance, folk biological classifications made
by different groups across the world have been seen to be remarkably similar in different settings, based on objective observations using similar criteria. Field studies of
attempts at classification by American students who had no formal training in biology
and no prior knowledge of the specimens they were asked to classify, showed that they
all came to similar classification systems based on observed criteria (Boster, 1987).
An increasing body of work in ethnobiology and anthropology shows that indigenous
peoples have independently observed the environment and come to similar conclusions
and taxonomies, largely out of an intellectual urge, more than a purely instrumental
need. “The difference between a Linnaeus, the eighteenth century founder of the modern classificatory system, and a folk classifier, becomes one partly of degree. Linnaeus
(like the other modern scientists after him) had access to a wider store of plant samples, created through European expansion into the rest of the world” (Goonatilake,
1998, p. 70).

--- [PDF Page 748 / Book Page 755] ---

An Indigenous Discourse: Reflections From India and Africa 755

The Civilising Agenda of School?
Not only do schools dismiss the civilisational knowledge resources of tribal children
but they also subject them to a severe sense of alienation, while their very existence
and identity is described in demeaning terms. Teachers are deeply conditioned by
social biases against indigenous tribes and refer to them stereotypically as ‘uncivilised
people engaged in drinking and dancing, and not interested in education’. In a textbook for Class 6, questions about ‘where in the State are tigers found?’ were framed in
exactly the same way as ‘where are tribals found?’ No effort was made to even semantically differentiate between ‘where people are found’ and ‘where people live’. Generally
no tribal characters and no tribal names appear in school books. In fact, teachers are
always ‘correcting’ tribal names, since they find them awkward and consider those to
be distorted versions of ‘proper’ Sanskrit names.
Spatial metaphors have played a role in the framing of emancipatory pedagogies to
counter the domesticating tendencies of education, ranging from phenomena of “border
crossing” to “legitimate peripheral participation” (Edwards & Usher, 2000). In countries of the South the urban poor today are witness to increasingly dehumanising, even
‘savage inequalities’, as the city reconfigures and monstrously metamorphoses into
a modern metropolis. In addition, the media relentlessly imprints surreal images on
young fertile imaginations and blossoming aspirations; jazzy Jacuzzis and fancy fittings seem to acquire a commonplace realism while modest taps and sanitary latrines
remain remotely unimaginable. Yet schools make no attempt to scaffold the ‘spatial
consciousness’ of a poor child to interrogate “the relationship that exists between him
and his neighborhood, his territory, or to use the language of the street gangs, his
‘turf’ ” (Harvey, 1973, p. 24; Rampal, 2007).
The school textbook usually maintains an inert distance, refusing to acknowledge the
lives of the tribals, and deals with survival issues in a cold, sterile manner. Assuming that
everyone lives in a brick and mortar bungalow provided with tapped water, it preaches
‘water conservation’ so that taps are not kept running while brushing one’s teeth. It also
deliberately evades any conflicting issue seen as ‘uncomfortable’ by its middle-class urban
authors, and unabashedly pontificates on what ‘they’ – the poor and the ‘unclean’ – must
do to keep themselves clean. There is an implicit understanding that while education must
inform ‘those backward’ children on how to conduct their lives ‘properly’, it should project
only happy and ‘positive’ situations to protect the ‘innocence’ of the privileged. Textbooks
traditionally contain highly prescriptive and moralistic lessons (about hygiene, cleanliness, hard work, etc.) together with naive and insipid generalisations about the lives of the
poor. In fact, under ‘types of houses’ the concrete bungalow, the semi-pucca house and the
‘jhuggi’ (makeshift shelter) are presented just as if these constituted another natural ‘scientific’ taxonomy, as in plants or soil types! Moreover, a ‘good’ house is always defined as one
with a kitchen, toilets, windows and electricity. Millions of children who live in conditions
that do not conform to these norms are deliberately alienated, and receive signals that their
life style is ‘bad’.
The ‘civilising’ agenda of school has almost been timelessly and righteously imposed
on poor children, who supposedly need to be ‘rescued from the abyss’, where the discipline of school is meant to be contrasted with the chaos and squalor in their homes.

--- [PDF Page 749 / Book Page 756] ---

756 Rampal

In fact, the disdain faced by the urban poor in our present schools is reminiscent of
nineteenth-century England, where the Compulsory Education Act of 1870 gave state
sanction to the purported maintenance of ‘order’ through often oppressive measures.
Education was enforced with prosecutions and fines, with seizure of goods if parents
could not pay, and even prison. Order and obedience came with cleanliness, vested
with the same moral righteousness, the same sense of ‘shame’, and even greater priority than instruction (Davin, 1996).

Unpacking the Packaged Discourse
The exclusion of the knowledge of poor, rural children from the curriculum is exacerbated by the languages through which schooling is delivered. The discourse of school
has normally been highly transactional, impersonal and dense, with encapsulated
information that is expected to be memorised, since children in any case cannot make
sense of it (Rampal, 1992a). The hegemony of the heavily classicised terminology
used in the regional languages has made science and mathematics doubly debilitating
for children in government schools. This contributes to a large extent to their failure to
cope with these subjects.
The Ministry of Human Resource Development appointed a Committee in 1993
to help reduce the ‘burden of the school bag’. Its report ‘Learning without Burden’
(Government of India, 1993) was prefaced with the observation that the gravitational
load of the bag was not the main problem, but “that the more pernicious burden is that
of non-comprehension. In fact, a significant fraction of children who drop out may be
those who refuse to compromise with non-comprehension – they are potentially superior to those who just memorise and do well in examinations, without comprehending
very much!” It was sharply critical of the overarching trend to package as much information as possible in a ‘highly compressed and abstruse manner’ and noted that:
Barring exceptions, our textbooks appear to have been written primarily to convey information or ‘facts’, rather than to make children think and explore. …
The distance between the child’s everyday life and the content of the textbook
accentuates the transformation of knowledge into a load. … Even books used
for teaching the mother tongue are written in such a stylised diction that children
cannot be expected to recognize this language as their own. Words, expressions
and nuances commonly used by children in their milieu are absent. So is humour.
An artificial, sophisticated style dominates, reinforcing the tradition of distancing knowledge from life. (Ibid. pp. 7–8)
Often the rhetoric of ‘activity-based’ teaching may be adopted by textbooks but there
is no attempt to promote any exploration or activity. Children are asked to observe the
‘picture’ of an object, rather than go out and look at the ‘real’ thing, be it a common
sparrow or the leaf of a plant, and the conclusions are already provided about ‘what
will be observed’. A typical passage on ‘Weather’ from a Class 3 textbook ‘Exploring
Environment’ shows how distant it is from a truly exploratory approach. Notice the

--- [PDF Page 750 / Book Page 757] ---

An Indigenous Discourse: Reflections From India and Africa 757

density of the text and the use of statements that actually do not explain anything
(Rampal, 2002; PROBE Team, 1999):
When water evaporates it changes from liquid into water vapour. Water vapour is
the gaseous form of water. Wet things dry when the water in them becomes water
vapour and moves into the atmosphere. You cannot see water evaporating into
water vapour. Water vapour exists in the form of very tiny particles.
Most of these sentences do not offer any real explanations, and for these concepts
on evaporation and states of matter it is not even possible to do so for children this
age. They are only statements that go round in circles, as tautologies. If a child asks
‘But what is water vapour?’ she gets the answer ‘Water vapour is the gaseous form of
water’! Naturally the child stops trying to make sense of what is being ‘taught’, and
falls in line with what is expected – to unthinkingly repeat what she has been told.
There has been little systematic attempt to get feedback from children and to elicit
their perceptions about this kind of writing. It is generally believed that if they fail
to learn in school there must be something wrong with them, for which they need
all kinds of additional inputs, from tuitions to tonics. Eleven-year-old Gargi, a pupil
in Mumbai, is one such exception. When asked to critically analyse her textbook,
she looked at two pages from the chapter on ‘Air’ which contain a heavy density of
unfamiliar terms and concepts, such as, crucible, mass, desiccator, clay pipe triangle,
magnesium, apparatus, mercuric oxide. The book, supposed to be among the better
textbooks, used by urban schools and published by a private firm, thoughtlessly goes
into elaborate instructions for doing an experiment, normally given to high school
students, to find the difference in the ‘mass’ of magnesium after burning it in air. Gargi
dared to question the suitability of what was being taught. She sent me her expressive
comments with a drawing:
The section on Priestley’s experiment was most confusing. Mercury, red powder,
heating, re-heating. … Add to this Preistley, Lavoisier, glowing splinter, oxygen.
… Garbage! It went zoom over my head.
As a third-world country a major problem we have had to contend with, especially while
designing curricula, is the notion of ‘catching up’ that India must do to become abreast
of what is popularly called the ‘global information explosion’. When told that European
children, for instance, learn concepts of valence or chemical equations much later than
their counterparts here, it is argued that those countries can now ‘afford to go slow’. The
latest National Curriculum Framework (Government of India, 2005) has promoted a social
constructivist approach towards children’s learning, with a focus on the cultural context of
concept-formation. All children are natural theory-makers, and from much before they go
to school they begin to construct their own theories and explanations for the world they
observe. Learning in childhood is not a process of accumulating or storing information
about different topics, but the ability to apply the understanding of one phenomenon to
others. Children often form consistent ‘alternative frameworks’ or ‘naive theories’ that may
even be contradictory to established knowledge (Driver et al.,1985). Therefore, schools

--- [PDF Page 751 / Book Page 758] ---

758 Rampal

need to consciously elicit, address and critically examine children’s intuitive ideas before
presenting new ways of looking at the world.
Many students fail in their mathematics exams, feeling frustrated at not being able
to cope with numbers even later in life. Yet unschooled children and adults enjoy
solving oral riddles and play folk games, with tamarind seeds or pebbles, which are
entertaining and also sharpen their mathematical abilities. Traditional methods of estimation, sorting and measurement still used in villages have their own terminologies,
which are meaningfully related to real-life contexts. We have found that unschooled
children and adults who sell in the market or do vocational work are adept at mental
arithmetic as part of their daily transactions, and use effective algorithms and strategies to get results (Rampal et al., 1999; Rampal, 2003a, b, c).
The presentation of mathematics in textbooks has also traditionally been associated with entrenching gender inequalities. A detailed study of mathematics textbooks
and teachers’ manuals undertaken by Mary Harris (on behalf of the Commonwealth
Secretariat) points out that the language of the Class 1 book, Let’s Learn Mathematics,
is already too formal and runs the risk of alienating girls right from the beginning of
their schooling. “Girls find co-operative and generative ways of working a better way
of understanding mathematics than the more definitional, hierarchical ways used in
this text and indeed throughout the series” (Harris, 1999, p. 93). Thus, redressing gender imbalance in textbooks is not simply a matter of introducing more examples with
women, but of understanding that women have continued to play an important role in
accumulating and refining traditional knowledge in various spheres of activity.
Indeed, in the new primary school textbooks produced by National Council of
Educational Research and Training (NCERT, 2006a, 2007, 2008; also at www.ncert.nic.
in) we have consciously given place to children’s unschooled knowledge of science and
everyday mathematics. With a focus on those who are most vulnerable to be pushed out of
school, and unlike the prevalent ‘culture of silence’ at school, some key questions openly
address issues of inequality or difference, and encourage children to reflect on their lived
experiences, however unpleasant. The syllabus for Environmental Studies for Grades III–V
(NCERT, 2006b) uses an integrated approach, through ‘themes’ that allow for a connected
and interrelated understanding of what may conventionally come under the subjects of
Science, Social Studies and Environmental Education. This required moving beyond traditional boundaries of disciplines and looking at priorities in a shared way, with a focus on
children’s understandings and experiences rooted in diverse cultural milieu.
For instance, the theme on ‘Food’ begins with ‘cooking’ and ‘eating in the family’,
and sensitises children to the notion that food is a deeply cultural concept. The key
question ‘Which of the following is food – red ants, birds’ nest, goats’ milk, etc.?’ is
meant to focus on the understanding of such differences, to promote tolerance, and
also to address social biases about indigenous culinary practices. Certain tribal communities relish condiments made out of red ants or fried termites, but face oppressive
discrimination from often insensitive and ignorant non-tribal peers and teachers. The
theme then moves on to how food is grown, how it reaches the city, who grows it, and
the hardships farmers face (in the light of the severe crisis in agriculture and unprecedented suicides by farmers), while staying grounded to the reality of our own pangs of
hunger or the plight of people who do not get food. Further, changes in food habits and

--- [PDF Page 752 / Book Page 759] ---

An Indigenous Discourse: Reflections From India and Africa 759

crop patterns are analysed through the historical experiences of village elders/grandparents, not just from what the teacher or textbook says.
Themes on ‘Water’ and ‘Shelter’ in the syllabus include questions on the immediate
issues of caste and deprivation in rural and urban environments. For instance, the following
questions are meant to scaffold critical dialogue: How far do you have to go to fetch water?
Are there some people not allowed to take water from your source? What are underground
wells and do you still see them being used? Have you seen water being wasted? Are there
some people in your area who always face water shortage? Do you find factories or people dumping garbage or harmful materials in rivers or seas? Similarly for ‘Shelter’: Does
everyone have a shelter to live in? Why do people live together in hamlets/colonies/neighbourhoods? The syllabus and the textbook also include narratives of a child displaced by
the construction of a dam or the demolition of an urban slum.
The new NCERT textbooks based on the revised syllabus have been introduced in
schools in 2006. As our team continues to work on the Environmental Studies (EVS)
textbooks we have been through a process of debate and reflection. To remain sensitive
to all children and to consciously include the lived realities of the rural and tribal child
is indeed a challenge, especially when most of us – teachers and educators – are from
among the urban educated sections of society, with increasingly fewer shared spaces
of social and cultural interchange. For us tapped water (though now in short supply in
most cities) or personal toilets are unquestioned essentials of urban life, while many
other markers of our middle-class existence – be it cooking gas, a refrigerator, an ice
cream cone, or even ordinary coloured paper – might unthinkingly appear in the chapters we draft. We also continue to contend with a middle-class moralistic discourse
on hygiene and cleanliness, and the belief that the poor need the ‘right messages’
through school. Nevertheless, we have made space for different children’s voices and
concerns, from diverse regions, cultures and socio-economic backgrounds – of those
whose houses are washed away by floods each year, and also those who walk miles to
get a pot of water. We have consciously included several real-life narratives of inspiration and transformative action for the textbooks for language, mathematics and EVS
in grades III (NCERT, 2006a, 2007, 2008).

Scientific Temper and Social Beliefs
Science for development has been a shared dream in most third-world countries, including South Africa and India. However, often an overly positivist and even erroneously
glorious view of science is projected as the panacea for all national problems (Rampal,
1992b). Scientific thinking is perceived to be in direct confrontation with peoples’ religious and customary beliefs, superstitions and traditional practices. Standard courses
in school allow no room for thought and critical reflection to intelligently deal with
students’ indigenous knowledge or to sensitively interrogate social beliefs.
The media mindlessly beams a barrage of often crude and condescending messages,
again with no attempt at critical inquiry or communicative explanation. For example,
in a regular ‘social advertisement’ on Indian television, a commanding disembodied
voice interrogates the poor housewife on whether she had cleaned the plates well, and

--- [PDF Page 753 / Book Page 760] ---

760 Rampal

even patronisingly orders viewers to wash their hands before eating (and after defecating). This format is immensely offensive and gender-insensitive. Even in the parched
drought-prone desert of Rajasthan, where women solely bear the backbreaking burden
of carrying several pitchers of scarce water from long distances, they show enough
indigenous acumen and plain good sense to scrub their utensils clean with sand.
Similar condescending messages on the vaccination of children or about keeping food
covered seem to place the blame entirely on the poor viewers for their illness, absolving the state of its responsibility to provide basic amenities such as potable water or
primary health care. There is no popular scientific attempt to communicate why vaccinations help or what happens with contaminated food, so that this didactic discourse
is almost similar in its import and spirit to any other knowledge claim arising out of
‘unscientific’ systems of belief.
The inculcation of scientific thinking is a slow and complex process, and remains
embedded within the various complementary layers of social cognition – between
myths, beliefs, folklore, superstitions, taboos, etc. – that have influenced people’s thinking for centuries. Such beliefs broadly constitute what Horton (1970) calls a ‘closed’
system of thought, characterised by a lack of awareness of alternatives to the body
of tenets espoused and constrained by the tendency to reason only within a ‘limited
idiom’. The language of science needs to be careful while invoking such ideas that may
relate to people’s sacred and social beliefs in attempting to provide ‘scientific’ explanations to them. Moving towards scientific thinking would involve providing alternate
explanations and allowing traditional tenets to become less sacred as they lose their
absolute validity, through an accompanying loosening of social structures that sustain
such tenets (Rampal, 1994; Ogunniyi, 1988, 1989).
This issue has repeatedly troubled and creatively engaged colleagues and friends
during our work in the literacy campaign and as part of the activities of the All India
People’s Science Network. For instance, during the total solar eclipse in 1994, thousands of literacy activists in the country had conducted a special ‘Cosmic Voyage’, and
travelling cultural troupes had moved across the country communicating with millions
of people and mobilising them to watch and learn about the phenomenon. Poems and
plays were specially written and printed in books that indicated how to incorporate
people’s own beliefs and legends, while presenting new knowledge. The play Grahan
men bhi Surya Sundar (The sun is beautiful during the eclipse too) used folk humour
and satire to portray popular beliefs and rituals related to the eclipse, while also trying to motivate them to see the spectacular event, and accept other explanations for
its incidence. Dismissing traditional beliefs cursorily, without addressing how past
civilisations have sought explanatory metaphors for such natural occurrences, can be
counter-productive. It alienates and gives the unnecessary impression that science is
too ‘impersonal’ and opposed to all that they may hold dear or sacred.

Conclusion
This chapter has highlighted the gulf between the indigenous knowledge learners
have about math and science and the formal, distancing and often incomprehensible

--- [PDF Page 754 / Book Page 761] ---

An Indigenous Discourse: Reflections From India and Africa 761

ways in which school textbooks are presented. On the other hand, while working with
unschooled youth and adults engaged in a craft we can see how their knowledge is
situated in practice (Rogoff & Lave, 1984; Lave, 1996) and is based on high levels of
innovation, creativity and resourcefulness. I am reminded of a young watch mechanic
I had gone to (in the small town where I once lived) with a very inexpensive (and
perhaps disposable) watch that had stopped functioning. He handed it back the next
day, ticking away, and charged only a pittance of 10 rupees (roughly 20 cents) saying,
with visible pride “I have learnt from my father that my job is to make it work, not
throw it away!” This sentiment is integral to the ethics of his unschooled knowledge.
It has its roots in the system of learning he experienced during his apprenticeship with
his ustaad or master, who happens to be his father. It is such resourcefulness and innovation of ‘making things work’, with austerity and minimum expendable resources,
often through creative recycling, which is the hallmark of this system of education.
Moreover, such ‘learning while doing’ is premised on greater participation and collective effort, where thought, action and feelings are organically linked (Rampal, 2003a).
Our schools could learn much from such systems of unschooled knowledge. These
could serve to scaffold a counter-hegemonic discourse against globalisation. Indeed,
what could be a better way to resist globalised consumerism than to take pride in making things work without expending resources or throwing anything away!
It is a matter of concern that in low-income countries like India ‘vocational’ education remains the least sought after, perceived as meant for the non-academic ‘backward
learners’, even while working-class families despair that schools alienate their children from their own vocations and livelihoods. More often, institutes or polytechnics
that offer such courses are not creatively or academically engaged with education, and
are even placed under the Labour Department. In the present globalizing discourse
of ‘brain vs body’ skills, where ‘creative twenty-first century skills’ are competitively
sought for schools in industrialised countries, almost justifying the outsourcing of
‘low-skill’ jobs to low-income countries, there lies an urgent challenge to design indigenous vocational curricula with an innovative and academic ‘high skill’ edge for the
majority. Moreover, as Brown, Lauder and Ashton (forthcoming) argue, the dominant
discourse on education and globalisation needs to be challenged to show “that Britain
and the US are not knowledge economies, where the value of knowledge continues to
rise, but are characterised by an economy of knowledge that is transforming the relationship between education, jobs and rewards”.
There is a Zimbabwean proverb (Brock-Utne, 2002) which goes: ‘Stories of the hunt
will be stories of glory until the day when animals have their own historians.’ Stories of
our civilisational knowledge need to be told by historians of oral and indigenous knowledge using our languages that cradle our cognitive heritage and script our aspirations.

References
Alexander, N. (2002). An ordinary country. Scottsville, South Africa: University of Natal Press.
Bhattacharya, S. (Ed.) (1997). The Mahatma and the poet: Letters and debates between Gandhi and Tagore
1915–1949. New Delhi: National Book Trust.

--- [PDF Page 755 / Book Page 762] ---

762 Rampal
Boster, J. (1987). Agreement between biological classification systems is not dependent on cultural transmission. American Anthropologist, 89(4), 914–920.
Brock-Utne, B. (2002). Stories of the hunt – Who is writing them? In C. Odora-Hoppers (Ed.), Indigenous
knowledge and the integration of knowledge systems. Claremont, South Africa: New Africa Education.
Brown, P., Lauder, H. and Ashton, D. (forthcoming). Towards a high skills economy: Higher education and
the new realities of global capitalism. In D. Epstein, R. Boden, R. Deem, F. Rizvi & S. Wright (Eds.),
World yearbook of education 2008 – geographies of knowledge, geometries of power: framing the future
of higher education. London: Routledge.
Davin, A. (1996) Growing up poor: Home. school and street in London 1870–1914. London: Rivers Oram Press.
Dlodlo, T. S. (1999). Science nomenclature in Africa: Physics in Nguni. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 36(3), 321–331.
Driver, R., Guesne, E., & Tiberghien, A. (1985). Children’s ideas in science. Milton Keynes: Open University
Press.
Edwards, R. & Usher, R. (2000). Globalization and pedagogy. London: Routledge.
Goonatilake, S. (1998). Toward a global science. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Government of India (1956). Report of the official language commission. New Delhi: Government of India
Press.
Government of India (1962). Report of the committee on national and emotional integration, Ministry of
Education. New Delhi: Author.
Government of India (1966). Report of the education commission 1964–66: Education and national development. New Delhi: Author.
Government of India (2000, 2005). National curriculum framework. New Delhi: National Council for
Educational Research and Training.
Government of India (1993). Learning without burden. Report of the National Advisory Committee,
Ministry of Human Resource Development. New Delhi: Author.
Harvey, D. (1973). Social justice and the city. London: Edward Arnold.
Hindustani Talimi Sangh (All-India Education Board) (1938). Report of the Zakir Hussain committee on
basic education. Wardha, Maharashtra: Author.
Harris, M. (1999). Gender sensitivity in primary school mathematics in India. Report of the Commonwealth
Secretariat. London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
Horton, R. (1970). African traditional thought and western science. In B. Wilson (Ed.), Rationality. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Lall, M. (forthcoming) Globalisation and the fundamentalisation of curricula: Lessons from India. In R. K.
Hopson, C. Camp Yeakey & F. M. Boakari (Eds.), Power, voice, and the public good: Schooling and
education in globalized societies. Oxford: Elsevier.
Lave, J. (1996). The practice of learning. In S. Chaiklin & J. Lave (Eds.), Understanding practice:
Perspectives on activity and context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McKinley, E., McPherson Waiti, P., & Bell, B. (1992). Language, culture and science education. International
Journal of Science Education, 14(5), 579–595.
NCERT (2006a, 2007, 2008). Math-Magic and Around us (Textbooks for primary mathematics and
Environmental Studies). New Delhi: National Council for Educational Research and Training.
NCERT (2006b). Syllabus for elementary school. New Delhi: National Council for Educational Research
and Training; also at www.ncert.nic.in
Nelson Mandela Foundation (2005). Emerging voices: A report on education in South African rural communities. Cape Town: HSRC Press.
Odora-Hoppers, C. (Ed.) (2002). Indigenous knowledge and the integration of knowledge systems.
Claremont, South Africa: New Africa Education.
Ogunniyi, M. B. (1988). Adapting western science to traditional African culture. International Journal of
Science Education, 10(1), 1–9.
Ogunniyi, M. B. (1989). Traditional African culture and modern science. In E. Ekeh & A. Ashiwaju (Eds.),
Nigeria since independence: Volume on culture. Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books.
Pinar, W.F. (2004). What is curriculum theory? Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
PROBE Team (1999). Public report on basic education. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Rai, A. (2001). Hindi nationalism. Tracts of the Times, 13. New Delhi, Orient Longman.

--- [PDF Page 756 / Book Page 763] ---

An Indigenous Discourse: Reflections From India and Africa 763
Rampal, A. (1992a). A possible orality for science? Interchange, 23(3), 227–244.
Rampal, A. (1992b). The image of science and scientists: A study of school teachers’ views. I. Characteristics
of scientists. Science Education, 76(4), 415–436.
Rampal, A. (1994). Innovative science teaching in rural school of India: Questioning social beliefs and
superstitions. In J. Solomon & G. Aikenhead (Eds.), STS education: International perspectives on
reforms. New York: Teachers College.
Rampal, A., Ramanujam, R., & Saraswathi, L. S. (1999). Numeracy counts! National Literacy Resource
Centre, Mussoorie: LBS National Academy of Administration.
Rampal, A. (2000). Education for human development in South Asia. Economic and Political Weekly 35,
2623–2631.
Rampal, A. (2002). Texts in Context: An EFA 2000 Review. In R. Govinda (Ed.), India education report.
New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Rampal, A. (2003a). Counting on everyday mathematics. In T. S. Saraswathi (Ed.), Cross cultural perspectives in human development: Theory, research and applications. New Delhi: Sage.
Rampal, A. (2003b). The meaning of numbers: Understanding street and folk mathematics. In B. Kothari, P.
G. V. Sherry Chand & M. Norton (Eds.), Reading beyond the alphabet: Innovations in lifelong literacy.
New Delhi: Sage.
Rampal, A. (2003c). Indian market women and their mathematics. In J. Solomon (Ed.), The passion to learn:
An inquiry into autodidactism. London: Routledge Falmer.
Rampal, A. (2007). Ducked or bulldozed: Education of deprived urban children in India. In W. T. Pink
& G. W. Noblit (Eds.), International handbook of urban education, (pp. 285–304). Dordrecht, the
Netherlands: Springer.
Rampal, A. (forthcoming) Curriculum, economic and cultural development. In B. McGraw, E. Baker & P.
Peterson (Eds.), International encyclopedia of education, 3rd edn. Oxford: Elsevier.
Rogoff, B. & Lave, J. (1984). Everyday cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
SAHMAT and Sabrang (2001). Against communalisation of education. New Delhi: Author.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) (2005). Education for All
Global Monitoring Report 2005 – The quality imperative. Paris: Author.

