================================================================================
Chapter 49: Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices in a Post-Apartheid South Africa
Author(s): Nazir Carrim
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 765–779
PDF Pages: pp. 757–771 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 757 / Book Page 765] ---

49
HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE LIMITATIONS
OF RELEASING SUBALTERN VOICES
IN A POST-APARTHEID SOUTH AFRICA
Nazir Carrim

Postcoloniality and the achievement of human rights in South Africa mark the transition
to a post-apartheid society. The denial and violation of human rights of particularly
“black”1 South Africans under apartheid has placed the provision and protection
of human rights centrally in the definition of a post-apartheid, “new” South Africa.
Policy and administrative changes in education underscore this. The Preamble of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa reads as follows:
We, the people of South Africa,
Recognise the injustices of our past;
Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land;
Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity.
We, therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this Constitution
as the supreme law of the Republic so as to –
Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values,
social justice and fundamental human rights;
Lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is based
on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by the law;
Improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person; and
Build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a
sovereign state in the family of nations.
May God protect our people.
Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrica. Morena boloka stejhaba sa heso.
God seen Suid-Afrika. God bless South Africa.
Mudzimu fhatutshedza Afurika. Hosi Katekisa Afrika (South Africa, 1996a).
The Constitution explicitly notes the historical context within which it emerged and
the ways in which issues of the past are to be addressed in the future development of
democracy. It notes that it replaces what existed under apartheid and attempts to “heal
the divisions of the past”. In order to do so, it “recognises the injustices of our past”
and “honour(s) those who suffered” and all those who have contributed to “build(ing)”
and “develop(ing)” South Africa. The Constitution and the changes in education in
765
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 765–779.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 758 / Book Page 766] ---

766 Carrim

South Africa established to give it effect cannot be understood outside of the historical
context and legacies of apartheid. Its purpose is to (re)address the “injustices” and
“divisions” of apartheid and to “lay the foundations of a democratic and open society”
which were delegitimated and repressed under apartheid.
The recognition of “black” South Africans as citizens, on the basis of equality of all
before the law, altered the political landscape and restored the “dignity” of all South
Africans. It also provided the basis for “black” people to enter the political system,
be members of parliaments, and become president of the country. The official abolition of apartheid signalled by the 27 April 1994 elections, is not only of titular and
symbolic importance but was critical to altering materially the positoning of “black”
South Africans in the polity. South Africa was welcomed back into the community of
democratic nations of the world because of this historic accomplishment. Recognition
in and by the law thus can effect material changes in people’s lives. This cannot be
underestimated or undermined.
However, my focus in this chapter is the extent to which such recognition of human
rights of all South Africans in and by the law, allows for the release of the voices of the
“subaltern”. In the first section I draw on some precepts of the work of Gayatri Spivak
and Walter D. Mignolo to outline the ways in which I use postcolonial theorising. I am
concerned with exploring the extent of the achievement of human rights and democracy
in post-apartheid South Africa. However, this is continuous with modernity and, as
such, limits the extent to which “subaltern” voices are released. In the second section I
outline some of the limitations of the discourse of human rights and show that, despite
these limitations it did (and still does) play an important role in resistances to apartheid
and the ways in which ordinary South Africans are able to defend themselves in the
face of human rights violations. I draw on empirical data documenting experiences of
pupils in schools regarding sexual orientation.
My primary purpose in focusing on sexual orientation is because the new South
African Constitution recognises sexual orientation as a human right and is among the
few constitutions in the world that does so. Article 9 of the Bill of Rights, states:
The state may not discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on one or
more grounds, including race, gender, sex, pregnancy, marital status, ethnic or
social origin, sexual orientation, age, disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture, language and birth. (South Africa, 1996b)
In 2006, South Africa passed laws recognising civil unions among same sex partners,
and became among the few countries in the world to have done so as sexual orientation
tends to be unspoken in most contexts. Gays and lesbians occupy marginalised spaces
in virtually all societies which are powerfully controlled by heterosexuality. Looking
at sexual orientation provides a useful way to assess the extent to which the provision of human rights in post-apartheid South Africa reaches people on the margins of
this heterosexual hegemoic order. In this chapter I tease out some of the implications
for education of human rights, the construction of a post-apartheid South Africa, the
postcolonial imagination and subalternity.

--- [PDF Page 759 / Book Page 767] ---

Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices 767

Can the Subaltern Speak?
In the essay “Can the Subaltern Speak”, from which this section borrows its title, Gayatri
Spivak (1993) explores hegemonic ideas concerning aspects of the subaltern condition. The
essay is a very complex and sophisticated analysis of the ways in which the “West” is constructed as the “Subject” and how “Others” are positioned and constructed as “Subjects” of
the West. In the essay Spivak enters into a conversation with Deleuze and Foucault, including several references to Marx, Guattari, Gramsci and Edward Said in particular, before
using Derrida in her thought-provoking deconstruction of “sati” or “suttee” – that is, Indian
widows’ self-immolation on the pyre of their deceased husbands.
Spivak’s argument is that the voices of the subaltern – by which she means colonised
peoples – cannot simply be about “releasing” “their” voices so that they can “speak
for themselves”. This she sees as a tendency within some types of subaltern studies
published in the USA to ignore the “macrological” constraints and conditions which
position people. Such “micrological” studies, she argues, focus on personal experiences in decontexualised and individualistic ways and ignore the wider power matrices
that construct our worlds on social, economic and political levels, and have global and
historical dimensions. Micrological studies which do not chart such personal experiences in relation to wider socio-economic, political and historical forces can provide
only partial accounts. Spivak’s point is that there ought to be an “articulation” (Hall,
1996) between the “micrological” and “macrological”, that is, studies which focus on
social, economic and political power within global and historical contexts. Analyses
need to consider not only the positionalities and experiences of the “subaltern” but of
social phenomena in general.
In asking the question, can the subaltern speak, Spivak is at pains to show that for
the subaltern to speak the very bases of the knowledge systems and subject positions
need to be reconfigured. In looking at whether “the Indian woman”, as “subaltern”,
can speak, through the experiences of “sati”, Spivak shows that first the Indian woman
needs to be deconstructed. She needs to be seen as a Subject in relation to the legitimated and dominant concepts of the imperialist and imperialising West. She also should
not be seen as the Other assimilated within colonising frameworks. Thus, she needs
to be seen in her own terms. Spivak’s deconstruction of the Indian woman and “sati”
entails examining Hindu terms and ancient, sacred Indian texts. These reveal that the
woman remains subordinate to the Indian male, with such subordination inscribed on
her body, particularly her genitalia. Spivak concludes that despite deconstruction the
subaltern still cannot speak. She cannot speak in the grammar of the West, she cannot
speak in the chauvinism of the Hindu male, she cannot speak in the scriptures of the
pious Brahmin and she cannot speak in the heavens. Not until she disembodies herself
from her female body, destroys herself and is no longer woman, that is only in the utter
annihilation of her as woman can she speak and be heard. As long as she is woman and
subaltern she cannot speak.
Spivak’s analysis of subalternity points to two significant factors that are of critical
importance to an analysis of a postcolonial and post-apartheid South Africa. First,
Spivak allows us to see that the voices of the subaltern can be heard only once he or

--- [PDF Page 760 / Book Page 768] ---

768 Carrim

she has been assimilated as the Subject of the West. But this is speaking in “his Master’s
voice”. For South Africa this implies that the establishment of human rights in the
“new” South Africa through current constitutional provisions is continuous with what
the West can “hear”. The ‘new South Africa’ is spoken in the language and grammar of
the West. Spivak alerts us that even if one uncovers indigenous knowledge systems this
does not necessarily mean that the voices of the subaltern can or will be released.
Walter Mignolo (2000), in commenting on the subaltern dilemma refers to “border
thinking” or “an other thinking” and a “double critique” which characterise analyses
of subalternity. He points to some of the points of tension in postcolonial (and postmodern) ways of thinking and the challenges that confront them. He says that “border
thinking structures itself on a double consciousness, a double critique operating on the
imaginary of the modern/colonial world system, or modernity/coloniality” (Mignolo,
2000). Thus “subaltern reason” is able to:
open up the countermodern as a place of contention from the very inception of
Western expansion making it possible to contest the intellectual space of modernity and the inscription of a world order in which West and the East, the Same
and the Other, the Civilized and the Barbarian were inscribed as natural entities”
(Mignolo, 2000, p. 96).
Mignolo’s argument is thus that the subaltern condition is not fixed, but is always in a
state of flux, presenting the potential of counter-hegemonic ideas. But this potential
will always be constrained by global conditions.
“Border thinking” or “double critique” is similar to and an elaboration of Spivak’s “macrological” and “micrological” forms of analysis. “Double critique” and “border thinking”
are about understanding the personal experiences of people and deconstructing them with
regard to how they are positioned within modernity and “the intellectual space” of the
West. It simultaneously allows for the “stories” of the “subaltern” to be told “in their own
voices” and not as inscriptions of Subjects of the West. To further expand on this point
consider the following in relation to the category of “race”. People may be classified as
“black”. It does not mean that they in fact are ‘black’ genetically or historically. Following
“border thinking” and a “double critique” one needs to understand the ways in which the
category “race” (and all of its significations) is constitutive of “the modern/colonial imaginary”, and to explore the experiences of people categorised as “black” in their own terms
and “in their own voices”. However, one also needs to understand that the “own voices”
of “black” people, once released, may not necessarily be “countermodern” because they
too may be informed and constructed within the ideological constructions of other power
matrices which would not necessarily release the “voices of the subaltern” but in fact rearticulate them in the terms of another hegemonic construction.
In employing this type of double critique, with a double consciousness, a border
thinking analysis of post-apartheid South Africa has to question to what extent and in
which ways it colludes with modernity and the world order. It would be too easy to
employ what Spivak’s calls a “micrological” analysis and celebrate the achievement of
democracy and human rights in the abolition of apartheid in South Africa, and, thereby
ignore the “macrological” interconnections between this process and the global political economy and knowledge systems.

--- [PDF Page 761 / Book Page 769] ---

Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices 769

Why has a post-apartheid South Africa been so welcomed by the Subject of the
West? Drawing on Chakrabarty, Mignolo states:
One can only articulate subaltern subject positions in the name of history – (the
discourse of which has Europe as sovereign, theoretical subject of all histories.
(Mignolo, 2000, p. 203)
In many ways this captures some of the reasons why the achievement of democracy in
post-apartheid South Africa has been welcomed by the West and Europe. The abolition
of apartheid was a necessary event in the globalisation of democracy and the establishment of a culture of human rights among the colonised. Many have also pointed out
that these are the ideological conditions for a global political economy which requires
the development of modernity in colonised countries (Castells, 2001; Zizek, 2005).
Apartheid was not in keeping with the trajectory of global capitalism and could not
hold within its framework a modernist socio-economic and political project (Wolpe,
1986). The post-apartheid, postcolonial South Africa is a modernist project and it is
precisely for this reason that Derrida, for example, regards Mandela as the “last of
modernist prophets” (Derrida, 1986). Post-apartheid South Africa has been applauded
by the West and Europe. Politically this is demonstrated by the fact that South Africa
now (as of October 2006) enjoys “non-permanent member status” in the UN Security
Council. Culturally the status of post-apartheid South Africa is evident in instances
such as its selection to host the World Cup Soccer in 2010, its winning the Oscar
awards for the best foreign film (Tsotsi) and a Grammy award for the Soweto Gospel
Choir. On global economic, political and cultural levels, then, a post-apartheid, postcolonial South Africa is very much “at home” as the Subject of the West.
In the following I use this framework provided by Spivak and Mignolo to show that
“subaltern” voices in South Africa speaking from education settings are both enabled
and constrained within current conditions. In pursuing this argument I indicate that the
discourse of human rights is contradictory, but this contradiction is by no means negative. It is constitutive and constructive, but it is limiting and limited. My point in this
argument is to demonstrate that whilst “subaltern” voices may be argued to be released
in the post-apartheid, postcolonial moment, the “subaltern” in fact still cannot speak.
Subaltern expressions are instead being re-articulated in the imaginary of the West and
are being projected, positioned and received in the name of the West. My entré into
this is via a discussion on the framing of human rights in South Africa and the ways
in which gays and lesbians express in their “own voices” rights with regard to sexual
orientation and schooling in the “new” South African dispensation.

Using Human Rights to Achieve Democracy in South Africa
The discourse of human rights is at once empowering and limiting. It is empowering
because it accords formal equality to all people in the world. But it is limiting because
of its point of origin and discursive framework. There are several critiques of the
discourse of human rights. These range from early critiques of Marx and Bentham in
relation to the The Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, to critiques of the

--- [PDF Page 762 / Book Page 770] ---

770 Carrim

United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) which led to the adoption of the African Charter of Human and People’s Rights (1981). My purpose here is
not so much to review the criticisms of the discourse of human rights, but to point to
some of the central points in these critiques in order to demonstrate that the discourse
of human rights is not unproblematic and should be treated critically. However, as
pointed above, I also intend to show that the discourse of human rights does at the
same time provide enabling conditions for countering forms of oppression.
The discourse of human rights came to international prominence through the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 by the United Nations.
Prior to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights Declaration of the American (USA)
Independence of July, 1776, the Virginia (USA) Declaration of Rights of June, 1776 and
the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen of 1789 during the French Revolution
all contained formulations regarding human rights (Osler & Starkey, 1996; Touraine, 1997;
Weston, 2002). This discourse has been criticised for “misrecognising” and “nonrecognising” (Taylor, 1994) the particularities of the people of Africa and other colonised peoples
of the world. By “misrecognition” Taylor refers to a “demeaning, oppressive” and inferiorised positioning of the “other” by a dominant, and dominating, Subject. “Nonrecognition”
entails an almost complete ignoring and denial of the “presence” of the “other”, as if “they”
are not even there.
In the imaginary of the modern world system is that in the declaration of the
“rights of man and the citizen” the colonial question has vanished; consequently
the concept of man and of the citizen universalized a regional issue and erased
the colonial question. (Mignolo, 2000, p. 62)
Mignolo’s comment above raises a critical issue that is of importance to Africa, and
South Africa in particular. The “erasure” of the “colonial question” within the establishment and origins of human rights is most visible when one takes into account
the fact that when the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen of
1789 was proclaimed, the French continued with colonising “other” countries on the
African continent. When the Virginia (USA) Declaration of Rights of June, 1776 was
declared Native Americans were having their lands taken away from them in order to
consolidate the USA (Squadrito, 2002; Goldberg, 2002). The “erasure” of the “colonial question” in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of the United Nations is
most stark in the experience of apartheid in South Africa. The Universal Declaration
of Human Rights of the United Nations was promulgated in 1948, the year the racist,
white supremacist, apartheid regime established itself in South Africa. Thus, whilst
Europe and the West were heralding the importance of human rights and projecting
them as if they were universal, in colonised countries, like South Africa, human rights
were in fact being violated and inhuman and degrading conditions were being consolidated. This process was supported actively by the governments of the countries that
were, at the same time, proclaiming human rights as a “standard” for “all the peoples
of the world”. Derrida comments on this:
For one must not forget that, although racial segregation didn’t wait for the name
apartheid to come along, that name became the order’s watchword and won its

--- [PDF Page 763 / Book Page 771] ---

Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices 771

title in the political code of South Africa only at the end of the Second World
War. At a time when all racisms on the face of the earth were condemned, it
was in the world’s face that the National Party dared to campaign “for separate
development of each race in the geographic zone assigned to it” (Derrida, 1986,
pp. 330–331).
Thus, whilst the discourse of human rights was projected as “universal” by the West,
countries on the African continent were still caught in the yokes of colonialism that
entailed blatant violations of human rights by people of the West. These are some of
the reasons that provided the impetus for the establishment of the African Charter of
Human and Peoples’ Rights, which was adopted by the Organisation of African Unity
(now the African Union) in 1981. This came into force in 1986 (Weston, 2002).
The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights was seen by many in
Africa as a Western and European document. It was framed with European and Western
contexts in mind and recognised in its early history Western and European people, their
views and experiences. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights seems not to recognise Africa and African experiences. It seems to be silent on the economic, political and
sociocultural power differentials constitutive of colonialism. It is the knowledge systems
of the West that are legitimated. Colonised world views are not articulated. Subjugated,
colonised people are invisible and hence inferior. Colonised countries, it is implied, are
available to imperialism and their wealth can be extracted by the West.
As such, the pretence at universalism within the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights is decidedly “monological” (Taylor, 1994), in character. In Taylor’s terms “monologues” are conversations one has with one’s self and/or with others who are like oneself.
Colonisers had conversations about the colonised with and among themselves, not in a
“dialogue” with the colonised at all. For Taylor, such “monologues” are fundamentally
informed by “misrecognition” of the “other”. It is misrecognition because the image
of the “other” is constructed by the Same in the terms of the Same, so that the Same
can be assumed to be better than and superior to the “other”, thereby inferiorising and
subalternising the “other” in order to ideologically justify and consolidate the project of
colonialism. In this light, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights does not “speak
to” the experiences of the colonised “other” and thus, in Migonolo’s terms, “erases” the
“colonial question”. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was, in its own terms,
a response to the atrocities experienced during the Second World War in the West and
Europe! The aspirational response was framed as ‘universal’ even though it was the outcome of a very particular group of diplomats and the countries they represented.
Debates about the extent to which human rights are applicable to the African continent have dealt with three themes. Firstly, conditions in Africa which are characterised
by extreme poverty, disease and underdevelopment – all of which are also argued to
be consequences of colonialism – imply that human rights in Africa have to focus on
issues of development in order to eradicate poverty and disease, as opposed to individual civil and political rights (Ambrose, 1995). Secondly, due to colonialism, human
rights in Africa are tied centrally to developing independent nations, which require far
more state intervention than is often acceptable in Europe or North America (Nanda
et al., 1981). Thirdly, indigenous African cultures do not fit neatly within a human
rights paradigm and often contradict, if not violate, human rights (Abdullah, 2000).

--- [PDF Page 764 / Book Page 772] ---

772 Carrim

These critiques point to the need to acknowledge the specificities of the conditions and
cultures of the continent and its people. They suggest implicitly, and at times explicitly, that the “universalism” in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights cannot be
uncritically accepted to mean that the conditions and ways of being of Africans are
acknowledged within it. In fact, their arguments show that the “universalism” of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights is not significantly inclusive of African realities and needs to be adapted to fit into African contexts and lives.
Apart from the misrecognition and non-recognition of African people and their
realities, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights has also been criticised for its
“silence” on the experiences of women (MacKinnon, 1993). Looking specifically at the
experiences of women during the war in the former Yugoslavia, Mackinnon shows that
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights not only ignored the violation of women
and their rights during this war but that the discourse of human rights is framed in the
image of and speaks to the realities and experiences of men. It is decidedly masculinist.
Thus, in respect to “race”, gender and class the discourse of human rights cannot be
assumed to enable people to counter the forms of domination they experience.
Given the above discussion, it is evident that a mere legalistic treatment of human
rights in South African school curricula would be both inadequate and insufficient.
A legalistic treatment of human rights would simply make pupils aware of what the
laws state, and cover the human rights provisions in the South African Constitution
and the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and similar human
rights instruments. However, as the above discussion shows, human rights are contested and contestable which implies that they cannot be treated as if they are abstract,
given truths. Simply teaching the law, as it were, would be inadequate to capture the
contestations that have marked the developments of, and in, the discourse of human
rights. A legalistic treatment of human rights would not, in itself, outline what the
specific implications of such human rights provisions are in the particular contexts of
people’s lives. The teaching of human rights in education, thus, needs to explore the
contested and contestable nature of human rights, and engage with their implications
in the actual lives of people. Otherwise, they will simply be legalistic abstractions
which do not speak to the conditions of people’s existence.
The discourse of human rights has played a significant role in the resistance to apartheid
and the establishment of democracy in South Africa. Many have argued that the claims of
human rights and of equality of all people played a significant role in anti-colonial struggles
by providing a basis to oppose the monological impositions and inequalities of colonialism.
At the 50th anniversary of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights in
1998, South African constitutional judge Albie Sachs said:
Twenty years [after the Proclamation of the Universal Declaration], I am in exile
… I am using the text of the Declaration to prove that my country is the worst in
the world … I go through the Articles one by one and show how law and policy
in South Africa violates them all (Sachs, 1998).
Sachs, like many in the anti-apartheid movement, used the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights to show how unjust apartheid was and how it was a blatant violation of

--- [PDF Page 765 / Book Page 773] ---

Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices 773

human rights. Mandela (1964) stood up in an apartheid court and argued against
racism as a violation of human rights using the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Mandela said:
As your Worship pleases. I was developing the point that a judiciary controlled
entirely by whites and enforcing laws enacted by a white parliament in which we
have no representation, laws which in most cases are passed in the face of unanimous opposition from Africans, cannot be regarded as an impartial tribunal in a
political trial where an African stands as an accused.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides that all men are equal before
the law, and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law.
In May 1951, Dr. D. F. Malan, then Prime Minister, told the Union parliament that
this provision of the Declaration applies in this country. … But the real truth is
that there is in fact no equality before the law whatsoever as far as our people are
concerned, and statements to the contrary are definitely incorrect and misleading.
It is true that an African who is charged in a court of law enjoys, on the surface,
the same rights and privileges as an accused who is white in so far as the conduct
of this trial is concerned. He is governed by the same rules of procedure and evidence as apply to a white accused. But it would be grossly inaccurate to conclude
from this fact that an African consequently enjoys equality before the law.
In its proper meaning equality before the law means the right to participate in the
making of the laws by which one is governed, a constitution which guarantees
democratic rights to all sections of the population, the right to approach the court
for protection or relief in the case of the violation of rights guaranteed in the
constitution, and the right to take part in the administration of justice as judges,
magistrates, attorneys-general, law advisers and similar positions.
In the absence of these safeguards the phrase ‘equality before the law’, in so far as
it is intended to apply to us, is meaningless and misleading. All the rights and privileges
to which I have referred are monopolised by whites, and we enjoy none of them.
The white man makes all the laws, he drags us before his courts and accuses us,
and he sits in judgement over us. … I feel oppressed by the atmosphere of white
domination that lurks all around in this courtroom. Somehow this atmosphere
calls to mind the inhuman injustices caused to my people outside this courtroom
by this same white domination (Mandela, 1962, lines 40–63).
In the above lies the distinction that is Mandela’s – his confrontation of the law
with a law about the law. The irony and paradox in this is, nonetheless, not unnoticed by Mandela. Indeed his call for “recognition” by the law of himself, of
lawyers, of “black” people and of “justice” alerts us to a framing of laws that was
decidedly racist. As much as MacKinnon (1993) pointed to the masculinism of
the framing of human rights, Mandela points to their racist frame when utilised in
South Africa without an acknowledgement of the conditions of the majority of the

--- [PDF Page 766 / Book Page 774] ---

774 Carrim

population. As Mandela puts it, “whites” are “interested parties” and the law was
constructed in order to serve “their interests”. Herein, then, one notices the simultaneous “recognition” of “whites” by and in the law, and the “non-recognition” and
“misrecognition” of “black” people by and in the law. Mandela’s presence in the
courts, and his statements, demonstrated this powerfully. Mandela was able to do
this by recourse to the discourse of human rights, drawing on this to express ideas
on which systems of justice ought to be based. In the above he refers directly to the
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. He forced recognition of
his absence in the law by his presence before the law.
This effect of the discourse of human rights as an enabling factor in people’s defense
of themselves appears to continue in post-apartheid South Africa and is evident in
the way young gay learners negotiated their positions in school. This is evident from
a study that looked at understandings and experiences of human rights, democracy
and citizenship among Grade 9 learners and teachers in schools in the Western Cape,
Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal.2 Dion (fictitious name) is a gay learner in a school in
the Western Cape. One Monday morning, Dion arrived at school with his hair dyed
“shocking orange”, and went around saying “I am not scared anymore. I am what I
am and I am proud”. Dion “outed” himself. His orange hair was a symbol of him
being unapologetic about being gay. In the interview transcripts this comes through
explicitly:
I:
Tell me about the orange hair.
Dion: I just had enough you know, and I said I am tired of being afraid all the time
and I am just going to be myself no matter what it takes.
I:
What were you afraid of?
Dion: As you know our school is filled with gangs and they always threaten to rape
me and insult me, laugh at me and, Here (“My God”), harass me all the time.
I was just gatvol (“sick and tired”) of this and said, you know, how long must
I walk around feeling scared. So, I decided to dye my hair orange to show them
that I am not afraid and I am proud to be gay and who I am. I am here
to stay.
I:
How did they react?
Dion: Now they think I am just crazy, you know, like mad. But they got the message. I told this guy, the big shot in the gang, I am here to stay and he better
get used to that, I have my rights, and he just looked at me completely
shocked. Ooo … (giggles) I just loved it.
I:
So, has the harassment stopped?
Dion: Yes, but they still make comments, but it is not as bad as it was because they
know that now I will stand up for myself and I won’t take any shit from them
anymore.
Dion refers to his rights which he now enjoys and uses them in order to assert his
identity and presence.
Another gay learner, Tulani (fictitious name) is a learner in a school in Gauteng and
drew on ideas about human rights to discuss how he was treated.

--- [PDF Page 767 / Book Page 775] ---

Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices 775

I:
Tulani:
I:
Tulani:

Do you experience any discrimination in the township now?
Not really, but I am out and I won’t stand for it.
What would you do?
Harw? I have my rights now, they can’t do what they want to do like before.
Now I can take them to the police and they are “bang” (scared).
I:
Would you do that, I mean would you take them to the police?
Tulani: Of course, I have my rights, I am like they are and if they do something to
me that is like really bad, I will take them.
I:
Have you reported anybody to the police so far?
Tulani: No I haven’t.
Tulani explicitly refers to his “rights” in defense of himself, and views instruments of
the law –“the police” – as “now” being there for the protection of his rights. Tulani
views these rights as establishing equality between him and others – “I am like they
are”. He also views this as being different from the past. The perceived increased
acceptance among community members has to be also seen in the light of greater confidence and assertion on the part of Tulani, as well as the existence of formal equality
provisions which recognise sexual orientation as a human right, to which both Tulani
and Dion refer.
Thus for Dion and Tulani, the discourse of human rights as enshrined formally in
the “new” South African Constitution seems to enable them to assert their identities
positively and defend themselves as being equal to others. I have deliberately chosen
to focus on Dion and Tulani, because as gay learners they indicate a marginalised and
generally invisible sector of society. In their marginalised spaces, however, the discourse of human rights which in this case explicitly recognises their rights to a sexual
orientation of their choice seems to have a direct effect on them viewing themselves
positively and asserting their rights to be themselves in the face of “others”.
Thus, whilst there is a need to treat the discourse of human rights critically and to be
mindful of Western and European constructs in its history, it has played a significant
role in resistances to apartheid and continues to have positive effects in the post-apartheid situation as the examples above show. This has a direct implication for education
in many countries. Whilst the discourse of human rights needs to be treated critically
when it is taught and its contested nature needs to be engaged with explicitly, this does
not mean that teachers should not ensure that learners understand the law and their
human rights. People need to know what human rights are. They need to know what is
contained in Constitutions and laws of countries and what international human rights
instruments are. These still remain “necessary knowledge” (Osler & Starkey, 1996).
Rights do not exist outside laws, and people need to know these laws in order to know
their rights.
However, I am arguing that whilst the legalistic understandings of human rights
may be necessary, they are by no means sufficient. For human rights to be viewed as
meaningful in relation to the wide range of human experiences which embrace powerful, silencing processes, one needs to also ensure that the teaching of human rights
acknowledges these contexts. Human rights education needs to “speak to” people’s
own experiences in the form of articulation of macrological and micrological language

--- [PDF Page 768 / Book Page 776] ---

776 Carrim

Spivak suggested or Mignolo’s “double critique”. Such an approach to human rights
education has tremendous potential. It would thus:
1. Provide learners with the “necessary knowledge” of human rights in legalistic
terms
2. Expose learners to the historical development of the discourse of human rights
3. Equip learners with an understanding of the ways in which human rights have
been, and are, debated
4. Enable learners to access some of the ways in which the discourse of human
rights is framed rather than treat it as if it is pre-given and unconstructed
5. Allow for an exploration of what human rights mean in the context of people’s
own lives thus enabling human rights education to “speak to” people’s own
experiences
Nonetheless, the discourse of human rights in South Africa is linked inextricably to the
project of modernity that the post-apartheid formation establishes with its consolidation of
democracy in South Africa. The possibilities of releasing “subaltern” voices within such
a modernist project cannot be taken for granted. The abolition of apartheid and the provision for sexual orientation in terms of human rights in the new South African Constitution
signify South Africa’s assimilation within, rather than opposition to, the Subject of the West
and Europe. But, as Mignolo points out this is not unique. In developing the differences
between “exterior subalternity” and “interior subalternity” he states:
This difference allows us to understand that gender, ethnic and sexual differences could be absorbed by the system and placed in the sphere of interior
subalternity. This is visible today in the United States as far as Afro-Americans,
women, Hispanics, and queers (although with sensible differences between these
groups) are becoming accepted within the system as lo otoro, complementary of
the totality controlled by “the same”. (Mignolo, 2000, p. 176)
Thus, as is indeed the case, South Africa upholds its “exterior subalternity” by arguing
that its presence on the UN Security Council and it hosting of the Soccer World Cup
are “for the continent of Africa”. However, in its assimilation within the global political and economic order it displays its “interior subalternity” as it becomes “accepted
within the system as lo otoro, complementary of the totality controlled by the same”.
In the instance of recognition of sexual orientation as a human right the passing of the
Civil Union Act points to significant features of “interior subalternity”. In the debates
and public discussions around the passing of the Civil Union Act it became clear that
whilst the South African Constitution recognises sexual orientation as human right,
this does not necessarily imply that gays and lesbians would be able to be “married”.
It became clear that “marriage” remains framed within traditional conceptions of marriage as a heterosexual union between a man and woman, and that it is underpinned by
a “divine” recognition of such a union being ordained by God. This includes dominant
religions as well as indigenous belief systems. As such, partnerships between people
of the same sex may be considered as “civil unions” but not as marriages, causing seri-

--- [PDF Page 769 / Book Page 777] ---

Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices 777

ous discontent among the gay and lesbian community in South Africa (Exit, October
2006). Thus, as is the case with “sati” which Spivak looked at, gays and lesbians are
recognised only to the extent to which they can be assimilated within the frame of
modernity, which remains heterosexist. Its discursive frame, in this instance, is continuous with indigenous knowledges and dominant religions. In this regard, whilst
gays and lesbians do enjoy considerable status politically, economically and socially
within the post-apartheid, postcolonial South Africa, they remain subalternised and
cannot “speak” before God, in indigenous and traditional knowledge systems, and are
ensured to only exist and speak within modernist hegemony as lo otoro.
The situation however is extremely complex. The South African government argues
that the development of modernity in South Africa and Africa in general are necessary
conditions for an effective challenge to global hegemony. It also contends that its presence within the Subject of the West is necessary for it to put the voices of the subaltern
at the feet of power and redefine the world order. In this regard, one could argue that
becoming lo otoro may be a strategic necessity and not necessarily an assimilation
within the West. However, such arguments tend to underestimate the power of the
forces at work within the global political economy and assume that by merely putting
the subaltern on the global agenda power matrices can be reconfigured. It is useful to
keep in mind, as Mignolo puts it, using Das, that, “the ‘subaltern’ is not a category but
a perspective; and that the subaltern perspective is not engaged in understanding such
and such social organisation or social actions per se but in understanding its ‘contractual’ relations under colonial rules and the ‘forms of domination belonging to the
structures of modernity’ ” (Mignolo, 2000, p. 188).
I am not suggesting here that South Africa’s role and presence on the global stage is
insignificant. Rather, what I am pointing to is that South Africa’s re-entry into the world
order is part of a modernist project and that this does not necessarily mean that it is counterhegemonic or would enable the release of subaltern voices. In all likelihood its insertion
in the world order will limit the possibilities for “an other thinking” since modern conceptions of reason and rationality and power configurations of the global political economy
subalternise “the other” in order to constitute itself. In other words, South Africa in its
post-apartheid and postcolonial form participates in the world order; it does not reconfigure
it. In this regard, the experiences of Dion and Tulani in asserting their rights at school are
also limited in their counter-modern potential. The assertions of sexual orientation rights
by Dion and Tulani are lo otoro, within the “totality of the (modernist) Same” ands marks
their “interior subalternity”. Positioned as “subalterns”, Tulani and Dion still cannot speak,
just like Indian women in Spivak’s analysis of “sati”
Drawing on the complexity of subaltern positions, this chapter has suggested that
education of (and for) human rights needs to firstly ensure that the legalistic nature
of the discourse of human rights is covered; but at the same time the discourse of
human rights needs to be presented as contested and is contestable. This suggests that
the teaching of human rights needs to promote a critical exploration of human rights,
rather than teaching them as dogma and uncontested truth. Lastly, the teaching of
human rights needs to allow for an exploration of their articulation of “interior” and
“exterior subalternity”, noting their “micrological” and “macrological” links with global and national orders.

--- [PDF Page 770 / Book Page 778] ---

778 Carrim

This suggests that schools teaching for nation building, which arguably is important
for social cohesion, cannot deal with human rights in ways that are narrowly nationalistic and parochial. As the examples show, schools need to locate their societies within
wider global settings.
My purpose in this chapter has been to use a “double critique” associated with
subaltern studies in order to understand the transition from apartheid to democracy
in South Africa. I have done so by first viewing the achievement of democracy in
post-apartheid, postcolonial South Africa from the perspective of human rights and
noted the contradictory ways in which the discourse of human rights enabled resistance to apartheid and continues to exert positive effects on the lives of young, in this
instance, gay pupils in schools. I have, however, also shown that rather than celebrating
the human rights “victories” which a “micrological” analysis of post-apartheid South
Africa may be prone to do, it is important to place South Africa within the context of a
global political economy. At this post-apartheid and postcolonial moment South Africa
is presently an actor on the stage of the world order. But rather than reconfiguring the
hegemony of the global order it is inserted within it as an important and significant
actor. This insertion, I have argued, is part of the consolidation of modernity, which
the post-apartheid South Africa represents. This representation, however, is not necessarily a condition for the release of subaltern voices through educational and cultural
practices but places limitations on the authenticity and possibilities of their expression.
Throughout, I have tried to show how both in the resistance to apartheid and in the
post-apartheid situation the discourse of human rights and the project of modernity are
filled with contradictions. These contradictory forces at once constitute the modernity
of the postcolonial South Africa and limit its transformative potential. Nonetheless, the
contradictions are productive, not only because they are constitutive, but also because
they bring to the fore the tensions and challenges that exist in order to exercise “border
thinking” and counter the hegemonic global order and its knowledge systems.

Notes
1.

2.

The word “black” refers to people who were classified under apartheid as “Coloured”, “Indian” and
“African” under the Population Registration Act. “Black”, thus, refers inclusively to all of these South
Africans who were racially classified. Throughout this chapter I use references to racial classification of
people in inverted commas to signal that they are apartheid racial classifications, and, more importantly
to indicate that racial classifications are social constructions which I reject as valid descriptions of
people within or outside of South Africa, under apartheid or in the present time. The terms, however,
are used in this chapter in order to facilitate the narrative and for theoretical convenience.
This study was conducted between 1996 and 2000 and formed part of wider study (Carrim, 2006).

References
Abdullah, H. (2000). Beyond rights talk and culture talk: Comparative essays on the politics of rights and
culture. Cape Town: David Phillips.
Ambrose, B. (1995). Democratisation and the protection of human rights in Africa, Problems and prospects.
UN Symposium on Southern Africa: Unpublished.
Bentham, J. (1970). Anarchical fallacies. In A. I. Meldon (Ed.), Human rights (pp. 28–48). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.

--- [PDF Page 771 / Book Page 779] ---

Human Rights and the Limitations of Releasing Subaltern Voices 779
Carrim, N (2006) Human Rights and the Construction of Identities in South African Education, PhD Thesis.
Johannesburg: Wits School of Education, Unviersity of the Witwatersrand.
Castells, M. (2000). The new global economy. In J. Muller, N. Cloete & S. Badat (Eds.), Challenges of globalisation: South African debates with Manuel Castells (pp. 2–22). Cape Town: Maskew Miller Longman.
Castells, M. (2001). The Rise of the network society. Oxford: Blackwell.
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (1996). As adopted on 8 May 1996 and amended on 11 October
1996 by the Constitional Assembly. Pretoria, Government Press.
Derrida, J. (1986). Racism’s last word. In L. Gates (Ed.), Race, writing and difference. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Hayward, G. (2006). Big “No” to Civil Union Bill, Exit: South Africa’s Gay and Lesbian Newspaper ,
November, Issue 198.
Goldberg, D. T. (2002). The Racial state. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Hall, S. (1996). On postmodernism and articulation: An interview with Stuart Hall (L. Grossberg, Ed.).
In D. Morley & K. Chen (Eds.), Critical dialogues in cultural studies (pp. 131–150). London: Routledge.
MacKinnon, C. (1993). Crimes of war: Crimes of peace. In S. Shute & S. Hurley (Eds.), On human rights:
The Oxford Amnesty lectures. New York: Basic Books.
Mandela, N. (1962). Old synagogue court of Pretoria trial records. Johannesburg: Microfilm reel OCLC
No. 24897985.
Mandela, N. (1964). Pretoria Supreme Court trial records. Johannesburg: Microfilm reel OCLC No.
56330366.
Marx, K. (1969). Basic writings in politics and philosophy. London: Collins.
Marx, K. (1978). Quoted in: E. Tay Kamenka & A. Erh-Soon Tay Human rights. London: Edward Arnold.
Mignolo, W.D. (2000). Local histories/global designs: Coloniality, subaltern -knowledges and border thinking. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Osler, A. and Starkey, H. (1996). Teacher Education and Human Rights. London: David Fulton.
Nanda, V. E., Scarritt, J. R., & Shepherd, G. W. Jr. (Eds.) (1981). Global human rights: Public policies, comparative measures and NGO strategies: A Westview special study. Colorado, Frederick A. Praeger.
Osler, A. & Starkey, H. (Eds). (2005). Citizenship and language learning: International perspectives. Stokeon-Trent: Trentham Books.
Sachs, A. (1998). Moments of memory. In Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sweden, A human rights message
(pp. 133–137). Bords, Sweden: Centraltryckeriet.
Spivak, G. C. (1993). Can the subaltern speak? In P. Williams & L. Chrisman (Eds.), Colonial discourse and
post-colonial theory: A reader (pp. 66–112). Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Squadrito, K. (2002). Locke and the dispossession of the American Indian. In J. K. Ward & T. Lott (Eds.),
Philosophers on race: Critical essays (pp. 101–125). Oxford: Blackwell.
South Africa (1996a). Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (1996). As adopted on 8 May 1996 and
amended on 11 October 1996 by the Constitional Assembly. Pretoria: Government Press.
South Africa (1996b). Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (1996). Bill of Rights: Article 9. As
adopted on 8 May 1996 and amended on 11 October 1996 by the Constitional Assembly. Pretoria:
Government Press.
Taylor, C. (1994). The politics of recognition. In A. Guttmann (Ed.), Multiculturalism: Examining the politics of recognition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tinker, H. (1977). Race, conflict and international order: From empire to United Nations. New York: St
Martin’s.
Touraine, A. (1997). What is Democracy? London: Verso.
Uzgalis, W. (2002). “An inconsistency not to be excused: On Locke and racism. In J. K. Ward & T. Lott
(Eds.), Philosophers on race: Critical essays (pp. 81–101). Oxford: Blackwell.
Ward, J. K. & Lott, T. (Eds.). Philosophers on race: Critical essays. Oxford: Blackwell.
Weston, B. H. (2002). Human rights. In Encyclopaedia Britannica. 15th revised edition, Vol. 20 (pp. 656–
664). London: Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Wolpe, H. (1986). Race, class and the apartheid state. Paris: UNESCO.
Zizek, S. (2005). Against human rights. New Left Review, 34, 115–131.

