================================================================================
Chapter 50: Social Justice, Development Theory and the Question of Education
Author(s): Elaine Unterhalter
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 5: Postcolonialism
Book Pages: pp. 781–800
PDF Pages: pp. 772–791 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 772 / Book Page 781] ---

50
SOCIAL JUSTICE, DEVELOPMENT THEORY
AND THE QUESTION OF EDUCATION
Elaine Unterhalter

Education holds a particular place for theorisations of development formulated since
the 1950s. In changing conditions, marked initially by the political economy of the
Cold War and decolonisation, and later by globalisation and the political realignments
of the post-Cold War era, views on the aims for education, how to systematise school
knowledge, organise pedagogy or view school management have been much contested.
Particular development theories’ assumptions, research methodologies and practices
have emphasised certain aspects of education and de-emphasised others. But little
attention has been given to views of justice (both implicit and explicit) and how these
orient the dynamics of thinking about education and international development.
Six approaches to development theory are explored in this chapter in relation to
the ways in which they conceptualise education and social justice. This is a partial
selection as it is not possible to explore all the varieties and debates in development
theory in one chapter. I have made the selection, partly because these approaches are
evident in largely chronological waves from the 1950s and partly because they are
those commonly discussed in general reviews of phases of contemporary development
theory (Preston, 1996; Munck & O’Hearn, 1999; Rapley, 2002; Gasper, 2004). In discussing them I have tried to draw out how each locates the aims of education and the
implications of these for practices advocated in relation to curriculum, pedagogy and
management. I also attempt to distil in each approach assumptions about the nature
of the person to be educated and the connection between education and social justice.
I draw out some of the consequences of these formulations for the preferred forms of
research associated with each theory. The consequences of the explanations these offer
for global action on education and poverty is then assessed.

Modernisation Theory and Nation Building
Modernisation theory emerged in the 1950s and 1960s and expressed the view that the
economic, political and social formations associated with Western Europe and North
America were at a more evolved level of development than what were termed the ‘traditional’, non-modern or underdeveloped societies of the rest of the world. ‘Modernity’
was linked by Rostow (1959) with a market economy where investment and growth in
a particular sector would lead to take-off, higher wages and increased consumption.
David Apter identified modernity with democratic politics, where local affiliations and
781
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 781–800.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 773 / Book Page 782] ---

782 Unterhalter

practices of governance were replaced by institutional forms associated with political parties, elected parliaments, and efficient local government (Apter, 1965). Inkeles
and Smith (1974) identified particular dispositions of a modern personality who was
independent and rational.
These theorists suggested sharp and normatively inscribed distinctions between the
world of modernity and that of tradition. The former, it was claimed, would deliver
higher living standards, more efficient government and more rational forward-looking
human subjects. The latter, it was claimed, was characterised by stagnant economies
and poverty, corruption, inept government and backward-looking parochial subjects.
In its ideal form at the centre of the theorisation of modernity stood a man, with all the
attributes of a good subject. The relationships that were considered important to him
were in the public sphere of politics or work. While he might have ties of affiliation to
women, children, or community these were all at a second order of concern located in
a private sphere, which might be problematically not modern or not modern enough.
A slightly different version of modernity, less overtly critical of certain forms
of ‘tradition’ was being articulated by the architects of new nation states that were
forming as decolonisation gathered pace from the late 1940s. Here modernity was
associated with citizenship of the new states, a putting aside of affiliation based exclusively on one religion, language or region for commitment to a national project rooted
in a Constitution, the establishment of key social institutions such as universities or a
national radio or a planned economy. The establishment of an official language was
often an important site of contestation for new nations. While many of the anti-colonial
national movements that put in place this version of modernity had been actively supported by the mobilisation of women (Jayawardena, 1986; Stasiulis & Yuval Davis,
1995), the modern citizen envisaged tended to be considered gender-neutral; all it was
claimed, were equal before the law and had equal opportunities in the new secular state
(Rai, 2002).
These two intersecting appropriations of ideas of modernity were aligned with different social forces which sometimes made common cause. The first was linked with
the expansion of American political and economic influence into areas once the sphere
of European colonial powers (Ambrose & Brinkley, 1997). The second was associated with the complex politics of decolonisation (Chatterjee, 1991; Pieterse & Parekh,
1995; Hyam, 2007). But despite some significant differences these two perspectives
on modernity have in common a limited capacity to acknowledge sufficiently, either
analytically or in practice, the diverse contexts of citizenship, the ambiguities of understandings of modernity and the millions of people who did not have clear relationships
of citizenship with nation states, either because they lived in regions that were inaccessible to modern institutions and forms of mass communication, or because they
had been dispossessed of citizenship through war or a politics of exclusion. From the
perspective of modernisation theory social relationships that did not fit with ideas of
rational citizenship, employment in the wage economy, consumption, secularism, and
national affiliation were portrayed as ‘weighed down’ by tradition, particularism and
inefficiency. For democratic projects associated with new forms of state emerging,
for example, in India or Ghana, there were intense struggles about how to articulate a
popular vision that was inclusive enough.

--- [PDF Page 774 / Book Page 783] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 783

The implications of this sharp binary were that the aims of education should include
a process through which people could become modern and ‘take off ’ the burdens of
‘tradition’. In schools, technical institutes, adult literacy classes and universities they
would learn the dispositions of citizenship, democracy and the importance of national
economic growth. Education was thus a key process through which the transformation
to modernity was to be achieved (Fagerlind & Saha, 1983). The new technologies associated with mass communication, for example, radio and then television, were seen as
key instruments to achieve this (Lerner, 1958). The provision of mass schooling was an
important component of the form of modernity associated with nation building. Mass
schooling for all citizens was seen as necessary for economic growth and as an indication of commitment by new governments to social development for all the people
(Carnoy & Samoff, 1990).
It was thus important that schools should teach those forms of knowledge associated
with modernity, not available elsewhere. Literacy in the official language, understood in
terms of the capacity to read and write a short statement with understanding, was considered best taught in schools to adults and children (Jones, 1990). Languages associated
with nation building: Swahili or Hindi or Spanish were also seen as the particular remit of
schools (Aikman, 1999; Mvungi, 1974).Practices of national affiliation, such as saluting
the flag or learning about the provinces that made up the country of which children were
citizens, were also emphasised (Uchendu, 1980; Harber, 1997). Numeracy was considered
key to employment in the modern sectors of the economy where a science of measurement,
numeric representation, and abstract deduction, were seen as important for efficiency, technological innovation and understanding of health (Eisemon, 1989). Thus, schools were key
spaces for teaching subjects associated with modernisation.
The pedagogy that would support learning these subjects for these purposes was
often termed transmission teaching, because its main concern was conveying the
content of knowledge, not particularly responding to the ideas or contexts of the learners. Thus, for example, Eisemon, commenting on the teaching of science in African
schools in the 1970s, suggested that it was not the length of time in school, but the
nature of teaching, that is content and quality of instruction that would strengthen
understanding (Eisemon, 1989). Adesina, reviewing changing approaches to the teaching of history in Nigeria, charts how in the 1960s emphasis initially was on instruction
in the sequence of events in the 1960s (Adesina, 2006). The approach to school management associated with modernisation stressed rational bureaucracies with a central
role assigned to Departments of Education located in capital cities with subordinate
district or circuit offices reporting upwards. For example, in South Africa this system of education administration, duplicated for all the racially divided groups, was
considered rational and efficient in relation to ‘modern’ ideas about national- and
provincial-level organisational structures (Behr, 1966). When all education provision
was unified under one Ministry of Education in Kenya at independence, the units for
administration were designed in terms of what was seen as a rational national organisational structure (Raju, 1973).
The assumptions about the person in relation to the institutions of modernity were
thus ideas about sameness and unity. All should be offered equal opportunities to
access school and these new forms of knowledge.

--- [PDF Page 775 / Book Page 784] ---

784 Unterhalter

Two ideas about justice are implicit within modernisation theory. The first is that
justice is not a theory, but a set of efficient legal institutions. This understanding links
together descriptive accounts of state authority with a normative account of the legitimacy of that authority (Hart, 1961) If laws in education are made by democratically
elected bodies and interpreted by courts that are not corrupt, if revenue is collected
efficiently and spent rationally on school provision as laid out in economic plans, then
justice is seen to be done.
The second idea concerning justice and legitimate authority associated with modernisation is that a person who acts in accordance with modernity and the impartiality
and morality of modern institutions is acting justly. In Joseph Raz’s formulation the
authority of the state is guided by its morality in acting to promote what is good. The
state’s authority derives from codifying as law the reasons for action towards others
that people already have, for example, paying taxes to support schools or encouraging
economic growth that will benefit all. Because this is reasonable, it is also legitimate
and thus just (Raz, 1986). This notion that states can be active in creating the conditions for individuals to pursue meaningful lives, can be seen to animate ideas about
global justice developed in the 1950s and 1960s, where this aspiration was seen to
be articulated through states and the international machinery of the United Nations
organisations, rather than through the connections of individuals or civil society organisations or a wider notion of the state concerned not just with government (Jones &
Coleman, 2005).
These ideas about justice and equal opportunities had a particular effect on how
research agendas were set. What was researched and measured in schools was success in teaching functional literacy and numeracy, proficiency in the national language
and the psychological traits of modernity because these showed the extent to which
just institutions were at work nationally. Hence, the explanatory force of methodologies concerned with measurement and large-scale surveys were stressed. The research
paradigm suggested that improving institutions would expand provision and the poorest would eventually access school.

Basic Needs
Many problems associated with the uneven realisation of the optimism of modernisation theory were evident by the late 1960s. Pressing issues included widespread
poverty which the new institutions seemed unable to overcome. Some brutal governments claimed they were acting in response to modernisation. The exclusion of some
on grounds of race, ethnicity or gender from the institutions associated with economic
growth and political legitimacy called into question the efficiency of modernisation. In
the 1970s, a highly influential group of development economists critiqued the assumptions of modernisation that poverty would be eradicated by economic growth, the
expansion of employment, higher incomes and the trickle-down effects of successful
capitalism (Streeten, 1981; Stewart, 1985). The basic needs approach to social policy
stressed one should not focus on particular outcomes or on humans as a means to social,
economic or political ends. Basic needs theorists outlined how it was important to

--- [PDF Page 776 / Book Page 785] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 785

consider those who might not be incorporated into successful modernisation projects,
who might never be economically productive, and never increase economic growth.
Some people might have important preferences that could not be satisfied on the same
terms as everyone else, such as the old, the very young, those with disabilities or those
who were excluded from political or economic participation because of historically
located forms of discrimination on the grounds of gender, race or ethnicity. Wiggins
made explicit that there was a normative basis to need. The argument he developed was
that the importance of needs was that they expressed aspects of a condition of human
flourishing. Failure to ensure a certain level of human flourishing – meeting basic
needs – would constitute harm (Wiggins, 1988). One of the important contributions
of the work on need was that it gave philosophic, political and economic visibility
to ideas about care and concerns that modernisation theory had relegated to the private realm of the household, beyond the purview and resourcing of government policy
(Reader, 2006).
In Frances Stewart’s work provision of education and health were intimately connected with a minimal provision of a good life, below the threshold of which harm
would result (Stewart, 1985). Thus the idea of education associated with the basic
needs approach was that education up to a certain level was crucial to ensure human
flourishing regardless of whether or not the dispositions of the person were made modern or the institutions associated with education were run in accordance with ideas
about governance, democracy or efficiency. A second implicit idea was that basic
needs in education could not be considered outside concern with health, housing, food
security and other aspects of well-being. The multi-dimensionality of need and the
implication that needs could be met by a range of persons or institutions (Reader,
2006) indicated that the aims of education would not be realised only in schools, but
that it was important to address provision for basic needs in education in conjunction
with work on all the other basic needs (Stewart, 1985).
The strength of the basic needs approach lay with the idea of thresholds and the interconnection with other areas of social policy. But with regard to specifying particular
features of schooling, this clear direction presented a number of problems. Basic needs
as applied to schooling came to be interpreted in a weak and a strong form. In its weak
form basic needs in schooling came to be interpreted as a finite package of a certain
number of years in school, generally 4–5, which were taken to mean that a basic need
had been met. The problem with this was that computing the number of years children
were enrolled in school without attention to what was taught or learned, how, and with
what consequences, actually provided very little assurance that basic needs were being met
(Unterhalter, 2007). Nonetheless, in early applications of the basic needs approach by
UN organisations it was simply the number of years in school of children in particular
countries that were analysed (see e.g., UNESCO, 1976; World Bank, 1979).
A stronger form of the basic needs approach in relation to education was articulated
in the Jomtien Declaration on Education for All (EFA) in 1990 which launched the
EFA movement as an alliance initially of UN organisations and some governments, but,
increasingly from 2000, a movement taking in the majority of world governments, UN
organisations and civil society (Chabbott, 1997; Mundy & Murphy, 2001). The purpose of EFA was to meet basic learning needs. These were defined very broadly:

--- [PDF Page 777 / Book Page 786] ---

786 Unterhalter

Every person – child, youth and adult – shall be able to benefit from educational
opportunities designed to meet their basic learning needs. These needs comprise
both essential learning tools (such as literacy, oral expression, numeracy, and
problem solving) and the basic learning content (such as knowledge, skills, values, and attitudes) required by human beings to be able to survive, to develop
their full capacities, to live and work in dignity, to participate fully in development, to improve the quality of their lives, to make informed decisions, and to
continue learning. The scope of basic learning needs and how they should be met
varies with individual countries and cultures, and inevitably, changes with the
passage of time. (WDEFA, 1990)
It can be seen that the prescriptions regarding functional literacy and numeracy to
participate in the modern sectors of the economy or access the institutions of the state
have been replaced by wider and fuzzier notions of literacy, numeracy, oral expression
and problem-solving aligned with self-development, achieving a life of dignity and
quality. There is no single set of ideas concerning curriculum content that is being
prescribed. The second article of the Declaration stresses tolerating a plurality of ideas
about curriculum, pedagogy and management and is concerned with situating EFA
within existing ‘cultural, linguistic and spiritual heritage(s)’. The sharp distinction
between the languages and practices of modernity and tradition has thus disappeared:
The satisfaction of these needs empowers individuals in any society and confers
upon them a responsibility to respect and build upon their collective cultural,
linguistic and spiritual heritage, to promote the education of others, to further
the cause of social justice, to achieve environmental protection, to be tolerant
towards social, political and religious systems which differ from their own,
ensuring that commonly accepted humanistic values and human rights are
upheld, and to work for international peace and solidarity in an interdependent
world. (WDEFA, 1990)
In this form supporting basic learning needs turns the pedagogy couplet from teaching
to learning, from outcome to process. What is important is not moulding particular dispositions of a modern person, who is rational and responsible, in relation to
the institutions of the state and the economy. Facilitating learning, seen as synonymous with flourishing, empowerment and surviving in an interdependent world, now
becomes key. It is the relational and contextual aspects of the situation of learner that
is a matter of concern. Thus, the question of selecting or sequencing school knowledge and managing that process disappears from the global agenda and come within
the purview of particular governments or schools. In this transition these discussions
may well lose the dimensions of need articulated in documents such as the Jomtein
Declaration. For example, in Bangladesh, state expansion of mass primary education
and the introduction of a competency-based curriculum was linked to local political
shifts, which involved aid agencies and aid packages on teaching and learning, but
which interpreted meeting basic needs not with the emphasis on learning and empowerment suggested by WDEFA, but more in the spirit of modernisation (Davis, 2001;

--- [PDF Page 778 / Book Page 787] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 787

Hosain et al., 2002). In Kenya, as the 1990s progressed, a number of international
development partners withdrew assistance because of high levels of corruption and
the perception that Kenya was a ‘reluctant reformer’ (Collier, 2004). This exacerbated
some of the effects of structural adjustment which had resulted in the imposition of
charges for schooling. However the Government of Kenya embarked, nonetheless, on
a programme, with some donor assistance, to enhance the supply of textbooks, and
deepen advice and training for teachers. The emphasis, however, was on improving
school provision, more than meeting the basic learning needs of the poorest (Nzomo
et al., 2001). These instances indicate how the global agenda on meeting basic learning
needs, was interpreted in diverse ways in national policy.
Concerns with justice and need brought together discussion of what needs were basic
and fundamental to human life, and what priority should be given to basic needs. There was
considerable debate about whether basic needs were satisfied by commodities or conditions, and the extent to which non-marketable goods and services associated, for example,
with emotional needs, were within the realm of public action (Sen, 1981; Doyal & Gough,
1991; Dasgupta, 1993; Gasper, 2004). However, this philosophical discussion of need was
not considered in putting into practice policy based on the rather limited conception that
basic education needs were fulfilled by 5 years in school (Unterhalter, 2007).
Nonetheless, the conception of basic needs and the multi-dimensional aspects of a
person’s flourishing this suggested, raised the question of justice in terms not related to
the authority or efficiency of institutions but much more within the approach mapped
out by political liberalism which stressed that there is no comprehensive all encompassing notion of the good (e.g. linked to modernisation). Rather it is important to
consider how an overlapping consensus can be formed so that people will collaborate
on the basis of ideas about justice and reasoned discussion they hold in common in
an overlapping consensus (Rawls, 2005). Exploring and resolving difference through
this process of consensus building could allow questions about priority or equality or
threshold entailed in a discussion of need to be adjudicated. The EFA movement with
its establishment of forums for very different states and multilateral bodies to meet, its
slow opening of space at the table for international NGOs and its concern with issues
of quality that do not touch on content, may be seen as one instance of this form of
political liberalism in action. Elsewhere I have termed this a thin cosmopolitanism
(Unterhalter, 2007) in that it was concerned to support global action for provision
for basic learning needs, but not to demand further reforms in relation to political
economy, culture or gender relations.
Although the basic needs approach in education presented a clear critique of modernisation theory, and drew on very different ideas of the person and of justice, the
approach did not generate different research methodologies. The very methods associated with reviewing the extent of modernisation – that is, large-scale surveys and
interpretation of census data – were used in assessing whether basic learning needs
were being met. Some of the research questions implicit in the approach – for example,
how basic learning needs were understood, and what level of provision was considered
sufficient – called for qualitative methodologies, but few studies of this form were
used in developing policy. In the expansion of EFA, as Karen Mundy remarked, the
political and ethical literature on global obligations for the poorest was little discussed

--- [PDF Page 779 / Book Page 788] ---

788 Unterhalter

(Mundy, 1998). It seems that the weak interpretation given to basic learning needs as
a bounded package of provision and the thin cosmopolitanism invoked in global and
national interpretations of EFA was legitimated by research methods which did not
depart from the terrain mapped by modernisation theory. This may have contributed to
this approach not generating global action commensurate with its ethical concerns.

Human Capital Theory
In the 1960s, ideas about the economic value of schooling itself, not the particular
subjects or dispositions of citizenship so central to modernisation, were elaborated.
Gary Becker’s (1964) classic work Human Capital elaborated the notion of human
capital within neoclassical economics registering that investment in humans could be
viewed as similar to investment in other means of production, like factories or mines.
Investment in human capital, just like investment in physical infrastructure would yield
a rate of return, which could be calculated. Becker’s study set out to estimate the return
to college and high school education in the United States, but he was able to show that
it was not only schooling per se that was significant for growth, but a range of other
investments in people including health and on-the-job training.
Developing Becker’s work, Theodore Schultz, set out to map how rates of return
from education could be calculated in countries with different levels of income, different variables concerning wage patterns, and different human attitudes to foregoing
earnings to develop human capital. Schultz’s hypothesis was that calculating rates of
return from investment in human capital would confirm how important investment in
schooling and research was for the productivity of the labour force and the capacity of
the economy to grow (Schultz, 1971).
Detailed work investigating rates of return from education to families and national
economies was undertaken by George Psacharopoulos in the 1970s and 1980s. In bringing together data from many countries on the role of education in economic growth,
he set out to examine how the profitability of investment in education compared with
profits from investment in physical capital, symbolised in the rhetorical question
investment in schools or steel mills? (Psacharopoulos, 1973) Psacharopoulos was also
interested in whether inter-country differences in human capital could explain differences in per capita income, what the rate of return by level of education was across
countries, whether there were differences with regard to the level of public subsidy to
education, and whether subsidies reduced or increased incentives. Psacharopoulos’
findings were to have profound significance on international policy with regard to
investment in education. On the basis of the data he examined he concluded:
[R]ates of return decline by the level of education. Looking first at the social
rates of return, the average for primary education is 19.4 per cent, for secondary
13.5 per cent and for higher 11.3 per cent. (Psacharopoulos, 1973)
This stress on the high rate of return from primary education was to orient a generation of planners in the World Bank and other international and national institutiutions

--- [PDF Page 780 / Book Page 789] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 789

to focus on this level. There has been a critical discussion of the way Psacharopoulos
calculated rates of return and reached these conclusions (Bennell, 1996), but the policy
implications of his work were nonetheless enormous.
Generally, work within a human capital framework assumes that labour markets
work rationally and efficiently and that once schools have developed certain aspects of
human capital the labour market will allocate people to occupations that are appropriate for their level of skill. The framework does not take account of segregated labour
markets where people, irrespective of their level of education, are allocated to particular jobs on the grounds of race, gender, or assumptions about class or caste. The
framework tends to view schooling something like a machine which children enter
and exit with their human capital appropriately topped up. Enhancing human capital,
like developing the political subjects of modernisation, does require particular forms
of knowledge and particular pedagogies that enhance this learning. But the theory
suggests that there will be different kinds of human capital. Thus, different schools
may enhance human capital differently. For example, elite schools will be required
for managers and good-enough schools for those who will be semi-skilled workers.
As both groups will help contribute to economic growth the different emphasis in
curriculum and pedagogy is not a major issue. The ways in which schools may provide different learning environments for children of diverse backgrounds with very
divergent outcomes is not considered significant unless the schooling is so poor and
children learn so little it does not increase human capital. Thus, writers interested in
human capital will generally consider whether the school is efficient, in other words,
how many hours of instruction are provided, what the level of teacher qualification is,
and whether children pass. The UNESCO Global Monitoring Reports, published since
2002, were strongly influenced by human capital approaches in developing indicators
to measure EFA, compiling statistical tables on inputs and outputs, that is, enrolment
rates, retentions and teacher training (UNESCO, 2003) Writers working within this
framework are generally not interested in debates about curriculum hidden or in use,
constructed or negotiated processes of learning or the identities of teachers.
While some of the writing on human capital noted differential rates of return for
women and men (Woodhall, 1973; Schultz, 1995) their general conclusion was not that
structures of gender or race inequality should be considered, but that more education
should be growth is provided for these groups to improve levels of economic growth.
It can be seen that what is important for all the writers on human capital theory. In this
framework schooling assists growth and a major social obligation is to increase access
to schooling to facilitate economic growth. What this framework does not register
is questions of value that extend beyond the economic sphere, questions of inequality and how to address this, and how or whether critical pedagogy or new forms of
knowledge that are not deemed appropriate for enhancing economic growth should be
incorporated into school.
The idea of the person inherent in human capital theory is an active agent primarily
concerned with utility maximisation, which is achieving the highest level of wellbeing or happiness for himself, herself or a society. However, most writers on human
capital did not look at an individual and the mental metrics she or he might use in
making this assessment. Assumptions were made about people in families or nations

--- [PDF Page 781 / Book Page 790] ---

790 Unterhalter

where the individual person disappeared into a larger unit bent on utility maximisation
for all its members, giving scant attention to distributional issues or different needs.
Thus, as Naila Kabeer pointed out for views about utility maximisation generally, the
assumption was that there were no gender dynamics in families and that fathers or husbands would always act to enhance utility for all members of a family, despite research
evidence which showed that in many contexts sons were preferred over daughters
(Kabeer, 1994). When these ideas were translated into education policy (see e.g., King
& Hill, 1993) the assumption was that if cost or distance barriers to schooling could be
removed the rationality of utility maximisation would be evident.
Human capital theory draws implicitly on ideas about justice associated with classical liberalism, as it came to be interpreted in the era of Thatcher and Reagan, namely,
that the individual is a rights bearer with regard say to rights to education or to economic accumulation. These rights pre-date the existence of any particular form of the
state and do not take account of different situations or social contexts. Free markets
that allow for the circulation of ideas, different kinds of schools, or different forms
of employment must not be inhibited. An individual’s rights to education and to the
returns from investments in education should be protected by a limited form of constitutional government. In this limited interpretation of the ideas of Adam Smith concerns
with social context and the political dimensions of the economy are underplayed. Ideas
associated with basic needs of care, obligation and overlapping consensus on social
justice are not of particular interest to this interpretation of classical liberalism with its
stress on a single individual’s rights to accumulation and education.
The assumptions about ontological rather than ethical liberalism, and the notion
that utility maximisation entailed simply economic growth, generated a concern to
establish efficient institutions to deliver an education that articulated well with the
economy. The research methods associated with the approach tended to be large-scale
surveys which looked at the level of rate of return and considered how school inputs
related to outputs. While a number of qualitative studies were done to understand why
some families or particular ethnic or social groups did not make use of schooling with
particular attention to gendered exclusion (Herz & Sperling, 2004) the data were not
utilised to consider wider aspects of need or discrimination. The implication was that
obstacles to increasing the rate of return from education were located within families,
communities and inefficient polities. The remit of global action was thus to help governments remove these and enhance growth, from which the poorest, as a result of
trickle down, would ultimately benefit.

Development and Underdevelopment
Marxist critiques of development theories based on growth reach back to the nineteenth
century, but from the 1960s, took a particular form in considering how development
and underdevelopment could be articulated and how the persistence of poverty was
not an oversight, but a key dimension of capitalism which required a reserve army
of labour, who were poorly educated and impoverished, in order to drive down the
wages of those employed and buy allies amongst a relatively small skilled segment

--- [PDF Page 782 / Book Page 791] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 791

of the working class (Wolpe, 1980; Leys, 1996). Walter Rodney’s widely read How
Europe underdeveloped Africa (1973) made the case that the slave trade and other
interventions in African political economy reaching back to the fifteenth century had
resulted in exploitation and forms of domination. Martin Carnoy’s (1971) Education
as cultural imperialism extended this analysis looking at the ways in which the school
system had been allied to repression.
The assumption in the Marxist view of education and development was that schools
reproduced capitalist or imperialist relations. Thus, in a political economy marked by
exploitation and the articulation of modes of capitalist and non-capitalist production,
schools would form ideas about the place of children according to class or gender. In
the research within this framework in South Africa (where development and underdevelopment coincided in one country), race was generally viewed as equivalent to
class and the ways in which the school system reproduced the racialised occupational
structure was a major theme (Kallaway, 1984; Nkomo, 1990).
The challenge to the Marxist critique of development was how education could
be transformative. Paulo Freire (1968, 1970) developed the notion of conscientisation within a Marxist framework elaborating how misunderstanding of social relations
associated with capitalism could be transformed. Freire gave particular attention to
the nature of the relationship between learners and teachers, a departure from some
Marxist writing on education, where the school was seen as merely reproductive of
capitalist relations of production (Wolpe, 1990).
The Freirean approach to school took basic learning needs much further than suggested in the Jomtien Declaration, suggesting schools should not only satisfy needs and
empower individuals, but should also help them to transform themselves and their societies. Implicit in this work is a notion of a person, who is both made by his or her social
conditions, but also has the capacity to change. Change is both personal and has a consequence for changing social relations. Marx’s statement that man can change history, but
not on terms of his own making, sums up a view of the person who is at once constrained
by global capitalism, class structures and schools that mirror this, but who also has the
potential, through collective and transformative action, to change this. Attempts have
been made to put these ideas into practice in schools and adult literacy classes with
explicitly transformative pedagogies. Generally this entails developing a different form
of school management from that focused on delivering only outputs. The management
ideas associated with Freirean pedagogies tend to stress the participation of learners,
teachers and communities in reflection and critique. While Freirean educational work
may have been imperfectly realised or difficult to sustain, in settings as diverse as Latin
America, Southern and Eastern Africa and India, they offer powerful examples of how
teachers and learners engage with critiques of their society (Archer & Costello, 1990;
Stromquist, 1997; Motala & Vally, 2002; Abadzi, 2003; McCowan, 2008).
The concern for justice associated with this approach is linked with discussions of
egalitarianism and redistribution and with attending to how conditions in schools can
be made more equal or the formation of educators can be linked to the struggles of the
poorest (Lynch & Lodge, 2004; Hill, 2003). In Katarina Tomasevski’s work (2003), the
importance of justice in making education free for all children, particularly the poorest, presents a view of justice grounded in a conception of rights to education that is

--- [PDF Page 783 / Book Page 792] ---

792 Unterhalter

different from that associated with human capital theory. These moral rights that evoke
equality and non-discrimination require satisfaction partly because of the historical
global relations of dominance and subordination, but also because of the potentially
transformative power of education. Distribution and transformation are thus the major
emphases in these discussions of justice.
In advancing these arguments quantitative and qualitative research methods have
been used. While quantitative studies have been important to document inequalities in
distribution by class, race, gender or region, qualitative investigation has been used to
show how Freirean educational experiences transform lives in many of the works cited
above. The methods thus give explanatory weight to the framework, but the forthright
critique of global capitalism and national accommodations with inequality have not
translated comfortably into programmes for action.

Postmodernism and Postcolonialism
From the 1980s postmodernism and post-structuralism, drawing on work such as
Edward Said’s study of colonial relations in Orientalism (1978) and Michel Foucault’s
work on discourse (1969, 1977), began to present a very clear paradigmatic challenge
to ideas about education, society, international development and social justice of previous decades. These influences came together in postcolonial theory, which had its
greatest influence in discussions of art and literature, but which raised a number of
salient questions for education (Loomba, 1998).
All the preceding approaches, despite their different emphases, worked with similar
aspirations to extend the distribution of education. There are distinctions between those
that were more attentive to wider social relations concerning power, inequality and need
beyond education (basic needs and underdevelopment) and those that were more confident of the connection between education and economic growth (modernisation and
human capital theory) underplaying the structural dimensions of injustice. The challenge
postcolonial theorising presented was to consider how the very paradigm of education
and international development carried within itself assumptions about Western superiority and constructions of third-world peoples as ‘others’. A binary opposition was
therefore posited between ‘the West’ and ‘the rest’, colonial and postcolonial states or
dominant discourse on appropriate education and the multiple experiences of colonised
peoples. The latter, it was noted, were always portrayed in deficit in relation to dominant
forms of knowledge, homogenised by particular identities, such as ‘third world woman’
and silenced by the languages of power concerning policy discussion (Mohanty, 1979;
Bhabha, 1984; Spivak, 1988). In postcolonial theorising the multiplicity of identities,
constructed, reconstructed, hybridised and resisted in different settings was of particular
note. The political task was to consider that dominant languages and discourses may be
the only vehicle available to subalterns to contest the identities of subordination given to
them, yet that language erased those very identities (Spivak, 1999).The capacity to see
things, nonetheless, as it were in double exposure was a key concern (Minh Ha, 1989).
Thus the colonial past was always in the present of education reform, and all activities
had multiple resonances.

--- [PDF Page 784 / Book Page 793] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 793

Underpinning this paradigm shift was a notion that all action can only be understood
through discourse and that the key social relations to be analysed are forms of language and representation. Thus the notion of the person associated with this approach
notes fragmented identities and considers human practices of making and using language, emphasising this is not a simple act of agency but entails action within powerful
formations of already formed languages systems, structured both by forms of words
and the nexus of ideas concerning, for example, race, gender or rationality.
Because the focus was on a critique of discourses and identities, there was very
little concern at first with the content of what was taught in school or the outcomes
of schooling. Initial work within this framework identified policy discourses and discursive shifts. Thus, for example, the process through which ideas about unifying
education and training into one National Qualification Framework were diffused in
South Africa were explored using a range of different methods from discourse analysis
(Lugg, 2007). In India the tropes entailed in thinking about a new saffronised curriculum were noted (Kamat, 2004). However, later work within a postcolonial frame
began to look at forms of negotiation and resistance within classrooms to dominant
discourses looking closely at children and teachers’ identity formation and discursive
forms (Hickling Hudson, 2003). It can be seen that the emphasis on discourse and
process meant that little attention was given to management or distributional issues.
In contrast with the concern with institutional and distributional approaches to justice, which characterise the foregoing frameworks, postcolonial theorising raises the
question of justice in terms of recognition. The problem outlined by the approach is
how to value subordinated, multiple, shifting identities, and how, acknowledging this,
conditions of justice are to be established (Fraser, 1997; Spivak, 1999).
These assumptions about the person – discursively situated with shifting identities
– and about justice, as no longer primarily a matter of distribution, have generated
a profound change in methodologies. Deconstruction and analysis of discourse and
identity in education became a major concern. Methods borrowed from literary criticism, social linguistics, history and cultural studies have been used. As a consequence
more textured understandings of processes of policy formulation, identity negotiation
and the experiences of subordination have been generated. The remit of what attending to the education of the poorest might entail has broadened considerably, but the
breadth has not generally been accompanied by concern with strategy and policy.

Human Development and the Capability Approach
The human development and capability approach, linked with the work of Mahbub Ul
Haq (1995), Amartya Sen (1992, 1999) and Martha Nussbaum (2000, 2006) repositions education as a distributional issue, but gives considerable attention to human
diversity, albeit in a different guise to that suggested by postcolonial theory.
Human development is defined by Ul Haq as an approach where
[p]eople are moved to centre stage. Development is analysed and understood in
terms of people. Each activity is analysed to see how much people participate in

--- [PDF Page 785 / Book Page 794] ---

794 Unterhalter

it or benefit from it. The touchstone of success of development policies becomes
the betterment of people’s lives, not just the expansion of production processes.
(Ul Haq, 1995)
As a consequence, health and education, which form people, are as important to development as what people do in their work, politics or leisure. Implicitly education is here
both a process that encourages human development and an expression of the enjoyment of human development.
Ul Haq’s ideas about human development drew explicitly on Sen’s notion of capabilities and Sen’s perception that in looking at equality one must not assess equality of
opportunity or outcome, but capabilities, that is, a person’s “ability to do valuable acts or
reach valuable states of being … the alternative combinations of things a person is able
to do or be” (Sen, 1993, p. 30). The approach thus points to the importance of evaluation of social, economic and political arrangements that people can and do enjoy for an
expansion of freedoms. Thus in dealing with education we need to evaluate not simply
inputs (numbers of teachers or classrooms) or outputs (level of education qualifications),
but also whether there are a range of opportunities for valued actions and states of being
to be achieved and whether this is accomplished. Sen is particularly interested in human
diversity and the ways in which people in different situations convert resources like
education into valued functionings. For example, women in a patriarchal family might
consider they have less need for education because they do not attribute value to their
contribution to the family (Sen, 1990). Widening the capability set addresses diversity
in ways that diverge from the postcolonial plea for the recognition of difference without
attention to distribution or social institutions. Sen also stresses the significance of participation in processes to select valued capabilities and decide on forms of provision (Sen,
2005). In developing some of these ideas further Martha Nussbaum identified a list of
central capabilities for human functioning, where education figures large (Nussbaum,
2000). It is evident that all three view the purpose of education as much wider than
developing the skills that will enhance economic growth. They are not only interested in
schooling as a system of inputs and outputs, but as nurturing processes of critical reflection and connection with others that are intrinsically ethical, and not just instrumental.
The utilisation of the human development and capability approach in the practice
of education is currently more apparent in terms of aspiration, rather than practice.
Although the state of Madhya Pradesh in India utilised this framework in drafting its
education policy, the interpretation in districts and schools showed little signs of a
full engagement with the key ideas (Page, 2005). Arguments for the potential of the
approach in developing higher education pedagogies, assessments of education provision for those with disabilities, new forms of management, and curriculum to engage
with HIV or the training of social workers have been developed, but remain to be
put into practice (Walker, 2006; Terzi, 2005; Bates, 2007; Unterhalter, 2008; Otto &
Zigler, 2006). To date the most significant instance of human development and the
capability approach at work in education has been through the generation of alternative indicators to assess development.
Ul Haq suggested a measure of human development that would allow for rankings
between countries or districts similar to measures of GDP, but express more fully the

--- [PDF Page 786 / Book Page 795] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 795

range of valued aspects of living the human development approach encompassed. Sen
worked on the mathematics for the Human Development Index (HDI) (Sen, 2003).
Subsequent work generated indices to assess gender, poverty and rights The HDI
methodology was adapted for measuring progress on EFA in the Education Development Index to measure progress on EFA (UNESCO, 2003). A Gender Equality and
Education Index was subsequently developed (Unterhalter et al., 2005).
The idea of the person in the human development and capability approach is both
active and reflective, considering not just utility maximisation as interpreted by human
capital theory, or incorporation into modernity, but a wide range of valued ‘doings
and beings’. There is considerable attention paid to diversity and different conditions
which constrain the realisation of capabilities. The person is not only dedicated to
economic growth, as in human capital theory. She or he may be very much constrained
by conditions of exploitation and oppression as outlined in Marxist and postcolonial
theory. But the assumption in postcolonial theorising that the person cannot be conceptualised or act outside particular forms of discourse and that experiences of hybrid
identities raise significant questions with regard to justice is questioned.
Although in formulating his notion of capabilities, Sen criticised conceptions of
basic needs (1981), in practice there are many ways in which human development may
be seen as a continuation of the basic needs approach. The links between capabilities
and basic needs continue to be much discussed and concern in the capability approach
to broaden the scope of evaluation from one-dimensional outputs to broader notions
of flourishing has much in common with assessments of need (Reader, 2006; Alkire,
2002; Terzi, 2007).
Sen and Nussbaum both developed their ideas about capabilities, partly as an engagement with the work of John Rawls in A theory of justice (1973) and Political Liberalism
(2005). They are interested, as he was, in distributional questions of justice, but they
try to take his ideas further as the very notion of capability provides dimensions for
thinking about justice and distribution that supplement Rawls’ stress on primary goods
(Robeyns, 2006a). Further, Sen suggests, a theory of justice in contemporary times of
grave inequalities requires not a complete transcendent theory but insights to make
comparative assessments that enable action to make the world less unjust (Sen, 2006a).
In some conditions, he therefore implies questions about justice must be concerned
with recognition, language and identity, but the route to this conclusion is not through
critiques of discourse, but through rigorous engagement with debates in political philosophy and acknowledgement of how the construction of antagonistic identities is
generally associated with injustice (Sen, 2006b).
The capability approach has much in common with a human rights approach which
emphasises equality and non-discrimination and obligations to deliver in education,
for instance. The claims people can make for protection against abuse and deprivation
associated with human rights support a number of ideas about justice invoked by the
capability approach. Robeyns (2006b) draws on suggestions by Brighouse (2004) to
suggest that the notion of capabilities might provide a normative basis for thinking
about rights. Vizard (2006) argues that human rights and the capability approach can
work together in campaigns against poverty to hold governments accountable for nonfulfilment of obligations.

--- [PDF Page 787 / Book Page 796] ---

796 Unterhalter

Both Sen (1999) and Nussbaum (2006) have drawn out how their visions for justice
are global, not just local and given education a significant place in terms of the obligations of people to each other to expand capabilities. This demands thinking through
education in relation to debates about cosmopolitanism and the processes of global
justice.
The idea of the person and associated conceptions of justice in the human development and capability approach have generated a distinctive methodological approach.
Work within this framework is characterised by a high level of multi-disciplinarity
drawing on philosophy, economics and sociology, and crossing disciplinary boundaries
to link together different forms of data. Thus social statistics are utilised in innovative
forms of combination and qualitative accounts provide rich insight into how capabilities are understood in practice (Raynor, 2007; Uyan, 2007). In using new explanatory
frameworks to address the issue of global action on education the approach appears to
have overcome some of the difficulties of not generating alternative methods encountered by the basic needs approach. Furthermore, the location of human development
research within some of the UN organisations gives a level of access to powerful settings thus far denied critical approaches such as underdevelopment and postcolonial
theorising. However the capacity of the human development and capability approach
to make use of this advantageous conjunction in relation to affecting the practice of
education for the poorest remains to be seen.

Conclusion
This chapter set out to explore the ways in which education was placed in relation
to different theories of development and the implications of associated ideas about
social justice for the research conducted. The discussion has revealed how education has been linked by different development theories with particular dispositions
or outcomes (modernisation and human capital theory), with problems of imperialist exploitation and positioning of third-world people as the subordinate ‘other’
(underdevelopment and postcolonial theory) and with the potential to bring about
changes that attend to the needs of the poorest, facilitate critical reflection and expand
opportunities for demanding and living a life one has reason to value (basic needs,
underdevelopment and the capability approach). The most mainstream approaches
(modernisation and human capital) situate justice primarily as the remit of individuals
or institutions. Critical accounts highlight the social dimensions of justice, be they the
processes of political liberalism, the demands of rigorous redistribution or concerns
with recognition. While both basic needs and human development and the capability
approach have significant presence in the policy documents of UN institutions and
the programmes that flow from these, the ideas about justice associated with both
approaches are often ignored. The education assumptions of human capital theory
and modernisation continue to command respect and widespread understanding of
the research methods they use contribute to this. The challenge is to turn the social
justice aspirations of many global EFA documents into policies that express their core
ideas and develop rigorous research agendas to sustain global action on poverty and
education.

--- [PDF Page 788 / Book Page 797] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 797

References
Abadzi, H. (2003). Improving adult literacy outcomes: Lessons from cognitive research for developing
countries. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Adesina, O. C. (2006).Teaching history in twentieth century Nigeria: The challenges of change. History in
Africa, 33, 17–37.
Aikman, S. (1999). Intercultural education and literacy: an ethnographic study of indigenous knowledge
and learning in the Peruvian Amazon. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Alkire, S. (2002). Valuing freedoms: Sen’s capability approach and poverty reduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Ambrose, S., & Brinkley, D. (1997). Rise to globalism: American foreign policy since 1938. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Archer, D., & Costello, P. (1990). Literacy and power: The Latin American battleground. London:
Earthscan.
Astorga, P., Berges, A. R., & Fitzgerald, V. (2005). The standard of living in Latin America during the twentieth century. The Economic History Review, 58(4), 765–796.
Apter, D. (1965). The politics of modernization. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bates, R. (2007). Developing capabilities and management of trust. In M. Walker & E. Unterhalter (Eds.),
Amartya Sen’s Capability Approach and Social Justice in Education (137–135). Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Becker, G. (1964). Human capital. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Behr, A. (1966). Education in South Africa. Pretoria: van Schaik.
Bennell, P. (1996). Rates of return to education: Does the conventional pattern prevail in Sub-Saharan
Africa. World Development, 24(1), 183–199.
Bhabha, H. (1990). Nation and narration. London : Routledge.
Brighouse, H. (2004). Justice. Cambridge : Polity.
Carnoy, M., & Samoff, J. (1990). Education and social transition in the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Chabbott, C. (2003). Constructing education for development: International organizations and Education
for All. London: RoutledgeFalmer
Chatterjee, P. (1993). The Nation and its fragments: Colonial and postcolonial histories. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Collier, P. (2004). Consensus building, knowledge and conditionality. Paper prepared for the Annual
World Bank conference on development economics on line at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
INTABCDEWASHINGTON2000/Resources/collier.pdf (consulted September 2007).
Dasgupta, P. (1993). An inquiry into wellbeing and destitution. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Davis, P. (2001). Rethinking the welfare regime approach: The case of Bangladesh. Global Social Policy,
1(91), 79–107.
Doyal, L., & Gough, I. (1991). A theory of need. London: Macmillan.
Eisemon, T. O. (1989). Schooling, cognition and creating capacity for technological innovation in Africa.
International Review of Education, 35(3), 329–348.
Fagan, H., Munck, R., & O’Hearn, D. (1999). Critical development theory: Contributions to a new paradigm. London: Zed.
Fägerlind, I., & Saha, L. J. (1983). Education and national development: A comparative perspective. Oxford:
Pergamon.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge. London, Tavistock Publications.
Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish. London, Allen Lane.
Fraser, N. (1997). Justice interruptus: Rethinking key concepts of a post-socialist age. London: Routledge.
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the oppressed. London: Sheed & Ward.
Freire, P. (1974). Education for critical consciousness. London: Sheen & Ward.
Gasper, D. (2004). The ethics of development. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Harber, C. (1997). Education, democracy and political development in Africa. Brighton: Sussex Academic
Press.
Hart, H. L. (1961). The concept of law. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

--- [PDF Page 789 / Book Page 798] ---

798 Unterhalter
Herz, B., & Sperling, G. B. (2004). What works in girls’ education. New York: Council on Foreign
Relations.
Hickling-Hudson, A., & Ahlquist, R. (2003). Contesting the curriculum in the schooling of indigenous
children in Australia and the United States: From Eurocentrism to culturally powerful pedagogies.
Comparative Education Review. 47, 64–89.
Hill, D. (2003). Global neoliberalism, the deformation of education, and resistance. Journal of Critical
Education Policy Studies, 1, 1. On line at http://www.jceps.com/index.php?pageID = article&articleID
= 7 (accessed August 2007).
Hossain, N., Subrhamanian, R., & Kabeer, N. (2002). The politics of educational expansion in Bangladesh.
Falmer: Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex.
Hyam, R. (2007). Britain’s declining empire: The road to decolonisation, 1918–1968. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Inkeles, A., & Smith, D. H. (1974). Becoming modern. Cambridge, MA,: Harvard University Press.
Jayawardena, K. (1986). Feminism and nationalism in the third world. London: Zed.
Jones, P. (1990). UNESCO and the politics of global literacy. Comparative Education Review, 34(1),
41–60.
Jones, P., & Coleman, D. (2005). The United Nations and education: Multilateralism, development and
globalization. London: Routledge.
Kabeer, N. (2004). Reversed realities: Gender hierarchies in development thought. London: Verso.
Kallaway, P. (1984). Apartheid and education: The education of Black South Africans. Johnannesburg:
Ravan Press.
King, E., & Hill, M. A. (Eds.) (1993). Women’s education in developing countries. Barriers, benefits and
policies. Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lerner, D. (1958). The passing of traditional society: Modernizing the Middle East. Glencoe, IL,: The Free
Press.
Leys, C. (1996). The rise and fall of development theory. Oxford: James Currey Publishers.
Loomba, A. (1998). Colonialism/postcolonialism. London: Routledge.
Lugg, R. (2007). Making different equal? Social practices of policy-making and the National Qualifications
Framework in South Africa between 1985 and 2003. Doctoral thesis, University of London, Institute of
Education.
Lynch, K. & Lodge, A. (2004) Equality and power in schools: Redistribution, recognition and representation. London: Routledge.
McCowan, T. (2008). Enacting citizenship: A study of three educational initiatives in Brazil. Doctoral thesis,
University of London, Institute of Education.
Minh Ha, T. (1989). Woman, native, other: Writing postcoloniality and feminism..Bloomington, IN, Indiana
University Press.
Mohanty, C. (1988). Under Western eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial discourse. Feminist Review,
30, 65–88.
Motala, S. & Vally, S. (2002). People’s Education: From People’s Power to Tirisaro. In P. Kallaway (Ed.) The
History of Education under Apart heid Pinelands: Masked Muller.
Mundy, K., & Murphy, L. (2001). Transnational advocacy, global civil society? Emerging evidence from the
field of education. Comparative Education Review, 45(1), 85–126.
Munck, R., & O’Hearn, D. (Eds.) (1999). Critical development theory: Contributions to a new paradigm.
London and New York: Zed.
Mvungi, M. (1974). Language policy in Tanzania with emphasis on implementation. Dar es Salaam:
University of Dar es Salaam.
Nkomo, M. (1990). Pedagogy of domination. Trenton: Africa World Press.
Nzomo, J., Kariuki, M., & Guantai, L. (2001). The quality of primary education in Kenya. SACMEQ Report.
Paris: International Institute for Educational Planning.
Nussbaum, M. (2000). Women and human development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nussbaum, M. (2006). Frontiers of justice. Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
Otto, H., & Ziegler, H. (2006). Capabilities and education. Social work and society, 4(2).
Page, E. (2005). Gender and the construction of identities in Indian elementary education. Doctoral thesis
University of London, Institute of Education.

--- [PDF Page 790 / Book Page 799] ---

Social Justice, Development Theory and The Question of Education 799
Pieterse, J., & Parekh, B. (Eds). (1995). The decolonization of the imagination. London: Zed.
Preston, P. W. (1996). Development theory. An introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.
Psacharapoulos, G. (1973). Returns to education. An international comparison. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rai, S. (2002). Gender and the political economy of development. Cambridge: Polity.
Raju, B.H. (1973). Education in Kenya: Problems and perspectives in educational planning and administration. London: Heinemann.
Rapley, J. (2002). Understanding development: Theory and practice in the Third World. Boulder, CO: Lynn
Rienner.
Rawls, J. (1972). A theory of justice. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rawls, J. (2005). Political liberalism. Columbia, NY: Columbia University Press.
Raynor, J. (2007). Education and capabilities in Bangladesh. In M. Walker & E. Unterhalter (Eds.),
Amartya Sen’s capability approach and social justice in education (157–176), Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Raz, J. (1986). The morality of freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reader, S. (2006). Does a basic needs approach need capabilities? Journal of Political Philosophy, 14(3),
337–350.
Robeyns, I. (2006a). Assessing gender justice: Primary goods or capabilities. Paper presented at the meeting of the Human Development and Capability Association, Groningen, the Netherlands.
Robeyns, I. (2006b). Three models of education: Rights, capabilities and human capital. Theory and
Research in Education, 4(1), 69–84.
Rodney, W. (1972). How Europe underdeveloped Africa. London: Bogle-L’Ouverture Publications.
Rostow, W. (1959). The stages of economic growth: A non-communist manifesto. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Said, E. (1978). Orientalism. New York: Pantheon Books.
Schultz. T. W. (1971). Investment in Human Capital: the Role of Education and of Research. New York: The
Free Press.
Schultz, T. P. (1993). Returns to women’s education. In E. King & A. Hill (Eds.), Women’s education in
developing countries. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Univeristy Press.
Sen, A. (1981). Poverty and famines. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sen, A. (1990). Gender and co-operative conflict. In I. Tinker (Ed.), Persistent inequalities. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Sen, A. (1992). Inequality reexamined. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sen, A. (1993). Capability and wellbeing. In M. Nussbaum & A. Sen. The quality of life. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Sen, A. (1999). Development as freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sen, A. (2003). Foreword. In S. Fukuda-Parr & A. K. Shiva Kumar (Eds.), Readings in human development.
New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Sen, A. (2005). Human rights and capabilities. Journal of Human Development, 6(2), 151–66.
Sen, A. (2006a). What do we want from a theory of justice? Journal of Philosophy, 103(95), 215–238.
Sen, A. (2006b). Identity and violence. New York and London: Allen Lane.
Spivak, G. (1988). Can the subaltern speak? In C. Nelson & L. Grossberg (Eds.), Marxism and the interpretation of culture (pp. 271–313). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Spivak, G. (1999). A critique of postcolonial reason: Toward a history of the vanishing present. Cambridge
and London: Harvard University Press.
Stasiulis, D., & Yuval Davis, N. (Eds.) (1995). Unsettling settler societies. London: Sage.
Stewart, F. (1985). Basic needs in developing countries. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press
Streeten, P. (1981). Recent issues in world development: A collection of survey articles. Oxford : Pergamon.
Stromquist, N. (1997). Increasing girls’ and women’s participation in basic education. Paris: UNESCO:
International Institute for Educational Planning.
Terzi, L. (2005). A capability perspective on impairment, disability and special educational needs: Towards
social justice in education. Theory and Research in Education, 3(2), 197–223.
Terzi, L. (2007). The capability to be educated. In M. Walker & E. Unterhalter (Eds.), Amartya Sen’s capability approach and social justice in education (pp. 25–44). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Tomasevski, K. (2003). Education denied. London: Zed.

--- [PDF Page 791 / Book Page 800] ---

800 Unterhalter
Uchendu, V. (Ed.) (1980). Dependency and underdevelopment in West Africa. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Ul Haq, M. (1995). Reflections on human development. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
UNESCO (1976). Statistical yearbook. Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO (2003). Global monitoring report 2004. Gender and education for all. The leap to equality. Paris:
UNESCO.
Unterhalter, E., Challender, C., & Rajagopalan, R. (2005). A scorecard on gender equality in girls’ education in Asia, 1990–2000, Bangkok: UNESCO.
Unterhalter, E. (2007). Gender schooling and global social justice. London and New York: Routledge.
Unterhalter, E. (2007). The capability approach at work in education: Sore issues of operationalisation in the
context of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in South Africa, In F. Comim, M. Qizalbash & S. Alkire (Eds.), The
capability approach: Concepts, measures and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Uyan-Semerci, P. (2007). A relational account of Nussbaum’s list of capabilities. Journal of Human
Development, 8(2), 203–221.
Vizard, P. (2006). Poverty and human rights: Sen’s ‘capability perspective’ explored. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Walker, M.(2006). Higher education pedagogies: A capabilities approach. Maidenhead: Open University
Press.
Wiggins, D. (1985). Claims of need. In T. Honderich (Ed.), Morality and objectivity. London: Routledge.
World Declaration (1990). In ‘World declaration on education for all’ in World education forum, The Dakar
framework for action. Paris: UNESCO.
Wolpe, H. (1980).The articulation of modes of production. London: Routledge.
Wolpe, H. (1990). Education and Social transformation: problems and dilerres: In E. Unterhalter, H. Wolpe
& T. Botha (Eds.), Education in a future South Africa. London: Macmillan.
Woodhall, M. (1973). The economic returns to investment in women’s education. Higher Education, 2(3),
275–299.
World Bank (1979). World development report. New York: Oxford University Press.

