================================================================================
Chapter 51: On Educational Knowledge – A Neglected Theme in Comparative Education
Author(s): Andreas Kazamias
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 803–812
PDF Pages: pp. 792–801 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 792 / Book Page 803] ---

51
ON EDUCATIONAL KNOWLEDGE –
A NEGLECTED THEME IN COMPARATIVE
EDUCATION
Andreas M. Kazamias
Comparative education, as it developed in the second half of the twentieth century,
has been concerned mainly with the study of educational systems (their philosophies,
organisation and governance), educational institutions (mostly schools, colleges
and universities), educational policies, school and society relationships (political,
social and economic), and educational change, reform and development. Discourses
and studies in such areas have been carried out in national state contexts, in ‘rims’
or regions (e.g., the Pacific and the Mediterranean ‘rims’, or the European Union,
Latin America, Africa and the Middle East), or cross-nationally and cross-culturally.
Paradoxically, prominent themes that are germane to educational systems and the
educational process, although not entirely neglected, have not received the attention
that they deserve. The themes in question have to do with educational knowledge, or
the content of the curriculum, and with pedagogy, in other words, with the internal
or ‘intrinsic’ aspects of ‘schooling’.
Knowledge – its selection, organisation/classification and acquisition – has been of
crucial importance to all modern systems of education. According to M. F. D. Young,
“the acquisition of knowledge is the key purpose that distinguishes education, whether
general, further, vocational or higher, from all other activities”. For this reason, “debates
about knowledge are crucial; by this I do not mean specific knowledge contents,
although they are important, but the concepts of knowledge that underpin curricula”
(Young, 2008, p. 81). Of crucial importance are also debates about the related theme of
pedagogy, defined by Robin Alexander, a contributor to this section of the Handbook,
as “both the act of teaching and its contingent theories and debates-about, for example,
the character of culture and society, the purposes of education, the nature of childhood
and learning and structure of knowledge”. Pedagogy, Alexander explains further, “is
the domain of discourse with which one needs to engage if one is to make sense of the
act of teaching – for discourse and act are interdependent, and there can be no teaching
without pedagogy or pedagogy without teaching” (Alexander, 2006, p. 6).
The study of the curriculum, as the codification of areas of knowledge into
‘subjects’, and curriculum change have not been entirely absent in comparative
education, as Anthony Welch pointed out in 1991 (Welch, 1991); nor has ‘pedagogy’. However, in 2000, Angela Little, a specialist in development studies, could
write in the British journal Comparative Education that between 1977 and 1998
803
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 803–812.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 793 / Book Page 804] ---

804 Kazamias

only 6.1% of that journal’s articles “dealt with ‘curricular content and the learner’s
experience’ ” (quoted in Alexander, 2006, p. 2). And in the same issue of the journal,
Robert Cowen wrote that “we are nowhere near coming fully to grips with the
themes of curriculum, pedagogic styles and evaluation as powerful message systems
which form identities in specific educational sites” (Cowen, 2000, p. 34).
This chapter is a comparative-historical analysis of the theme/problem of educational knowledge as codified in the curriculum of the secondary schools of England
at two periods of modern English history: the mid-nineteenth century and today. It
tackles the perennial curriculum question of ‘what knowledge is of most worth’. At
the same time, passing references are made about the same problem in continental
Europe and the United States. Other chapters in this section of the Handbook examine
the theme of ‘knowledge’ and ‘knowledge traditions’ in various historical and national
contexts. And one, in particular, deals with the almost forgotten theme of ‘pedagogy’.

What Knowledge Is of Most Worth? A Historical Conception
‘Knowledge’ and its valuation has been an epistemological concern of all major philosophers and educational thinkers since antiquity; it has also been a curriculum concern
of educational policy-makers and pedagogues since the emergence and development of
national modern systems of education in the post-Enlightenment world. For example,
Plato’s rational account of the educational ascent from ‘belief’ to ‘true’ rational knowledge,
Aristotle’s stratification of knowledge into prestigious theoretical “liberal arts/sciences”
(eleutheriai epistemai) and ‘philistine’ (banausic) “illiberal practical arts”, Descartes’ scientific rationalism, Locke’s empiricism, Herbert Spencer’s “scientific culture” and John
Dewey’s problem-solving instrumentalist “how we think”, have been influential, to a
degree more or less at different historical periods, in the educational thinking and planning about the selection, organisation and stratification of ‘curriculum knowledge’.
In the post-Enlightenment era of modernisation and democratisation, when national
public systems of education were being formed, Herbert Spencer, the English social
evolutionist sociologist, raised the question of ‘what knowledge was of most worth’
in an industrial society like the English, and hence of value to be included in the
school curriculum (Spencer, 1859). In raising this question, Spencer was contesting
the hegemony of ‘liberal humanistic paideia/culture’ that characterised the European
and American knowledge traditions and the curriculum of the schools and the universities, not only of England but of continental European countries (e.g., France, Germany,
Italy, Greece) and the United States, as well (McClean, 1995; Winterer, 2002; Dimaras,
1973; Kazamias, 1960).
Spencer’s question, raised at the same time as the publication of Charles Darwin’s
scientific treatise The Origin of Species (1859), sparked a controversy involving some
of the leading mid-Victorian English intellectuals (e.g., philosophers, classical scholars, poets and scientists), and practicing educationists, and it revolved around the
content of ‘general’ or ‘liberal’ education, in terms of ‘curriculum studies’, which
at the time was considered to be the most valued and the most prestigious type of
education. Specifically, “the great controversy of the day”, according to the political

--- [PDF Page 794 / Book Page 805] ---

On Educational Knowledge – A Neglected Theme in Comparative Education 805

philosopher J. S. Mill, a key participant in the debate, was “the vexed question between
the ancient languages and the modern sciences and arts; whether general education
should be classical – let me use a wider expression and say literary – or scientific”
(Mill, 1867, p. 5). A comparative historical analysis of the controversy was made by
me back in 1960 (Kazamias, 1960), and would not be necessary in this section of the
Handbook. For my purposes here, it would suffice to comment briefly on what knowledge was considered to be ‘of value’ or “of most worth” at a specific historical period
– the nineteenth century – in post-Enlightenment modernist Europe, and, therefore,
what ‘knowledge’ in the form of ‘subjects’ or ‘studies’ was “of most worth” to be
included in the curriculum of the secondary schools.
At the time that Spencer raised the famous question, the dominant concept of ‘most
valued knowledge’ in England and in continental Europe could be epitomized as the
‘Eurocentric liberal humanistic canon’ or the ‘Eurocentric liberal humanistic paideia’
with classical studies – ancient Greek and Latin languages and cultures – as its epistemic core. In France, it was intrinsic to the concept of culture generale (Halls, 1965),
in Germany it was referred to as Allgemeine Menshenbildung (Lovlie et al., 2003) and
in Greece, as enkyklios paideia (Dimaras, 1973; Antoniou, 1987). The Eurocentric
liberal humanistic canon/paideia denoted essentially ‘literary-philological studies’;
it was ‘non-utilitarian’, ‘non-practical’ and economically ‘non-instrumentalist’ in its
orientation; it was considered to be of higher status than vocational education; and it
was legitimised epistemologically in terms of its mental disciplinary value, and morally, in terms of its intrinsic quality in cultivating Christian and other moral virtues,
for example, piety, godliness, truthfulness, patriotism and the ideal of public service.
Interpreted ‘sociologically’, however, school knowledge and the content of the curriculum are “socially produced and acquired” (Young, 2008, p. 88) and, therefore, they
cannot be looked at as being independent of the social and political historical context
in which they are developed; the dominance of the general ‘liberal humanistic paideia’
can be illuminated by viewing it through the prism of the elitist, nationally ‘monochromatic’ culture of nineteenth-century England, and the concomitant English elitist
political power structure. In such a historical context, what was particularly “extraordinary”, according to the historian D. W. Brogan, “was the idea that only a ‘public
school’ could give an education fitting a boy for command in business, in politics, in
the army, the civil service, even in the arts” (Brogan, 1943).
In the ‘great controversy’ of the 1860s, Spencer and eminent scientists like T. H.
Huxley, J. Tyndall and M. Faraday contested the hegemony of the classical literary
humanistic education, and championed the cause of scientific education for an important place in the curriculum of the schools. These and others, like the classicists F. W.
Farrar and H. Sidgwick, and poets like M. Arnold and J. Ruskin, argued in favour of a
general liberal education that would include classical humanistic studies, sciences and
other modern subjects such as history and modern foreign languages. (Kazamias, 1960;
Jordan & Weedon, 1994). It was argued that the elitist Eurocentric classical humanistic type of knowledge and paideia could not meet the needs of a developing modern
industrial and democratic society. The inclusion of science, for example, into the curriculum of the prestigious Grammar Schools and the Public Schools was advocated
not only for its mental disciplinary value, but also for its instrumental utilitarianism,

--- [PDF Page 795 / Book Page 806] ---

806 Kazamias

“realism and naturalism” in an industrial society. As the historian J. S. Brubacher has
noted, T. H. Huxley, the champion of scientific education, “took the general line that it
was an extremely shortsighted policy for a great colonial nation like England with vast
industrial and commercial interests to fail to give instruction in physics and chemistry
on which its industrial and commercial greatness rested” (Brubacher, 1947, p. 265).
The questioning of the hegemony of liberal humanistic knowledge, with classical
studies as its core, was also evident in France, Germany and the United States. In
France, for example, where the dominance of a humanistic general culture was even
more entrenched than in England since the days of Napoleon, according to the historian F. Ringer (1987), “from the 1870s to the end of the century the running debate over
the special or modern programme … was accompanied by an almost equally intensive
discussion of the classical secondary curriculum” (for France, also see Talbott, 1969;
for Germany, see Albisetti, 1987; for the United States, see Kliebard, 1986).
Although in England and in continental Europe the nineteenth-century educational
modernists were calling for an expanded knowledge-based curriculum to include science
and other modern subjects, their conception of an expanded general education, knowledge or paideia, ‘of most worth’, was still elitist, Eurocentric, theoretical, privileged
and “liberal” in the Aristotelian meaning of the term. Except for Spencer’s conception,
it did not include what Aristotle called banausic, that is, philistine, non-theoretical,
and “illiberal” practical studies/arts. Towards the end of the nineteenth century and the
beginning of the twentieth, in England, France and Germany, general education was
expanded and modern ‘liberal studies’ were included in the curriculum of the English
secondary Grammar schools, the French lyçées and the German Gymnasia.
Spencer’s idea about curriculum knowledge ‘of most worth’ was not heeded in Europe.
It was heeded in the United States, where Spencer was widely read, as reflected in the
Cardinal Principles Report on the Reorganization of Secondary Education in the United
States. According to Kliebard, an authority on the history of the American curriculum,
“By far the most prominent portion of the report”, which was a major landmark in secondary education in the United States, “was the statement of the seven aims [principles]
that would guide the curriculum: 1. Health. 2. Command of fundamental processes.
3. Worthy home membership. 4.Vocation. 5. Citizenship. 6. Worthy use of leisure. 7. Ethical
character” (Kliebard, 1986, pp. 112–114). In his historical analysis of the development of
the American curriculum, Kliebard further noted “that 1918 may be regarded as the year
when the humanist position reflected in Eliot’s Committee of Ten Report [published in
1893] was forced to go on the defensive, no longer playing the dominant role it once did
in the battle for the American curriculum” (Kliebard, 1986, p. 115).

What Knowledge Is of Most Worth in the ‘Europe
of Knowledge’? The Late Modern Sequel
in the European Union
In Western Europe and America, what knowledge is of most worth, what the essential knowledge ingredients of the curriculum of the schools should be, and how school
knowledge should be organised and taught continued to be themes/questions that were

--- [PDF Page 796 / Book Page 807] ---

On Educational Knowledge – A Neglected Theme in Comparative Education 807

discussed at different historical periods in the twentieth century. Debates of this nature
have been especially manifest in the decades following Second World War. The question posed by Herbert Spencer “what knowledge is of most worth?” is as basic and
thought-provoking today – in what I have called in another chapter in Section Seven of
this Handbook, “The Brave New Cosmopolis of Globalisation” and “The Information/
Technological Knowledge/Learning Society” of late modernity even postmodernity
(also see Castells, 1998) – as it was in the nineteenth-century industrial cosmos of EuroAmerican modernity. The literature on this theme is vast and even a cursory review of
it is beyond the scope of this chapter. I examine some post-war key developments and
discourses on this theme in the Anglo-Saxon world in another context in another chapter,
already mentioned, in Section Seven of this Handbook.

Knowledge Society
Knowledge society (KS) and such co-extensive terms as ‘information society’ and
‘learning society’ have recently become dominant discourses with respect to the economic robustness and development of European Union (EU) and its member states.
“The Europe we are building”, the French minister of education is said to have declared
in 1998, “is not only the Europe of the Euro, the Europe of Banks and the economy; it
must also be the Europe of Knowledge”. In the White Paper Growth, Competitiveness
and Employment issued in 1993, it was stated that, in view of such changes in the world
as ‘globalisation’, the coming of ‘information society’, and the rapid development of
techno-science, it was imperative that the EU be transformed into “knowledge- based”
societies (European Commission, 1993). And in the much-publicised and influential
White Paper Teaching and Learning: Towards the Learning Society of 1995, one reads:
“Be that as it may, the countries of Europe today have no other option. If they are to
hold their own and continue to be a reference point in the world, they have to build on
the progress brought about through closer economic ties by more substantial investment in knowledge and skills” (European Commission, 1995, p. 1).
What is a knowledge society? Knowledge society has been conceptualised in various ways. A. Hargreaves, has conceptualised KS in terms of three dimensions:
First, it [KS] comprises an expanded scientific, technical and educational sphere. …
Second, it involves complex ways of processing and circulating knowledge and
information in a service-based economy. Third, it entails basic changes in how
corporate organizations function so hat hey enhance continuous innovation in
products and services, by creating systems, teams and cultures that maximize
the opportunities for mutual spontaneous learning. (Hargreaves, 2003, p. 9).
From a Marxist critical perspective, C. Stamatis, a Greek scholar, has conceptualised
KS as follows:
The conceptual nucleus of a ‘knowledge society’ echoes, in substance, an
actual capitalist trend, which is also ratified ideologically. It signifies the use of
knowledge as a productive force in labour process under the conditions of late
capitalism. The type of education that is cultivated in educational institutions is

--- [PDF Page 797 / Book Page 808] ---

808 Kazamias

accordingly called upon to be adapted to such knowledge use. (Stamatis, 2005,
p. 115. Translated from the Greek text)
In the prevalent discourse, the following epistemic elements appear to characterise the
emerging KS:
- Enormous development of ICTs and sophisticated learning technologies; the
rise of what M. Castells has called “Network Society” and the “Information/
Technological Epistemological Paradigm” (Castells, 1998/2000).
- Knowledge as a factor of production; increased importance of information technologies and what D. Guile has called “codified knowledge” (Guile, 2002) for the
accumulation of capital and for sustainable development in a competitive global
economy.
- Techno-scientific instrumental rationality.
- Knowledge as a trading commercialised commodity.
- Changing forms of organization of living and work: a “learning organization”.
(Senge, 1990); a “flexible workforce”, a “knowledge worker” (Drucker, 1994);
the “shamrock organization” (Handy, 1989).
- A renegotiation of power among established power formations (e.g., states, markets, civil societies, international organisations).

A ‘Europe of Knowledge’ Through Education and Training
Discourses about KS and about ‘knowledge’ – what it is, what its forms are, and how
it is acquired – invariably have included references to education and training and to the
sites that have traditionally been responsible for the production, reproduction and dissemination of knowledge, namely, schools, colleges and universities. In the EU texts,
a European educational discourse (policy talk and policy practice) is propounded that
emphasizes the development of “skills” and “competencies” to meet the needs of the
Single European Market, and integrated European KS and a European “knowledgebased competitive economy”. Although in some of the texts reference is made to “solid
based- broad education”, what is more salient in the EU discourse is the privileging of
certain kinds of knowledge, skills and competencies, for example, education in ICTs,
techno-scientific instrumental rationality, and vocational skills, for “competitive advantage’, so that, as the Lisbon Council put it in 2000, the EU by 2010, will become “the
most competitive and dynamic knowledge economy in the world, capable of sustainable
economic growth accompanied by quantitative and qualitative improvement of employment and of greater social cohesion” (Conclusions of the Lisbon Council, 2000). The
instrumentalist knowledge bias in the EU’s educational discourse is patently clear in the
text Towards a Europe of Knowledge, which was issued in 1997. In this text one reads:
Noting that we are entering the ‘knowledge society’, the Commission in its
Agenda 2000 proposes making the policies which drive that society (innovation, research, education and training) one of the four fundamental pillars of
the Union’s internal policies…Economic competitiveness, employment and the
personal fulfillment of the citizens of Europe is no longer mainly based on the

--- [PDF Page 798 / Book Page 809] ---

On Educational Knowledge – A Neglected Theme in Comparative Education 809

production of physical goods, nor will it be in the future. Real wealth creation
will henceforth be linked to the production and dissemination of knowledge and
will depend first and foremost on our efforts in the field of research, education
and training and on our capacity to promote innovation. This is why we must
fashion a veritable ‘Europe of Knowledge’ (European Commission, 1997).
In the aforementioned widely quoted Teaching and Learning – Towards a Learning
Society (1995), one gets a clearer picture of the EU’s educational discourse in relation
to the European KS and the Europe of Knowledge. This important text pays homage
to globalisation, namely, “the internalisation of trade, the global context of technology
and above all, the arrival of the [global] information society”. In the global “learning
society” of the future, according to it, knowledge and cognitive skills will be of pivotal importance, especially knowledge and skills in techno-science and mathematics,
particularly for purposes of economic growth and prosperity. At the same time, however, the White Paper urged that education and training in the “learning society” (also
read ‘knowledge society’) should not be narrowly instrumental, but multi-purpose. It
should (a) focus on “a broad knowledge base” and emphasise breadth and flexibility
rather than narrowness; (b) build bridges between schools and the “business sector”;
(c) combat “social exclusion”; (d) develop proficiency in “at least two foreign languages”, that is, in “three Community languages”; and (e) “treat capital investment
and investment in training on an equal basis”. The White Paper, further, talked about
the importance of “personal development”, the “passing of cultural heritage”, and “the
teaching of self-reliance”. Finally, it referred to the development of “human values”
and “citizenship” which, according to it, “is essential if European society is to be open,
multicultural and democratic” (European Commission, 1995).
However, from a careful reading of this text, it appears that in the envisaged ‘Europe
of Knowledge’ greater emphasis and space were placed on the acquisition of certain
kinds of knowledge and on the development of cognitive and vocational skills that
would be instrumental for the productive employability of the worker, for the accumulation of wealth and economic growth, and for European Union prosperity. In this
connection, John Field’s critical comments on the White Paper’s reformist orientation
are well taken. “Although the White Paper”, Field has observed, “paid lip-service to
the need for personal development and social learning, and even active citizenship, as
well as training, there was no sign that the Commission had any concrete proposals
in these areas”. In fact, Field has added, “the White Paper simply replicated the established boundary between vocational training and general education” (Field, 1998,
p. 75). And, according to J. Spring, even subjects such as literature and philosophy,
not to mention science and mathematics were viewed not for “their intrinsic beauty or
personal satisfaction”, but for their instrumental value in improving Europe’s position
in the global economy” (Spring, 1998, p. 105; also see Grollios, 1999).
The educational discourse that is being promulgated by the European Union for the
imagined Europe of Knowledge, may be epitomized in terms of the following key ideas:
- Education and training, instrumental rationality, not paideia
- Techno-scientific knowledge/information base, not general/liberal education and
humanistic culture/paideia (culture generale, Allgemeine Bildung)

--- [PDF Page 799 / Book Page 810] ---

810 Kazamias

- Cognitive, vocational, flexible and social skills that are readily assessed and constantly renewable; competitiveness, entrepreneurship, employability, innovation,
creativity, productivity, accreditation
- Emphasis on competencies (theoretical, practical, cognitive), mostly instrumental; underemphasis of aesthetic and ethical dispositions and civic virtues – what
I would call the paideia of the soul
Lastly, it would be pertinent here to refer to A. Hargreaves’ astute observations about
the contemporary reform discourses on teaching (and education) in the ‘knowledge
society’ and the related ‘knowledge-based economy’. Hargreaves argues that contemporary capitalist societies that are also knowledge-based economies serve primarily the
private good; their schools are geared to develop primarily cognitive learning, instrumental skills and competencies for a knowledge society and a knowledge economy.
But a knowledge-based economy, according to him, is a “force of creative destruction”.
On the one hand, “it stimulates growth and prosperity”, but on the other, “its relentless
pursuit of profit and self-interest also strains and fragments the social order”. In the
knowledge-based economies, school systems “have become obsessed with imposing
and micromanaging curriculum uniformity”, instead of “fostering creativity and ingenuity”. Hargreaves adds:
In place of ambitious missions of compassion and community, schools and
teachers have been squeezed into the tunnel vision of test scores, achievement
targets and league tables of accountability. And rather than cultivating cosmopolitan identity and the basic emotion of sympathy, which Adam Smith called
the emotional foundation of democracy, too many educational systems promote exaggerated and self absorbed senses of national identity. (Hargreaves,
2003, pp. xvi–xvii, 9).

What Knowledge Is of Most Worth? –
Looking Backwards into the Future
From the above, it can easily be inferred that the knowledge ‘of most value’ or ‘of most
worth’ in the late modern globalised European ‘Network Society’ is different from that
of the nineteenth-century industrial Europe of early modernity. In the early modern
industrial Europe, the knowledge that was ‘of most worth’ was what could be called
‘liberal humanistic knowledge’. In the contemporary post-industrial informationtechnological and globalised Europe of late modernity, the knowledge that is ‘of most
worth’ and privileged is ‘techno-science’ and instrumental rationality. As I argued in
another chapter in Section Seven of this Handbook, it appears that neo-liberal globalisation and the “instrumentalist ethos of market fundamentalism”, with their emphasis,
on instrumental rationality, the production of useful knowledge and what F. Furedi has
called “philistine concerns”, are having corrosive effects on liberal culture, the arts and
“the life of the mind” (Furedi, 2004). Commenting on the European Union’s action
programmes, namely, SOCRATES, LEONARDO DA VINCI, ERASMUS, ARION

--- [PDF Page 800 / Book Page 811] ---

On Educational Knowledge – A Neglected Theme in Comparative Education 811

and COMENIUS, Field has noted that they are “relentlessly vocational, utilitarian
and instrumental in their emphasis,” a “technological option”, according to him, that
has created a tension between “instrumentalism” and the European attachment to the
humanistic tradition of education” (Field, 1998, p. 8).
One could speculate that a resurrected Herbert Spencer would in all probability welcome such a swing of the epistemological pendulum from a predominantly
‘humanistic’ and “general type of knowledge to a predominantly techno-scientific,
instrumental and pragmatic type. But, in my opinion, a resurrected T. H. Huxley, who
also championed scientific education, would not. In the great controversy of the 1860s
over what knowledge was of most worth, Huxley warned against “exclusiveness” and
imbalance in curriculum studies; for, as he had aptly put it, “the value of the cargo does
not compensate for a ship’s being out of trim” (Huxley, 1902, pp. 153–154).

Coda
Recently, Michael Young (1998, 2008), a noted sociologist of the curriculum, and a
critic of the contemporary educational trends as they affect educational knowledge
and the curriculum, urged that ‘knowledge be brought back in education’, and that a
society of the future “embody an education-led economy rather than an economy-led
education system”. In another chapter of this Handbook entitled “Agamemnon contra
Prometheus: Globalisation, Knowledge/Learning Societies and Paideia in the New
Cosmopolis”, where I examine critically the negative consequences of “globalisation”
on education, I argue for the re-enchantment of “humanistic paideia” in the broad
meaning of the term, for what I call “Promethean Humanism” that would include “all
human arts”, theoretical and practical.

References
Albisetti, J. (1987). The debate on secondary school reform in France and Germany. In D. Muller, F. Ringer
& B. Simon (Eds.), The rise of the modern educational system: Structural change and social reproduction, 1870–1920 (pp. 181–196). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Alexander, R. (2006). Dichotomous pedagogies and the promise of cross-cultural comparison. In A. H.
Halsey et al. (Eds.), Education, globalization and social change. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Antoniou, D. (Ed.) (1987). Ta programmata tis mesis ekpaideusis, 1833–1929 (The programmes/curriculum
of secondary education), vol. 1. Athens: Historical Archives of the Greek Youth – General Secretariat
of the Young Generation.
Brogan, D. W. (1943). The English people: Impressions and observations. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Brubacher, J. S. (1947). A history of the problems of education. New York and London: McGraw-Hill.
Castells, M. (1998/2000). The information age: Economy, society and culture, Vol. I. The rise of the network
society. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Castells, M. (1998). The information age: Economy, society and culture, Vol. III, End of Millennium. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Cowen, R. (2000). Comparing futures or comparing pasts? Comparative Education, 36 (3), 333–342.
Dimaras, A. (1973) (Ed.). He metarrythmisi pou den egine (The reform that never was). Athens: Hermes.
Drucker, P. (1994). Postcapitalist society. New York: Harper Business.
European Commission (1993). White Paper on growth, competitiveness employment: The challenges and
ways forward into the 21st century, Parts A and B. COM (93), 700 final/A and B, 5 December 1993.
Bulletin of the European Communities, Supplement 6/93.

--- [PDF Page 801 / Book Page 812] ---

812 Kazamias
European Commission (1995). White Paper on education and training: Teaching and learning—towards the
learning society. COM (95), 590 final, 29 November, 1995).
European Commission (1997). Towards a Europe of knowledge. Communication from the commission to the
council, the European Parliament, the economic and social committee and the committee of the regions,
COM (97), 563 final, 12. 11. 1997.
Field, J. (1998). European dimensions: Education, training and the European Union. London and
Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley.
Furedi, F. (2004). Where have all intellectuals gone? Confronting 21st century philistinism. London:
Continuum.
Grollios, G. (1999). Ideology, pedagogy and educational policy: Logos and praxis of the European programs in education. Athens: Gutenberg. In Greek.
Guile, D. (2002). Skill and work experience in the European knowledge economy. Journal of Education
and Work, 15(3).
Halls, W. D. (1965). Society, schools and progress in France. Oxford, Pergamon Press.
Handy, C. (1989). The age of unreason. Boston,MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Hargreaves, A. (2003). Teaching in the knowledge society: Education in the age of insecurity. Maidenhead
and Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Huxley, T. H. (1902). Science and education. New York: D. Appleton and Company.
Jordan, G.,& Weedon, C. (1994). Cultural politics: Class, gender, race and the postmodern world. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Kazamias, A. M. (1960). What knowledge is of most worth? An historical conception and a modern sequel.
Harvard Educational Review (Fall).
Kliebard, H. M. (1986). The struggle for the American curriculum, 1893–1958. Boston, London and Henley:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Lovlie, L. et al. (2003). Educating humanity: Bildung in postmodernity. Oxford: Blackwell.
McClean, M. (1995). Educational traditions compared: Content, teaching and learning in industrial countries. London: Kogan Page.
Mill, J. S. (1867). Inaugural address delivered to the University of St. Andrews, February 1, 1867. Boston:
Littell and Gay.
Ringer, F. (1987). On segmentation in modern European educational systems: The case of French secondary
education, 1865–1920. In D. K. Muller, F. Ringer & B. Simon (Eds.), The rise of the modern educational
system: Structural change and social reproduction, 1870–1920 (pp.53–196). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Senge, Peter, M. (1990). The art and practice of the learning organization. New York: Double day
Spencer, H. (1859). What knowledge is of most worth? The Westminster Review, XVI (July and October).
Spring, J. (1998). Education and the rise of the global economy. Mahwah, NJ and London: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Stamatis, C. M. (2005). He avevei koinonia tis gnosis (The uncertain knowledge society). In Greek. Athens:
Savvalas Publications. In Greek.
Talbott, J. E. (1969). The politics of educational reform in France, 1918–1940. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Welch, A. (1991). Knowledge and legitimation in comparative education. Comparative Education Review,
35(2), 508–531.
Winterer, C. (2002). The culture of classicism: Ancient Greece and Rome in American intellectual life,
1780–1910. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Young, M. F. D. (1998). The curriculum of the future: From the ‘new sociology of education’ to a critical
theory of learning. London: Falmer Press.
Young, M. F. D. (2008). Bringing knowledge back in: From social constructivism to social realism in the
sociology of education. London and New York: Routledge.

