================================================================================
Chapter 52: What Knowledge is of Most Worth? An Old Question Revisited in England
Author(s): Denis Lawton
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 813–821
PDF Pages: pp. 802–810 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 802 / Book Page 813] ---

52
WHAT KNOWLEDGE IS OF MOST WORTH?
AN OLD QUESTION REVISITED IN ENGLAND
Denis Lawton

One assumption of this chapter is that education, and especially curriculum, should
be examined within a specific location before even modest attempts at generalisation
are made. In this paper the focus will be mainly upon England: the recent histories of
Wales, Scotland and Ireland differ considerably from that of England. For example,
since education policy in Wales was devolved from the UK Parliament to the Welsh
National Assembly in the 1990s, much greater priority has been given to ‘Welshness’
in their national curriculum than Englishness in the English national curriculum.
The question ‘what knowledge is of most worth?’ has more usually been taken
for granted in England than given specific attention. In England, politicians and other
decision-makers, including educationists, have tended to look backwards to justify the
curriculum in terms of tradition rather than more fundamental epistemological enquiry.
When the question has been specifically addressed it has almost always been due to
social pressure of a political or economic kind. These kinds of social change have tended
to be of more significance than changes in ideas or educational theory and practice.
One of the best-known publications addressing the question of the worth of knowledge in the school curriculum was made by Herbert Spencer (1820–1903). In his essay
‘Education’ (1861) Spencer made it clear that his reason for questioning the content
of the school curriculum was that tremendous social and economic changes had taken
place in England in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries but these changes had
not been reflected sufficiently, if at all, in school curricula. England had pioneered the
Industrial Revolution in the eighteenth century which had then produced all kinds of
social and economic pressures in the nineteenth century but schools largely ignored
those changes. The curriculum of public or independent schools still concentrated very
largely on Latin and Greek, perhaps with a little mathematics, when the dominant
forms of knowledge were now science and technology.
In the twentieth century the education system, including the curriculum, was reexamined on a number of occasions: the 1902 Education Act and the Secondary
Regulations of 1904; the 1944 Education Act; the 1988 National Curriculum, with
subsequent additions and modifications up to the end of the century.
A major concern of this chapter is to look at those occasions of curriculum change
and to attempt to analyse what social pressure or combination of pressures (economic,
political and ideological) have been responsible for the re-examination of the education
813
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 813–821.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 803 / Book Page 814] ---

814 Lawton

system and any changes made to the curriculum. It is also suggested that these social
changes have normally taken priority over changes in educational ideas.

The Education Act 1902 and Secondary Regulations 1904
The changes that Spencer was concerned with in the nineteenth century had by the
beginning of the twentieth century produced something of a crisis in the availability
of educated manpower in England. There was a much greater demand for literate and
numerate clerks in the City of London and elsewhere than the school system was producing. Hence, for the first time in England, the government authorised the spending of
public money for the purpose of state secondary education (the 1870 Education Act had
only sanctioned the spending of public money on elementary schools – secondary education had been specifically excluded). The Balfour Education Act of 1902, accordingly,
encouraged Local Education Authorities to use some of their funds to support secondary
schools. Soon after the Act, the Board of Education in England produced a set of rules
for the secondary curriculum — the Secondary Regulations 1904 — which tightly controlled what could or should be taught. (The notion, sometimes expressed, that there was
no control of the curriculum until 1988 is complete nonsense. This is important because
from now onwards one pressure on the curriculum was the political concern of the central authority in education to have some control over the content of the curriculum).
These events at the beginning of the twentieth century were not simply a question of
the worthwhileness of knowledge but also the extent to which worthwhile knowledge
should be shared amongst the whole population. Only a minority of young people aged
11 and over were to be given access to the new secondary curriculum: the vast majority
of the age group from 5 to 13 or 14 was to be limited to the elementary school curriculum which consisted very largely of reading, writing, elementary mathematics and
religious education. Those drawing up the secondary curriculum were conscious that
it was important to preserve the distinction between elementary education for all and
secondary education for a selected few who would follow a curriculum similar to that
received by those who could afford to pay fees in independent schools. The 1902 Act
has sometimes been hailed as a step on the way to education for all, but it was not at
this time seen in that way, and could hardly be perceived as democratic in its intention
or outcome; probably, quite the reverse.

The 1944 Education Act
In 1944, towards the end of the Second World War when egalitarian views were
being expressed by many citizens, there was a much more significant step towards
‘secondary education for all’ when the 1944 Education Act decreed that all children
should receive education from 5 to 16, free and compulsory, according to age, aptitude
and ability. Once again this was not a complete move into democratic education because
the Act was usually interpreted by Local Education Authorities to mean that all children would go to secondary schools but not necessarily to the same secondary schools
and certainly not receiving the same access to knowledge. In answering the question
‘What knowledge is of most worth?’ there was still an assumption of differentiation, if

--- [PDF Page 804 / Book Page 815] ---

What Knowledge is of Most Worth? An Old Question Revisited in England 815

not according to social class then nearly always according to ‘ability’. However, at this
stage, the question of the content of the curriculum was not specifically mentioned in
the Act. Some say that the question was deliberately avoided in order to achieve consensus in Parliament; thus it was left to Local Authorities to decide for themselves rather
than being given any kind of direction from the central government. So the Secondary
Regulations continued in spirit if not in legislation for those pupils in grammar
schools regarded as academic and the Local Authorities allowed other kinds of schools
(secondary modem and technical schools) to sort out the curriculum for themselves.
Our question about knowledge and worth was answered differently for various social
rankings within the community. Even at a time of heightened democratic pressure, the
question was not seen as involving equality of access to worthwhile knowledge.
This neglect of a political priority ‘secondary education for all’ was, however, spotted by an independent, non-governmental group of educationists. A self-appointed
group of educational experts formed themselves into the ‘Council for Curriculum
Reform’. They discussed the whole question of a new curriculum extensively, and
eventually produced a very interesting report ‘The Content of Education’ (1945). This
group launched the most intelligent review of the school curriculum available at that
time although it received no official backing and in fact relied for its funding on £50
from the Institute of Education and £25 from the London Co-operative Society. Some
of the answers that they offered were clearly much too advanced for the government
and most Local Authorities at that time, and were not even considered by the new
Labour Government in 1945. The proposal of the Council in 1945 was, however, that
all young people should have access to the following kinds of knowledge: moral and
religious education, aesthetic education (including literature and the visual arts), languages (English and foreign), mathematics, natural sciences, social science (social
studies, history, economics and politics).
The recommendations of the Council were largely ignored, despite the fact that the question of the organisation of secondary education (but not the curriculum) was discussed
frequently over the next 30 years. The debate centred more on the question of school structure (should there be comprehensive schools for all or separate grammar, technical and
secondary modem schools according to ability) rather than tackling the more fundamental
question of what kinds of knowledge all young people should have access to.

Changes in Educational Ideas: The Philosophical
and Sociological Views of Knowledge
Meanwhile, at the University of London, Institute of Education, questions were being
asked about ‘What knowledge is of most worth?’ In the philosophy department R. S.
Peters in Ethics and Education (1966) had attempted to look at the criteria operating
when our question was addressed from a philosophical point of view in the context of
evaluating school curricula. Peters expressed dissatisfaction with the Utilitarian answer
to our question, namely, ‘the greatest happiness of the greatest number’. One of his colleagues, P. H. Hirst, looked at the question of knowledge and schooling and came to the
conclusion that many theories of education were incomplete if they did not work out
some principles for deciding on which subjects should be taught. He was critical of some

--- [PDF Page 805 / Book Page 816] ---

816 Lawton

extreme progressive views of education emphasising ‘child-centred’ curricula and also
some ideas about education for autonomy. He asserted that it was no good talking about
motivation, for example, whilst ignoring the fact that education is not simply concerned
with learning how to learn but must also include ideas about the nature of knowledge
and what should be learned. Accordingly, Hirst (1975) distinguished between seven
‘forms’ of knowledge, which had different key concepts and different kinds of validation procedures and sometimes methods of enquiry. He put this forward as one way
of looking critically at existing school curricula. His seven forms of knowledge were:
mathematics and formal knowledge; the physical sciences; the human sciences, including history; moral understanding; religion; philosophy; and aesthetics.
A little later D. Lawton (1983), without disparaging the value of his colleagues’
philosophical views, suggested that to answer the question of knowledge and worth
from the curriculum perspective, it was necessary to go beyond academic knowledge and beyond philosophical linguistic analysis. He suggested that sociological and
anthropological approaches to knowledge should also be taken into account. His proposal consisted of two kinds of enquiry: the first being concerned with the human
universals which, he suggested, existed in some form in all human societies, and that
these human universals gave rise to different kinds of cultural systems involving different kinds of knowledge. Such differences would be more evident in more advanced
industrial societies than in simpler, pre-literate communities despite sharing human
universals. His second set of propositions was that the human universals could be
analysed into distinctive cultural systems each containing different kinds of knowledge which should be used as a basis for curriculum construction. Essentially, his
approach recommended that every school curriculum necessarily consisted of some
kind of ‘selection from the culture’ but that many curricula had serious gaps and omissions. As one possible approach to analysing selection from the culture he proposed a
number of cultural ‘systems’ derived from human universals: socio-political, technological, communication, economic, belief, moral, rationality, aesthetic, and physical
or maturational. He suggested that these cultural systems could be used not as a basis
for a curriculum design, replacing existing school subjects, but as a checklist to make
sure that there were no important gaps left in the curriculum. In the case of England,
the socio-political, economic and morality systems were strangely neglected or sometimes completely ignored. He recommended using the cultural systems as one side of
a matrix, the other axis being existing school subjects. The intersection of these two
could provide a means of analysing where knowledge omissions existed and should be
filled. Such a matrix would not provide a complete answer to our question but would
indicate the first stage of a cultural analysis in the curriculum design procedure.

Kenneth Baker’s National Curriculum 1988
and Subsequent Changes
There were few official attempts to answer the question about knowledge and worth from
the time of the first Labour Government (1945) until Kenneth Baker and the Thatcherite
government put together proposals for a national curriculum in 1988. In 1979 when the

--- [PDF Page 806 / Book Page 817] ---

What Knowledge is of Most Worth? An Old Question Revisited in England 817

Conservatives came to office they did not initially propose a national curriculum and the
second of Thatcher’s Education Secretaries, Keith Joseph, was ideologically opposed to
the idea, because he believed that schools should decide on their own curricula provided
that parents had the right to choose a school for their children. However, his successor,
Kenneth Baker, was both more of a moderniser and more of a centralist in education and
saw the need to improve the performance of schools by greater control over what they
taught. When Kenneth Baker decided that England should come into line with other
advanced European countries and develop a national curriculum, he might have looked
to his own body of experts, Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Schools (HMI), but if he did,
his decisions did not show that he had asked the right HMIs. A group of Inspectors had
been working for some years on the idea of a common curriculum for secondary schools
and had even produced some booklets on the subject and encouraged some schools
within a few LEAs to embark upon some experiments along the lines of the model
they had developed. Although HMI had not explicitly addressed our question, they put
forward some very sensible proposals: making use of the familiar school subjects, but
going beyond that traditional approach by emphasising ‘areas of knowledge and experience’. Like Lawton, they clearly wanted to move beyond the purely academic subjects
of grammar schools and tried to produce a curriculum suitable for all young people
– an ‘Entitlement Curriculum’. It should be remembered that by then the majority of
secondary schools were, officially, comprehensive – that is, all-ability schools. The eight
areas of knowledge and experience suggested by HMI were: aesthetic/creative, ethical,
linguistic, mathematical, physical, scientific, social/political, and spiritual (HMI, 1983).
It is not clear whether Baker knew about the existence of this HMI, ‘Entitlement’
model, or of the valuable experimental work undertaken by some secondary schools
under the supervision of his Inspectors, or whether he was advised to ignore these
innovations. In any case what happened was that his 1988 national curriculum was
based purely on a list of conventional school subjects so close to the 1904 Secondary
Regulations that many commentators have examined the two lists of subjects side by
side; they drew the obvious conclusion that the Baker national curriculum was indeed
backward-looking.

1904
English
Mathematics
Science
History
Geography
Foreign language
Drawing
Physical exercise
Manual work/Housewifery

1988
English
Mathematics
Science
History
Geography
Modern foreign language
Art
Physical education
Technology
Music

See Aldrich (1988) in Lawton and Chitty (1988).

--- [PDF Page 807 / Book Page 818] ---

818 Lawton

However, the 1904 answer intended for a small percentage of academic pupils
was not adequate for a comprehensive curriculum more than 80 years later. In other
words, Baker failed to ask the most important question about knowledge, being satisfied with the aim of improving the standards of schools in the pursuit of producing a
more competitive manpower for a technological society. It would be unfair to say that
he was not interested in the curricular needs of a democratic society, but he did not
attempt to include ‘citizenship’ as a new subject although he had earlier – before he
was Education Secretary – shown some interest in that development.
So obvious were the gaps in the proposed national curriculum that almost immediately the National Curriculum Council (NCC), a body officially set up to monitor the
implementation of the national curriculum, began working on ways of supplementing
the list of subjects by means of cross-curricular themes, to include other important
educational priorities: for example, environmental studies, citizenship, health education and careers education (none of which had been officially part of the secondary
curriculum post-1902).
Thus, hardly had schools got to grips with the new list of subjects in 1988 than
they were encouraged to plan their own school curriculum so as to accommodate the
other needs identified by the NCC. The Education Secretary had failed to ask the key
question about knowledge and worth, but his NCC had seen that an opportunity had
been missed. Unfortunately, whereas the national curriculum was mandatory, the NCC
additions were only recommendations which could be ignored by schools if they found
themselves already preoccupied with the management of the national curriculum.

Changes to the National Curriculum (1990–2000)
As we saw above one intention of the national curriculum was to have ten subjects,
three of which were prioritised and that all ten subjects should be assessed regularly and
rigorously. It was pointed out on several occasions that had this come about, England
would have had the most prescriptive and the most highly assessed curriculum in the
world. This was not to be because the teaching profession found the burden of teaching
and assessment intolerable. In 1990 the retreat from the ten subject content began. First,
subjects were pruned but when this reduction proved to be insufficient, the subjects
themselves were gradually cut down so that eventually all that remained was the area of
core subjects, namely, English, mathematics and science, plus religious education which
was taken much less seriously. While this was happening the prospect of adding further
material to the national curriculum in the form of the NCC cross-curricular knowledge
was extremely unlikely, however much individual schools might have regarded such
cross-curricular knowledge as worthwhile. It will not be necessary to go into detail
about the retreat from the total Baker national curriculum to a slimmed-down version
over the next 10 years. All that remained of the compulsory national curriculum for the
14–16 age group was the three core subjects and even they were reduced in content.
Without asking the question explicitly, the central authority in education had arrived at
an answer that by the year 2000 the school knowledge that was considered of most worth
was English, mathematics and science. But by the beginning of the new century a new
subject was added to the compulsory national curriculum – education for citizenship.

--- [PDF Page 808 / Book Page 819] ---

What Knowledge is of Most Worth? An Old Question Revisited in England 819

The ‘Education for Citizenship’ Curriculum
During the 1990s, along with the reduction of emphasis on the non-core curricular subjects, one additional subject was emerging as ‘worthwhile knowledge’. The Conservative
Party had remained in government from 1979 to 1997 when the Labour Party under
Tony Blair emerged with a landslide majority. Given that Blair’s slogan was ‘education,
education, education’ it might have been expected that a review of curriculum content
would have been undertaken as part of a new vision. It was not. In education policy,
as in many other respects, Blair was content to carry on with Thatcherite measures but
pursued, he hoped, with greater efficiency and sometimes more money.
There was one exception to that general rule: the question of educating young people for democracy – a new subject ‘education for citizenship’ which was to be given
high status by being compulsory for all in secondary schools and with some preparatory work in primary schools. This would indicate that someone in the government
thought that this was knowledge of considerable worth. And it must have been backed
by other members of the Labour Party and some in other Parties.
Several efforts had been made throughout the twentieth century to include citizenship or political education as part of the school curriculum. One problem was that
even for those who regarded this knowledge as worthwhile it was, or might be, dangerous: ‘high risk – low pay-off’. One long-term advocate of the teaching of politics in
schools was a professor of Politics at the University of London, Bernard Crick, who
had worked in various ways to promote the idea of serious teaching of citizenship in
the secondary school curriculum. Politics had been an optional subject for schoolleaving examinations at 16 and 18, but Crick wanted the subject compulsory for all.
The story of how he attempted to persuade educationists and politicians over a period
of about 30 years that this knowledge was not only worthwhile but vital for democracy,
is an interesting one which cannot be recounted in detail here. Crick had been involved
in a variety of projects, notably one supported by the very respectable Hansard Society,
which published ideas about ‘political literacy’ in schools in the 1970s. Nothing came
of any of this during the Thatcher era, despite the tacit support of Kenneth Baker,
and it was only with the change of government in 1997 that a serious project became
official policy. One of Blair’s most ardent supporters was David Blunkett, who became
Education Secretary in 1997. Much earlier, Blunkett had been one of Crick’s students
and had been impressed by his ideas. He persuaded Blair to appoint Crick as Chairman
of a Committee given the task of making recommendations for ‘education for citizenship’. The proposals were extensively discussed during a consultation period, and
eventually passed into law as part of the national curriculum in the new millennium.
All Party support was obtained.
The reason why political education became ‘worthwhile’ at the end of the twentieth
century in England was that politicians as well as educationists, were worried by the
fact that young people were extremely ignorant about this aspect of their own society,
and secondly, that politicians in particular were worried about the low percentage of
young people voting in general and local elections – especially the 18–30 age group
and this was thought to be the result of ignorance and apathy rather than political
sophistication.

--- [PDF Page 809 / Book Page 820] ---

820 Lawton

At the turn of the century, as far as England was concerned, worthwhile knowledge
consisted largely of English, mathematics, science and political education. Religious
education was officially a requirement but did not carry the same kind of importance
as the other compulsory subjects. This order of priorities was the result of, as we
have seen, social and political pressures. But since the 1970s in England the major
influence in education was economic: the need for better-skilled and better-educated
workers associated with the desire to compete more efficiently with our industrial and
commercial competitors.

What Knowledge Is of Most
Worth — In the Twenty-First Century?
In the last section we gave the immediate answer to that question, but it is also important to have some concern for longer-term priorities in terms of knowledge and worth.
What had not been seriously attempted, publicly, in the twentieth century, was the
question, what else matters – what concerns, other than economic, should be reflected
in the curriculum?
Educationists, including HMl, have from time to time voiced their concern about the
lack of attention paid in primary schools, for example, to art, music and literature, and
in secondary schools have bewailed the fact that few young people now continue to
study such subjects as history and modem languages after age 14, when such subjects
become optional. Any kind of cultural analysis has to address another question as well
as what knowledge is of most worth, that is, the general purpose of education. And if
it is the case that one important purpose of education is to pass on a selection from the
culture in terms of what is regarded as of most worth, some attention has also to be paid
to the question of balance. In other words, is the selection from the culture a balanced
one? It is not enough for a young person to be educated in those kinds of knowledge
which will enable him to earn a living; there are other requirements as well. For example, the kinds of knowledge that enable the young person to develop as an individual,
such as the aesthetic subjects, or kinds of knowledge which make the individual a
better contributor to society apart from citizenship; this would include such kinds of
knowledge as the belief system, the morality system and the maturation system. All of
which are comparatively neglected in most secondary schools. The immediate prospect for secondary schools in general having a balanced and worthwhile curriculum is,
therefore, not good; we still need a thorough analysis of what constitutes a worthwhile
education for all young people.

Summary and Conclusions
It is clear that the question enshrined in the title of this chapter cannot expect an answer
which will be absolute, either in terms of time or place. Priorities will change from
time to time and from place to place according to the social, political and technological
pressures in a specific society. The best that educationists can do by means of cultural
analysis is to settle for the parameters that should guide the selection from culture and

--- [PDF Page 810 / Book Page 821] ---

What Knowledge is of Most Worth? An Old Question Revisited in England 821

to point out when some forms of worthwhile knowledge have been neglected in the
pursuit of more immediate priorities. If we go back far enough in our history – beyond
the limits of our chapter title – the answer to our question might well have been theological knowledge. In the Middle Ages, theology was certainly ‘queen of the sciences’.
After the Renaissance and Reformation, however, Latin and Greek history and literature became the knowledge regarded as worthy of the educated gentleman. Later, after
the Enlightenment in the eighteenth century and then the industrial revolution, science
and mathematics began to gain priority – more relevant in the modern world than Latin
and Greek. Schools were sometimes slow to adjust to these social changes, but eventually the pressures on the curriculum were strong enough to ensure change.
Within the bounds of this chapter, that is, the twentieth century, we have looked at
a number of political events in the history of education and tried to see what changes
occurred and what social pressures brought them about. The extension of educational
opportunity in 1902 was a mixture of demands for educated manpower as well as a
reluctant acceptance of the need for a better-educated electorate. Even partial democracy strengthened the case for greater access to worthwhile knowledge. By 1944,
secondary education for all was seen as an important principle due largely to the egalitarian changes brought about by the Second World War. But the chance was missed at
that time of asking fundamental questions about what kind of education and therefore
what kind of knowledge should be made available for all young people. After that, economic pressures, especially the demand for more skilled manpower, grew to such an
extent that a common attitude to education was that its main purpose was ‘training for
employment’. This philistine outlook was emphasised during the Conservative years
1979–1997, and contrary to the hopes of many in education, was continued under
the Blair regime after 1997. The exception was the greater value that was placed on
political education at the end of the twentieth century. It remains to be seen what
will happen in the twenty-first century. Throughout the twentieth century it was often
assumed and sometimes even explicitly stated, that a problem of knowledge and the
curriculum could be seen in terms of a ‘common culture’. In the twenty-first century,
this is unlikely to be an acceptable policy. England is now a pluralist society with
strong cultural minorities. The most problematic of those is a large number of Moslem
citizens (and perhaps non-citizens), who not only wish to retain their own belief system, but have also begun to demand their own morality system, their own language
and their own schools. How to cope with that kind of pluralism is likely to be a major
problem for some years to come.

References
Aldrich, R. (1988). The National Curriculum: An Historical Perspective. In D. Lawton & C. Chitty (Eds.),
The National Curriculum. Bedford Way Papers, 33. Institute of Education, University of London.
Crick, B., & Porter, A. (Eds.) (1978). Political education and political literacy. London: Longmans.
HMI (1983). Curriculum 11–16 (Towards a statement of entitlement). London: DES.
Hirst, P. (1975). Knowledge and the curriculum. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Lawton, D. (1983). Curriculum studies and educational planning. London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Lawton, D., & Chitty, C. (Eds.) (1988). The National Curriculum. Bedford Way Papers, 33. Institute of
Education, University of London.

