================================================================================
Chapter 53: The Enlightenment and Religion, Knowledge and Pedagogies in Europe
Author(s): Thyge Winther-Jensen
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 823–835
PDF Pages: pp. 811–823 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 811 / Book Page 823] ---

53
THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND RELIGION,
KNOWLEDGE AND PEDAGOGIES IN EUROPE
Thyge Winther-Jensen

The last half of the eighteenth century is the period in European history which is
normally known as the age of Enlightenment. The sources of this movement were
tendencies which had already made themselves felt in the seventeenth century. John
Locke (1632–1704), the English philosopher, had followed the tradition from Francis
Bacon (1561–1626) by focusing on experience, particularly sense experience, as the
foundation of human cognition. And rationalist philosophers like Descartes (1596–
1650), Spinoza (1632–1677) and Leibniz (1646–1716) had supported the belief that
it was rationally possible to solve the essential problems of human life. Both movements, empiricism and rationalism, were combined towards the end of the eighteenth
century in a demand for enlightenment. The demand was based on a changed view
on nature, society, and the human being. But it also influenced the view on education which itself was transformed and at the same time awarded a prominent role in
the transmission of the new ideas. From now on education was seen as an activity
which should be carried out independent of the church and serve only a secular society based on rational science, democracy and human rights (Grue-Sørensen, 1972;
Winther-Jensen, 2004).
The society which gave rise to the Enlightenment was characterised by absolute
monarchy. The social upheavals following the Renaissance and the Reformation had
strengthened the power of kings and princes as both the Papacy and the Protestants
needed them to fight each other. In the northern European Protestant countries, the
king had been appointed supreme bishop and he had at the same time taken possession
of church property. This was not the case in the southern European Catholic countries,
but the Catholic Church needed assistance to fight against heresy in order to prevent
the ideas of the Reformation from spreading further. Consequently, the church ended
up being heavily dependent on the worldly powers. Only England avoided this concentration of absolute power, mainly because of inter-religious rivalry.
But the creation of absolute monarchies with supreme power in the hands of one
person did not bring about the liberation of the individual which had prompted the
creators of the Renaissance. One master – the church – had been replaced by another
– the king – and the new master was as strict as the old one. Even though the medieval Christian teaching of equality and the Renaissance demand for individual liberty
had prepared the ground for a different concept of what it was to be human it was
823
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 823–835.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 812 / Book Page 824] ---

824 Winther-Jensen

necessary to go back to pre-medieval times, to the Roman emperors, to find a similar
concentration of power.
Everywhere a strict regulation of society was carried out by the monarch and the
privileged classes, and everywhere the church, more or less reluctantly, blessed the
absolute kings and princes. The alliance between the worldly and the clerical authorities appeared to be an invincible fortress, which on one hand made society safe, but on
the other, kept it in fetters (Barth, 1925).
The ideas which in the long term would contribute to the breaking down of that
fortress, however, had for a long time been on the drawing board under the unifying
term ‘The principle of Nature’. The last part of the eighteenth century is characterised
by the fact that this principle is widely employed in the fields of thinking and in society. The principle was to become an important means in the struggle for more liberal
enterprise for the individual and for society.

The Principle of Nature
Behind the principle of nature were a number of ideas with the mutual aim of creating
a new basis for human thinking and cognition. Instead of the ‘light of revelation’ as the
foundation for cognition there was to be the ‘light of nature’, that is, reason. ‘Natural’
was all that was left when the parts which could not stand up to a more thorough
examination from human experience and reason had been cut away.
It began with the development of a so-called ‘natural’ religion. With the rediscovery
in the Renaissance of the ancient philosophers it was revealed that many of the ‘truths’
which so far had only been revealed to us through Christ in the Gospels could also be
found in the ancient philosophers. In Plato, and later on, the Stoics, the concept of one
god was already active. In the work of the Roman philosopher Seneca the concept of
the immortal soul was described vividly.1 And the idea of Doomsday could be found in
Plato’s Republic (Plato, Republic, book X).
With the ‘natural’ religion eighteenth-century thinkers believed that they had created a religion which not only might help to reform the existing church, but would also
bridge the different branches of the Christian faith.
But the principle of nature also became active and powerful in other fields of intellectual life. The name as well as the concept of natural law was already known from
the classical concept of natural right, for example, with the Stoics, among others. It
considered human reason as part of the universal divine reason. Natural right was
consequently not the right of the strong, but a right based on universal equality and
a universal personal liberty (Grotius, 2005). This concept was seized upon by all the
great personalities of that age. John Locke, for example, compared natural law with
the rational right wished by God (Locke, 2003; Russell, 1993, p. 603). Natural law
gained substantial political importance, partly in the struggle for an improved state
of law and partly in the designing of what later would be known as human rights.
Locke (1964), in Some thoughts concerning education, advocated an upbringing
based on natural principles. He spoke against an education through general rules and
commands imposed on the child from outside and maintained through rewards and

--- [PDF Page 813 / Book Page 825] ---

The Enlightenment and Religion, Knowledge and Pedagogies in Europe 825

punishments. Instead he recommended a character training matching the aptitude and
nature of children.
An even more revolutionary use of the principle of nature was applied in the field
of national economy. In his pioneering work, Wealth of Nations, 1776, the Scottish
economist Adam Smith advocated ‘natural freedom’ as a principle when running the
economy of countries. He strongly criticised the mercantile system and demanded that
the state interfered as little as possible in the actions of the citizens, economic or otherwise. If only the economic forces were subjected to a free market in which the law
of supply and demand had a free hand it would, like ‘an invisible hand’, regulate the
economic forces to the good of the individual within a community as well as among
nations (Smith, 1962).
The reduction of the religious contents in what stood up to the examination of
experience and reason also gained importance in the field of ethics. The English philosopher A. C. Shaftesbury (1671–1713) claimed, in contrast to his master Locke, that
ethics was independent of theology and that humans had a number of innate ‘natural’
moral urges which formed the basis for morality, the so-called moral-sense theory.
Consequently, the age of Enlightenment contained a heavily moral, if not moralising,
element.
Education would be another example. The principle had been in embryo with earlier
thinkers like Montaigne (1533–1592). And in 1613 the German ‘didacticus’, Ratichius
had asserted Omnia juxta methodum naturae, that is, all according to the method of
nature, which to him meant, among other things, that learning your mother tongue
should have priority over learning Latin (Vogt, 1894; Linderstrøm-Lang, 1903).
Also the Czech educator, Comenius (1592–1670), who was influenced by Ratichius,
included the principle of nature in his teachings (Comenius, 1910). However, it was
Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) who in Emile really established the principle in
the educational field and who furthermore added a number of new dimensions (Emile,
OC, vol. 4).

The Enlightenment View of Human Nature
One characteristic of man is that he explains and interprets himself, which again
implies that he decides himself in whose picture he wants to form himself. While
animals are born almost ‘fully fledged’, that is, with the capabilities and skills necessary to survive in their particular environment, but on the other hand disappear if this
environment changes radically, man is capable of, through his formidable capacity for
learning, adapting to all kinds of environments. Not only can he adapt to the physical
or technological environment he is placed in, but he also has the capacity, through
active learning, to form himself as a human being in harmony with the values on which
his community is based (Winther-Jensen, 2004).
To throw light on the consequences of the human concept which stemmed from the
Enlightenment it is useful to look at the previous period by considering some of the most
influential views of human nature caused by penetrating spiritual and cultural upheavals.

--- [PDF Page 814 / Book Page 826] ---

826 Winther-Jensen

The Classical View
According to the German philosopher Ernst Cassirer, the Greeks were the first to
ask the question: What is man? In the pre-Socratic stages Greek philosophy was
mainly concerned about the physical universe: cosmology overshadowed all other
philosophical studies. Only Heraclitus was on the borderline between cosmological
and philosophical-anthropological thinking. But Greek anthropology did not reach
its zenith until Socrates. “Thus it is”, says Cassirer,“in the problem of man we find
the landmark separating Socratic from pre-Socratic thought” (Cassirer, 1963, p. 4).
Socrates’ entire search is aimed at the human existence. It is characteristic, however, that even though Socrates in all Plato’s dialogues analyses and discusses human
qualities he never gives us a direct definition of man. Physical objects can be described
through their positive qualities, but man can only be understood through his consciousness. Only through conversation – dialogue – is it possible to gain an insight into the
very essence of man (Cassirer, 1963).
In Socrates’ and Plato’s preference for a pedagogy centred in dialectics and dialogue
they used the analogy as a necessary method to examine the new problem they were
facing: what is man? (Plato, Republic, book VII). When in the Republic Socrates is
asked to define ‘a just man’ he does so indirectly by describing the just society and thus
makes it possible here to read in capital letters what in man is written in small.
The classical Greek image of man is therefore a human being seeking to find himself through mutual questions and answers. It is a fundamental capacity in man that he
is supporting himself by an unwavering faith in reason as the key tool available to him.
It was this tool which Plato wanted to elevate to a supreme position in the lives of the
community and the individual.

The Christian View
The classical human concept was carried on by the Stoics, but with the emergence of
Christianity it was opposed by a new and powerful concept which added new dimensions. The Christian concept was particularly expressed in St. Augustine (354–430), a
teacher of rhetoric and an admirer of Plato. As a Christian thinker, he criticised ancient
philosophy for its optimistic belief in reason as the ruling principle in human affairs.
With St. Augustine the biblical concept of human reason was introduced in Western culture. The classical concept of reason cannot be maintained, according to St. Augustine.
It can only be saved through holy grace. Since the Fall, sin has become a fundamental
feature in man. According to Cassirer: “Here, (i.e. in Augustine) we have come to a
complete reversal of all the values upheld by Greek philosophy. What once seemed to
be the highest privilege of man proves to be his peril and temptation; what appeared
as his pride becomes his deepest humiliation” (Cassirer, 1963, p. 10). The encounter
of the classical and the Christian concept can be traced right up to the seventeenth
century. Comenius, for example, was indebted to Greek philosophy in spite of his
Christian outlook. But in a less dogmatic way he placed education and enlightenment
as a human-made means to give back to reason its original pure being (Winther-Jensen,
2004). Even though he at no time neglects to emphasise the importance of Revelation
for the salvation of reason he became nevertheless with his universal educational ideal

--- [PDF Page 815 / Book Page 827] ---

The Enlightenment and Religion, Knowledge and Pedagogies in Europe 827

– to teach all everything – a Christian example of what worldly means alone can do to
save ‘reason’ about which Augustine was so suspicious.

The Rationalist View
In the wake of the Renaissance a new conflict between a Christian and a secularised concept of human reason began. The new concept was primarily a consequence
of the so-called ‘new science’ announced by Francis Bacon (1561–1626) in Novum
Organum (1620) and developed further in the fertile spiritual climate during and after
the Renaissance.
Crucial for this new concept was Nicolaus Copernicus’ (1473–1543) discovery of
the heliocentric system which launched human reason into a new crisis. The basic
concept, up to then, that man was the centre of the universe, was abruptly ripped away.
Man was now placed in infinite space. All at once human reason reduced man to an
infinitesimal dot in an infinite universe (Landmann, 1964).
The Copernican picture of the universe meant a dethronement of human reason.
It was no longer to be found in a hierarchical system ranked only second to God as
the mediaeval line of thought had mainly emphasised. But it also gave ‘reason’ new
challenges. By means of its new tool, science, it was given the new task to turn this
apparent weakness into new strength.
The combined efforts of the seventeenth-century rationalist philosophers and scientists were needed, to overcome this new crisis in human self-perception, caused
by the Copernican world system. People like Bruno, Descartes, Spinoza, Newton,
Leibnitz and Galileo, each contributed to the solution of the problem, and their chosen
means was mathematics. Mathematical reason became the bond between man and
universe and mathematical thinking became the means to comprehend the cosmic and
moral order. Humans had been forced to consider themselves as logical and rational
beings who increasingly found support in the new science rather than in godly powers.
Understandably enough, the relation between belief and knowledge became one of the
key issues in the seventeenth century.

The Enlightenment View
These views about man, built up over time, were crystallised during the Enlightenment,
into a new idea of man. The Copernican world picture had triumphed and the world
was no longer a universe pervaded by God, but rather a machine regulated according to
rational, that is, natural principles. God was only the initiator of the machinery. Human
beings were looked upon as machines to be taken care of and to be regulated according to rational principles. To La Mettrie (1709–1751), author of the work L’homme
machine (La Mettrie, 1996), education became a question of keeping the machine in
good order and to add to it a big and carefully chosen range of sensations.
This kind of rationalistic thinking culminated during the Enlightenment and, at the
same time, fused with empiricism. John Locke, whose thoughts had been introduced
to the French philosophers of Enlightenment by Voltaire (1694–1778), considered conscious mental life as a product of the sensations reached through our senses. His tabula
rasa theory which, however, also contained the idea of inner sensations and reflection,

--- [PDF Page 816 / Book Page 828] ---

828 Winther-Jensen

emphasised that all spiritual powers develop through the senses, the only source of
cognition. This is a prominent view in Condillac, for example (Condillac, 1984).
But both Locke and the French theorists, in contrast to the rationalists, considered
experience to be the real source for our knowledge and denied all so-called a priori or
innate factors. This concept necessarily had to ascribe greater importance than hitherto
to education. “Poor education, few ideas” La Mettrie claimed, among others (GrueSørensen, 1972). It goes without saying that no religious ideas, but only rational ideas
which could be the object of empirical experience, were allowed in such a programme.
It follows from this, that the Enlightenment was also a secular movement. The new science, for which the foundation was laid during the Renaissance, was meant to replace the
church as an organiser of society and human relations. Worshipping was a personal affair
that could take place irrespective of the church, and public institutions, including educational institutions, should no longer be subject to clerical supervision. Above all, human
beings themselves were to be considered as products of their own personal endowments
and individualities. This concept of what it was to be human had a crucial influence on
educational theory, but it needed Rousseau’s eloquence before it was finally accepted.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Rousseau is, on the one hand, a representative of the age of Enlightenment, but on
the other, not quite typical. In his treatise Discours sur les sciences et les arts (OC,
vol. 3, org. 1792) he strikes the theme which later becomes dominant in his work:
precedence of nature and what is natural over art and artificiality. His works might fall
into two parts. In the first part, which includes Du contrat social ou principes du droit
politique (OC, vol.3, org. 1762), De l’économie politique (OC, vol. 3, org. 1755), and
Considérations sur le gouvernement de Pologe et sur sa réformation projetée (OC, vol.
3, org. 1772), he confronts existing social conditions with ideal demands for a different
and better society. As far as education is mentioned it assumes the character of what we
today would call a conforming, patriotic mass education in order to create and preserve
an ideal society. This goes for Considérations, in particular.
In the second part, which apart from his classic educational/pedagogical ‘novel’
Emile ou de l’Education (OC, vol. 4, org. 1762) includes the second Discours sur
l’origine et les fondaments de l’inégalité parmi les hommes (OC, vol. 3, org. 1755)
and La nouvelle Héloïse (OC, vol. 3, org. 1761), the emphasis on society as a theme
is less. In the Second Discours a paradisical natural condition is praised. In La nouvelle Héloïse, family and family-based education in rural and idyllic surroundings are
extolled, but in Emile too, society is kept at bay, at any rate for the first 15 years of
Emile’s life. “How to live a human life”, it says, “is what I want him to learn. When
he leaves me, he is – I admit that – neither, soldier, judge, nor priest; he is above all a
human being” (OC, vol. 4, Emile, book 1). Man should be prepared for the fact that
life only in rare moments will be ideal. Therefore, he must be educated to trust his own
actions, experiences and thinking. This is the basic attitude in Emile.
In his works as a whole all the themes set out in the above are played through each
in their own way. Among those the concept of equality is very dominant. In Contrat

--- [PDF Page 817 / Book Page 829] ---

The Enlightenment and Religion, Knowledge and Pedagogies in Europe 829

social he combines the reform ideas in the two Discours into a radical political system
which almost corresponds to direct democracy. The state was originally created on
the basis of a social pact which everybody has subscribed to. Equality and personal
freedom are considered to be ‘natural’ freedoms. Sovereignty lies with the people and
cannot be disposed of or shared. The real ruler in the state is ‘the general will’ which
absorbs the individual will. The law is an expression for the ‘general will’ and the people must convene regularly to give laws. The book became a bible for the men behind
the French revolution and remains to this day, together with De l’Esprit des lois by
Montesquieu (Montesquieu, 1949–1956), one of the most important documents from
the Enlightenment in the development of modern democracy.
Contrat social contains no special emphasis on education, but the planned chapter
on education appeared some years later as Considérations. In this Rousseau tries his
hand at lawgiving, urged by a Polish patriot. The abstract state of Contrat social has
now been replaced by the concrete fatherland or nation. In this treatise he ushers in the
awakening European nationalism. The aim for education is now not only the republican or citoyen of Contrat social, but the patriot who, for better or worse, has drunk in
with his mother’s milk a passionate love for his fatherland. All means are used to further this attitude. For example, texts which are to be read must have patriotic contents
which emphasise physical education with public and obligatory games and exercises,
public competitions and a solemn awarding of prizes.
Further, in his works we see the concept of reason in the light of a new myth of the
Fall of Man which in his version is secular and not religious. The Christian themes
of stages of paradise, of sin and of grace are repeated in Rousseau with a secular
emphasis: original natural stage, stage of culture, and a recreated stage according to
the principles of nature. In Rousseau it is not the stage of sin, but the stage of culture
which has corrupted and blurred human reason. The means of penance which must
bring about recovery is not holy grace but a new education according with the principles of nature. This was the new and revolutionary education he described in Emile.
In this he is in line with the philosophers of the Enlightenment when he demands that
using the senses should be a central part of the new education. Reason was not – as in
Plato – an innate quality characterising man from birth, but something which is gradually created through sense impressions, not through formal exercises, but through
individually chosen activities in natural and realistic situations. Intellectual education
through reading of books should be postponed until Emile is able to realise its usefulness. “Exercise his body, his limbs, his senses, his strength, but keep his mind idle as
long as you can. Distrust all opinions which appear before the judgement to discriminate between them. Restrain and ward off strange impressions; and to prevent the birth
of evil do not hasten to do well, for goodness is only possible when enlightened by
reason’ (OC, vol. 4, Emile, book 2).
With Rousseau, Plato’s thinking man is substituted with a sensing man. In this he
agrees with the philosophers of enlightenment, but he differs from them by also pointing at feeling as an innate human quality. The strong emphasis on feeling which is so
characteristic of Rousseau’s entire works is also a fundamental trait in his understanding of human beings. He considered feeling to be more original, valuable and ‘natural’
than reason and moved focus in our culture from reason, where it had been since Plato,

--- [PDF Page 818 / Book Page 830] ---

830 Winther-Jensen

towards feeling. “Even though Spinoza, Shaftesbury, Hutcheson, and Hume were his
predecessors it is due to him that feeling has been recognized as an independent and
particular feature in spiritual life … (feeling) gives us our real merit: We are small in
knowledge, but big in feelings” (Høffding, 1896, p. 101).
Man’s most fundamental trait he sees as his need to love himself. “Self-preparation
requires, therefore, that we shall love ourselves; we must love ourselves above everything,
and it follows directly from this that we love what contributes to our preservation” (OC,
vol. 4, Emile, book 4). From self-love stems not only natural, human feelings like compassion, love for human beings, the religious feeling, but also fantasy and imagination.
His emphasis on feelings was without doubt contributory to the fact that he found
himself in conflict with Diderot and the circle around The Great Encyclopedia (1755);
they were all seized with – and, to a large extent, creators of – the spirit of rational
enlightenment of the age. It was also due to his emphasis on feelings that posterity
remembered him more as a forerunner of Romanticism than as a genuine representative of the Enlightenment.
The emphasis on feeling was also to influence his view on religion. The treatise The
Creed of a Savoyard Priest which is included in Emile and rightly considered to be among
the most beautiful he has written proves him to be a strongly religious person who may
have taken up the “natural” religion of the age, but who at the same time bases it more on a
subjective feeling than reason. (OC, vol. 4, Emile, book 4). The statement clearly indicates
that the church no longer was needed as an intermediary between man and deity.
With the ideas presented by Rousseau and the philosophers of the Enlightenment
the notion of education was changed forever: from a forming from the outside to a
development from the inside of innate, ‘natural’ capabilities, from a curriculum based
on bookish learning to an activity-oriented curriculum, and from a notion of knowledge as a product of deductive, rational thinking to a product of personal experience.
The ideas became core elements in the educational reform movements that swept over
Europe in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and they are also recognisable in
the American progressive movement. Although John Dewey (1859–1952) criticised
Rousseau for elevating nature to a deity, many of Rousseau’s notions on education and
knowledge are repeated in his pragmatic, child-oriented curriculum: the emphasis on
growth, on problem-solving, on experience, and on activity-oriented teaching methods (Dewey, 1916, Democracy and education, MW 9). Especially Rousseau’s ideas
gained their strongest foothold in the northern Protestant part of Europe (Germany and
Scandinavia). His influence was less in the southern Catholic oriented part of Europe.
This observation inevitably draws attention to the way in which the relation between
state and church was dealt with during the Enlightenment.

State and Church
In the European Enlightenment you meet for the first time in history a concept of state
which does not build on a religious ideology, but which constructs the state as a purely
secular arrangement without divine authority or sanctions. But the path towards this
concept had been long.

--- [PDF Page 819 / Book Page 831] ---

The Enlightenment and Religion, Knowledge and Pedagogies in Europe 831

In 311 the Roman emperor gave up his struggle against the Christians and the
following year Constantine the Great could appoint himself Emperor. Therefore, in
380 the government could officially offer its protection to all who followed the apostle
Peter’s creed, that is, Rome’s, and denounce the adherents of different creeds as heretics.
From that moment you can talk of a Christian state church – though not in a modern
sense (Lindhardt, 1961). The theoretical argument was given by Augustine: God’s
state came to rule on earth, and did so through two regimes: the state as ruler of the
earthly life and the church of the divine. Both were equal, but their fields were different
(Augustinus, 1957–1972).
In the eastern Byzantine world this transition happened fairly easily. State and
church merged totally. In the West it looked different as it proved very difficult in
practice to define the limits between the two regimes. The Middle Ages were consequently characterised by severe struggles between church and state with the result that
papal victory in the Middle Ages was turned into defeat when the national states came
into existence and, through reformatory movements, led to rupture of the medieval
church unity.
After the Reformation the states consolidated themselves with their state churches.
In the Roman countries the Roman church kept its influence and remained a state religion, but in northern Europe the different national states allied themselves with mainly
three reformatory types of churches, Lutheran, Calvinist or Anglican, and in 1555 in
Augsburg in Germany the territorial system was phrased, which in practice became
valid in all Europe. Cujus regio, ejus religio, that is, the political power decides the
religion of the country (Bergmann, 1965–1972, vol. 2, p. 48). This was in harmony
with the tendency of the times for Absolutism, and the church in all its forms considered it to be a natural task to state a dogmatic and biblical reason for the God given
right of Absolutism.
But a state church often means coercion. Those whose beliefs did not coincide with
those of the people in power had to escape and in America there was room for all. So
here convened all those who had been persecuted in their home countries and when the
North American free states broke away from Europe and created their own constitution – written by people with painful experiences of religious intolerance – built in the
precondition that state and church must be independent of each other and that religious
freedom was a human right and a principle of society” (Lindhardt, 1961).
This proclamation of human rights quickly reflected back on Europe. To the French
democrats the existing alliance between royal power and papacy in France was the real
enemy; the state only had their political interest; if the church was to exist it had to be
in the form of an association of religiously like-minded people. As a consequence of
this, the church programme of modern democracy was clearly expressed in two sentences: “Religion is a private matter, and as a consequence state and church must be
separated” (Lindhardt, 1961, p. 46).
The new programme necessarily had consequences in the field of education.
Following the age of Enlightenment the development moved towards even more separation between school and church, but with different speeds from state to state and
slower than one should immediately think. Most radically they set about it in France
with the Jules Ferry laws (1879). In this connection church and state had diverging

--- [PDF Page 820 / Book Page 832] ---

832 Winther-Jensen

opinions, but the new school was altogether a state school (the laïcité principle). In
order to emphasise this, religious instruction was abolished in public schools; it had
to be a matter for homes and churches only. They were, however, so accommodating
that one weekly day was free for religious instruction to be given outside the schools.
Moreover, private schools, mainly Catholic, were allowed to give the religious instruction they wanted. The rules are still valid today and still cause frictions.
In contrast, England maintained religious instruction in the schools, according to
the 1944 law, as the only compulsory subject. The Scandinavian schools also kept the
religious instruction, but the clerical supervision of the schools was abolished in the first
half of this century (in Denmark from the mid-1930s, when the vicar stopped being
ex-officio chairman of the education committee).
If the principle of separation of church and state is carried out the problem seems to
appear in a new disguise somewhere else. The USA can serve as an example. Although,
from a formal point of view, there is no contact here between church and state, the contact is nevertheless widespread in practice. The state opens its festivities with religious
ceremonies and its representatives must be very careful not to express themselves
in such a way that one or more religious communities will take offence. More than
300 religious communities are reflected in the amount of private, clerical educational
institutions (Lindhardt, 1961, p. 49). The complexity of the church–state issue in the
USA has been manifested since the establishment of a free and universal system of
public education in the nineteenth century and has been especially salient in the second
half of the twentieth century. The central issue has been the meaning of the prohibitions that were set forth in the First Amendment of the Constitution, the so-called
Establishment Clause which reads as follows: “Congress shall make no law respecting
the establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof ”. With the establishment of a public and state-funded educational system in the nineteenth century, one
that would serve all classes and diverse religious groups, education became the site of
the controversy regarding the constitutionality of (a) state aid to religious schools, and
(b) religious instruction and other religious practices in public schools.
As to the former issue, the Supreme Court, which decides on such aspects of schooling when cases are brought before it, has decided that free school textbooks and lunches,
auxiliary services such as public transportation, and public welfare benefits such as
medical and dental services, for children who attended non-public schools did not violate the First Amendment of the US Constitution, that in Jefferson’s words established
a “wall of separation” between church and state. Such benefits, according to the courts,
did not imply public support of religious schools; based on the “child welfare theory” it
was support of the children who attended such schools (Kliebard, 1968, p. 313).
The second issue, namely, religious instruction and other religious practices in the
public/state schools, has taken several forms and continues to be problematic. The following Supreme Court cases involving the constitutionality of religious instruction and
other religious practices in the public schools illustrate the complexity of this issue:
a. In the state of Illinois (McCollum v. Board of Education, 1948), conducting
classes in religion on school grounds, even by non-sectarian groups, has been
judged to be unconstitutional (Kliebard, 1968, p. 313).

--- [PDF Page 821 / Book Page 833] ---

The Enlightenment and Religion, Knowledge and Pedagogies in Europe 833

b. In a celebrated “school-prayer” case in the state of New York, the Supreme Court
decided that the daily recitation of a non-sectarian prayer in the public school
system of the state was unconstitutional. The prayer read: “Almighty God, we
acknowledge our dependence upon Thee, and we beg Thy blessings upon us, our
parents, our teachers and our country”.
c. In Pennsylvania (Abington School District v. Schempp), the reading of ten verses
from the Bible, without any comment, at the beginning of each school day, was
judged to involve the establishment of religion by the state, even though “the
verses were to be read without comment, and any child could be excused from
reading the verses or attending the Bible reading, upon the written request of the
parents or guardians” (Spring, 2002, p. 262).
On the one hand, it is probable that the principle of a separation between church and
state will go from strength to strength especially because of the increasing mixture of
representatives of different religions in the European societies. On the other hand, history teaches us that religion and politics – that is, church and state – to a certain extent
are inseparable and always will be related to one another in some form. But the whole
problem deserves thorough comparative research. Lately the problem has appeared
again in the question of whether the new EU constitution should contain a reference to
the fact that Christianity is the basis for European civilisation.

Conclusion
The ideas and thoughts characteristic for the age of the Enlightenment are the
result of developments that reach further back in time. Currently, there is increased
interest which stems from the fact that new positions were taken on a number of
inherited fundamental and principal questions about man, nature, society and education, which to a great extent also govern the way we organise our lives today;
some would even suggest that we still live in the age of Enlightenment. For one
thing the consequences of the scientific conquests and man’s new position in a
world kept in balance by mathematical laws were realised. Even though faith in
human reason was unabated, it was given a new interpretation. It was no more only
considered to be an innate capacity in man, but also to be something which to a
high degree is gradually built up through our senses. The idea that there is nothing
in our minds which had not previously been in our senses had consequences for our
concept of knowledge and its nature. Though knowledge was still considered an
important product of reasoning sense experiences were from now on nonetheless
regarded as a sine qua non. Locke’s empiricism and French sensualism left distinct
marks on the educational thinking.
Rousseau deserves particular mentioning. On the one hand, he is a child of the
Enlightenment. This made him an early forerunner of European reform of education.
On the other hand, he distinguishes himself from it through his strong emphasis on
feeling. This same emphasis also made him a forerunner of later romanticism and
national movements.

--- [PDF Page 822 / Book Page 834] ---

834 Winther-Jensen

The relationship between church and state was examined. The emergence of the
modern liberal democratic nation state with its emphasis on freedom and equality
necessarily led to confrontations with the church. The church was on the defensive
and the concept of state, its role and function, were emphasised instead. This led to
a demand for the separation of the state from the church. In other words, the foundation of the modern democratic state was laid and education was intended to play an
important role in the new modernity project. When the nation states were created during the nineteenth century the educational ideas of the project became fused with the
ideas of national navigators into different European traditions of education: French
encyclopedism (Descartes), English humanism (Locke), North European naturalism
(Décroly, Grundtvig, Kerschensteiner, etc.). This might not have been intended by
the original representatives of the Enlightenment. They had a far more cosmopolitan
approach.

Epilogue
But this approach might still be active. In the comparative literature you sometimes
come across the concept, ‘world system’ which implies that certain demands on education become generally accepted across cultures and national borders (Boli et al.,
1985). The explanation to this phenomenon is that the ideas which originated from the
Enlightenment resulted in a new educational model which gradually became the foundation of European education. The model is characterised by a rational and secularised
institutional structure, compulsory schooling and is based on values such as respect
for the individual, religious tolerance, democracy and human rights. Apparently it has
succeeded in establishing itself politically to such a degree – not least through the
international organisations – that it makes sense to talk about a surprising universal
uniformity along the lines modern mass education – though in different measures – develops worldwide. Observations of this kind have inspired some comparative scholars to
talk about a ‘world system’, whose ideals the local national educational systems, more
or less consciously, try to fulfil.
Whether justifiable or not to talk about a ‘world system’ per se there is no doubt that
the ideas of the Enlightenment are still as active and influential as at the time in which
they were fostered.

Notes
1

See two of his consolatory letters: Consolatio ad Marciam and Consolatio ad Helviam.

Bibliography
Augustinus, A. (1957–1972). The city of God against the pagans. (Original title: De civitate dei contra
paganos. Parallel Latin text and English translation). London: Heinemann.
Barth, P. (1925). Die Geschichte der Erziehung in soziologischer und geistesgeschichtlicher Beleuchtung
(The history of education in the light of sociology and the history of ideas). Leipzig: Reisland.
Bergmann, L. (1965–1972). Kirkehistorie I-III (church history). Copenhagen: Haase.

--- [PDF Page 823 / Book Page 835] ---

The Enlightenment and Religion, Knowledge and Pedagogies in Europe 835
Boli, J., Ramirez, F. O., & Meyer, J. (May 1985). Explaining the origins and expansion of mass education.
Comparative Education Review, 29(2), 145–170.
Cassirer, C. (1963). An essay on man: An introduction to a philosophy of human culture. New Haven and
London: Yale University Press.
Comenius, J. A. (1910). The great didactic of John Amos Comenius. M. V. Keatinge (Ed.) (originally published 1628–1632). London: A & C Black.
Condillac, E. B. (1984). Traité des sensations, Traté des animaux (originally published 1754).Paris: Fayard.
Dewey, John (1916). Democracy and education in Middle Works 9 (Boydston, J. A., General Ed.). Southern
Illinois University Press.
Grotius, H. (2005). The rights of war and peace. R. Tuck (Ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund (original title:
De jure belli ac pacis libri tres, published 1625).
Grue-Sørensen, K. (1972). Opdragelsens historie I-III (History of education). Copenhagen: Gyldendal.
Grundtvig, N. F. S. (1991). Selected educational writings. M. Lawson (Ed. and trans.) (the selected texts
are originally published in the 1830s). Skive: The International People’s College and The Association of
Folk High Schools in Denmark.
Høffding, H. (1896). Jean-Jacques Rousseau og hans filosofi (Jean-Jacques Rousseau and his philosophy).
Copenhagen: Det Nordiske Forlag.
Kliebard, H. (1968). Religion, the state, and public schooling: The American context. In A. M. Kazamias &
E. H. Epstein (Eds.), Schools in transition (pp. 308–316). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Landmann, M. (1964). PhilosophischeaAnthropologie. Berlin: Sammlung Göschen (1969).
Linderstrøm-Lang, C. F. (1903). Wolfgang Ratichius: Et bidrag til pædagogikkens historie (A contribution
to the history of education). Copenhagen: Gyldendal.
Lindhardt, P. G. (1961). Religion og evangelium (Religion and gospel). Copenhagen: Hans Reitzel.
Locke, J. An essay concerning human understanding (originally published 1690).
Locke, J. (2003). Two treatises on government and A letter concerning toleration. I. Shapiro (Ed.). New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Locke, J. (1964). Some thoughts concerning education F. W. Garforth (Ed.) (originally published 1693).
London: Heinemann.
Lowum, A. (1899). Den franske oplysningstids pædagogiske ideer (The educational ideas of the French
enlightenment period). Oslo.
La Mettrie, J. O. (1996). Machine man and other writings. A. Thomson, (Ed. and trans.)(originally published
1748). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Montaigne, M. (1949–1951). Essais (Oeuvres complètes). Paris: Garnier.
Montesquieu, C. (1949–1956). Oeuvres complètes. Paris: Galimard.
Plato (1997). Republic. J. L. Davies & D. J. Vaughan (trans.) (original work from about 367 BC).Hertfordshire:
Wordsworth.
Platons skrifter (1932–1941). Plato’s writings, vols. I–X. C. Høeg & H. Ræder (Eds.). Copenhagen: C. A.
Reitzels Forlag.
Plato (1993). Republic. R. Waterfield (trans.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rousseau, J.-J. (1964). The first and second discourses. R. D. Masters (Ed.). New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Rousseau, J. -J. (1985). The government of Poland. W. Kendall (Ed.). Indianapolis, IN, Hackett.
Rousseau, J. -J. (1990–1996). Oeuvres complètes (OC). (Édition publiée sous la direction Gagnebin, B. et
Raymond, M.) 5 vols. Paris: Galimard.
Rousseau, J. -J. (1991). Émile or on education (originally published 1762). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Rousseau, J.-J. (1996). Confessions. Wordsworth.
Russell, B. (1993). History of western philosophy. London: Routledge.
Smith, A. (1962). The wealth of nations (originally published 1776). London: Dent.
Spring, J. (2002). American education. New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
Vogt, G. (1894). Wolfgang Ratichius, der Vorgänger des Amos Comenius. Langensalza.
Winther-Jensen, T. (2004). Undervisning og menneskesyn hos Platon, Comenius, Rousseau og Dewey
(Education and view of man of Plato, Comenius, Rousseau and Dewey). Copenhagen: Akademisk forlag.

