================================================================================
Chapter 54: The Church and the State in Argentina and Brazil: Knowledge, Religion and Pedagogy
Author(s): Maria C. M. De Figueiredo-Cowen and Silvina Gvirtz
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 837–855
PDF Pages: pp. 824–842 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 824 / Book Page 837] ---

54
THE CHURCH AND THE STATE IN ARGENTINA
AND BRAZIL: KNOWLEDGE, RELIGION
AND PEDAGOGY
Maria C. M. de Figueiredo-Cowen and Silvina Gvirtz

Introduction
In Latin America, the Catholic tradition is the basis of identity, originality and unity of
the subcontinent. It is a historical and cultural reality, with only one exception in the
twentieth century: the leftist revolutions in Cuba and in Nicaragua.
Historically and traditionally, the relations between the Church and the State have
been very close, particularly during colonial times. The expansion of the Portuguese
and Spanish empires, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries occurred in the name of
the Crown and of the Church. In Brazil, for example, one of the first actions when the
Portuguese first landed on the coast, of what is today Porto Seguro in Bahia, was the
celebration of a Catholic mass.
With independence, later in the nineteenth century, tensions started to emerge in the
new republics which came to favour a secular State, particularly under the influence
of Comte’s positivism among, especially, the military elites. Nevertheless, the Church
continued to have a voice in public policies.
Education was one area of intense debates. Groups representing secularism and
groups representing the Catholic Church, in their search to maintain political hegemony, had specific educational programmes which contained a vision of society and a
pedagogical project.
This chapter will discuss the relationship between the Church and the State in different cultural, economic, political, and social periods in both Argentina and Brazil. The
analysis will try to contextualise the efforts that different governments, the political
and intellectual elites and the Catholic leaders undertook to define school curriculum,
the knowledge to be offered to pupils and the many pedagogical practices to their individual political and educational projects. The chapter finishes with an identification of
the Argentine and Brazilian similarities and differences in terms of the relations and
patterns of their political ideologies, their different economic problems and their different educational practices.

837
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 837–855.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 825 / Book Page 838] ---

838 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

State and Catholic Religion in Argentine Primary Schools:
A Historical Approach (1884–2007)
The purpose of this section is to introduce a review of the historical development of the
relation between the National State and the Catholic Church, as regards basic education
in Argentina. Before 1880 education was basically provided by the families and the
Church. The participation of the State in providing education increased dramatically in
the last decades of the nineteenth century. At that time the conflict between the Catholic
Church and the sectors who where running the National State increased dramatically.
So this part of the article comprises the period from the enactment of the national
Ley de Educación Común (Common Education Law) no. 1420/84 (1884) up to the
present. Special emphasis will be paid to the disputes by and between both actors
about whether primary school should be Catholic or secular.
This analysis is structured on the basis of three relevant periods. The first one, where secularity prevailed in primary school, lasted from 1884 until 1930, after which Catholicism
was re-established – starting with the conservative restoration of the 1930s and continuing
during Perón’s administration (1946–1955) – when the teaching of the Catholic religion in
public schools became mandatory. The third and last period is from the end of the 1950s
up to the present. Two aspects will be highlighted from this last period.

The Origins of the Argentine Primary School
and the Regulation of Secular School Legislation:
Public Law 1420 Passed in 1884
Different experts (Puiggrós, 1989; Tedesco, 1970) refer to the 1880s as a key decade
for the construction of the Argentine National State and the simultaneous institutionalisation and massification of the basic educational system. During this period in
Argentina, the different actors involved in the design of the national education agreed
on the central role that the State should play in such affairs. However, they disagreed
on whether the State should offer a secular or Catholic education. That is to say, if
public education should be inspired in Christian doctrine and if the Catholic religion
should be studied at schools.
As Braslavsky (1989) suggests, the convergence of opinions on the central position
of the State as regards education, arose, among other factors, out of the institutional
and organisational weakness of the Church.
Tedesco (1970) points out how religious freedom began to win the main battles as
after Rosas’ fall. Such freedom belonged to a project carried out by an entire generation of exiled liberals during Rosas’ administration and was imposed in the discussion
of the Constitutional Convention, which in 1853 and 1860 passed a Constitution rejecting Catholic standpoints and therefore the possibility of adopting the Catholic doctrine
as the State’s religion. However, the political strategies of the National State as regards
the Church aimed at controlling it and thus avoided an institutional separation between
the Church and the State.

--- [PDF Page 826 / Book Page 839] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 839

During 1884, different actors, both liberals and Catholics, were faced in the national
parliament under a process that finalised with the enactment of the Ley de Educación
Común (Common Education Law)1420.
Nevertheless, Tedesco (1970) points out that those liberals tried to justify secularity
at schools on the basis of the strong immigration process undergone by the country
during that time. To that effect, they focused on the immigrants from northern Europe,
which resulted in the need of a school space characterised by its religious freedom.
The above mentioned Law 1420 set in place the gradual, free and secular nature
of primary school in the City of Buenos Aires and National Territories. During the
following years, the Consejo Nacional de Educación (National Education Council)
constructed the necessary regulating measures to make effective “religious tolerance
and neutrality”, which, pursuant to such law, should be obeyed at schools.
Therefore, the incorporation of secularity into primary school was a real defeat for
the Catholic Church. The triumph of secularity in education crossed even the borders
with national jurisdiction to provinces where the teaching of the Catholic doctrine
was compulsory in official schools and, after 1884, was adjusted to the secular model
embraced by Law 1420 (Campobassi, 1964).
Nevertheless, as time went by, the Church became stronger and thus its possibilities
of offering education grew. At the same time, new social sectors began to consider
Catholicism as a potential means to unify the nation. Therefore, the Church
started to modify its viewpoint on educational matters and found the climax of its
development during the conservative period that started in 1930 and continued during the Peronist period until 1954 and the last military dictatorship (1976–1983)
(Braslavsky, 1989).

Catholic Education Is Back
Campobassi (1964) indicates that the first 45 years of enforcement of Law 1420
showed no major difficulties in applying the legal principle of school secularity and
the teaching of the Catholic doctrine. Both conservatives (1884–1916) and radicals
(1916–1930) respected and obeyed the legislation on “secular school”. Even the
majority of the main educators of that time, such as Berra, Torres, Ferreira, Scalabrini,
Vergara, Mercante, Senet, Ingenieros, Korn, González, Nelson and Vera Peñalosa supported the idea of the ‘secular school’ (Campobassi, 1964).
In 1930 (with a military coup) the conservative forces returned to the national
and provincial political powers. During almost the three following decades there
was, in the teaching in the primary school, an intense anti-liberal and anti-positivist
preaching and action, developed under the consecutive protection of conservatism
and Peronism. These were years of a strong offensive carried out by the Catholics
in order to control public education. In these respects, Puiggrós (1993) points
out how, as from 1930, the spiritual, nationalist-authoritarian movement began to
advance in the political arena. At the same time, values and rituals of Catholicism
started to gain space and influence, rather than the secular motif on discourses
about school.

--- [PDF Page 827 / Book Page 840] ---

840 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

During the first years of the conservative administration, the resistance of different actors
impeded the Church’s offensive to defeat school secularity from resulting in national laws.
However, this was not the case in the provinces. Some jurisdictions that had failed to adopt
the Catholic doctrine as the official religion, during such years passed laws or decrees by
which the teaching of Catholicism was implemented in primary schools. Among such
jurisdictions, the cases of Buenos Aires and Santa Fé stand out (Campobassi, 1964).
The clerical offensive became stronger as from 1943, when the Armed Forces dominated and focused on the public arena (Campobassi, 1964). Puiggrós and Bernetti
(1993) considered that the government arising out the strike of 1943 represented an
ideology that did not allow for the continuity of secular education. On December
31, 1943, Decree 18.411 was passed. The teaching of the Catholic religion became
mandatory in Argentina’s primary schools. Catholicism was to be taught as “ordinary
subject” within the curriculum. A period of the decisive rise of the school Catholicism
thus culminated. Its beginning dated back to 1930 and its first victory took place in
1937, a year in which Catholic teaching became imposed in Buenos Aires province,
under the administration of Manuel Fresco (Puiggrós, 1993).
The “Catholic revenge” within the framework of elementary teaching did not preach
tolerance towards secular values. In these respects, Campobassi (1964) highlights
the infinite number of slanders against everything that was non-Catholic, presented
in the text books used for religion teaching. Civil matrimony, “false religions”,
liberalism and school secularity were clearly among the references of this advanced
Catholicism.
The victory of Peronism in the general elections of 1946 ratified the path that
had been adopted as regards Catholicism and primary school teaching. Law 12.978
passed on April 29, 1947 implemented the teaching of Catholicism in public
schools. Two years later, the amended National Constitution declared that both the
family and the private institutions were the pillars of the school system. As noted
by Puiggrós and Bernetti (1993), the Constitution, far from establishing the State’s
hegemonic role as regards education, indicated participation in supporting private
or community activities. This constituted since the origins of the national educational system the strongest step towards the encouragement of the development of
private teaching.
Nevertheless, by the end of the Peronist era, a crisis arose in the relations between
the Catholic Church and the State, and the more relevant consequence was precisely
the annulment of the Law that years ago had consolidated the teaching of the Catholic
religion in public schools. Therefore, Law 1420/84 was enforced. Provincial legislatures followed the national Congress and also annulled the corresponding laws of
jurisdictional enforcement. As Campobassi (1964) points out, the whole power that
the Catholic Church had gained in elementary education disappeared within only 6
months of confrontation with the Peronist administration.
Together with the so-called Revolución libertadora (Liberating Revolution) that
toppled Perón on September 16, 1955, the Catholic sectors began to argue for the reenactment of the decree of the year 1943. However, the new government maintained
Law 1420 in force and thus a policy of secularity for the elementary school.

--- [PDF Page 828 / Book Page 841] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 841

Religious Education from the 1960s to the Present
As from 1958, together with the election of Frondizi as President of the nation, new perspectives arose about Catholic education, unexpectedly fostering private education. This
was the beginning, for the first time in national education history, of the construction
of private education as an organic system. As indicated by Narodovsky (2001), the
sustained and progressive change of the State’s regulations towards private schools –
that granted them more autonomy and the same legal status as that of public schools
– constitute one of the most relevant characteristics of the State’s education policy from
the 1960s until today.
Finally, during the last dictatorship, between 1976 and 1983, there were five
consecutive ministers of education in the national framework. Nevertheless, two
administrations stand out: those of Bruera and Llerena Amadeo, characterised by their
explicit interest in restoring order, hierarchies and authority, and for consolidating
social sciences (Tedesco, 1983).
Special interest shall be paid to Llerena Amadeo’s project, and his commitment to
traditional Catholic ideology. He followed the most traditional line of the pedagogic
authoritarianism. One of his fundamental goals was the limitation of the secularisation
process. Therefore, during these years, the values of the Catholic doctrine were incorporated as components of moral education into the curriculum of the national elementary
education. All through the country, there were different expressions of this incorporation. In some cases, the Catholic religion overlapped with the contents of moral
education and, in others, it was directly taught as a school subject (Tedesco, 1983).

Catholic Education Today
According to the poorly developed school census of 1883, at that time there were a
total of 437 private primary schools, 109 (25%) were religious. Today, almost 120
years later, one out of four Argentine non-university students attend private institutions
(Morduchowicz, 2001); more than half of them (57%) get their education in Catholic
schools. Even when the primary stage (EGB) is relatively the less developed within
private education (it gathers 21% of students, against the 79% of the public sector), its
participation in Catholic institutions in comparison to the total in the private sector is
higher (63%) than that of the middle education (55%).
The encouragement of private education that the National State started, either in an
explicit or implicit manner, by 1960, has modified the public tradition of the elementary school in Argentina. Braslavsky (1989) points out that, in this process, the Catholic
Church succeeded in becoming the most powerful private education entrepreneur, currently the majority of the institutions offering private education in Argentina.
Perhaps, in conclusion, it is plausible to assume that, even when the Catholic Church
as from 1960 began to develop a strong presence in Argentine education, based on its
main role in the private education sub-sector, it has never ignored public schools, taking advantage of each opportunity offered by the different historical circumstances to

--- [PDF Page 829 / Book Page 842] ---

842 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

incorporate its religious values and ideology into the national curriculum. The Catholic
Church is now one of the main actors in the educational arena.

The Church and the State in Brazil
Religious education in Brazil since colonial times was based on the official religion of
the Portuguese Empire, later adopted by the Brazilian Empire – the Roman Catholic
religion. With the Proclamation of the Republic in 1889, the legal separation between
the Church and the State took place, as stated in the Constitution of 1891. The State
became laic. No particular religion was named as an official religion, but, in practice,
the teaching of religion continued to be the teaching of Catholicism (Cury, 2004). The
most recent educational legislation – the Constitution of 1988 (Art 210) and the Law
of Directives and Bases of 1997 (Art 33) declared religious education to be an integral
part of the basic education of the citizen. It also established religious education as a
discipline, with optional attendance in the school curriculum in primary and lower secondary State schools. Details such as the definition of the model of religious teaching,
the curriculum organisation, the methodology and the kinds of teachers who should
teach were given special attention.
Indeed the relationship between the Catholic Church, the State and education in
Brazil has always been very close. It has taken different characteristics historically: the
actors and roles have altered from the Jesuits and the overall control over education
(in the colonial times) to ecclesiastics and Catholic intellectuals (in the early twentieth
century) opposing the so-called educational reformers in debates on school curriculum, and higher education.
This second section of the chapter proposes, therefore, to analyse these tensions
between the Catholic Church and the State in Brazil, particularly in significant
momenta of the trajectory of the Brazilian educational system. It will try to point
out the struggles the Church went through in trying to maintain a continuous and
stable presence in the educational scenario, sustaining (or fighting to sustain) a hegemonic role in the formulation of educational policies. The counter-reactions from
intellectuals and politicians advocating a free and laic educational system will also be
sketched. Each group had a specific educational project with a model for the school
curriculum, the kinds of knowledge that should be offered and the pedagogical methods to be used.

The Jesuits, the Colony and the Empire
With the arrival of the Portuguese in Brazil, in the sixteenth century, the Jesuits were
granted a privileged and hegemonic position in setting up and controlling the cultural
and educational scenario of the new colony. They set up schools for catechisation of the
native Indians and to provide basic education for the children of the administrators.
The Jesuits believed they had a supernatural right to be in charge of education.
This right was taken away from them when they were expelled from Brazil by the

--- [PDF Page 830 / Book Page 843] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 843

Marquis of Pombal, an influential politician and Prime Minister for King Joseph I, in
the eighteenth century.
Thus, for about two centuries, the Jesuits controlled the school curriculum and
the knowledge offered in schools in the Portuguese empire, metropolis and colonies.
Overall, the educational principles of the Jesuits included: the search for perfection;
total obedience to the superiors; and a very strong discipline. Education was at the core
of their work: it served the purposes of catechism (for the native Indians), for evangelism (as an efficient instrument of counter-reform) and for the training of the elites in
the colonies (Schwartzman, 1979; Maciel & Neto, 2006).
The Jesuit pedagogical experience was based on the Ratio Studiorum, according to
which theology was at the top of the pyramid, followed by philosophy. The choice of
books and texts was under strong control. New questions or opinions formulated by
pupils were not permitted (Schwartzman, 1979; Alves, 2007).
The concept of pedagogy and the knowledge that should be offered in schools,
according to the Jesuits’ educational project, were subordinated to the Church and the
religion. As Alves states:
The main objective of the Jesuits was to spread the gospel, and all the activities
carried out by the priests in Brazil were subordinated to the Church and religion. The labour of the Jesuits required them to involve themselves in domestic
political and educational matters, as well as meet the needs and interests of the
Catholic Church. (Alves, 2007, p. 15)
Two Jesuits did a remarkable job in the provision of education in the newly conquered
colony: Father José de Anchieta and Father Manuel da Nóbrega. They established a
large number of missions in different regions of the colony, they created large schools
and they were very inventive: with the constant lack of pedagogical material, they used
songs composed by themselves, they distributed books and texts they wrote themselves, they set up dramas to teach Christian morals and religion (Alves, 2007).
The curriculum, the knowledge content and the methodology of the educational
project implemented by the Jesuits in the colony, therefore, were mainly associated
with the training of priests, the men of letters and the scholars. The teaching of Latin,
grammar, rhetoric, humanities, and religious doctrine was the basis of the curriculum.
The main concern was with moral education and saving souls.
The Jesuit control expanded so much that the Jesuits were asked for advice by the
King and the politicians on matters of the State. Any important position in government
or inside the Church was decided only after consultation with the Jesuits. The overall
dominance of the Jesuits was also perceived by some politicians as blocking Portugal
from modernisation, as if a barrier all around Portugal isolated it from the modern
culture. Such a power started to upset a very influential politician, the Marquis of
Pombal. When he became Prime Minister, he banned the Jesuits from Portugal and all
Portuguese territories (Schwartzman, 1979, p. 14).
The Marquis of Pombal was Prime Minister from 1750 to 1777, under King Joseph
I. Very controversial and charismatic, the Marquis of Pombal represented Enlightened
Despotism in Portugal in the seventeenth century. Two places, London and Vienna,

--- [PDF Page 831 / Book Page 844] ---

844 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

where the Marquis de Pombal served as diplomat, had a remarkable influence on his
pedagogical project of renovating Portuguese and colonial education. In London, he
became convinced that the English economic success resulted from applying scientific
knowledge to the productive sector (Falcon, 1982). In Vienna, as Serrão puts it:
[I]t was in this capital that the spirit of the Portuguese Minister, in contact with
the world of politics and diplomacy, drank the great principles of the Enlightened
Despotism which he would apply to his country on his return. From there he also
brought, as understood by Maria Alcina Ribeiro Correia, the economic and cultural ideas which were the key elements of his government. (Serrão, 1982, p. 22)
While he was Prime Minister, Pombal promoted a series of reforms in the country,
at the administrative, economic, educational and social levels. According to Maciel
and Neto (2006), with the Marquis de Pombal, the Jesuit traditional methodology
was replaced by a pedagogical proposal that advocated State and lay schools. The
position of director of studies, with an advisory and quality-control role, was implemented; isolated classes (aulas régias) replaced the course in humanities, created
by the Jesuits. Such innovative pedagogical proposals and new forms of curriculum aimed at offering the necessary conditions for the modernisation of Portuguese
society.
The Pombal reforms – primarily secular – were indeed extensive. They expanded
the school curriculum, with the creation of schools of mathematics and philosophy.
Knowledge was fundamentally based on sciences and applied knowledge. Secondary
education was changed radically, with special attention given to Latin, Greek and
French. Vocational education was introduced with classes in trade and artillery. The
dual system of education was implemented: popular education, with emphasis on
spelling, grammar, arithmetic, Christian doctrine, and social and civic education, and
education for the nobility through the ‘College of the Nobles’ (Avellar, 1983, p. 12;
Teixeira Soares, 1961, p. 218; Schwartzman, 1979, p. 18).
Inspired by Luiz Antonio Verney, a philosopher of the Enlightenment, Pombal’s
pedagogical project included the secularisation of teaching, the importance of Latin,
Greek, Hebrew, English, French, Physics, Anatomy, and free and laic schooling.
Azevedo summarises well Pombal’s pedagogical proposal:
Instead of a single system of education, the duality of schools; instead of an
education entirely classic, the development of scientific teaching …; instead of
the exclusive teaching of Latin and Portuguese, the progressive penetration
of modern languages and literatures (French and English); and, finally, a variety of
trends … open up the ways to the first conflicts between the old ideas, embedded in the Jesuit teaching, and the new pedagogical thinking, influenced by the
French encyclopaedists. (Azevedo, 1976, pp. 56–57)
In the colonies, the educational reforms under Pombal aimed at restoring the State control over education, secularising education, and standardising the curriculum. Schools
were set up in different villages, one for boys and another for girls. The curriculum and

--- [PDF Page 832 / Book Page 845] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 845

knowledge content was also differentiated according to gender: boys would learn how
to read, write and count, and the Christian doctrine. Girls would learn how to look after
the house and how to sew (Salem, 1982; Maxwell, 1996).
One direct consequence of Pombal’s pedagogical reforms was the progressive loss
of prestige and power of the Catholic Church at the educational and political arenas.
However, the Church never gave up hopes of regaining the same privileged position
– of playing a major role in education in Brazil. The loss of power resulted initially
from Pombal’s policies, then from the impact of the French Enlightenment in the eighteenth century, and, particularly, under the French Positivism wave that influenced the
political, cultural and educational stances of Brazil.

The Republic, the New State, and the Military Regime
During the Empire, in the nineteenth century, right after Independence, following the
Constitution of 1824, the Catholic religion was declared the official religion of
Brazil. But the Church had a very submissive position to the government (Iglesias, 1971).
The situation became much worse with the Proclamation of the Republic, in 1889.
Brazilian generals, politicians, and intellectuals, under the leadership of Benjamin
Constant, favoured the ideas of Comte and of the French Positivism in politics and in
education.
Indeed, in Brazil, as well as in Argentina, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Uruguay, among
other Latin American countries, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
educational policies were framed by the principles of Positivism. Sobreira points out:
[T]he Positivism answered the issues raised by the Republicans i.e. the split
between the Church and the State, the idea of a republican dictatorship, the
appeal to a strong and interventionist power, the progress through the State, the
rejection of the monarchy and the incorporation of the proletariat to the new
society. (Sobreira, 2003)
Positivism influenced profoundly the Republican leaders. As Carlos Roberto Jamil
Cury states:
From an officially Catholic country through the Imperial Constitution, we
became laic with the Magna Carta of 1891, which proclaimed freedom of religious and freedom of expression, but prohibited the State from establishing any
religious worship, from having any financial responsibility, and from creating
any form of alliance. (Cury, 2004, p. 188)
At the time of the proclamation of the Republic, industrialisation was emerging; the
urbanisation process was gaining strength; immigration from Europe was increasing;
and a strong urban middle class started to grow, similarly to emerging industrial and
working classes. Therefore the new social and economic classes hoped to have a more
effective participation in the rapidly changing society. In counterpart, in politics, the

--- [PDF Page 833 / Book Page 846] ---

846 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

new political regime was becoming weaker. The elites, from the coffee-based oligarchies, were facing opposition from the new social classes. Different political, social,
mainly urban, movements emerged, with proposals for the reformulation of society,
education included. An example of such social, political and cultural commotion
is the Week of the Modern Art in 1922 and the founding of the Communist Party
(Iglesias, 1971).
The Catholic elites (ecclesiastics and intellectuals) started to reorganise themselves
in order to offer alternative proposals for the reformulation of society and education.
The journal A Ordem (The Order), launched in 1921, and the creation of the Centre
D. Vital, in 1922, played a very important role in what Salem calls the “Catholic
renaissance” (Salem, 1982, p. 4).
The Catholic movement was not an isolated action. The weak political frame of the
First Republic stimulated the emergence of different movements which were advocating their own proposals for reforming society, as it happened with the Catholic
movement. With the Revolution of 1930, the Church did regain some legitimate power.
Thus, education became an important element of bargain. Educational reforms were
seen as paramount for the reformulation of society (Salem, 1982; Cury, 1978).
Soon, two pedagogical proposals dominated the national debate on education for
almost a decade, during the 1930s. The Catholic group interpreted education from an
ideological perspective – education would serve as a basic instrument for structural
transformations in society. What became important was a version of education framed
by the teachings of the Christian doctrine (Cury, 1978; Nagle, 1974; Salem, 1982).
The Catholic proposals involved the dissemination of a higher Catholic culture and the
insertion of Catholic legislation in the Constitution.
Intellectuals such as Jackson de Figueiredo, Alceu de Amoroso Lima, Father Leonel
Franca, Sobral Pinto, and the Archbishop of Olinda and Recife, D. Leme, played a
major and extremely important role in the Catholic movement of the first half of the
twentieth century. They all shared the same vision of transforming society through
education (Cury, 1978; Salem, 1982).
The Catholic movement gained a new impetus during the 1930s, with a series
of organisations such as the Association of the Catholic University Students, the
Catholic Institute of Higher Studies, the National Confederation of Catholic Workers,
the Confederation of the Catholic Press, the Association of Catholic Bookshops, the
Mariana Congregation, the Workers Circles, the Association of Catholic Teachers.
Such organisations had an impact on different sectors of national life. Very important
also was the Brazilian Catholic Action, created in 1935.
During the 1930s, education became a major issue nationally. As Schwartzman states:
[I]t was only with the so-called “Revolution of 1930”, which brought Getúlio
Vargas to power and began a new period of political centralization, that education finally appeared as a national priority. (Schwartzman, 2004, p. 17)
It is precisely in the period between 1930 and 1945 that the Catholic movements
enjoyed its major prestige. Of course this was helped by the political situation before
and just after the 1930 Revolution. The State formed a heterogeneous coalition of
rather weak political parties. This gave to the Church more bargaining power including

--- [PDF Page 834 / Book Page 847] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 847

the redefinition of its influence vis-à-vis the relationship with the State. This is well
illustrated by Salem:
D Leme … in the inauguration of the statue of Christ the Redeemer in 1931,
which gathered several groups of Catholics … warns: “The name of God is crystallized in the soul of the Brazilian people. Either the State acknowledges the God
of the people, or the people will not acknowledge the State.” The warning … was
immediately understood by Vargas. From that time, a new phase in the relationship between the temporal and ecclesiastic power begun to consolidate; from a
situation of separation and lack of harmony between the two institutions it moves
to a situation of cooperation and progressive closeness. (Salem, 1982, p. 10)
Four main themes were consistently important issues for the Church. The first was
the fight against communist infiltration in Brazil; the second, the non-legalisation of
divorce; the third, the official recognition of the Church, by the State, to be inserted in
the Constitution; and, the fourth, the introduction of religious teaching in schools.
The battle against Communism was going to be a long process but the output for all
the other policy-areas were almost straightforward gains. In the Constitution of 1934,
for example, the religious wedding was made official; religious education was reintroduced in the school curriculum. Education was a kind of important negotiating tool
used by politicians and by Catholic intellectuals in order to bring together the Church
and the Vargas government. The Ministry of Education, in the early 1930s, Francisco
Campos, for example, wrote to Vargas arguing the necessity of re-establishing an alliance with the Church through education (Lima, 1931; Cury, 1978).
Opposing the Catholics in the debate about education was the group known as
the Pioneers of Education, followers of the New School Movement. This movement,
which had its origin in a similar movement which emerged in the USA and in Europe
at the end of the nineteenth century, was based on John Dewey’s ideas. It represented a
reaction against the traditional pedagogical practices and aimed at an education which
would promote the integration of individuals in society and a wider access to schools.
This group consisted mainly of the so-called progressive educationists and important scholars such as Lourenço Filho, Afrânio Peixoto, Hermes Lima, Carneiro Leão,
Anísio Teixeira, Fernando de Azevedo who conceptualised education on a different
basis. They published in 1932 the Manifesto of the Pioneers of the New Education,
written by Fernando de Azevedo, based to a large extent in the ideas of Anísio Teixeira
and signed by a large number of the Pioneers (Azevedo, 1932). The Manifesto soon
became the clear divider between the progressive group and the Catholic group. For
the Pioneers, education and the expansion of schools was an important mechanism that
could guarantee the insertion of the country in the developed world.
Educational reforms should take place following a specific pedagogical epistemology, which was based on John Dewey’s philosophy, mostly on the concept of education
as the only means for the implementation of a truly democratic society where individuals would be respected. Teixeira, after reading Dewey and after becoming acquainted
with the American pragmatism, was greatly influenced by ideas on democracy and
science; he believed that education was the only instrument able to generate changes in
the modernisation needs of the country. The Pioneers of Education of the New School,

--- [PDF Page 835 / Book Page 848] ---

848 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

similarly to the Catholic groups, gained institutional support through the creation of
the Brazilian Association of Education, in charge of organising lectures, courses and
conferences (Cury, 1978; Salem, 1982; Piletti, 1996).
The main ideas of the Manifesto included the following themes: education is a means
of reconstructing democracy in Brazil; it ought to be essentially public, compulsory,
free of charge and lay; any discrimination based on differences of race, sex or kinds
of study should be excluded; education must also be carried out inside communities;
education ought to be unified and suited to attend all stages of human development;
unity does not mean uniformity; education must be adapted to take account of regional
characteristics; the pupil ought to be the focus of education; and the curriculum must
be adapted to the pupils and their interests; every teacher, even those who teach in
primary education, ought to be educated at a university (Piletti, 1996, pp. 177–178).
These themes translated the pedagogical project of the Pioneers of Education, which
clashes with the Catholics pedagogical project particularly in two areas – the confessional and the private aspects of education.
Some of the scholars of the New School, at the time, held important positions in different states of Brazil. They transformed their pedagogical principles into public policies
through educational reforms in different states and in the Federal District. The political
moment in Brazil was very favourable to reforms and new educational policies. The
country was undergoing important political, economic and social changes – urbanisation
was under rapid progress, the expansion of coffee plantations brought along industrial and
economic progress, and liberalism emerged as a strong political and philosophical ideology (Schwartzman, 2004; Piletti, 1996). Anísio Teixeira, for example, was State Secretary
of Education of the Federal District, Rio de Janeiro, from 1931 to 1935. He was able to
plan and implement educational reforms locally, within the principles that oriented the
New School Movement. Teixeira created a municipal system of education, from primary
school to higher education. He introduced modern school architecture, expanded the
number of places in schools, introduced the system of secondary technical schools and
transformed the Normal School into an Institute of Education. Teixeira also assured the
dissemination of his educational ideas and projects by his writing. Publications such as
Educação Progressiva – uma introdução à filosofia da educação (Progressive Education
– an introduction to the philosophy of education) and Em marcha para a Democracia
(Towards Democracy) were published in 1932 and 1934, respectively, during his term of
office at the Secretariat of Education in Rio (Cury, 1978; Schwartzman, 2004).
The principles the Pioneers believed in and fought for included the restructuring of
educational systems which would lead to national reconstruction. This meant that those
in control of educational systems were those who would hold power. More important
than power in Teixeira’s concept of education in a changing society is the notion that
the school should be prepared to train the new man, a modern man integrated to a
democratic society. Hence, Teixeira’s beliefs in science, in the scientific method and its
technical applications (Teixeira, 1968).
The Catholics too believed that new pedagogical projects were of a political nature.
Thus education would be an important instrument of power. Like Teixeira and other
Pioneers of Education, Alceu de Amoroso Lima and Father Franca offered their

--- [PDF Page 836 / Book Page 849] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 849

arguments as advocated by the Church in a number of books and articles (Franca,
1931; Lima, 1931). One argument put forward by Alceu de Amoroso Lima was about
spiritual revolution as the only basis for the re-implementation of order in society:
[T]he spiritual unity of the nation is no longer, for the liberalism, a concern of a
public nature. All sorts of unity are considered: political unity, legal unity … The
only unity that the political liberalism of today has no interest in is the spiritual
unity which is, however, the basis of all others. (Alceu, 1931, pp. V–VI)
At the core of the criticisms of the New School Movement by the Catholics was the
concept of the laicisation of education, a key idea in the project put forward by the
Pioneers of Education. For the Catholics, the pedagogy advocated by the New School
educators had to be opposed as it had no consistent pedagogical principles. In such
a project, sciences dominated philosophy and ignored the supernatural aspect of the
human being. Such pedagogical projects presented a purely utilitarian and pragmatic
character. Education, for the Catholics, had to be religious; the lay school, because it
rejected education, was unable to educate (Franca, 1931; Lima, 1931).
Another issue in these debates referred to who should be in charge of education.
The pedagogical proposal of the Pioneers of Education argued for the pedagogical
monopoly of the State. The Catholics’ proposal referred to the Church and the family
as the main institutions in charge of education. The State would have just a coordinating role in the provision of education (Cury, 1978; Salem, 1982).
Finally, the legislation of 30 April of 1931 established the optional character of religious education in State schools. It satisfied the claims of the Catholics. However, the
conflicts between the two groups did not cease. Rather than consensus, with the fait
accompli – the 1931 legislation – the two groups continued the debates.
Thus, after 1931, under the pressure of the Catholic movements, religious education
was included in the school curriculum as a discipline, but of an optional attendance. In
subsequent Constitutions, including the last one in 1988, religious education remained
legally part of the school curriculum in both State and private schools. But the matter
continues to be highly complex and controversial within the context of a laic State, a
secular culture and the multiplicity of creeds (Cury, 1993).
The late 1930s were marked by a sequence of activities. The Association of Catholic
Teachers and the Brazilian Catholic Confederation of Education started to promote
conferences and courses nationally. The aim was to formulate an educational policy
based on the Christian doctrine. There were gains from both sides – the Catholics and
the Pioneers. The Constitution of 1934 recognised semi-officially the Catholic Church
by inserting articles stating the recognition by Civil Law of the religious wedding,
the dismissal of divorce, and the incorporation of facultative religious education in state
schools. As a counterpart, in the same Constitution of 1934, it was stated that it was the
privilege of the State to intervene in matters related to the National Plan of Education.
It also stated that primary school would be free and compulsory for all. Therefore, both
groups had their basic claims approved by the State. However, Lima speaks of the lack
of a precise pedagogical project from both groups:

--- [PDF Page 837 / Book Page 850] ---

850 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

If the merit of the Catholics was to emphasise the national dimension, that of the
reformers was to open an opportunity that the non-dominant social groups did
not benefit from. … The birth of the school of the people was far away. Education
continued to be an agent of the dominant classes. (Cury, 1978, IX–X)
In the pedagogical proposal of the Catholics, the knowledge that should be offered in
the schools is the Catholic vision of the world and of men:
Such a pedagogical ideal is provided not by the experimental sciences but by a
concept of life dictated by the speculative sciences. These, in turn, are governed
by ethics which are subordinated to theology.(Cury, 1978, p. 54)
In contrast, the Pioneers of the New School argued for a pedagogical proposal whose
knowledge content is based on sciences:
Hence such (educational) sciences are to be based on the social sciences and
those which intend scientifically to discover the normal processes that act upon
the human being. They are, for example, Physiology, Biology and Psychology.
Biology requires the harmony of education with the tendencies of children. The
social sciences locate the role and social function of the school. This forms the
scientific basis of the school organisation. (Cury, 1978, p. 83)
Thus the tensions between the Catholics and the liberals lasted almost 20 years. These
tensions were also evident in relation to higher education. The first movements from the
Church to the creation of Catholic institutions of higher education in Brazil emerged in
the first decade of the twentieth century. The aim, similar to the creation of the Centre
D. Vital, was the co-optation and the religious teaching of the elites. A few institutions,
such as the Association of Catholic University Students and the Catholic Institute of
Higher Studies, were implemented to offer support to the Church in relation to their
proposals for a Catholic higher education (Salem, 1982).
The first attempts to offer formal courses at higher education level were provided
by the Catholic Institute of Higher Studies. Initially the curriculum was limited to
three compulsory disciplines (Sociology, Philosophy and Theology) and three facultative ones (Introduction to Law, to Mathematics and to Biology). Later the curriculum
expanded considerably. As pointed out by Salem, in the late 1930s, the number of
students rose to 200 (Salem, 1982, p. 18).
Of course, the task of providing Catholic studies at higher education level was not
an easy one. According to Decree 19.851, of 11 April 1931 which implements the
Statutes of the Brazilian Universities, the State was given a strong role in terms of
administering and controlling higher education, thus keeping the Church away. So for
the Catholic leaders and scholars it became clear that they would not have the support
of the State to implement their Catholic model of university. The Catholic Institute
for Higher Studies, created in 1932, set out the first grounds of the future Catholic
University. As Salem points out:

--- [PDF Page 838 / Book Page 851] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 851

[T]he Catholic University is considered by the Catholic and Church leaders of
the time as having a dual political meaning … it would be an institution which
would oppose the laic education and mentality, it would guarantee the solution
of national crises; and it would block the penetration of the communist ideology
in the country … the Church supposedly would reach its aims of re-evangelisation of society and of the State itself. (Salem, 1982, p. 21)
The Catholic Institute for Higher Studies was meant to provide an alternative model
of university in Brazil. The belief among the Catholic scholars and ecclesiastics was
that this would liberate the university from State rule, as it should always belong to the
Church. Naturally, the Catholics were upset with the creation of the first state university in 1934. They considered the University of the Federal District, implemented with
the support of Anísio Teixeira, as laic and anti-Catholic. There were even claims that
the new institution would make easier the Americanisation of Brazilian education or
even favour the transformation into a Communist institution (Salem, 1982).
The need and urgency to have a Catholic University was claimed in the First Council
of Brazilian Bishops in 1939. Two years later the first Catholic Faculties were implemented, after having received the official approval of the National Council of Education.
The courses included Law, Philosophy, Literature and Languages, Geography, History,
Social Sciences and Pedagogy. They were geared mainly to the training of secondary
school teachers, within the Catholic pedagogical framing. All the Faculties included in
the curriculum a course of religious culture (Salem, 1982). In 1942, by governmental
legislation, the Catholic Faculties were granted power to award their own certificates,
similarly to the federal and state universities. In 1946, through Decree 8.681, the
Catholic Faculties were upgraded to university level, the Catholic University.
Today, the knowledge and curriculum provided by the Catholic Universities go
beyond religious education. Almost all areas of knowledge are offered, from humanities
to sciences in almost every state in Brazil. They are private, as are 2,000 institutions.
Still today, the Federal and State universities in Brazil fight vigorously against any government financial support of any kind for the private universities. Most of the Catholic
universities are institutions of excellence.
In the second half of the twentieth century, there were dramatic changes in the
Brazilian economic and political life. The military elite, associated with the economic
elite, took power, in 1964; democratic elections were banned; educational reforms at
primary, secondary and higher levels took place in the 1960s and 1970s, following the
economic and political ideology of the military regime (Figueiredo, 1986, 1987). The
Church had a different role in the political and cultural life, during the military regime.
Initially allied to the military government, in 1964, it opposed the regime when issues
about torture started to emerge.
The Episcopal Latin American Conference in Medellin (Colombia), in 1968, was
a turning point in the position of the Church. Inspired by the principles of the
Second Vatican Council (1962–1965), the actions of the Church moved towards
the material conditions of the population. In Brazil, certainly the Church was vital
in the process of re-democratisation of the country through the Basic Ecclesiastic

--- [PDF Page 839 / Book Page 852] ---

852 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

Communities (Comunidades Eclesiais de Base) and the Theology of Liberation (Castro,
1984; Pucci, 1984).

Religious Education Today
The teaching of religion in state schools cannot be treated as a simple question of curriculum. The dialectic between secularisation and laicism embedded in sociocultural
contexts has to be considered.
In fact, the Constitution of 1824 established Catholicism as the religion of the
Empire (Pauly, 2004). The Republican Constitution of 1891, under the influence of
the Positivism, abolished religious education from the school curriculum, declared
education as secular, and the Church was separated from the State (Pauly, 2004). In
all subsequent Constitutions, as mentioned previously, religious education became a
constitutional matter. Through Decree 19.941 of 1931, Vargas
reintroduces the teaching of religion in state schools, authorize the Church
authorities to design the programmes, to choose the textbooks, appoint teachers
and supervise their fidelity to the doctrine and moral. (Cury, 1978, p. 175)
Since 1931, overall, the teaching of religion, although optional, was rather of a catechist nature and remained outside the list of regular disciplines of the school system.
The teachers were not allowed to be in the state payroll. There was no consensus on
the content of teaching. The majority of teachers of religious education in schools normally belonged to a specific religious order. In other cases the teachers were members
of the community, involved in catechism or other religious activities. Such status quo
remained until the 1990s.
New definitions about the kind of knowledge religious education should offer, and
its place in the school curriculum, started to emerge when Law 9.394 of Directive
and Basis of National Education, of 1996, Article 33, confirmed religious teaching
as a duty of the State, as an optional discipline: “Religious education, of an optional
enrolment, is a discipline within the normal timetables of primary and lower secondary
education in state schools, and will be offered, without costs for the State” (Cury,
2004). The counter-reaction of the Catholics was immediate and effective. In 1997,
Law 9.475 amended Article 33 maintaining the compulsory provision of religious
education in the curriculum and its optional nature. It also opened up the possibilities
for using public money for teachers’ salaries (Cury, 2004). At the same time, the new
text of Article 33 introduced some innovations: religious education would integrate
the education of the citizen; each educational system would regulate the process of
the definition of the syllabus as well as the training and recruitment of teachers (Cury,
2004, p. 186). Heavily involved in the discussions about and advice on the kinds of
knowledge to be offered in religious education is the Permanent National Forum of
Religious Education (Forum Nacional Permanente do Ensino Religioso – FONAPER),
created in 1995. The FONAPER has been very active in the promotion of courses, in
writing documents and publications, in the definition of the knowledge that ought to be

--- [PDF Page 840 / Book Page 853] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 853

in the curriculum, as well as in the training of teachers. The Curriculum Parameters for
Religious Education, as set out by FONAPER, include the emphasis on the importance
of a pluralist and diversified society, on the religious traditions in different sociocultural contexts, and on the moral attitude of human beings.
The implementation of the curriculum parameters have, though, varied in the different states of the country. The discussions are still very much on. The association of
politics has some bearings with the past. Recently, schools managers and teachers have
been suggesting that a pedagogical school project is a political project as it is based on
a certain vision of the world and a certain ideology.
Finally, the discussions about secular education and lay education go beyond a
“curricular component in schools”, according to Cury (2004, p. 183). The lack of continuities in educational reforms planning and implementation is far more complex. The
difficulty may reside in the historical social-context in which such reforms take place.

Conclusion
Argentina and Brazil have kept, perhaps, a balance between what they have in common
and their differences. Linguistically and culturally, the differences are quite striking.
Portuguese and Spanish are Romance languages, sometimes leading to embarrassing
confusions. The Argentine tango and the Brazilian samba are much embedded in each
culture and do not transfer (in any serious way) between the countries. Politically, both
societies have, since Independence, oscillated between strong, authoritarian (very often
military), and democratic governments. Even a huge national shame – torture – has
tarnished some periods in the history of both countries. Economically, both Argentina
and Brazil have gone from real stages of economic stagnation to a flourishing economy
– though not always at the same time.
In education, the similarities are evident since colonial times. As in Brazil, the Jesuits
dominated the whole Argentine educational system. They built schools throughout the
colony, and they were in charge, teaching and evangelising. Only a very few schools
were under the control of municipalities.
With independence, throughout the nineteenth century, the political system was
rather different in Argentina and in Brazil. So was the educational system. In Brazil,
there was an Empire. Up to the Proclamation of the Republic, the Catholic Church was
the official Church and religious education was compulsory. In contrast, in Argentina,
for only 3 years, from 1943 to 1946, was religious education – compulsorily – part of
the school curriculum.
In both countries, the tensions between the Church and the State loosened occasionally but never disappeared. A strong alliance had been formed with conservative
governments. Whenever democracy is restored, as has happened in the late twentieth
century, especially since Tancredo Neves’ election in Brazil and since Raúl Alfonsín
in Argentina, the Catholic Church has maintained its influence in the formulation
and implementation of educational policies. In Brazil, for example, the 1997 legislation resulted from pressures from the Catholics to change Article 33 of Law 9396 of
1996 – religious education, of an optional nature, remains integral part of the school

--- [PDF Page 841 / Book Page 854] ---

854 Figueiredo-Cowen and Gvirtz

curriculum. In Argentina, it was again the Church which blocked the Kirchner government from introducing a new curriculum content based on the evolution theory.
Equally powerful in both countries is the presence of a high quality level system
of private Catholic schools. A number of them have been able to get subsidies from
the government in order to offer places to the working class. This is an invisible, very
powerful action of the Church in Argentina and Brazil, as well as elsewhere in Latin
America. It should not be underestimated.

References
Alves, M. C. L. (2007). ‘The Good Teacher’: morals, progress, and order in Brazil. Masters Dissertation,
Institute of Education, University of London.
Azevedo, F. (1976). A transmissão da cultura. São Paulo: Melhoramentos/INL.
Azevedo, F. (1932). Manifesto dos pioneiros da educação nova. http://www.histdebr.fae.unicamp.
brdoc1_22e.pdf
Braslavsky, C. (1989). Educación en la transición a la democracia. Casos de Argentina, Brasil y Uruguay.
Santiago: UNESCO/OREALC.
Campobassi, J. (1964). Ataque y defensa del laicismo escolar en la argentina (1884–1963). Buenos Aires:
Ediciones Gure.
Castro, M. (1984). 64: Conflito igreja x estado. Rio de Janeiro: Petrópolis.
Cury, C. R. J. (1978). Ideologia e educação brasileira – Católicos e Liberais [Ideology and Brazilian education – Catholics and Liberals]. São Paulo: Cortez.
Cury, C. R. J. (2004). Ensino religioso na escola pública: O retorno de uma polêmica recorrente [Religious
teaching in the state school: The return of a recurrent polemic]. Revista Brasileira de Educação, 27(1),
183–191.
Falcon, F. J. C. (1982). A Época Pombalina. Política econômica e monarquia ilustrada [The Pombal years.
Economic policies and illustrated monarchy]. São Paulo: Ática.
Figueiredo, M. (1986). Academic freedom and autonomy in the modern Brazilian university – a comparative
analysis. Doctoral thesis, Institute of Education, University of London.
Figueiredo, M. (1987). Politics and Higher Education in Brazil: 1964–1986. International Journal of
Educational Development, 7(3), 173–181.
Franca, L. (1931). Ensino leigo. Ensino religioso. Rio de Janeiro: Ed. Schmidt.
Iglesias, F. (1971). História e ideologia. São Paulo: Perspectiva.
Lima, A. A. (1931). Debates pedagógicos. Rio de Janeiro: Ed Schmidt.
Maciel, L. S. B. & Neto, A. S. (2006). A educação brasileira no período pombalino: Uma análise histórica
das reformas pombalinas do ensino. Educação e Pesquisa, 32(3), 1–9.
Maxwell, K. (1996). Marquês de Pombal – Paradoxo do Iluminismo. São Paulo: Editora Paz e Terra.
Morduchowicz, A. (2001). (Des)regulación y financiamiento de la educación privada en Argentina. In
Educación privada y política pública en América Latina. Buenos Aires: PREAL-BID-CEPA.
Nagle, J. (1974). Educação e sociedade na primeira república. São Paulo: EPU/MEC.
Narodovsky, M. (2001). Segregación y regulaciones en el sistema educativo argentino. In Revista Propuesta
Educativa, no. 24 (pp. 24–52). Buenos Aires.
Pauly, E. L. (2004). O dilema epistemológico do ensino religioso. Espaço Aberto, 27, 172–182.
Piletti, N., & Piletti, C. (1996). História da Educação (The History of Education). São Paulo: Ática.
Pucci, B. (1984). A nova práxis educacional da igreja. São Paulo: Paulinas.
Puiggrós, A. (1989). Educación en la transición a la democracia. Casos de Argentina, Brasil y Uruguay.
Santiago, Chile: UNERCO/OREALC.
Puiggrós, A. (1993). Peronismo: Cultura política y educación (1945–1955), Historia de la educación en la
Argentina, Tomo V. Buenos Aires: Editorial Galerna.
Puiggrós, A. (1996). Qué pasó en la Educación Argentina. Desde la Conquista hasta el Menemismo. Buenos
Aires: Kapelusz.

--- [PDF Page 842 / Book Page 855] ---

The Church and State in Argentina and Brazil 855
Puiggrós, A. Y, & Bernetti, J. (1993). Peronismo: Cultura política y educación (1945–1955), Historia de la
educación en la Argentina, Tomo V. Buenos Aires: Editorial Galerna.
Salem, T. (1982). Do Centro D. Vital à Universidade Católica. In S. Schwartzman (Ed.), Universidades e
Instituições Científicas no Rio de Janeiro. Brasília: Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e
Tecnológico (CNPq).
Schwartzman, S. (1979). A formação da comunidade científica no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Companhia
Editora Nacional/FINEP.
Schwartzman, S. (2004). The Challenges of Education in Brazil. In C. Brock & S. Schwartzman (Eds.), The
Challenges of Education in Brazil (pp. 9–39). Oxford: Symposium Books.
Serrão, J. V. (1982). História de Portugal: O despotismo iluminado (1750–1807). Lisboa: Editorial Verbo.
Sobreira, M. I. F. (2003). A concepção de educação no Positivismo de Comte. Masters dissertation, Federal
University of Minas Gerais.
Tedesco, J. C. (1970). Educación y Sociedad en la Argentina (1880–1900). Buenos Aires: Ediciones
Pannedille.
Tedesco, J. C. (1983). El proyecto educativa autoritario. Argentina 1976–1982. Buenos Aires: FLACSO.
Teixeira Soares, A. (1961). O Marquês de Pombal. Brasília, Editora da Universidade de Brasília.
Teixeira, A. (1968). Pequena introdução à filosofia da educação: Escola progressiva ou a transformacção
da escola. São Paulo: Melhoramentos.

