================================================================================
Chapter 55: Confucianism, Modernities and Knowledge: China, South Korea and Japan
Author(s): Terri Kim
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 857–872
PDF Pages: pp. 843–858 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 843 / Book Page 857] ---

55
CONFUCIANISM, MODERNITIES
AND KNOWLEDGE: CHINA, SOUTH KOREA
AND JAPAN
Terri Kim

This chapter offers a critique of the Confucian legacies in East Asian modernities,
knowledge and pedagogies. Specific examples are drawn from China, Korea and Japan
for comparative analysis. The three countries in East Asia have all experienced the
historical repetitions of discarding and then reviving the Confucian legacy at different
times of modernisation. However, they all have kept the strong Confucian pedagogic
culture, which frames the ways in which knowledge is transmitted and applied to
define modernities in East Asia.
Confucianism has a huge continuity – although it has been travelling widely and rewritten
over time. There have been various East Asian historiographies, writing and rewriting the
Confucian legacy in East Asian modernisation since the late nineteenth century. Scholars
attributed the lack of development in East Asia to that tradition initially, before more
recently attributing the success of these countries to the same tradition (Bellah, 1957, 1968;
Eisenstadt, 1968; Morishima, 1982; Weede, 1996; Bell & Hahm, 2003).
In other words, Confucianism has been used to account for both the failure and success of modernisations in East Asia over time. Confucianism used to be condemned
as a major cause for the economic stagnation of East Asian countries in the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, and then started to be praised as a major constituent
in the belated but rapid economic take-off and sustained industrialisation process in
Japan first, whose path was followed by South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong,
and now China (Berger, 1986, 1988; Tu, 1984, 1996; Tai, 1996).
Overall, Confucianism has been a frame of reference to explain East Asia as if
the legacy of Confucianism is the key to understand the commonality of the East
Asian enigma of late development and fast modernisation. The Confucian paternalistic modalities of family and social relations (Bell & Hahm, 2003), and the public
significance of educational credentials in training and selecting the governing elite,
Mandarin cadre (Zeng, 1999; Wilkinson, 1964, 1969) have been acknowledged as a
chronic attribute to both the retardation and remarkable success in economic development in East Asia (Woo-Cumings, 1999).
Although interpretations of Confucianism have been written at different times in both
positive and negative ways, it is argued that what has not changed is the acknowledgement
of Confucian “pedagogic” attributes to East Asian education and societies. The pedagogic
857
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 857–872.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 844 / Book Page 858] ---

858 Kim

attributes of Confucianism such as filial piety and patriarchal authority can be identified
broadly in the characteristics of Confucian political and social relations sustained in the
extended family-like “network institutionalism” (Ansell, 2006), which generates interdependence, mutual obligation and reciprocity, and strictly hierarchical social relations
according to age, gender and status. However, these characteristics may be identified also
as the common attributes of non-Western, and/or ‘traditional’ societies.
What is regarded as uniquely Confucian is the East Asian ‘secularism’ and ‘meritocracy’ epitomised in the tradition of exam-oriented schooling and the exam-based
selection of the civil servants in East Asia. The state’s control over school curriculum
and other facets of schooling and selection processes in East Asian countries in order
to guarantee the merit-based equality of educational opportunity, in principle, can be
regarded as a particular attribute of the Confucian pedagogic tradition.
Whether this proposition is true or not in practice, and how the Confucian pedagogic
elements are sustained or distorted in the contemporary real-life contexts in China,
South Korea and Japan will be examined. Accordingly, the chapter is organised in
the following thematic order: (i) Confucian concept of modernity; (ii) the nature of
knowledge and education in Confucianism; (iii) East Asian modernisation and the
attributes of Confucianism; (iv) East Asian pedagogic commonality as the attribute
of Confucianism; (v) Confucian impact on educational mobility in the twenty-firstcentury global knowledge economy and migration. The conclusion of the chapter will
discuss a way forward by discussing Confucian pedagogy as dogma in the postcolonial
discourse of Orientalism. A very basic question is raised first: what is ‘Confucian’?

Confucian Modernity and Knowledge
It was in the era of Han Dynasty (206 BC – AD 220) that the Chinese State and the
ruling class of literati developed a strong commitment to the ancient virtues labelled
‘Confucian’. There is a corpus of literature dating from antiquity, the Analects, the
Mencius, the Great Learning, and the Mean, in which Confucius (551 BC – 479 BC) is
revered as a sage; and the literature, however obscure its origin, forms a body of tradition called Confucianism (Zeng, 1999, p. 20).
There is a Confucian belief that knowledge is the beginning of cosmic order in the
following sequence: learning the Confucian ideas and canon, developing thoughts,
maturing souls, self-cultivation, self-realisation, family regulation, the state in proper
order, and the world in peace. In this order, Confucius perceived the State as a product
of natural evolution and therefore it is only a part of society. Neither Confucius nor
his disciples give any formal definition of the State. The existing Western literature
shows that Confucian political thought does not have the idea of the State in Western
terms: that is, the Confucian State does not originate in a “state of nature”, nor does
it take its legitimacy from a “social contract” (Book of Change, Chapter ii, re-quoted
from Hsü, 1932, pp. 33–36). From the formation of earth to the development of ethical State, there are eight steps of evolution symbolised by: Heaven and earth; material
things; male and female; husband and wife; father and son; sovereign and subject; high
and low; and propriety and righteousness. They signify, in order, the physical state,

--- [PDF Page 845 / Book Page 859] ---

Confucianism, Modernities and Knowledge 859

the dawn of life, the dawn of man, the dawn of social life, the age of patriarchy, the
political stage, the constitutional stage, and the moral stage. The ‘Great Appendix’ of
the Book of Change, emphasises these principles of relation and of sequence, according to which the State should be organised (Hsü, 1932, pp. 61–89).
Confucianism is a system of politico-ethical ideas in which rules and principles for
the guidance of private life are bound up with those for the regulation of the public
careers of men entrusted with the responsibility of governing. Therefore, there is a
close link between ethics and politics in the Confucian State. As the state orthodoxy,
Confucianism laid down the principle of social order – that is, an ethic of filial piety
and loyalty for social hierarchy as the key to social stability (Zeng, 1999; Tu, 1996).
Confucianism also connected moral virtue to knowledge. It then exhorted a meritocratic order by rewarding virtue and merit-based Confucian scholarship with official
governing position. During the Han Dynasty (206 BC – AD 220), provincial schools were
established and the Confucian tradition of education was spread across China. Since
then, this corpus of literature was studied by the literate people throughout imperial
Chinese history in the East Asian region. The Four Books were chosen as the curriculum for the civil service examinations keju. Keju was a government-orchestrated
system of high-stakes employment testing, which started to run in AD 606 and officially
ended in 1905, with a total span of almost 1,300 years. At its height of implementation,
millions of examinees were tested in China in each 3-year cycle (Suen & Yu, 2006, pp.
48). At the national level civil service examinations, candidates were tested on the ability to analyse contemporary political problems, in addition to the usual examinations
based on the Classics. There were also highly prestigious special examinations held
occasionally by imperial decree. The less prestigious examinations were testing candidates in law, calligraphy, state ritual and military skills (Dawson, 1981, pp. 71–73).
For the imperial civil service examinations, candidates had to memorise a vast amount
of classic Confucian texts, but never needed to demonstrate the ability to either theorise or challenge a particular premise. The raison d’être of the scholar-Mandarin class
after all was the reproduction of bureaucratic generalists familiar with an accepted
ethical outlook and body of knowledge, but not engaging in epistemic disputation,
nor academic specialisation. According to the exam results in the keju system, successful candidates were appointed to the government posts immediately or eventually.
However, the success rates of these exams were extremely small. During the Tang
Dynasty (618–907), which was a period of political stability and cultural progress on
the basis of the Confucian civil service system, the passing rate of keju was only about
2% (Merson, 1990, p. 86). Overall, keju was a “high-stakes” assessment, as termed by
Suen (2006). The personal endeavour and ordeal that individuals underwent both in the
preparation and in the taking of these exams has become part of Chinese lore.
The strong Confucian culture of learning to succeed in civil service examinations
was emulated in neighbouring countries, especially in Korea. During the Tang Dynasty,
Korean Confucian scholars and students travelled to China to study and prepare for the
Confucian civil service examinations. For instance, Choe Chiwon (857—tenth century), a distinguished Korean Confucian scholar Mandarin, philosopher and poet of
the late Unified Shilla period (668–935), went to Tang China at the age of 12 to study
Confucianism. When seeing off the 12-year-old son, his father told if he did not pass

--- [PDF Page 846 / Book Page 860] ---

860 Kim

the Chinese imperial civil service examination within 10 years, he would cease to be
his son (Samguk Sagi, biography no. 6; requoted from Chang, 1977, p. 57). And within
the decade Choe indeed passed the highest civil service exam to be appointed to high
office in the Chinese government. He remained in China for another decade to serve as
a high-ranking scholar-Mandarin in the Chinese government, close to Emperor Xizong
of Tang China, before returning to Korea (ibid).
In East Asian societies, education has been a forceful instrument of the ruling elite
to govern the state. According to Confucius, it was through education that the ruler
should “learn to care for the people”, while the ruled “learn to be obedient” (Zhou,
1996, p. 242). The Confucian ideal was to put learning and meritocratic selection at the
heart of governing elite culture. Throughout imperial Chinese history, emperors were
regarded as grand patrons of education, paying formal visits to the national university,
issuing edicts for the establishment of schools, and paying honour to Confucius as the
‘first teacher’. Chinese Emperors were lectured on Confucianism by venerable neoConfucian scholars (Dawson, 1981, p. 20).
The democratic and meritocratic nature of Confucian education principle, that is, it
offered a path of upward mobility to anyone who could survive the rigours of study and
examinations, was established by Confucius himself. A traditional saying attributed to him
states that “those who work with their heads will rule, while those who work with their
hands will serve”. To that end, test-driven education became a strategy for survival and
success in East Asian countries. The Chinese meritocratic principle of the civil service
examination to recruit governing elites was also emulated by France and Britain in the
nineteenth century when these countries were expanding their overseas colonies and thus
needed public servants for their far-flung imperial outposts (Wilkinson, 1964, 1969).
The Chinese neighbouring countries of Korea and Japan in East Asia – and also Vietnam
in Southeast Asia by extension – all absorbed and refined Confucianism in the state apparatus, though they had developed their separate versions of Confucianism, which increasingly
diverged along with a different path to modernisation taken by each country (Pye, 1985,
pp. 55–89; Smith, 1996, pp. 155–159). For instance, Confucianism in Korea transformed
its originally matrilineal societal order into a patrilineal one (Deuchler, 1992) to establish a
more hierarchical order, and at the same time to institutionalise the principle of meritocratic
promotion through the civil service examination system – gwageo in Korean – which was
fully adopted in AD 958 and lasted until the late nineteenth century. During the period of
Chosun Yi Dynasty (1392–1910), which was the last and longest-lived dynasty in Korea
and East Asia on the whole, Korea was a thoroughly Confucian State. The Confucian
civil servant examination in Korea was formally abolished during the Gabo Reforms of
1894, along with legal class discrimination and the old rank system (Eckert et al., 1990,
p. 98; Jin, 2005, pp. 226–234).
However, the Confucian principle of examination-based selection of civil servants
has survived strong regardless of modernisation and changes in political and education systems. The meritocratic principle of Confucian civil service examination is still
applied: that is, anyone who passes the civil service examination is to be appointed as a
public servant, and being a civil servant still means having power and security in Korea.
Therefore, entrance into the civil service is highly competitive, and therefore, most of
those who pass the civil service examinations are often from the most prestigious

--- [PDF Page 847 / Book Page 861] ---

Confucianism, Modernities and Knowledge 861

universities in Korea (Kim, 1997). The Confucian scholar-Mandarin tradition has also
survived in contemporary Korea, forming a close collaborative relationship between
the government officials and the university academic profession. It is not so uncommon to see university professors being appointed as ministers or other high-ranking
positions in the government in Korea, or occupying seats in the National Congress
(Kim, 2001, pp. 227–228).
Japan also adopted an examination system, testing the Chinese Confucian classics in the Heian period (794–1185), but unlike in China and Korea where those who
succeeded in the examination were almost always given a high-ranking civil service
position, the main route to the highest positions in Japan was hereditary privilege
based on the on’i system (Amano, 1990, pp. 21–23; Zeng, 1999, pp. 8–9). Japanese
Confucianism started as a cultural ideology serving the political needs of the Tokugawa
shogunate (1600–1868), forging alliances with Buddhism and Shintoism. As time
went on, Japanese Confucianism increasingly diverged from its origin as a political
ideology and became a collection of social and ethical codes (Hwang, 1979, p. 18; requoted from Smith, 1996, p. 158).
Overall, the great significance of Confucianism in the history of East Asian modernity is that Confucius himself was a model and inspiration for countless scholars who
often had to undertake half a lifetime of study before they at last succeeded in passing
the civil service examinations. If they were unsuccessful in these ambitions, for them,
too, teaching was the only obvious alternative outlet for their talents. And many of
them would keep the ambition to become a scholar-Mandarin in the future, especially
at the time of a cabinet reshuffle. They would hope to take the call to assume highranking government positions then.

The Nature of Knowledge and Education in Confucianism
The Confucians believed that there was a body of absolute truths, which combined
moral principles with cosmological laws, and that this body of knowledge had been
already understood and written down by the Confucian sages (Dardees, 1983). This
scholastic belief in a body of absolute truths directed energy towards mastering classical writings and standard interpretations (Wilkinson, 1964, p. 162). Therefore,
Confucian scholarship was dominated by documentary studies that sought to observe
and preserve the traditional conventions of the histories and the classics. Study of
the Confucian cannon was the most valued knowledge in the Confucian State, while
astrology and calendar making played a supporting role. Medicine ranked far down the
list and the status of mathematics was even lower. Technology and applied science did
not find favour in the Confucian World (Wilkinson, 1964, pp. 53–54).
In the Confucian tradition, knowledge per se is not important; it must be practised,
though not pragmatically. Confucius himself dealt with neither theology nor metaphysics, but with moral and political conduct. For Confucius, and for the Chinese tradition
in general, learning did not usually mean the accumulation of knowledge for its own
sake. It meant the gathering of knowledge for the sake of guiding one’s social conduct (Dawson, 1981, pp. 9–10). Given the emphasis on ‘practising’ knowledge, some

--- [PDF Page 848 / Book Page 862] ---

862 Kim

Confucian examination compositions demanded the application of general set rules to
a particular situation or problem – as illustrated earlier, and through Zhu Xi’s emphasis on self-discipline for the governance of men (hsui-chi cihh-jen), neo-Confucian
knowledge was accepted as an ideal for social order in China and throughout East
Asia, wherever the neo-Confucian curriculum became established.
Neo-Confucianism is based on the moral values of universal knowledge application
such as self-cultivation, self-realisation, individual responsibility, family cooperation and
local self-governance (Tu, 1996). Self-cultivation here means to determine one’s proper
position in the network of social relationships and to behave properly according to
one’s position. The principle of self-cultivation is applied to everyone, regardless of social
status hierarchy. The ruler is obliged to set an example for all men of self-restraint, selfcorrection and self-improvement. In that sense, the central concern of Confucian knowledge
is how to learn to be human. Learning to be human in Confucianism is not simply learning
the skills of a particular profession or becoming proficient in one specific task. The
learning process is continuous and holistic in Confucianism.
There are five types of knowledge Confucius saw as being crucial in the process of learning to become human. Each of these five areas is articulated in one of the Five Classics: The
Book of Poetry, the Book of Rites, the Spring and Autumn Annals, the Book of History, and
the Book of Change. During the later Han dynasty, the incorporation of the Analects and
the Book of Filial Piety into the “Five Classics” made up the “Seven Classics”. The basic
neo-Confucian texts, the Four Books, the Great Learning, the Doctrine of the Mean, the
Analects, and the Mencius are centrally concerned with self-cultivation of the person as the
prospective bearer of leadership responsibilities (Hsü, 1932).
The neo-Confucian doctrine was established on the premise that the nature of man is
fundamentally good, but it is also a metaphysical system of thought that endeavours to
find the roots of this premise in the natural order of the cosmos – with a philosophical
account of sagehood, self-cultivation, and, ultimately, the universe. Through deductive reasoning, neo-Confucians divided all existence into two inseparable components,
li and qi. Li is a patterning or formative element that accounts for what things are
and how they behave, or normatively should behave, while qi is the concretising and
energising element. The two are interdependent and inseparable. In this dualism, two
distinct neo-Confucian Schools developed further in Korea since the late fifteenth century: one giving primary emphasis to li, the other arguing the primacy of the role of qi.
These different intellectual visions also competed for political endorsement in Korea
(De Bary, 1981; Eckert et al., 1990).
In China and Korea, the Confucian State organised the education system to transmit this
knowledge based on (neo-) Confucian orthodoxy, and subsequently to recruit into government service those who had best mastered the (neo-) Confucian classics. The core values
exhorted in the (neo-) Confucian classics – humanity, empathy, harmony and the reciprocity of public and private relations and responsibility, civility, and communality – seem to
offer a timeless relevance and universal validity as the ideas of modernity.
However, can we actually ascertain that Confucianism has survived as a dominant moral
pedagogic creed in contemporary China, Korea and Japan? How do we legitimatise the
relevance of Confucianism in the contemporary East Asian contexts of modernity and
knowledge?

--- [PDF Page 849 / Book Page 863] ---

Confucianism, Modernities and Knowledge 863

East Asian Modernisation and the Attributes
of Confucianism
Apart from the origins and deep traditions of Confucianism in China, Korea and Japan
before they followed the Western paths of development, it has been controversial to
discuss the relevance of Confucianism as an epistemic frame of East Asian modernisation and industrialisation. In The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1930)
and The Religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism (1951), Max Weber argued that
the reason why modern capitalism did not develop independently in Asia is primarily
because of the restraining influence of religion: in China, Confucianism and Taoism.
Soon after the Second World War, however, many scholars, journalists, politicians and
other pundits started to reverse Weber’s thesis on Confucianism. While accepting Weber’s
(1930) thesis of a cultural basis for economic activity, they reject any notion that Western
Protestantism is the only, or the best, religious foundation for capitalism. The successful
nation building and economic development of post-war Japan, and then the East Asian
newly industrialised countries (NICs) was then attributed to their common heritage of
Confucianism – as something equivalent to Protestant ethics contributing to industrialisation in Western Europe. Central to the Confucian values are hard work, education, merit
and frugality, and these values are also essential to the development of modern capitalism,
as Weber viewed the Protestant ethic as the engine of Western capitalism.
During the second half of the twentieth century, the success of strong governmentled economic development in East Asia has offered a new model for modernisation
with the concepts of ‘Confucian Capitalism’ (Yoshihara, 1977, 1994; Kahn, 1979;
Vogel, 1979) and the ‘Developmental State’ (Johnson, 1999; Thompson, 1996). The
Confucian characteristics identified by scholars are strong government, tight bureaucratic structure, hierarchical order of social relations and networked social structure,
a high level of educational aspiration and attainment, emphasis on diligence, thrift,
cooperation, and loyalty to one’s group/organisation, etc. Accordingly, Yoshihara
Kunio, a well-known Japanese Development economist, argued that the best way to
hasten economic development is through the strong government or a developmental
state which ‘educates’ the people and initiates a dynamic private sector (Yoshihara,
1977, 1994, pp. 196–197, 202; Berger, 1997, p. 269). Also, in Ideology and National
Competitiveness: An Analysis of Nine Countries, edited by Lodge and Vogel, for example, the concept of a neo-Confucian ‘Developmental State’ is offered to account for the
rise of East Asia (Lodge & Vogel, 1987).
Overall, Confucianism has been interpreted as a frame of reference to understand
the pattern of East Asian political and economic activities in the process of rapid
industrialisation. It has been suggested that the Confucian traditions of patriarchal
authority, filial piety and loyalty in the extended family-like social relations, thrift, hard
work, and most of all, the respect for scholarship and learning and the bureaucratic
privilege, were all embedded in the East Asian political and economic development
(Tai, 1989; Tu, 1996; Berger, 1997).
In Korea, social relations and activities involve concern for inhwa, or harmony
based on respect of hierarchical relationships, including submission to authority. For

--- [PDF Page 850 / Book Page 864] ---

864 Kim

Japan, public relations operate within the context of wa, which stresses group harmony
and social cohesion (Alston, 1989). In both Japan and Korea, employees were often
indoctrinated to regard their workplace as a family environment with the company
director as a family head. They were taught to identify themselves as members of a big
family, typically organised in the order of a Confucian family hierarchy, which is especially visible in big business companies, conglomerates (i.e., Zaibatsu in Japan and
Chaebul in Korea). Given the group orientation demarcating the social boundaries of
inclusion and exclusion, academic bonding (hack-yeon in Korean) has been regarded
as crucial for successful employment and career development in Korea, in particular.
In the academic profession, academic power networks have been most evident in the
proportion of alumni faculty members at major universities; for instance, in 2002,
the proportion was 95.5% at Seoul National University, 80% at Yonsei University, 68%
at Korea University, and 60% was the national average. In comparison, at Harvard
and Stanford, the proportion of alumni (who gained a bachelor’s degree from the university) among the faculty members was only 12% and 1% respectively (KBS 1TV
Report, 10 June 2006).
In China, social relations and organisational behaviour revolve around Guanxi, or
personal connections. The Chinese place great emphasis on rank, but Guanxi operates
on the individual level. Guanxi links two persons, often of unequal ranks, in such a
way that the weaker partner can call for special favours for which he does not have
to equally reciprocate (Alston, 1989). In the Chinese social relations determined by
Guanxi, personal rank or organisational position may not be indicative of his or her
power; a person of low rank, in government or elsewhere, may in fact be very influential because of Guanxi relationships with those in higher positions. This individualistic
aspect of Guanxi, apart from the primary stress on family ties, seems to allow Chinese
workers to change employment easily. Given the cultural terms of the Chinese social
relations, the Chinese-based economies in both mainland China and overseas experience a large rate of both job mobility and entrepreneurship (Alston, 1989; Buttery &
Wong, 1999).
Despite these intra-East Asian variations, it can be suggested that the overall terms
of social relations have been derived from Confucianism, which in this context emphasises the regulation of ‘unequals’ for a harmonious social order. Such interpretations
of the social regulation of Confucianism as attribute to East Asian modernisation and
industrial development are often compared with Weber’s thesis on Protestantism in the
rise of Western capitalism – as indicated earlier.
In this line of discourse, metaphors like dragons, tigers and even cubs have been
adopted to describe the rapid and successful economic developments of East Asian
countries. However, it can be argued that these metaphors are the actual sign of persistent Orientalism applied to the contemporary East Asia. Lee (2006) also contends that
it is a little too far-fetched to emphasise Confucianism as the main cultural attribute to
the capitalist economic success in the East Asian region extensively. For instance, economic
advancement of Hong Kong and Singapore may have been attributed more to the legacy of
British capitalism, and therefore should be differentiated from the Korean and Japanese
pattern of economic development, which was based on a close relationship between
political and business circles. Similarly, Kwon (2007) argues that Confucian virtues

--- [PDF Page 851 / Book Page 865] ---

Confucianism, Modernities and Knowledge 865

can be better seen as the products of the State’s inculcation and social engineering for
modernisation and economic development rather than culturally inherited and embodied
social values.
Staying on this line of argument, it is suggested that what makes Confucianism significant in the trajectory of East Asian modernisation in general is not so precisely related to
economic development per se as the pattern of education and pedagogic relations.

East Asian Pedagogic Commonality as the Attribute
of Confucianism
Some major characteristics of the Confucian pedagogic tradition are embedded in the
East Asian State systems and sociocultural habitus – as incorporated in the concepts of
‘Confucian Capitalism’ and ‘the Developmental State’ as discussed earlier, in which
the relations of high level of educational attainment of the populace and economic
development have been acknowledged. By the 1970s, all children in South Korea and
Taiwan (as well as the rest of East Asia) were in primary schools, and a third or more
were in secondary schools. In contrast India had only 50% of girls in primary schools,
while in Bangladesh it was 34% and Pakistan 22% (Pempel, 1999, p. 170). It has been
suggested that the Confucian ethics and values in learning and hard work are both
directly and indirectly contributing to the rapid and successful national development
in East Asia.
Confucian values stress the importance of education and the ethics of hard work,
and harmonious but hierarchical social relations, and the Confucian literature equates
education with ‘moral training’. In the Book of History and in the Mencius, it is
reported that the legendary sage-emperor Shun appointed a Minister of Education to
give instruction to the people because they were not observing the five basic relationships – that is, the duties involved in the relationships between father and son, ruler
and subject, husband and wife, elder brother and younger brother and friend and friend
(Dawson, 1981, p. 11). The Confucian stereotype of the gentleman also epitomises the
Confucian advocacy of learning and the virtue of frugality, which was much admired
by Confucius: a poor scholar strives for examination success despite his humble origins. Overall, it can be argued that Confucian pedagogic legacy of ‘filial piety’ and
‘meritocracy’ continued to serve in the East Asian schooling systems in the course of
rapid industrial development.
A notable commonality in the East Asian schooling systems is that school education
is serving the purpose of examination-based selection. (The educational selection system for university entrance has been most controversial in education reforms in Korea,
for example. It has changed more than ten times since 1945.) Arguably, however, the
strong zeal for learning in East Asian societies often does not derive from intellectual
curiosity or thirst for knowledge per se, but from the single-minded pursuit of a successful university entrance and a successful job. Lack of curiosity in learning is closely
related to lack of creativity in education.
Overall, the strong culture of learning across East Asian societies is often a highly
focused and purposeful activity to prepare for various kinds of examinations and

--- [PDF Page 852 / Book Page 866] ---

866 Kim

eventually to gain certificates. The pragmatic value and use of formal education has
been highly appreciated by the common people themselves, who are eager to take
and use education as an important conduit for upward social mobility. It has been
reported that 72.6% of all Korean students take additional private tuitions after school
to prepare for and excel at the competitive university entrance examinations (Choi,
2003; KEDI, 2003). Given the culturally deep-rooted stress on higher learning and
significant rewards afterwards when successful in examinations, the enrolment rate in
higher education in East Asian countries is very high in general. The case of Korea, for
instance, shows that 97% of 18-year-olds graduated from high schools, with 81.3% of
these advancing to higher education institutions in 2005. Similarly, in Japan, 97.5%
of 15-year-olds proceeded to senior secondary education, and 76.2% of 18-year-olds
went on to higher/post-secondary education institutions in 2005 (Yonezawa & Kim,
2008). Other East Asian countries such as Taiwan and Hong Kong, which are often
identified as ‘mini dragons’ as inheriting the Chinese Confucian traditions, have also
shown high levels of educational attainment. China is moving towards mass higher
education since 1999, given the rapidly increasing gross enrolment rate in higher education from 9.8% in 1998 to 22% in 2006 (MoE, PRC; China News, 10 March 2007:
www.china.org.cn).
Whilst serving individual pragmatic needs for education, the modern schooling systems in East Asia have been carefully designed to meet the State’s political
and economic projects such as mass socialisation into the prevailing values of
the predominant regime, unifying society, producing skilled labour for rapid
industrial development, and regime continuity (Pempel, 1999, pp. 137–181). The
government’s regulations over educational institutions for the state’s purposeful,
utilitarian, technically functional uses of (higher) education are the common characteristics in China, Korea and Japan, denoting the mixed historical legacies of
the Confucian, Japanese imperial/colonial State, and Mao’s cultural revolution
and Chinese communist education. All in all, it can be argued that the trajectories of East Asian modernisation and political and economic developments have
been closely linked to the Confucian legacy of valuing education in general. The
Confucian political ideal was ‘to rule the state by moral virtues’, which had to be
developed by ‘education’.
In the Confucian tradition of education, stress is always on living well, living
properly, here and now, and by one’s own actions. According to Confucius, society is
made up of five basic relationships: Confucius laid great emphasis on harmony and
his teaching was largely concerned with the problems of good government: “Only after
the self is cultivated, can the family be regulated; only after the family is regulated,
can the state be governed; and only after the state is governed, can peace be brought
to the land” (Confucius, 2006, p. 8). Thus, the most distinct value of Chinese society
is harmonious relationships, not only within oneself, but with other people, or even
nature and the whole world. The Confucian concept of learning can then be considered
as humanistic, universal lifelong education which starts with self-cultivation and continues in day-to-day social actions as praxis. Such a group-oriented attitude has been
believed conducive to both economic productivity and social cohesion in East Asian
countries.

--- [PDF Page 853 / Book Page 867] ---

Confucianism, Modernities and Knowledge 867

In the Confucian culture-framed East Asian societies, learning together in a ‘social
setting’ is highly treasured (Yang, 1981). This may be related to the group orientation (like a web-like extended family relations) in Confucian pedagogic traditions,
which is in contrast to the individual-centred learning in Western/European pedagogic
tradition. At the micro level of observation on East Asian instructional practices, we
can also find the continuity and commonality in the pedagogic style in East Asia.
For instance, in China, Korea and Japan, classroom teaching is conducted typically
in a whole-class setting where the role model of the teacher is essential. The expectation of the teacher in Confucian East Asia is still that he be a scholar gentleman with
good subject knowledge. Expertise in pedagogy is secondary. This results in a direct
teaching to the whole-class mode in East Asian countries. Such an expectation of a
‘scholar-teacher’ and a modality of whole-class teaching can also be found in the old
European university lecture tradition; but not so much in the contemporary AngloAmerican pedagogic model. Overall, in the Confucian framed East Asian education
tradition, a teacher should be primarily a scholar before he is able to play the role of a
facilitator of learning.
Can we say then that there is a Confucian pedagogic element embedded in the commonalities of East Asian instructional practices? And what are the values implicit
behind these common instructional practices? The curricula in the East Asian schooling
systems are content-oriented and test-driven, in general (Zeng, 1999), and accordingly,
East Asian education has often been criticised as learning by rote. However, the scholars in the Effective Schools movement have revalued the East Asian mode of ‘learning
by repetition’, arguing that repetition in the East Asian pedagogic context is a conduit
to deeper understanding and thus it should be differentiated from the much criticised
concept of ‘rote’ learning in the West (Biggs, 1994,1996; Marton et al., 1996).
However, an obvious problem with the East Asian whole-class teaching and learning
by rote and exam-centric systems is that only a certain type of individual is chosen:
that is, those with a good memory, who are extremely hardworking, pliant, and good
at tests, even though there is no strict proven correlation between possessing these
qualities and being a good administrator or bureaucrat as idealised in the Confucian
tradition.
Overall, it can be said that the main goal of East Asian schooling has been to
produce literate, disciplined workers for factories and offices; and the secondary
goal is that by pushing students through a tapering hierarchy of universities, the
graduates of top-tier universities are likely to be successful in the meritocratic competitions to enter the best jobs in government ministries and major corporations.
In East Asian schools, the pecking order comes straight from grade scores. In fact,
this type of elitism, over time, has engendered insularity, cronyism, arrogance, and
an ideological and intellectual conformity and rigidity in Korea, which eventually
can corrupt the Confucian principles of egalitarian educational opportunity and
meritocratic selection. The current pattern of educational mobility and migration
from East Asia, notably from Korea and China nowadays, to other countries, e.g.,
to the United States, in particular, and other English-speaking countries, points to
the fact that there is strong public demand for alternative ‘internationalised’ education at all levels in East Asian countries.

--- [PDF Page 854 / Book Page 868] ---

868 Kim

The Confucian Impact on Educational Mobility
in the Twenty-First-Century Global Knowledge
Economy and Migration
An ancient Chinese story about Mencius’ mother, who moved home three times to
provide her son with good teachers, good neighbours, and good peers for a good education, is still very much relevant to contemporary East Asian mothers – the image of
the ‘education mother’ is well known.
Educational migration has become a new trend in East Asia. There has been steep
increase in the number of Korean students going abroad more recently. According to
OECD, Korea has the second largest absolute number of students (after China) studying abroad. The number of primary and secondary school students in Seoul who have
gone abroad to study was 7,001 between March 2005 and February 2006, marking an
increase of 15% (Seoul Metropolitan Office of Education; reported in Dong-A Ilbo,
11 May 2006). The number of Korean students studying in the United States alone
is estimated at 93,728 in April 2007. According to the US Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) report, this is the largest absolute number – 14.9% of the total
number of foreign nationals studying in the United States, 630,998 – followed by India
(76,708), China (60,850), Japan (45,820), and Taiwan (33,651) (US ICE; re-quoted/
reported by Kyunghyang Shinmoon, 5 April 2007).
The number of Korean students going abroad, especially to the United States for studying
purpose (at all levels from primary to higher education) has continued to increase, more
than 10% per annum (Kyunghyang Shinmoon, 5 April 2007). The contemporary trend of
educational migration notably from East Asia (Korea, China and Japan and Taiwan) to
the United States and other English-speaking, advanced countries is an interesting and
significant phenomenon to re-posit as entwined with the deep residual Confucianism in the
minds of East Asian people, creating a new geography of transnational academic mobilities
and networks in the twenty-first century (Kim, 2008).

Conclusion
The importance of Confucianism as a major reference for understanding East Asia
has pervaded the dominant Western discourses on the rise of East Asia. In the political economic field, Confucianism was first seen as inhibiting development by Western
theoreticians, and then was seen as encouraging it.
In China, Confucian thought was essential to the Empire – and then Mao attacked
it in the course of Chinese communist modernisation. During the Cultural Revolution,
an anti-Confucius campaign was organised and many Confucianists and intellectuals
were killed and some Confucian temples and statues were destroyed. However, now
that China has become a major player in the global market economy, the Chinese
communist government has begun to promote Confucianism as well in order to wield
China’s ‘soft power’ across the globe. More than 120 Confucius institutes have been
set up around the world – all sponsored and promoted by the Chinese National Office
for Teaching Chinese as a Foreign Language, attached to the Chinese Ministry of

--- [PDF Page 855 / Book Page 869] ---

Confucianism, Modernities and Knowledge 869

Education. The official aim of Confucius institutes, since first opened in Seoul, South
Korea, in 2004, is to promote Chinese culture and language (Hyland, 2007). These
overseas Confucian institutes are seen as part of a diplomatic strategy for China to
gain global influence through education and culture capital. Such ‘soft power’ is particularly influential in Asia-Pacific countries, where large ethnic Chinese communities,
natural resources and close relations with the United States are the incentives to the
Chinese government.
Overall, in East Asia, Confucian thought has been moving, and has been changed
and institutionalised in different ways. In terms of education, however, Confucianism
gives a number of simple unchanging pedagogic patterns – such as the status of teachers, exam-driven schooling, the culture of patriarchal authority and hierarchy, respect
for seniority, conforming to group norms, and individual success in education tied to
‘family face’ (Watkins & Biggs, 1996).
However, even in the field of education, Confucianism has been subject to a double
interpretation – for example, the typical East Asian emphasis on memorisation and
rote learning has been appraised both critically and positively. A number of authors –
for example, Watkins and Biggs (Eds.) (1996) – have tried to explain the phenomenon
referred to as ‘the Asian learner paradox’. This is the apparent contradiction between the
teaching methods/educational environment in East Asia (i.e., large classes, a teacherdirected whole-class teaching, examination-driven, content-oriented curriculum rather
than process, emphasis on memorisation, etc.), and the fact that East Asian students
have regularly performed better than their Western counterparts in international measurements – such as the IEA Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
(TIMSS) and the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA).
In the PISA results reported in 2003, Korea, Japan and China were all highly ranked.
Korea, for instance, was near the top of the league in mathematics, reading literacy
and science, and at the top for problem-solving (www.pisa.oecd.org). Having noted the
successful performance of East Asian students in international tests, however, it should
be equally noted that Confucian thought has always stressed the moral, and this has
affected the culture of schools (and not just the formal curriculum).
So there is something odd about Confucian thought – sets of double and changing
interpretations in many places. Despite all these changing accounts and contradiction,
Confucianism has always been used as a major explainer of ‘East Asia’. The overgeneralisation of East Asian commonalities as ‘Confucian’, however, could easily trap
us in the (self-) Orientalising discourse. This may distract us from the possibility of
new alternative interpretations.
The academic practice of Orientalism1 is found among contemporary East Asian
scholars as well, whose analyses actually refer to the Western narratives of East Asia. As
Meredith Woo-Cumings argued, “the East Asian response is reactive” (Woo-Cumings,
1993, pp. 142–143). For instance, Michio Morishima (1982), in his book Why Has
Japan ‘Succeeded’?: Western Technology and the Japanese Ethos, explains Japan’s
success as part of the wider Confucian heritage of East Asia. Morishima emphasised
the importance of the role played in the creation of Japanese capitalism by ethical
doctrines transformed under Japanese conditions, especially the Japanese Confucian
tradition of complete loyalty to the firm and to the state.

--- [PDF Page 856 / Book Page 870] ---

870 Kim

Critics have used the term ‘new Orientalism’ to denote the notions of an essentialist
approach to Confucianism. The contemporary “Asian Values” discourse, for instance,
can be understood as a postcolonial Asian remake of Orientalism, which serves some
political agendas in Singapore and Malaysia (Berger, 1997, pp. 265–275). Hung-chao
Tai asserts that the “cultural setting” of Japan and the East Asian NICs creates what he
describes as an ‘Oriental’ economic development model, which rests on “human emotional bonds, group orientation, and harmony”. He argues that the “Oriental model” is
the first “meaningful alternative” to the Western model (Tai, 1989, pp. 6–7).
Overall, such a postcolonial discourse of ‘new Orientalism’ can be understood as
a dialectical movement in East Asia. East Asian ‘Orientals’ have been incorporating
Confucianism in their making and remaking of an East Asian version of modernity
– given the Western reprises of revaluing Confucianism to classify East Asia over
time. In that sense, Confucianism has been a dogma in the postcolonial discourse of
Orientalism. The use of Confucian pedagogic attributes in the account of East Asian
‘modernities’ and modernisation will continue to change and evolve – obviously. The
trouble is that we do not know yet how.

Notes
1 I am indebted to Professor Robert Cowen for the initial suggestion that I should think about Orientalism
and Confucianism as a frame of reference.

References
Alston, J. P. (1989). Wa, Guanxi, and inhwa: Managerial principles in Japan, China, and Korea. Business
Horizons, 32(2), March–April, 26–31.
Amano, I. (1990). Education and examination in Modern Japan. W. Cummings & F. Cummings (trans.).
Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Ansell, C. (2006). Network institutionalism. In R. A. W. Rhodes et al., Oxford handbook of political institutions, Oxford University Press.
Bell, D., & Hahm, Chaibong (Eds.) (2003). Confucianism for the modern world. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bellah, R. (1957). Tokugawa religion: The cultural roots of Japan. New York: The Free Press.
Bellah, R. (1968). Reflections on the Prostestant ethic analogy in Asia. In S. N. Eisenstadt (Ed.), The
Protestant ethic and modernization: A comparative view. New York: Basic Books.
Berger, P. L. (1986). The Capitalist revolutions: Fifty propositions about prosperity, equality, and liberty.
New York: Basic Books.
Berger, P. L. (1988). An East Asian development model? In P. L. Berger & H. H. M. Hsiao, (Eds.), In search
of East Asian development model. New York: Transaction.
Berger, M. T. & Borer, D. A. (Eds.) (1997). The rise of East Asia: Critical visions of the Pacific century.
London: Routledge.
Biggs, J. B. (1994). What are effective schools? Lessons from East and West (The Radford Memorial
Lecture). Australian Educational Researcher, 21(3), 19–39.
Biggs, J. B. (1996). Western misconceptions of the Confucian-heritage learning culture. In D. A. Watkins &
J. B. Biggs (Eds.), The Chinese learner, cultural psychological and contextual influence. Hong Kong:
Comparative Education Research Centre.
Buttery, E. A., & Wong, Y. H. (1999). The development of a Guanxi framework. Marketing Intelligence &
Planning, 17(3), 147 – 155.
Chang Tok-Sun (1977). Ch’oe Ch’i-won and legendary literature in Korea. Journal, 17(8), August, 56–64.

--- [PDF Page 857 / Book Page 871] ---

Confucianism, Modernities and Knowledge 871
Choi, S-K et al. (2003). A study on the reality and volume of private tutoring expenditure. Korean Educational
Development Institute Research Paper No. CR 2003-19, (published in Korean). Seoul: KEDI.
Confucius (2006). The great learning & the doctrine of the mean. B. Bruya (trans.) (original work traced
back to 2,500 years ago). Beijing: Xiandai Press.
Deuchler, M. (1992). The Confucian transformation of Korea: A study of society and ideology. Cambridge,
MA,: Harvard University Press.
De Bary, W. T. (1981). Neo-Confucian orthodoxy and the learning of the mind-and-heart. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Dardees, J. W. (1983). Confucianism and autocracy: Professional elites in the founding of the Ming dynasty.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Eckert, C. J., Lee, Ki-baik, Lew, Y. I., Robinson, M., & Wagner, E. W. (1990). Korea old and new: A history.
Published for Korea Institute, Harvard University, Seoul: Ilchokak Publishers.
Hahm, Chaibong (2004). The ironies of Confucianism. The Journal of Democracy, 15(3), July, 93–107.
Hsü, L. S (1932). The political philosophy of Confucianism, an interpretation of the social and political
ideas of Confucius, his forerunners and his early disciples. London: Routledge & Sons.
Hwang, Byung Tai (1979). Confucianism in modernisation: Comparative study of China, Japan and Korea
(Ph.D. thesis), Berkeley, University of California.
Hyland, T. (2007). Confucius say… universities at risk in link-up with Chinese Government. The Age, 18
November. (http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/confucius-say – universities-at-risk-in-linkupwith-chinesegovernment/2007/11/17/1194767024579.html: Accessed on 22 November 2007)
Kahn, H. (1979). World economic development: 1979 and beyond. Boulder, CO,: Westview Press.
KEDI (2003). Measures against private tutoring: Material for the fifth public hearing. Korean Educational
Development Institute, RM 2003-32-5 (published in Korean). Seoul: KEDI. Kim, I. W. (1998) Hankook
moosock sasang yonku [A Research on shamanistic ideology in Korea]. Seoul: Jipmoon-dang.
Kim, T. (2001). Forming the academic profession in East Asia: A comparative analysis. New York and
London: Routledge.
Kim, T. (2008). Transnational academic mobility in a global knowledge economy: Comparative and
historical motifs. In D. Epstein, R. Boden, R. Deem, F. Rizvi & S. Wright (Eds.), World Yearbook
of Education 2008—geographies of knowledge, geometries of power: framing the future of higher
education. London: Routledge.
Kim, Young-Pyoung (1997). The Korean civil service system: A country report. A paper presented at the
Research Consortium of Civil Service Systems in Comparative Perspective, 5–8 April. Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN. (http://www.indiana.edu/csrc/kim1.html: Accessed on 22 November 2007).
Kwon, Keedon (2007). Economic development in East Asia and a critique of the post-Confucian thesis.
Theory and Society, 36(1) March, 55–83.
Johnson, C. (1999). The developmental state: Odyssey of a concept. In M. Woo-Cummings (Ed), The developmental state (pp. 32–60). Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.
Lee, Seung-hwan (2006). A topography of Confucian discourse: Politico-philosophical reflections on
Confucian discourse since modernity. Translated from Korean by Jaeyoon Song and Seung-hwan Lee,
Paramus. New Jersey: Homa & Sekey Books.
Leung, F. K. S. (1998). The implications of Confucianism for education today. The Journal of Thought,
33(2), 25–36.
Liu, Shu-hsien (1996). Confucian ideals and the real world: A critical review of contemporary neo-Confucian
thought. In Tu, Wei-ming (Ed.), Confucian traditions in East Asian modernity (pp. 92–112). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Lodge, G. & Vogel, E. (Eds.) (1987). Ideology and national competitiveness: An analysis of nine countries.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Marton, F., Alba, G. D., & Tse, L. K. (1996). Memorizing and understanding: The keys to the paradox? In D. A.
Watkins & J. B. Biggs (Eds.), The Chinese learner. Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research Centre.
Merson, J. (1990). The genius that was China: East and West in the making of the modern world. Woodstock,
NY: Overlook Press.
Morishima, M. (1982). Why has Japan succeeded?: Western technology and the Japanese ethos. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Said, E. (1978). Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books.

--- [PDF Page 858 / Book Page 872] ---

872 Kim
Smith, R. (1996). The Japanese (Confucian) family: The tradition from the bottom up. In Tu, Wei-ming,
Confucian Traditions in East Asian Modernity (pp. 155–174). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Suen, H. K. and Yu, L. (2006). Chronic consequences of high-stakes testing? Lessons from the Chinese civil
service exam. Comparative Education Review. 50(1), February, 46–65.
Tai, Hung-chao (1989). The Oriental alternative: An hypothesis on culture and economy. In Tai, Hung-chao
(Eds.), Confucianism and economic development:An Oriental alternative (pp. 6–37). Washington D.C.:
The Washington Institute Press.
Thompson, M. (1996). Late industrialisers, late democratisers: Developmental states in the Asia-Pacific.
The Third World Quarterly, 17(4), 625–647.
Tu, Wei-ming (Ed). (1996). Confucian traditions in East Asian modernity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Vogel, E. (1979). Japan as number one. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Weber, M. (1930). The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. Translated by T. Parsons. New York:
Scribner’s.
Weber, M. (1951). The religion of China: Confucianism and Taoism. Translated by H. H. Gerth. New York:
Free Press.
Wilkinson, R. (1964). The prefects: British leadership and the public school tradition, a comparative study
in the making of rulers. London: Oxford University Press.
Wilkinson, R. (Ed) (1969). Governing elites: Studies in training and selection. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Woo-Cumings, M. (Ed) (1999). The developmental state. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.
Woo-Cumings, M. (1993). East Asia’s America problem. In M. Woo-Cumings & M. Loriaux (Eds.), Past as
prelude: History in the making of a new world order. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Yonezawa, A., and Kim, T. (2008). The Future of Higher Education in a context of a Shrinking Student
Population: Policy challenges for Japan and Korea In the OECD Volume: Demographic Challenges and
their Impact on the Future of Higher Education, edited by Stéphen Vincent-Lancrin, Paris: OECD (in
press).
Zeng, Kangmin (1999). Dragon gate: Competitive examinations and their consequences. London: Cassell.
Zhou, Nanzhao (1996). Interactions of education and culture for economic and human development:
An Asian perspective. In J. Delors et al., Learning: The treasure within, Report to UNESCO of the
International Commission on Education for the Twenty-first Century. Paris: UNESCO, 239–248.

