================================================================================
Chapter 56: Hinduism, Modernity and Knowledge: India
Author(s): Joseph W . Elder
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 873–887
PDF Pages: pp. 859–873 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 859 / Book Page 873] ---

56
HINDUISM, MODERNITY AND KNOWLEDGE:
INDIA
Joseph W. Elder

Introduction
Four thousand years ago on the Indian subcontinent priests (Brahmans) were teaching Hinduism’s most ancient texts, the Vedas, to the sons of privileged families. These
Vedas, preserved and memorized in a liturgical language, included a curriculum of
sacrificial formulas, incantations, and magical spells that assumed a host of deities
capable of responding to appropriately framed human petitions. Brahmans specialized
in framing those petitions to the deities by performing fire sacrifices accompanied by
correctly intoned Vedic recitations.
After 1947 India became a sovereign democratic republic committed, according to
its constitution, to social, economic and political justice; liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; and equality of status and of opportunity. Article 45 of
India’s constitution declared that “the State shall endeavour (sic.) to provide, within
a period of ten years … for free and compulsory education for all children until they
complete the age of fourteen years”. The language used by India’s national leaders
while drafting their constitution was English – the language of a foreign power that had
ruled sections of India since 1757.
During the intervening 4,000 years, what happened to the knowledge of those
ancient Vedas, to the language in which they were composed, to the training in textual
memorization by which that knowledge was transmitted, and to the Brahman priestly
reciters, preservers, and expanders of the Vedic curriculum? This article will examine
the Hindu knowledge traditions in ancient India, their differences from Buddhist and
Jain knowledge traditions, their modifications in subsequent centuries, the knowledge
traditions of the Jews, Christians, and Muslims who settled in India, the educational
policies introduced by the British colonial rulers after 1757, the educational policies
adopted by independent-India’s government after 1947, and the emergence of militant
Hindu groups with their own views of educational knowledge and how to introduce
that knowledge into India’s current school curricula.

Knowledge Traditions in Ancient India
For centuries before the Vedas were written down, they were transmitted orally from
Brahman (priest) teachers to young men of the three higher ranks (referred to as varnas):
873
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 873–887.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 860 / Book Page 874] ---

874 Elder

the priests, warrior-administrators, and wealth-producers. According to Brahman
texts, women and those of the fourth (servant) varna were prohibited from learning either the Vedas or subsequent Hindu texts such as the Brahmanas, Aranyakas,
and Sanskrit Upanishads, Sutras, and Shastras (Van Buitenen, 1970, pp. 4–7). By the
end of the fourth century BCE the grammarian Panini had generated over 4,000 rules
for a “purified” Sanskrit language. Subsequently, elite young men sitting in the presence of their teachers (gurus) memorized Sanskrit grammar rules, learned to chant
accurately intoned Vedic passages, and debated points of complex schools of Hindu
philosophy (Ghosh, 2002, p. 18). According to tradition, in time the Brahman Kautilya
authored a Sanskrit text on statecraft, Caraka wrote a Sanskrit text on medicine, and
Bharata composed a Sanskrit text on performing arts. Again according to tradition,
the Brahman sage Manu produced one of many dharma Shastras (treatises on correct
moral conduct) that mandated Brahman superiority, prohibited inter-varna marriages,
and stigmatized categories of polluted people.
In northern India Mahavir (the founder of Jainism) and Buddha (both fifth century BCE) preached their doctrines of enlightenment denying the authority of Brahman
priests and the usefulness of the Vedas. Their teachings and subsequent commentaries in liturgical or Buddhist Sanskrit and the spoken Pali and Prakrit languages were
transmitted to the young not by individual gurus but by groups of monks in monasteries called viharas. Some of the viharas (both Mahayana and Theravada) evolved into
monastic universities. A major Buddhist university in Nalanda (in present-day Bihar)
founded in the fifth century CE flourished for six more centuries. According to a visiting Chinese monk, Nalanda University offered extensive training in Buddhist, Jain,
and Vedic knowledge to as many as 10,000 students (including foreign scholars) at any
given time (Basham, 1959, p. 165).
During the millennia before and after the start of the Common Era, major cities
such as Kashi (Banaras), Prayag (Allahabad), Taxila, and Kancipuram became centers of classical Hindu learning. During this period new narrative texts were added to
the Sanskrit Hindu corpus: the massive epics Ramayan and Mahabharat and shorter
Puranas describing gods and goddesses unheard of in the Vedas. Although such
Vedic gods as Agni, Indra, Mitra, Soma, and Varuna continued to be addressed in
Brahman-administered rituals, popular devotions focused on such deities of the epics
and Puranas as Vishnu, Lakshmi, Ram, Sita, Krishna, Radha, Shiva, Parvati, monkey-bodied Hanuman, elephant-headed Ganesh, and many others (Roy et al., 2005,
pp. 76–87). The narratives describing these deities’ adventures, passions, and foibles
were typically recited in public settings open to all Hindus. Geographical sites in India
became associated with specific deities and events: Brindavan where Krishna sported
with the milkmaids; Rameshwaram from where Hanuman’s monkey army attacked
Sri Lanka; Ayodhya, one of Lord Ram’s birthplaces; Janakpur, Sita’s hometown; and
Banaras, Shiva’s shining city. Beginning around the fifth century CE Hindus built
temples near these sites and often attached to them schools in which high-ranking
neighborhood children, particularly Brahman boys, could study. When Hindu monastic orders began to appear, some of the ashrams or monasteries where their founders
and propagators lived, such as Sringeri and Srirangam in southern India, became centers for the transmission of their Hindu philosophical systems.

--- [PDF Page 861 / Book Page 875] ---

Hinduism, Modernity and Knowledge: India 875

Jews, Christians, and Muslims, when they arrived in India, established their own
schools where their children could learn Hebrew, Persian, or Arabic and study the Bible
or Qur’an, and related commentaries. The Jews along India’s Malabar Coast built their
own synagogues and trained their own rabbis. As Muslims built mosques throughout
India, they frequently constructed maktabs or madrasas (Qur’anic schools) with their
mosques. There, local maulvis could teach neighborhood children about Islam and
encourage them to be better-educated members of the Muslim ummah (community)
(Ghosh, 2002, pp. 138–139). When Roman Catholic and Protestant missionaries came
to India, one of their first acts often was to establish schools for Christian converts and
potential converts in order to establish congregations that would continue to propagate
the faith.
Throughout the centuries Brahmans wrote Sanskrit texts not only on dharma (correct moral conduct) but also on such topics as theories of esthetics and performance.
However, India’s musical, dance, and artistic knowledge traditions, although they might
have made reference to those Sanskrit texts, were primarily transmitted from gurus to
students, often in the gurus’ homes. Artistic lineages evolved, known as paramparas
(Ghosh, 2002, p. 140), that traced their training through a succession of gurus back to
a presumed “original” guru. Some temples and royal courts provided financial support
for performing artists and their paramparas, but the transmission of the performing
arts themselves required years of disciplined learning by students from their gurus. In
similar ways medical practitioners acquired knowledge from various texts (Sanskrit,
Greek, Arabic, etc.) but primarily through apprenticeships with active medical practitioners. The skills of artisans, carvers, calligraphers, painters, and weavers were
likewise typically transmitted through households, relatives, and kinship lineages.

British Colonial Educational Policies
In 1757, following the battle of Plassey, the British East India Company acquired
administrative control of sections of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa. For several decades
the Company had no formal policy regarding education. Meanwhile, the Company
acquired control of ever larger sections of the Indian subcontinent. Finally, in 1817 the
Company founded Hindu College in Calcutta, followed in 1827 by Elphinstone College
in Bombay. By now a debate had arisen among the Company’s directors over whether
the language of education in their territories should be Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, local
languages, or English. In 1835 the Company chose to follow the recommendations of
Thomas Babington Macaulay’s “Minute on Education.” Macaulay’s “Minute” declared
there were no Indian books on any subject that deserved to be compared to British
books. Macaulay argued that the purpose of education in Company-controlled territories should be to form a class of Indians who could interpret the Company to their
fellow Indians – “a class of persons Indian in blood and colour [sic.] but English in
taste, in opinions, in morals, and in intellect. (DeBary et al., 1958, p. 601) In subsequent
decades such educated Indians came to be called “brown Englishmen”.
The Company’s decision to use public funds for public education, mandate English
as the all-India medium of instruction, and adopt the English curriculum for academic

--- [PDF Page 862 / Book Page 876] ---

876 Elder

content had far-reaching consequences. One consequence was that no efforts were
made to incorporate Vedic, Jain, Buddhist or Muslim “other” knowledge into the
schools’ curriculum. At that time the Vedic, Jain, Buddhist, and Muslim centers of
“other” knowledge were too varied and too locally based to mount a coherent opposition to Macaulay’s “Minute”. The centers for such “other” knowledge were left
to support themselves – or disappear. Another consequence was that many uppercaste young Hindus, recognizing career possibilities with the British, enrolled in the
Company schools, exposing themselves to English “intellect”. Muslim young men
were less eager to do so (DeBary et al., 1958, pp. 739–740). Another consequence of
the Company’s decision was that for the first time educated Indians throughout India,
regardless of their birthplaces or mother tongues, could communicate with each other
through a common language – English.
In 1854, following Charles Wood’s recommendations, the Company established
throughout British India an English-model school system topped by universities teaching British-university curriculum. The Company also established “aided” schools.
Privately funded schools that met certain requirements regarding curriculum, staffing, and external examinations could receive government grants-in-aid. The Company
forbade mandatory religious instruction in any “aided” schools. This “aided-school”
policy encouraged educators to found schools of widely differing religious preferences and accept government money on condition no students were required to attend
religious classes.
In 1857 the Universities of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay were established with
affiliated colleges patterned directly after the British university system. 1857 also
marked a transition in British-Indian history. Following widespread violence in northern India suppressed by British military retaliation, Queen Victoria replaced East India
Company rule with direct rule from Britain’s parliament. India was now the “crown
jewel” of the British empire.
In 1883, a retired British-India civil servant, Allan Octavian Hume, addressed a letter to Calcutta University graduates declaring they were the salt of the land and should
lead in shaping their country’s future. Partly in response to Hume’s letter, a group of
university graduates gathered in Bombay in 1885 and founded the Indian National
Congress. One of the Congress’s first acts was to call for greater Indian participation
in the British-Indian civil and judicial services (DeBary et al., 1958, pp. 660–663).
The Congress also advocated increasing involvement of Indians in determining their
own destinies, drawing on principles enunciated by British authors such as Jeremy
Bentham, James Mill, and John Stuart Mill whose writings they had studied in college. For generations of upwardly mobile Indian youths, the path to success required
an ocean voyage to England, a British higher degree, and a career back in one of India’s
growing cities sharing a social life with other middle-class English-educated Indians.
Some Indians were sensitive to the cultural denigration implicit in assumptions of
Britain’s intellectual superiority and the need to study for higher degrees in England.
Sir Syed Ahmed Khan (1817–1898), an Indian Muslim, studied in England, returned
to India and in 1875 founded an Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh where students
could study classical Arabic and learn about the Qur’an and Muslim jurisprudence
alongside European knowledge. In 1916 a Hindu, Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya,

--- [PDF Page 863 / Book Page 877] ---

Hinduism, Modernity and Knowledge: India 877

founded Banaras Hindu University where students could learn Sanskrit and Pali and
study Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain texts alongside European philosophies and sciences.
These two universities’ endowments mandated the imparting of Muslim and Hindu
instruction respectively. Mohandas Gandhi, who too as a young man travelled to
England and earned a law degree, became increasingly critical of British-style education. In the 1930s Gandhi advocated the replacement of British-style education from
bottom to top with self-supporting village-level “basic education” schools teaching
local languages, training children in village crafts, and preparing them to remain, and
improve the quality of life, in India’s hundreds of thousands of villages.
Despite the introduction of publicly funded schools by the British during the final
century of their rule in India and their establishment of some centers of academic
excellence, illiteracy remained a major fact of life in most of India. In 1947, when
India became independent, 85% of India’s population over age 10 were considered
illiterate – 73% of the men and 93% of the women (Davis, 1957, p. 151).

Hinduism in Post-Independence India
The Constitution that came into effect January 26, 1950, stated that India was committed to securing to all its citizens “liberty of … faith and worship.” Article 25(1)
declared that “all persons are equally entitled … freely to profess … practise [sic.]
and propagate religion”. Article 27 announced that “No person shall be compelled to
pay any taxes, the proceeds of which are specifically appropriated … for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion ….” Article 44 stated that “the State
shall endeavour [sic.] to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code ….” No place of
importance was given to Hinduism, the religion most closely associated in the public
eye with the Indian subcontinent.
India’s Constitution further established that matters of education were to be primarily in the hands of state governments rather than the federal government. The
pre-Independence policy of “aided” schools continued in post-Independence India. It
fuelled a rapid expansion of privately initiated elementary and high schools, colleges,
and universities, with state governments providing supplementary financial support,
controlling the curriculum, and administering the examinations. Article 28(3) of the
constitution continued the principle of religious neutrality in “aided” schools declaring
that no such schools could require their students to participate in religious instruction
or worship. This principle was applied across a wide range of institutions: government
schools, Muslim madrasas, Sikh schools, Christian convents, Dayanand Anglo Vedic
schools, and Ramakrishna Mission educational centers. The relatively even-handed
allocation of funds to a wide variety of educational institutions has done little since
1951 to improve educational levels of low-caste and tribal children (Govinda, 2002,
pp. 72–95).
According to India’s Constitution, in elementary schools throughout India the
medium of instruction would be the children’s mother tongues, that is, India’s regional
languages. It was hoped that this would facilitate the rapid expansion of literacy.
According to the constitution, India’s official language was to be Hindi, a language

--- [PDF Page 864 / Book Page 878] ---

878 Elder

spoken in the “Hindu belt” of northern India by about one-third of India’s population.
Throughout the non-Hindi-speaking regions of India, Hindi would be introduced
in schools as a second language. According to India’s constitution, in 15 years
English would be replaced by Hindi, and English would no longer be the official
language of India.
Outcries arose in regions of India where Hindi was not spoken. Millions of citizens
felt threatened. If the policies enunciated in the constitution were implemented, in less
than two decades they would permanently become disadvantaged citizens in their own
homeland – disenfranchised because their mother tongue was not Hindi. Anti-Hindi
protests in the southern states where Dravidian languages were spoken led to threats
of secession from the Indian union. Anger against the constitutional policies was
expressed in a series of national elections. Finally, in response to the agitation, parliament passed the 1967 Official Languages Amendment Bill indefinitely extending
the use of English in India. This brought a temporary end to the anti-Hindi agitation.
It also brought a renewed interest in English-medium education. A young Englishtrained job-seeker could look for work anywhere in India; whereas a Hindi-only or
regional-language-only trained job-seeker could look for work only in a specific region
of India.
In the 1980s and 1990s, as India increasingly participated in the global economy,
students’ and their parents’ demands for English-medium education at all levels
increased dramatically. Many primary and secondary schools and most colleges began
to provide additional classrooms for students wishing to study in English. Evidence of
the high quality of one’s education could be seen in one’s excellence in pronouncing
and writing English and obtaining admission into graduate programs in the United
States or Great Britain.
During the early decades following India’s Independence school curricula gradually shed their British past. Writings by Shakespeare and Tennyson were replaced by
poems by Rabindranath Tagore and Henry DeRozio. Stories of Helen of Troy and
the Trojan horse were replaced by episodes from the Hindu Ramayan, Mahabharat,
and Puranas. In their textbooks children now read about Lord Krishna and the milkmaids, the monkey-bodied Lord Hanuman, and the elephant-headed Lord Ganesh.
At all levels textbooks reminded India’s schoolchildren that Gandhi was the father of
India and India had won its independence from Britain by following Gandhi’s nonviolent leadership. Other heroes of the children’s textbooks were the Emperor Ashoka,
who renounced war and implemented Buddhist teachings throughout his land and the
Emperor Akbar, who, though a Muslim, encouraged interfaith dialogue throughout his
empire (Elder, 1971).
Policies adopting and increasing the use of regional languages in elementary schools
raised fears at the highest government levels that such policies might generate fissiparous tendencies. In time such tendencies might lead to the division of the Indian
subcontinent into a collection of small countries with their own languages, flags, and
armies. In 1956, the redrawing of India’s internal state boundaries along linguistic lines
appeared to some to be an ominous step toward India’s fragmentation. In 1961, to offset these possibilities, the central government set up a National Integration Committee
to encourage cooperation between India’s regions and religions. The government

--- [PDF Page 865 / Book Page 879] ---

Hinduism, Modernity and Knowledge: India 879

recognized school textbooks as possible vehicles for conveying to children messages
of regional harmony, interreligious respect, and national integration. Textbooks carried
stories of children from different regions in India – West Bengal, Kashmir, Kerala,
Punjab – describing their homes, food, dress, and regional festivals, and stressing that
they were fellow citizens of India (Bhattacharya, 1998).
The Partition of the Indian subcontinent into India and Pakistan appeared to some to
ease the problem of Hindu-Muslim relationships. Before Partition, Muslims comprised
24% of India’s population; after Partition they comprised only 11%. Now that Pakistan
existed, Muslims who wanted to live in a Muslim-majority region could migrate to
East or West Pakistan. Inside India the only state with a Muslim majority was the
former kingdom of Jammu and Kashmir where 77% of the population were Muslims.
But Kashmir’s inclusion in the Indian union remained disputed.
At the time of India’s and Pakistan’s independence, over 500 princely states existed
on the Indian subcontinent, each of which had been assured by the British that as long
as it had a male heir and paid its taxes to the British treasury it could indefinitely retain
its semi-autonomous princely state status. Independence and Partition ended those
arrangements. Each princely state was required to accede to either India or Pakistan
depending on its geographical location within the new national boundaries. For most
princes the decision was simple; their state was either inside India or inside Pakistan.
For the Raja of the kingdom of Jammu and Kashmir, however, the decision was more
difficult. His kingdom adjoined both India and Pakistan; he could, therefore, accede to
either country. The majority of Kashmiris were Muslims; the Raja and his family were
Hindus. The Raja vacillated. The date for signing the articles of accession came and
went; on August 15, 1947 India and Pakistan became independent. Muslim militants
in Kashmir took matters into their own hands. Trying to force the Raja to accede to
Pakistan, they threatened to overrun Kashmir’s capital, Srinagar. The Raja called on
India for military assistance. India’s Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru insisted that
India’s military units could not enter Kashmir unless it was formally a part of India.
Under those conditions the Raja signed the articles of accession – with the understanding that when all foreign troops had vacated Kashmir the citizens could hold a
plebiscite to determine whether to join India or Pakistan. Indian army units flew into
Kashmir and drove the militants back from the capital (Wirsing, 1994, pp. 39–41). In
1949, the United Nations mandated a cease-fire between India and Pakistan with UN
observers stationed along a defined Line of Control separating Pakistan-occupied and
India-occupied Kashmir.
Within the next few months all foreign troops did not vacate Kashmir. A plebiscite
was not held. An uneasy peace settled over the region periodically broken by crossborder incursions and civilian and military deaths. In 1950, India’s constitution (Article
370) guaranteed a special status for Kashmir differentiating it from all other Indian
states. Inside Kashmir only Kashmiris could own land. Furthermore, the Kashmir state
assembly would be allowed to oversee most of its internal affairs except for defense,
communications, and foreign policy, where final decisions would remain in the hands
of India’s federal government. In 1956, seeing no evidence of change in the Kashmir
situation, India declared that Kashmir was now an “integral part of the Indian union.”
Pakistan objected strongly. Between 1965 and 1999 India and Pakistan fought three

--- [PDF Page 866 / Book Page 880] ---

880 Elder

wars, in two of which the status of Kashmir played a major role. Each war aggravated
tensions in India between Hindus and Muslims, recalling the terrible days of Partition
and raising Hindus’ doubts about the ultimate loyalties of those Muslims who chose to
remain in India instead of joining their Muslim relatives in Pakistan. Within these contexts, India’s constitutional commitment granting equal rights to Muslims and Hindus
did not go unchallenged. Some Hindus felt that independent India gave special privileges to Muslims inasmuch as the majority-Muslim state of Kashmir enjoyed greater
autonomy than any other state in the union, and India’s Muslims were not obliged to
conform to India’s uniform civil code – being informally permitted to observe their
own shariah law regarding such matters as marriage, divorce, and inheritance. While
textbooks declared that all of India’s citizens – its Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs,
Jains, Buddhists, Parsis, and others – lived under the same law, it was apparent, nevertheless, that in certain respects Muslims lived under their own Muslim law.

The Rise of Militant Hinduism
In 1924, a Maharashtrian Chitpavan Brahman, V.D. Savarkar, whom the British had
previously jailed for terrorism, published a pamphlet titled Hindutva! Who Is A Hindu?
According to Savarkar, a Hindu was a person who regarded the Indian subcontinent
as his fatherland, his holy land, and the cradle of his religion. Savarkar advocated
the re-conversion to Hinduism of all former Hindus who had become Muslims or
Christians. He described Mahatma Gandhi’s nonviolence as “absolutely sinful” and
criticized Gandhi’s often-expressed concern for the well-being of India’s Muslims.
During World War II Savarkar coined the phrase “Hinduize all politics and militarize
Hindudom.” (DeBary et al., 1958, p. 886) Savarkar provided moral support to the
Chitpavan Brahman who assassinated Gandhi in 1948 for Gandhi’s efforts to protect
Muslims. In time Hindutva came to mean militant Hinduism.
Savarkar’s call for Hindutva resonated among various groups in India. The Hindu
Mahasabha (“Great Assembly of Hindus”), founded in 1919, elected him president for 7
consecutive years. The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) (“National Association of
Volunteers”) incorporated some of Savarkar’s statements into their para-military training
of youth volunteers. The RSS adopted saffron, the color of Hindu renunciants’ robes, for its
flag. The term “saffronization” was applied to efforts to extend Hindutva’s ideologies.
Starting in 1951, three Hindu political parties, the Hindu Mahasabha, the Jan Sangh
(“People’s Association Party”), and the Ram Rajya Parishad (“Council of Lord Ram’s
Reign”) ran Hindu-focused candidates in India’s national elections – with mixed results.
A cultural movement founded in 1964, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) (“World Hindu
Council”), sought to invigorate Hinduism throughout India with well-organized rallies and
cross-country chariot processions. In 1966, the Shiv Sena (“Shiva’s Army”) was founded in
Bombay, originally to discourage “outsiders” such as south Indians from coming to work in
Maharashtra, later to strengthen Hindu positions on political issues.
In 1980, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) (“All-India People’s Party”) emerged from
several parties’ reorganizational efforts. Starting by winning only 7% of the seats in
India’s parliament in 1984, the BJP gained more seats in each subsequent national

--- [PDF Page 867 / Book Page 881] ---

Hinduism, Modernity and Knowledge: India 881

election until, in 1995, it won 30% of the parliamentary seats. As the largest party, the
BJP was invited to form the national government. However, because of the BJP’s links
with Hindutva and Hindu “communalism,” other parties refused to join a coalition,
and the BJP lost that opportunity to form the government. Two years later, in the 1998
elections, the BJP won 33% of parliament’s seats and again was invited to form the government. This time the BJP was able to organize a coalition government (Puri, 2005).

Militant Hinduism, Educational Knowledge,
and Pedagogical Transmission
In its powerful position in the 1998 coalition government, the BJP could finally begin
to implement policies it had advocated for nearly two decades. During those decades
the BJP had witnessed the Islamization of Pakistan, the Khomeini-ization of Iran,
and the Talibanization of Afghanistan. In each case Muslims had molded their political structures to project their religious pride and religious convictions. Now the BJP
could try to project its Hindu religious pride and religious convictions through the
“saffronization” of India’s political and educational structures. The concept of a secular state was criticized as a Western imposition on an intrinsically spiritual India.
Educated Indians speaking flawless English were criticized for being modern versions
of Macaulay’s “brown Englishmen”.
During the 1980s and 1990s, such groups as the RSS, VHP, and BJP had begun
to write a “saffron” history of India. Based on their interpretation of the Vedic term
“Aryan” (“noble ones”), their history declared that the Aryans antedated by 2,000
years the “Harappan-civilization” cities discovered in the Indus river valley by archaeologists in the 1920s (Elliott, 2001). The archaeologists’ theories (discredited by later
archaeological findings) proposed that sedentary dark-skinned Dasyus (referred to in
the Vedas) had occupied the cities for hundreds of years before they were replaced by
mobile Aryans. Hindutva advocates, despite considerable counterevidence, proposed
that the Aryans had originated in India and had developed the original Indo-European
language, branches of which eventually spread to Europe to become Greek, Latin,
the Germanic languages, and English. According to Hindutva historians, the Aryans
in India developed highly sophisticated knowledge of philosophy, psychology, anatomy, medicine, chemistry, astronomy, astrology, physics, and engineering. They
developed flying machines, long-range missiles, and weapons of mass destruction.
They also developed a superior form of social life and organization spelled out in the
Brahmanical literature. In the Aryan golden age, people, fulfilling the duties of their
birth-assigned varnas, lived in harmony, following ethical principles taught by Vedic
sages, Brahmans, and renunciants. The Aryans developed unique forms of music,
dance, drama, art, and architecture. Neither famines nor epidemics nor wars disturbed
the Indian subcontinent.
After centuries, however, this harmony was disturbed. The disturbances arose from
foreign invaders. First came the Muslims, loyal to Arabia, plundering temples, destroying sacred images, and forcing conversions to Islam by the sword. “Muslim” rulers
fought “Hindu” rulers until “Muslim” rulers controlled much of the Indian subcontinent.

--- [PDF Page 868 / Book Page 882] ---

882 Elder

Then came “Christian” Europeans, loyal to Jerusalem, the Vatican, European nations,
or Great Britain who defeated both “Hindu” and “Muslim” rulers, drained India of its
wealth through taxation and economic manipulation, and acquired Christian converts
by offering them education and government jobs. According to the Hindutva historians, in 1857 Hindu soldiers, supported by Hindu citizenry, rebelled against their
British officers in India’s first war of Independence. By 1858 the soldiers and citizenry
had been brutally suppressed by the British, but the Hindu fight for independence had
been launched. For eight more decades Hindu freedom fighters struggled – violently
when necessary – to dislodge the British from India. In 1947 they succeeded. The
Hindu citizenry and leaders won India’s independence (Bhambhri, 2001).
Hindutva historians selectively ignored “positive” contributions Muslims had made
to India during those years. Missing were accounts of the religiously tolerant Muslim
emperor Akbar and such Muslim freedom-fighters as Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan.
Missing also were such magnificent architectural monuments built by Muslims as the
Taj Mahal and Humayun’s tomb. Ignored were the forms of art, music, dance, and
cuisine incorporating Muslim and Hindu elements, historical documents written in
Persian by Indian Muslims, the Urdu language, festivals combining Hindu and Muslim
features, sites sacred to both Muslims and Hindus, and accounts of kingdoms with
Hindu rulers and their Muslim retinues and Muslim rulers with their Hindu retinues
that refused to be defined as either “Hindu” or “Muslim”.
Hindutva historians also selectively ignored “positive” contributions the British had
made to India. Missing were the British concepts of the “rule of law” and an impartial
judicial system, the network of railways and postal and telegraph services that linked
together India’s remotest regions, the English language by means of which Indians
working for Indian independence communicated with each other, institutions of higher
learning whose graduates participated on a world stage, and internationally acclaimed
English-language writers such as Rabindranath Tagore.
According to the Hindutva historians, the British had left India an impoverished
third-world country facing a staggering legacy of economic problems. After Partition
the British had continued (unsuccessfully) to try to exploit India. But at least the
British were gone. The Muslims, however, had remained. As India’s independence was
approaching, they had demanded the subcontinent’s partition and a separate Muslim
nation. Despite many Hindus’ reservations, in 1947 the subcontinent had been divided,
and the Muslims had gotten their Pakistan. But that did not end the matter. Since
1947 Muslims in Pakistan had repeatedly conducted cross-border incursions into
Kashmir, killing thousands of Hindu soldiers and civilians. Furthermore, ever since
1947 Muslims inside India had demanded – and gotten – special privileges including
a uniquely autonomous Kashmir under the constitution’s Article 370 and preferential
exemptions as Muslims from portions of India’s uniform civil code.
To add to the anti-Muslim sentiments they were fanning, Hindutva supporters were
identifying Muslim-inflicted historical “wrongs” that now needed redress. One particular target was a mosque built in Ayodhya during the sixteenth century by the Muslim
emperor Babur. According to the VHP and RSS, Babur had built his mosque on the
birthplace of Lord Ram, hero of the Hindu epic Ramayan, after destroying and using
in his mosque pieces of a Hindu temple consecrating that spot. In the VHP and RSS

--- [PDF Page 869 / Book Page 883] ---

Hinduism, Modernity and Knowledge: India 883

interpretation, Lord Ram, a mythical hero with many attributed birthplaces, became
a historical human being with an established time and place of birth. Members of the
VHP and RSS defined Babur’s mosque as a humiliating relic of Muslim dominance
needing to be destroyed and replaced by a temple to Lord Ram. On December 6, 1992
thousands of Hindu activists broke through a protective fence and reduced Babur’s
mosque to a mound of rubble. Shock waves spread through India’s Muslims. AntiMuslim riots broke out in several cities. Before the rioting ended, hundreds of Muslims
had been killed. Again, in 2002, anti-Muslim violence related to Babur’s mosque
erupted, this time in the state of Gujarat. Once again hundreds of Muslims were killed.
In both cases of anti-Muslim violence the BJP did little to halt the violence or punish
the perpetrators. If anything, the BJP endorsed the Hindutva construction of history
that made Lord Ram into a historical person whose birthplace had been desecrated.
After the BJP’s successes in the 1998 elections, the party began implementing its
views of Hinduism through India’s political structures (Ahuja, 2004, pp. 48–58). The
BJP appointed Murli Manohar Joshi, a BJP supporter, to head the Union Human
Resource Development Ministry that dealt with education at the federal level. Joshi
had declared he wanted to “Indianize, spiritualize and nationalize” India’s primary and
secondary schools (Singh/Waghai). M. M. Joshi, in turn, appointed BJP supporters to
key positions in the Indian Council of Social Science Research, the Indian Council of
Historical Research, and the University Grants Commission. The Indian Council of
Historical Research halted the publication of two volumes of documentary sources
dealing with India’s independence movement from 1937 to 1947 on the grounds that
the volumes were overly secular and Marxist and under-represented the RSS’s role in
the independence movement. The normally rigorous University Grants Commission
began to fund dubious courses in Vedic mathematics and astrology.
In 1999 M. M. Joshi appointed J. S. Rajput, a member of the RSS, to chair the
National Council for Educational Research and Training (NCERT) that supervised
government curricula and textbook publication. In 2000, J. S. Rajput directed all
Central Board of Secondary Education affiliated schools to delete certain “objectionable” pages from current history textbooks. “Objectionable” pages included
references to the founder of Jainism not changing his clothes for 12 years before
adopting nudity; Tamil Brahmans eating beef; a Muslim ruler being generous to
Hindu court musicians; Sikhs, Jats, and Shivaji (a Hindu ruler) “plundering” nearby
regions; and British citizens condemning atrocities committed by their own British
troops in India. None of these passages fit the BJP view of Hinduism’s spiritual superiority
over Muslims and Christians.
J. S. Rajput introduced new history textbooks written by BJP supporters. Among
these new textbooks’ inaccuracies were references to India being the original home
of the Indo-European speaking Aryans; castes being unrelated to Hinduism; Muslims
bringing into India little except oppression and temple-destruction; and any Muslim
rulers who were wise or tolerant originally being Hindus who were converted to Islam.
One of the new textbooks describing India’s religions failed to mention either Muslims
or Sikhs.
Scholars protested the new BJP textbooks. In 2003, a committee of the Indian
Historical Congress published a 155-page History in the new NCERT Textbooks:

--- [PDF Page 870 / Book Page 884] ---

884 Elder

A Report and an Index of Errors criticizing many items presented as facts in the
BJP-sponsored textbooks. Scholarly reviewers found the textbooks to be chauvinistic, communally biased, and hostile to the idea of India having a composite culture
invigorated by Muslim and European elements.
In India’s April 2004 elections India’s voters replaced the BJP-led coalition with
a Congress-Party-led coalition. The BJP’s M. M. Joshi stepped down as head of the
Union Human Resource Development Ministry. In his place the winning Congress
Party appointed Arjun Singh, who quickly selected a three-person committee to
study the controversial textbooks and suggest appropriate next steps. Inside India
the “saffronization” of textbooks began to recede. But this did not automatically stop
“saffronization” processes outside India. One noteworthy process occurred in far-off
California, United States.
Every 6 years the state of California had to approve a list of history books from
which school districts could select textbooks. In 2005, some history books that
dealt with India contained accurate but “offensive” statements that Hindus had
many gods and goddesses, that Hindus considered some people to be untouchables,
and that in ancient India men had many more rights than women (Taneja, 2006,
p. 78). In California the Hindu Education Foundation and the Vedic Foundation
(based in the United States but with links to Hindutva groups in India) requested
the California State Board of Education Curriculum Commission to make certain
changes that modified history and enhanced the glories of ancient India. Harvard
University Professor Michael Witzel, upon learning of the Hindu foundations’
efforts, sent a letter to the Curriculum Commission, co-signed by nearly 50 scholars, charging that the recommended revisions were “un-scholarly [and] politically
and religiously motivated”.
The California Board and Commission found themselves caught in a cross fire.
On January 6, 2006, they heard Professor Witzel debate Professor Shiva Bajpai, a
supporter of most of the Hindu foundations’ requests. After the debate both scholars
agreed to a few specific sentence changes. Then the matter was referred to a subcommittee for future reference (Center for South Asian Studies, 2006, pp. 3–7).
When faced with a choice between full academic rigor and cultural sensitivities, the
California Board and Commission preferred to err on the side of sensitivity toward
those Hindus who, with their families, had moved to California. Militant Hindus among
the new arrivals tried to define for other Indians and the California Board a Hindutva
view of history and Hinduism that ought to be taught in California’s public schools.
If their Hindutva views were validated by a school board in the United States, that
“international” validation would strengthen their position back in India. As the Indian
Diaspora extends around the world, and Hindus describe their heritages to their new
neighbors, future debates will occur regarding what did or did not happen years ago on
the Indian subcontinent and how that should or should not be incorporated into systems
of educational knowledge and forms of pedagogical transmission outside of India.
To return to questions raised at the beginning of this chapter: during the 4,000
intervening years after Brahman priests transmitted knowledge of the Vedas through
memorization to the sons of privileged families, what happened in India to the knowledge of those ancient Vedas, to the language in which the Vedas were composed, to the

--- [PDF Page 871 / Book Page 885] ---

Hinduism, Modernity and Knowledge: India 885

training in textual memorization by which that knowledge was transmitted, and to the
priestly reciters and preservers of the Vedic curriculum?
Today outside India’s mainstream educational institutions, the Vedic curriculum is
still taught in isolated locations presumably much as it was 4,000 years ago (Fuller,
2003, p. 123). Young men (primarily Brahmans) memorize correctly intoned Vedic
passages under the tutelage of Brahman gurus. The Vedas they memorize still include
a curriculum of sacrificial formulas, incantations, and magical spells. Priestly reciters
of Vedic rituals are still in demand in major Hindu temples today, including Hindu
temples in Great Britain and the United States. Sanskrit as “purified” by the fourthcentury BCE grammarian Panini is still taught in Indian schools and universities, and
Panini’s grammar is studied in linguistics departments inside and outside India. Today
Kautilya’s Sanskrit text on statecraft is read only by the curious antiquarian. In several locations in India today students can earn degrees in Ayurvedic medicine and
astrology. Bharata’s Sanskrit text on performing arts is still referred to in India’s academies of dance and music in efforts to link today’s artistic performances with classical
Sanskrit aesthetic principles. Today Manu’s Sanskrit Dharma Shastra is burned in
public protests by one fifth of India’s citizens, members of lower castes, who define
themselves as Dalits (“the oppressed”) and blame Manu’s stigmatization of categories
of polluted people for two millennia of their oppression at the hands of India’s higher
castes (Zelliot, 1972, p. 77).
At most, however, this Vedic knowledge and its curriculum are peripheral to most
of India’s ongoing educational strategies. India’s declared policy of public funds for
mandatory education – though still unrealized – is enshrined in India’s constitution.
Schoolchildren are not required to memorize the Vedas. Training is not restricted to
sons of the three highest varnas. India’s educational policies are heavily shaped by
the federal and state governments, both of which have continued, with modifications,
much of the curriculum introduced by the British when they ruled India: mathematics,
science, regional language, Hindi and English (both India’s official languages), geography, history, and literature. By now the classroom materials dealing with geography,
history, and literature have abandoned much of their former British content. Instead
of reading about Robert Bruce and the spider or the Dutch boy and the dyke, India’s
schoolchildren read stories of Ram’s victory over the demon Ravan, Krishna stealing
the butter, and Arjun winning the archery contest and thereby the hand of the princess
Draupadi. When not tied to a Hindutva agenda, these stories from the epics and Puranas
are viewed as common culture narratives rather than as actual historical events that
occurred in some fixed times and places. To pass the external English exams in high
schools and colleges, students memorize the plots of Shakespeare’s major dramas.
During the months preceding the annual high school examinations many families hire
private tutors to come to their homes before and after regular school hours to prepare
their children to write the external examinations, practicing on exam questions from
previous years. At college and university levels measures of distinction include admission for postgraduate study in leading universities in Britain and the United States.
India’s educational policies have included the founding and maintenance of over
200 universities with thousands of affiliated colleges following the British model,
and external examiners and examinations in place to maintain standards of academic

--- [PDF Page 872 / Book Page 886] ---

886 Elder

integrity. National policies have included the establishment of Indian Institutes of
Technology and of Management that have produced world-class computer engineers,
information technologists, and corporate executives. India’s educational curricula are
selected by state-appointed boards of education – not by Brahman Vedic specialists.
The decisions of boards of education, however, are capable of being shaped by the
ideologies of those in political power making appointments to the boards of education –
witness events during the BJP’s 5 years in power from 1999 to 2004. During those
years a Hinduism was promulgated that did not exist 4,000 years ago – invented and
elaborated as Hindutva in the twentieth century. It was a Hinduism defined largely by
rejecting “other” non-Hindu components of India’s history – components contributed
by Muslims, Europeans (primarily the British), and, more recently, Americans.
India’s electorate voted the BJP out of office in 2004 and with it the BJP’s educational policies. However, passions will continue to surface regarding India’s national
identity and, hence, the goals of India’s educational system. Is one of those goals to
produce contemporary versions of Macaulay’s brown Englishmen? Is one of those
goals to produce Hindutva graduates denying events in India’s history and marginalizing significant portions of India’s current populations? Is one of those goals to produce
graduates participating in the most significant issues of our time while drawing on the
rich histories and cultures of the Indian subcontinent? Or is one of those goals some
as-yet undefined Indian participation in the twenty-first century? Regardless of eventual outcomes, for the foreseeable future Indians will continue to debate the usefulness
of ancient versus contemporary knowledge; the advantages of rejecting, adapting, or
adopting “outside” bodies of knowledge; and the ways in which Hinduism can be
incorporated into contemporary education while Hinduism itself continues to change –
as it has for thousands of years.

References
Ahuja, G. M. (2004). Bharatiya Janata party and resurgent India. New Delhi: Ram Co.
Basham, A. L. (1959). The wonder that was India: A survey of the culture of the Indian sub-continent before
the coming of the muslims. New York: Grove Press.
Bhambhri, C. P. (2001). Hindutva: A challenge to multi-cultural democracy. Delhi: Shipra Publications.
Bhattacharya, S. (Ed.) (1998). The contested terrain: Perspectives on education in India. New Delhi: Orient
Longmans.
Center for South Asian Studies (2006). CSAS professors contribute to debate on California textbooks.
Newsletter, 16(1), 3–7.
DeBary et al. (Eds.) (1958). Sources of Indian tradition. New York: Columbia University Press.
Davis, K. (1957). The population of India and Pakistan. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Elder, J. W. (1971). The decolonization of educational culture: The case of India, Comparative Education
Review, 15(3), 288–295.
Elliott, J. (2001). India moves to ‘Talibanize’ history: Children will learn that the Chinese (sic.) are descended
from Hindu warriors if Indian ministers have their way with the school curriculum, New Statesman,
Dec. 17, 2001.
Fuller, C. J. (2003). The renewal of the priesthood: Modernity and traditionalism in a south Indian temple.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ghosh, S. C. (2002). Civilisation, education, and school in ancient and medieval India, 1500 B.C.–1757
A.D.: Ancient India, 1500 B.C.–1192 A.D., Vedic Schools and Buddhist Viharas and medieval India,

--- [PDF Page 873 / Book Page 887] ---

Hinduism, Modernity and Knowledge: India 887
1192 A.D.–1757 A.D., Maktabs and Madrashas [i.e., Madrasahs], Mosques and Khanqahs, Frankfurt
am Main and New York: Peter Lang.
Govinda, R. (Ed.) (2002). India education report. New Delhi and New York: Oxford University Press.
Keith, A. B. (1925). The religion and philosophy of the Vedas and Upanishads. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Puri, G. (2005). Hindutva politics in India: Genesis, political strategies and growth of Bharatiya Janata
Party. New Delhi: UBSPD Publishers.
Singh/Waghai, A., A real textbook case: The BJP has begun to rewrite India’s history, Asiaweek, http://www.
asiaweek.com/ asiaweek/99/0326/nat7.html.
Roy, K., Chakrabarti, K., & Sarkar, T. (2005). The vedas, Hinduism, Hindutva. Kolkata: Ebong Alap.
Taneja, N. (2006). A saffron assault abroad, Frontline, January 27, 77–78.
Van Buitenen, J. A. B, rev. ed. (1970). Vedic and Upanisadic bases of Indian civilization. In J. W. Elder (Ed.),
Chapters in Indian civilization, vol. I. Classical and medieval India. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.
Wirsing, R. G. (1994). India, Pakistan, and the Kashmir dispute: On regional conflict and its resolution.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Zelliot, E. (1972). Gandhi and Ambedkar – A study in leadership. In J. M. Mahar (Ed.), The untouchables in
contemporary India (pp. 69–95). Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press.

