================================================================================
Chapter 57: Reflections on Educational Transitions in Egypt, Lebanon and Turkey
Author(s): Jennifer Ashkenazi
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 889–905
PDF Pages: pp. 874–890 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 874 / Book Page 889] ---

57
REFLECTIONS ON EDUCATIONAL TRANSITIONS
IN EGYPT, LEBANON AND TURKEY
Jennifer Ashkenazi

The historical intercultural encounters between Islam and the West in the Middle East
have intrigued numerous historians, political theorists, anthropologists and sociologists.
Within this context, one of the most debated topics has been the actual influences of
Westernisation on the Islamic World and the actions and reactions of the Islamic World
during the periods of intense Westernisation. Education was a key element of the traditional Islamic societies that underwent dramatic change. Alongside its vital role of
training new generations of Islamic intellectuals, education was of major importance in
the process of spreading new ideologies that accompanied the modernisation of Middle
Eastern societies, and in particular, in the emergence of Islamic national movements.
Since the nature of Western influence differed across the states that emerged in the
Middle East, it is impossible to point to a single general pattern of development in
national education in this area. In order to exemplify the variations and similarities
in the changes of knowledge traditions, this chapter will describe and compare the
essential characteristics of national education development in three Middle Eastern
countries: Egypt, Turkey and Lebanon. The study will concentrate in each country on
the negotiations between Islamic educational traditions and modern (Western) reforms.
Generally, the crucial moment for each country was manifested in the attempt to create
a national system of education, and thereby create national citizens. It will be shown
that these key transitions, which occurred in the political and social spheres, and their
effects, are still visible today. In their transformations into “modern” nation states,
Egypt, Turkey and Lebanon adapted key aspects of Western, often secular, traits into
their traditional educational systems; the resulting systems reflected the differences in
the political and national developments in each state.
This chapter will begin with a general overview of traditional Islamic education,
which was similar in form and content in most Middle Eastern and North African societies. Islam was fundamental not only to education, but was the base of most formal
and informal cultural and social institutions and practices.

Islamic Educational Traditions
The Ottoman Islamic empire, from which Egypt, Turkey and Lebanon emerged as
nation states, lasted for over 600 years (1299–1922) and is credited with extraordinary
889
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 889–905.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 875 / Book Page 890] ---

890 Ashkenazi

achievements in philosophy and science, in addition to its essential religious philosophy. Education and the acquisition of knowledge were interwoven into Islamic culture
and played a central role in a Muslim’s life. Major centres of learning existed across
the Middle East in Baghdad, Damascus, Isfahan and Istanbul. A tradition of Islamic
education, emphasising rhythmical and chanting methods of memorisation, was developed early in medieval times and is still maintained today (Hilgendorf, 2003).
The fundamental theory of Islamic education is based on the first verse revealed to
the Prophet Mohammad: Read, in the name of Thy Lord and Cherisher Who created …
and taught the use of a pen. Studying, and the transmission of knowledge to others,
were fundamental themes in the Islamic tradition and were based on the memorisation,
recitation and discussion of the Qur’an, the only text required for Muslims to study
(Massialas & Jarrar, 1991, 92 ff). Because of the high value placed on education,
mosques became the first schools in Islamic education, in addition to their function
as places of worship (Grabar, 1969; Berkey, 2003). The importance of the mosque for
Muslims, as a place for gathering and worshipping cannot be overemphasised, for it
had implications beyond the religious and social aspects of the community, namely,
in the political sphere (Tibawi, 1972). The mosque was and continues to be a symbol
of Muslim identity in many communities. According to one scholar, “the first school
for all Muslim children, even today, remains the mosque, where he learns to read and
memorise portions of the Qur’an and the tenets of the creed” (Saqib, 1983, p. 66).
The early forms of Islamic learning which showed the connection between school
and mosque (Berkey, 1992; Lapidus, 1988), focused on younger children and eventually encompassed all ages. Over time, separate free primary schools, the kuttabs, were
created for young children in order to learn to recite the Qur’an and learn Arabic, the
language of the Qur’an. Later on, institutions of higher Islamic learning were established, such as Al-Azhar in Cairo, and a system of preparatory schools called madrasas
were established to support the higher level of education (Nakosteen, 1964).
Within the system of madrasas, the great centres of religious studies were formed.
These centres had operated since the Middle Ages and continued well into the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The curriculum was relatively standard. The Islamic
intellectuals/ men of learning (ulema) mastered the following disciplines in order to
understand Islamic faith: Arabic grammar (sarf), Arabic syntax (nahv), Qur’anic commentary (tefsir), Islamic law and jurisprudence (fikh), prophetic traditions (hadith or
hadis), logic and dialectics (mantik), rhetoric (belagat) and scholastic theology (kelam)
(Berkey, 1992).
It was important in the philosophy of Islam to provide all Muslims, regardless of
social class, the opportunity to learn and participate in the sharing and the propagation of religious convictions. In fact, however, the majority of the students could only
attend primary school. Those who attended higher education came from wealthier
social classes, or they were supported by waqfs (endowments made by individual
Muslim believers) (Stanton, 1990). Generally, education beyond the primary school
level was not funded by the state.
Upon completion of their education in the madrasas the students joined the ranks of
the ulema, a group of men who had important roles in Islamic society as intellectual,
cultural and educational consultants. The ulema were also the teachers in the mosque

--- [PDF Page 876 / Book Page 891] ---

Reflections on Educational Transitions 891

schools and/or preachers themselves. In addition to their educational roles, they were
often called upon to act as mediators between the state and the people in regulating
political and social policies.
Important for this study were the changes in attitude of the state towards the ulema
and the highly stratified system of Islamic education, which existed in the Ottoman
empire and its more autonomous region in Egypt. Lebanon also experienced the
changes regarding the role of the ulema, but the system of religious education differed
significantly and followed a different path of development from Egypt. In the 1800s,
it had became obvious to the Ottoman leaders that in order to maintain an active role
in the European and Asian trade and politics, new kinds of knowledge and techniques
were required. To meet this need, a “modern” curriculum, that included Western
sciences and medicine, was incorporated into traditional education. The ulema had
mixed feelings about these innovations. They welcomed change that would strengthen
Islamic moral and ethical traditions but felt threatened by reforms which could lessen
their authority, claiming that new knowledge from the West may contradict and possibly challenge Islamic values and traditions. Egypt, traditionally an important cultural
and educational centre of the Middle East, developed some of the first reforms for the
Westernization of its educational system.

Egypt
The early influences of Westernisation in Egypt occurred with Napoleon’s invasion
in 1798 and continued under the leadership of Muhammad Ali after 1801. Ali introduced many innovative reforms that laid the foundation for the creation of the modern
Egyptian state. A Westernised education system was an important component of Ali’s
plan. Although the institutional reforms of the first half of the 1800s did not last long
in and of themselves, the spirit of Western education carried enough momentum which
ultimately contributed to the disestablishment of Islamic educational traditions and the
development of a national education system.
The French invasion and occupation of Egypt lasted only 3 years (1798–1801).
During this period, the French abolished the established system of Islamic education, which did not regain its prominent status thereafter. The French founded two
schools in Cairo, which were modelled on European patterns. Furthermore, an order
given by Napoleon in 1798 provided for Egyptian students to travel to France to study.
According to Silvera (1980), Napoleon used education “as a tool to win over the minds
of the native elite to the revolutionary principles he incarnated” (p. 3). One of the
consequences of this policy was the creation of a separate class of Western- oriented
Egyptian intellectuals and state administrators.
From 1801 to 1805, Ali constructed a centralised Egyptian state, albeit within the
overarching structure of Ottoman imperial power (Boktor, 1936). Significantly, the
ulema came to Ali and requested that he take over as pasha, signifying his acceptance
by the Islamic elites. Although he was respected by the ulema, which helped lead to
his success, Ali oftentimes bypassed their traditional role in Egyptian society in order
to advance his own modern reforms. In addition, he instituted a number of economic

--- [PDF Page 877 / Book Page 892] ---

892 Ashkenazi

and social changes to Westernise the country. As Saqib (1983) has argued, “[f]or his
brilliant projects, aimed at an all-round transformation of his country into a strong,
self-sustaining and progressive as well as independent nation, [Ali] has been rightly
hailed as the father of Egyptian nationalism” (p. 83).
Ali’s primary targets for reform revolved around the modernisation of the military, the initiation of industrialisation and the development of Western education. His
endeavour to establish a modern economy included a major land tenure reform; an
extensive irrigation project; the establishment of cotton as a prime crop; the development of a communications infrastructure; the initiation of new trade policies; and
industrial development (Issawi, 1961). The land tenure reform abolished the Ottoman
practice of tax farming; henceforth, peasants began to pay their taxes directly to the
government, which allowed Ali’s new administration to build new factories and to
support the improvement of the military. The planting of cotton and the improvement
of a communications infrastructure facilitated foreign trade with Europe and Asia,
and eased Egypt’s entrance into the international markets. Alongside these social and
economic reforms, Ali introduced Western educational ideas, institutions and practices
that were closer to his vision of a modern Egypt (Issawi, 1961; Silvera, 1980).
Ali sought to establish a Western-oriented system of schools separated from mosques
and different from Islamic educational methods. The general aim was the establishment
of a Western type of education, paralleling that of Europe, which would de-emphasise
Islamic education and weaken the traditional cultural and political authority of the
ulema. The de-emphasis of Islamic education, combined with other state administrative reforms, changed the role of religion in Egyptian society.
The Western-oriented system of schools, established under Muhammad Ali, focused
originally on higher education institutions with a special emphasis on military education. Soon thereafter, however, he supplemented the system of higher education with
public primary and secondary schools, the first time that a system of state-supported
mass education was attempted in Egypt. In all of these schools, Islamic elements were
de-emphasised in comparison to the secular and military curricula. The first official,
fully fledged military school was opened in 1826; other schools connected to military
education were established in the 1800s, in part replicating the French model for military education. Although after Napoleon the French were pushed out of Egypt, their
authority in educational development continued to be invoked. With the growth of
these schools and their secular, Western curricula, a new generation of Western-trained
intellectual elite appeared in Egypt, challenging the conventional ideas and norms.
Ali’s Western-oriented reforms, though far-sighted in their aim to Westernise Egypt,
were nevertheless narrow in scope. Throughout this period and into the early 1900s, the
majority of Egyptians continued to receive elementary religious education in the kuttabs
(Cochran, 1986). Gregory Starrett (1998) has pointed out that while this period saw the
introduction of the idea and form of mass national education and the implementation of
various Western reforms, such ideas and reforms did not take root in nineteenth-century
Egypt. After Ali’s rule, the systems which he had created, both in education and in state
administration, slowly disintegrated under the leadership of his followers. When the
British took power in Egypt in 1882, the education system was still primarily centred
on the transmission of religious ritual and text in the Muslim kuttabs.

--- [PDF Page 878 / Book Page 893] ---

Reflections on Educational Transitions 893

An important period in Egyptian history was the occupation and rule of Great
Britain, between the years 1882 and 1952. The British did not try to interfere with the
Islamic beliefs of the vast majority of Egyptians. In fact, Islamic learning prospered
during the early era of British rule (Cochran, 1986). During this early period (1882–
1919), very little was undertaken to improve the public (secular) system of education;
British educational policy could not be called progressive; it centred mainly in the education of government clerks, who were trained in technical and bureaucratic skills. On
a small scale, the British Mandate helped establish a system of public elementary and
primary schools: the elementary schools were controlled in large part by provincial
councils and only partially by the Ministry of Education, but the primary schools were
completely under the direction of the Ministry of Education. However, this system was
inadequate for the vast population of Egypt, and no concrete attempts were undertaken
to expand or improve the government schools (Tibawi, 1972).
When Egypt gained ‘conditional independence’ in 1922, the education system
inherited from the British was criticised by the new Egyptian government. There was
no unity in Egyptian education and the system was far from being a comprehensive
national system. The Ministry of Education (MOE) tried first to tackle the problem
of illiteracy, then to make the elementary system compulsory, and, at the same time,
expand the system of the primary schools (Tibawi, 1972). The MOE also tried to unify
the religious and secular systems of education and to construct a national curriculum
that included Islamic learning. After 1928, the influence of Islam grew in the government schools. In that same year, the Muslim Brotherhood, a grassroots Islamic
organisation was founded, and the government increasingly used Brotherhood members as teachers in their schools (Langohr, 2007).
When Egypt gained ‘full independence’ in 1953, the education system was still inadequate for the needs of the country, and not unified, despite the reform efforts of the
previous government. There were still a large number of private religious institutions
beyond the state’s ability to manage. During the early years of independence, however, this situation changed: the number of primary schools and the student population
increased substantially between the years 1953–1963 because of incentives such as
teaching a more expanded religious curriculum in the public schools (Starrett, 1998).
The religious curriculum in the public schools included not only the material in the
textbooks. It was also accompanied by such goals as the inculcation of Islamic morals
and values, along with the grasp of the five pillars of Islam, namely, the development
of faith in God; acquainting the child with the biography of the Prophet; memorisation
of some verses and suras of the Qur’an; and knowledge and practice of the process of
ablution and prayer (Starrett, 1998, p. 132). It was also important that the teachers
understand the religious curriculum as part of a ‘life’ curriculum, including the home
environment and society as a whole.
The main law enacted after Egyptian independence in 1953 established free, compulsory primary education for boys and girls from age 6 to 12 (Tibawi, 1972). The curriculum
focused on Arabic, patriotic education and religion, in addition to numerous subjects like
arithmetic, history and geography. The government succeeded in luring many students
away from the private and foreign schools by the early 1960s because of the promise of
free and equal educational opportunities offered in the public system (Cochran, 1986).

--- [PDF Page 879 / Book Page 894] ---

894 Ashkenazi

It is apparent that educational reform that aimed at Westernisation had a dialectical
course in Egypt. In the early days of Westernisation, Muhammad Ali’s reforms focused
primarily on military education. Ali’s system was unsuccessful owing to his failure to
integrate the majority of the Egyptian population with the existing Muslim schools.
However, despite the failure of his major efforts, Ali had initiated the first reforms to
introduce secular and Western education, including a mass school system, into Egypt.
Despite many setbacks subsequent to Ali’s rule, after 1953 the government succeeded
in nationalising and unifying the Egyptian school system.
The case of Westernisation in Egypt also reveals some of the typical conflicts
between Islam and secularism. In Egypt, the conflict began during Ali’s rule when
the religious elites, the ulema, were slowly relegated to a lower social and political
status in the society. At the same time, the benefits of secular, Western reforms were
heralded as advantageous and necessary for the social and economic development
of Egypt as a nation state. Hence, when many of Ali’s Western reforms failed to produce the promised societal improvements, and the general population was left in the
same impoverished condition as before, it was easy to link the secular reforms to the
difficulties of the majority of the Egyptian (Muslim) population.
During the 1800s and early 1900s the social and cultural gaps between the secular elites and the religious majorities were a challenge for the Egyptian government
and the British Mandate. Following the government’s inability to improve the poor
social conditions of the lower classes, grassroots Islamic organisations like the Muslim
Brotherhood were formed in the 1920s to reach out and help alleviate the situation of
these classes. The abject living conditions of these classes became associated with
failed Western and secular reforms, thus deepening the conflict between secularism
and Islam.
This pattern of conflict between Islam and secularism can be found throughout the
Middle East, especially in the previous colonised territories, where secularism has
been identified with the Western colonial powers, the disintegration of traditional
Islamic cultural norms and the general worsening of social and economic conditions.
The conflict between Islam and secularism has been a subject discussed at length in
other studies, especially with the recent rise of political Islam (Tibi, 1998; Asad, 2003;
Burgat, 2003). It should be noted, however, that despite the popular image that Islam
hinders the process of Westernisation and modernisation, one can cite counter-examples, like Indonesia, where there is a 95% Muslim population and a functioning secular
government, and Turkey, with an equally overwhelming Muslim population, which has
managed to maintain a secular, albeit fragile Republic for over 80 years.

Turkey
The Turkish Republic emerged out of the multi-ethnic Islamic Ottoman empire, a
great power that, at its peak, spanned a vast territory stretching from northern Africa,
southeastern Europe and western Asia. In the nineteenth century the Ottoman empire
began to decline, and after its disastrous participation in the First World War and a
3-year civil war, it finally collapsed. In 1923, after an internal war of independence

--- [PDF Page 880 / Book Page 895] ---

Reflections on Educational Transitions 895

the Turkish Republic was established under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk.
One of Atatürk’s top priorities was the development of a secular Western-oriented
democratic Turkish – not Ottoman – nation state propped up by an equally secular
Western-oriented national Turkish education system. The major aims of modern
Turkish education have been to transform Turkish society from its ‘traditional’ and
conservative Ottoman Islamic outlook to a contemporary Western/‘modern’ nation
(Kazamias, 1966; Szyliowicz, 1973; DBerkes, 1998; Kaplan, 2006).
The earliest modern reforms of the Ottoman empire date back to the late eighteenth century and the Imperial Rescript Nizam-I Cedid (New Order) issued by Sultan
Selim III. This Rescript called for a series of reforms to modernise the Ottoman military and political administration. In the nineteenth century, the reform efforts sought
to Westernise the Ottoman administration, the economic system and the education
system. In education, efforts were made to introduce Western types of educational
institutions with secular curricula for the purpose of educating leaders for public
service in the Ottoman empire. Two such institutions are of particular significance:
the Mülkiye, established in 1859, and the Galatasaray Lise which opened in 1868
(Lewis, 1961; Kazamias, 1966). The language of instruction in the Galatasaray Lise
was French, and its purpose was explicit: “to prepare young men of various religious groups for all the branches of the public [civil] service by providing a higher
type of education consonant with the needs of the empire” (Kazamias, 1966, p.
65). The Galatasaray Lise, according to Kazamias (2006), was the most secular and
Western of all the new schools opened during this period. The curriculum included
the following subjects: Turkish, French, Greek etymology, the elements of Latin
needed for the study of law, medicine and pharmacy, general and Ottoman history,
European and Ottoman geography, mathematics, cosmography, elements of jurisprudence, physics and chemistry, physical history, elements of political economy,
rhetoric, geometric drawing, ethics and practical mechanics (Kaplan, 2006). Karpat
(2001) has noted that the Galatasaray Lise initially attracted non-Muslim students,
but with later additions of Turkish courses, the Muslim student enrolment exceeded
that of non-Muslim students, further enhancing the school by teaching both Muslim
and non-Muslim students. The graduates of both the Mülkiye and the Galatasaray
Lise were influential in the modernisation of the Ottoman empire (Lewis, 1961;
Kazamias, 1966; Szyliowicz, 1973).
Unlike Muhammad Ali of Egypt, the Ottoman Sultan Abdülhamid II (1876–1908)
tried to harmonise Islamic and Western traditions through Western reforms and the
establishment of Western-oriented schools. As part of the Ottoman modernisation/
Westernisation process, Abdülhamid II allowed the drafting of an Ottoman Constitution
similar to those found in contemporary Europe and he invited European leaders to
help with economic reforms and the improvement of the military. In addition to these
measures, he promoted Islam along with an Ottoman national identity as common
denominators for all the diverse Ottoman ethnic and religious subjects in order to
increase solidarity among them. Despite these efforts, Abdülhamid II was unable to
realise fully his goals. Owing to the powerful influence of the ulema, and the rise of
nationalism in the Balkans and the Middle East in the late Ottoman period, his efforts
were largely unsuccessful (Berkes, 1998; Karpat, 2001).

--- [PDF Page 881 / Book Page 896] ---

896 Ashkenazi

The second major modernising/Westernising reform movement took place concomitantly with the establishment of the Turkish Republic in 1923 under the leadership
of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, and under his successor, Ismet Inonu. This second period
of reform, also called the Single-Party Era, lasted approximately from 1923 to 1949.
Atatürk developed a new national ideology to bolster the establishment of the new
Turkish Republic. Called Kemalism, this ideology consisted of six arrows as guiding principles for the new Republic: Nationalism, Republicanism, Revolutionism,
Secularism, Etatism and Populism.
Atatürk’s reforms entailed a wholesale transformation or “transitology” from an
Eastern Islamic empire to a Western secular Republic, by disestablishing the traditional
place of Islam in the state administration and promulgating a new, Western national
ideology (Kadioǧlu, 1996). Secularism also meant a shift of the primary Turkish identity from community and religion to country and nation (Lewis, 1961). The Kemalist
version of secularisation disestablished Islam by abolishing the Sultanate and the
Caliphate and creating the Directorate of Religious Affairs in 1924. Atatürk’s aim was
to disestablish the powerful role of Islam and the Islamic elites in Turkish society in
order to further his Western reforms (Berkes, 1998; Szyliowicz, 1973; Lewis, 1961;
Kazamias, 1966).
An important mechanism for the transformation and modernisation of the newly
established Turkish Republic and for Turkish nation building was the modernisaton/
Westernisation of the educational system. In the new Turkish Republic education
was brought entirely under state control and became the prime transmitter of the
Turkish republican national ideology and culture. During the formative years of nationbuilding, the religious schools (madrasas) were closed, and Islam, which was seen by
the Kemalists as an impediment to Western development, was disestablished.
A definite break from the past was made when the law of Unification of Education
was passed on 3 March 1924, declaring that a “modern, unified, secular, egalitarian,
and national” educational system must be adopted to ensure that all Turkish citizens
were receiving the same standard and quality of education. Religion was officially
eradicated from the public school curriculum in 1928, when the clause stating that
Islam was the state religion was removed from the Constitution (Berkes, 1998). The
Turkish public educational system was now unified under the direction of a central
state body – the National Ministry of Education – with a new Minister of Education
at the helm. The basic structure of education has remained substantially the same
since 1924. However, recent years have witnessed the introduction of reforms that
promoted the inclusion of religious schools into the national system and changed the
recommended duration of the middle school. The pattern of schooling today consists
of primary education, secondary middle education in orta okuls, upper secondary education in lises and post-secondary education in state universities, and private colleges
or vocational schools.
Although Islam was officially disestablished under Atatürk and secularism
became the national ideology, Islamic elements remained in the official administrative and economic spheres, including state education (Akşit, 1991; Yilmaz, 2002).
Moreover, while religious education was regarded by the Kemalists as a barrier to
modernisation and Westernisation, it was not totally eliminated from the national

--- [PDF Page 882 / Book Page 897] ---

Reflections on Educational Transitions 897

system. Instead, it was brought under the control of the state and modified to suit
national interests.
Turkey experienced several acute conflicts after the end of the Single-Party Era
between Islamic and secular political parties and among political leaders. The 1946
elections, which marked the commencement of the Multi-Party Era in Turkish politics,
also marked the beginning of an era of a widespread reaction against the strict secular
policies of the Atatürk period. Political parties with Islamic elements had developed
and a number of educational initiatives were introduced. These included optional religious courses in the state schools; further support of state-funded religious vocational
schools, the Imam-Hatips; and the opening of the Faculty of Divinity at the University
of Istanbul. These developments were to a degree more or less under the auspices of
the Ministry of Education. The loosening of the strict Kemalist secular policies in
education, as in other areas, was not supposed to result in a fundamental change of
the national secular ideology. Indeed, Kemalist secularism remained the cornerstone
of Turkish ideology. Nonetheless, clear directives regarding the place of Islam in secularist Turkey were not decreed by the government. This ambiguous role of Islam in
Turkish society resulted in political and social unrest, creating widespread tension
between secular nationalists and Islamic religious supporters.
In addition to this tension, the tension between the secular political and military
elites and the religious needs of the Turkish people reached new peaks with the rise of
political Islam after the 1970s. Henze (1998) attributes the political crisis of the 1970s
to a number of factors, not least of which was the cumulative result of the failure of
Islamic and secular political leaders to govern effectively. This state of affairs created
a hotbed for terrorist activities, which continued to increase and were supported in part
by foreign powers. The continuing crisis reached its peak in September, 1980, when
following a fundamentalist Islamic demonstration in Konya, the military seized power
under the leadership of General Kenan Evren and established martial law that lasted
until 1983.
Following the military regime and the accession of Turgut Özal as Prime Minister
in 1983, a series of successful reforms was instituted to suppress political and social
violence and to stabilise the government. This, in turn, helped to improve the national
economy and to strengthen public support for the government. This success was partly
based on a new attitude towards the role of Islam in Turkey. Instead of showing aversion towards Islam, the post-1980 governments took several steps to strengthen it: they
opened new Qur’anic schools, made religious courses compulsory, and employed new
preachers (Yavuz, 1996). This new stance of the Turkish state on Islam was clearly
reflected in the new Turkish Constitution promulgated in 1982.
Articles 24 of the 1982 Constitution provided inter alia the following:
Education and instruction in religion and ethics shall be conducted under State
supervision and control. Instruction in religious culture and moral education
shall be compulsory in the curricula of primary and secondary schools. Other
religious education and instruction shall be subject to the individual’s own
desire, and in the case of minors, to the request of their legal representative.
(The Constitution, 1995, para. 8)

--- [PDF Page 883 / Book Page 898] ---

898 Ashkenazi

With these new measures, the Turkish government hoped to avoid any further religious
politicisation of the Turkish society, and in the words of Yavuz (1996) “to fuse Islamic ideas
with national goals, … to create a more socially homogeneous and less politically active
Islamic community” (p. 80). Consequently, the Kemalist principles were strengthened
and, at the same time, a liberal form of Islam was incorporated into the national ideology,
in particular into national education. This development did not evoke the Islamic traditions of the Ottoman empire; Islam was included as part of the moral and ethical
lessons in Turkish schools (Özdalga, 1999).
In 1983, Turgut Özal, the head of the Motherland Party, a political party with open
Islamic affiliations, was elected as Prime Minister. With the backing of the ever-powerful
military establishment, Özal inaugurated a new period in Turkish history, one with a different official approach to Islam and its social role in the modern state (Kadioğlu, 1996).
Özal hoped to overcome the polarisation between the secularists and the anti-secularists
by instituting a reform in Islam that, in his view, was in accordance with modern conditions. In his view, this reform would make Islam more palatable to the Western-oriented,
secularist Turks who resented the strict overtones of the Qur’an and the Sunna.
Özal’s reforms sought to bring about what has been referred to as the Turkish
Islamic Synthesis (TIS). The TIS was a philosophy developed by Ibrahim Kafesoğlu
and a group of centre-right intellectuals who formed a group known as the Turkish
Intellectual Hearth (Turk Ocaği). This group of intellectuals felt that the true Turkish
culture was a synthesis of the pre-Islamic traditions and the Islamic traditions of the
Turkic people (Copeaux, 2000). They held that Islam was an important cultural and
historical tradition and should be part of contemporary Turkish society. Additionally,
the Hearth advocated state control over Islam. In keeping with this philosophy, the
Özalist reforms to a large extent were an expansion of state control over religious
areas, including education (Akarsu, 2000). Özal’s perception of religion and its role in
the society mirrored the synthesis of secularism and Islam, which would not threaten
the Western secular aspirations of the Kemalists, but would make Islam a fundamental
element of Turkish identity. The TIS was seen as a cure for the political and social
unrest by both the religious leaders and the military regime. This continuation of
Islamic values became part of the educational system.
The major educational reform of this period was the implementation of compulsory
religious education, which was thought to answer a public call for morality and ethics in Turkish society. The system of semi-private Imam-Hatips, which had operated
partly under the auspices of the state since the 1950s, was greatly expanded by the
1980s. However, the language of the national policies was vague and inconsistent; the
TIS was not successful in helping to develop a practical framework for state policy
beyond offering some general philosophical guidelines.
After these reforms were introduced, Islamic instruction was expanded across
Turkey. It is important to keep in mind, however, that Islam was never entirely eliminated from the schools of Republican Turkey. Instead, it was brought under state
control with a series of new Western-styled laws and religious reforms. In the 1980s,
when the Turkish Republic reintroduced Islam into government policies and into the
Constitution, religious education was made compulsory. This action strengthened the
place of Islamic education in the schools and in the Turkish society.

--- [PDF Page 884 / Book Page 899] ---

Reflections on Educational Transitions 899

In the 1990s, following the Özal era of support and tolerance for Islam, the place of
Islam in Turkey and in its national education system again became controversial. The
military’s strict position on secularism remained the same, despite their tolerance for
Islam in the early 1980s. When the number of students enrolled in the semi-private
religious Imam-Hatips, grew to an unprecedented proportion (to almost 10% of the
student population in 1997), the military intervened and forced the government to
change the number of years of compulsory education to 8 consecutive years of regular
public (secular) education (Özdalga, 1999). Until then, students attended 5 years of
regular public schools and then they could attend the Imam-Hatips in order to fulfil
their compulsory education obligations. The Imam-Hatips offered a broad range of
religious curricula in addition to the standard public school curricula, and they were a
popular choice for religious conservative families for their children. While this reform
did not affect the compulsory religious education of the public schools, it indicated the
lack of patience by the secular military establishment for a type of education that did
not fall within the framework of Turkish national education, which guaranteed equal
(secular) education for all students.
The current political situation in Turkey further reflects the tension between secular
and Islamic interests. In the spring of 2007, large demonstrations took place in Ankara,
the capital, in protest against Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo an, a conservative
politician with a pronounced Muslim background, and his campaign to elect Abdullah
Gul, a person known for his Islamic affiliations, as president of the Turkish Republic.
Erdoğan’s intentions sparked a strong opposition from secular Kemalists, who felt
that the presidency should remain a secular political stronghold (Turkish News Daily,
21 April 2007). Following a strong opposition by the secular Republican People’s Party
and warnings by the military, Gul withdrew his candidacy. Erdo an then called for
general elections which were held in July, 2007, at which Erdo an’s ruling Justice and
Development Party, a centre-right party with Islamic affiliations, won by a landslide,
having garnered 46.6% of the votes cast (Bozkurt, 2007).
Turkey was and is a unique case in its implementation of secularist policies. The
state control of religion did not imply separation between religion and the state, and
certainly did not imply the removal of Islam from the ostensibly secular Republic. The
degree to which Islam and Turkish nationalism can coexist without significant tension
and instability, however, remains to be seen.

Lebanon
Unlike Egypt and Turkey, Lebanon is known for its multi-sectarian population that
includes the following religious communities: Maronite, Sunni, Shi’ite, Greek Orthodox,
Greek Catholic, Druze, Armenian Orthodox, Armenian Catholic, Protestant, Jewish,
Latin (Roman Catholic), Chaldean, Syrian Orthodox, Syrian Catholic, Alawi and Bahai
(Crow, 1962). The extreme heterogeneous nature of the society has also made Lebanon
vulnerable to internal conflict that has been reflected in civil hostilities from the 1860s
until the more recent tragic civil war of 1975. The varied nature of sectarian expansion
has been responsible for the unique national development of Lebanon. The lack of a

--- [PDF Page 885 / Book Page 900] ---

900 Ashkenazi

common national ideology between the Christian and Muslim confessional groups is
reflected in the educational system, which was influenced by various religious traditions
and which the state administrations have never succeeded in completely centralising.
Alongside the small state system of schools, each religious community has historically been given the right to maintain a private system of education according to a
tradition that began with the period Ottoman rule (1516–1918); it continued under the
French Mandate (1918–1943); and it has been sustained under the current administration (Crow, 1962; Hudson, 1985; El-Solh, 2004). After the French Mandate began in
1920, the borders of the State of Greater Lebanon were expanded to include coastal
regions and the Beqa Valley. This expansion dramatically altered the population
make-up because the citizens of the acquired regions were primarily Muslim. This
development succeeded in eliminating the Christian majority and creating a population comprising several large religious communities (Crow, 1962).
There were two main thrusts of Westernisation in Lebanon: the first appeared with
a burst of missionary activity in the second half of the 1800s and the second, under
the French Mandate between approximately 1920 until 1943. Whereas other Middle
Eastern nations, for example, Egypt, Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Jordan developed Western
and national education systems for military and secular purposes, in Lebanon Western
education was introduced under the auspices of private missionary, and hence religious groups (Szyliowicz, 1973). Beginning in the 1600s, Jesuit, Capuchin, Lazarist,
Maronite, Greek orthodox, Catholic and Quaker missionaries all founded schools and
churches in Lebanon (AMIDEAST, 1993). In the 1800s, Sunni Muslim and Druze
communities established their own schools to protect their cultural interests from foreign Western influences (Abouchedid, 2002; Frayha, 2003). These schools began a
long-lasting tradition of formal education outside of the state system, based on private
and religious community affiliation.
The majority of the private and foreign schools established were based primarily
on French educational models (Massialas & Jarrar, 1991). Curricula were heavily
influenced by the respective communities and the language of instruction was either
French or English, reflecting the large number of European and American missionaries
who valued educational freedom in Lebanon. Educational initiatives organised by the
various missionary and private groups intensified existing cultural rifts and sharpened
regional perceptions of identity. Although a state system of schools existed during
this period, the perpetuation of sectarian differences strengthened regional values and
objectives, and thwarted eventual efforts by civil authorities to promote a national
social and cultural ideology, let alone a unified curriculum.
Western education in Lebanon was more pronounced in higher education. Two universities founded during this period were the American University of Beirut (1866)
and the University of Saint Joseph (1875). Considering their American and French
affiliations, respectively, and their Western and modern intellectual orientation it is
interesting to note that one of the first formal political parties in Lebanon that called
for Christian/Muslim cooperation for social unity was organised at the American
University of Beirut (AUB) (Frayha, 2003; Barakat, 1977). However, admission into
these institutions depended on university entrance examinations, which were part of
the foreign schools and easier for the students of those institutions to pass. Students

--- [PDF Page 886 / Book Page 901] ---

Reflections on Educational Transitions 901

of the state schools found it difficult to attend higher education because they were not
trained properly for the entrance examinations.
The unequal system of elitist foreign and private education was perpetuated after the
end of the First World War, when the Ottoman empire was defeated. In 1920, France was
granted a Mandate in Lebanon that established the Greater Lebanon (Khalifah, 2001).
The French crystallised the fragmented nature of Lebanon in granting a large degree
of autonomy to individual confessional communities, giving priority to the Maronite
Christians in order to increase French political control in the region (Khalifah, 2001;
Hudson, 1985). Under the French Mandate the state administration was dramatically
modernised; Lebanon ‘acquired’ a National Constitution in 1926, a parliament elected
by popular vote, a president elected by the parliament, a council of ministers, an independent judiciary, a modern fiscal system and a national policy of education.
However, the French did not have the resources, or the motivation, to nationalise the
extensive system of private and foreign schools in Lebanon and instead opted to create three systems consisting of state, foreign and private schools. In effect, the French
were not able to unify the social divisions which had existed for decades in the education system. They opted, therefore, to link the public school system with the systems
of private and foreign schools. This manner of maintaining the unequal educational
opportunities has been perceived as an attempt to preserve the French Catholic influence in Lebanon (Frayha, 2003).
After Lebanon gained complete independence from France in 1943, education was
assigned the important role of helping to create a common sense of Lebanese national
identity. The major confessional groups in Lebanon agreed to the National Pact of
1943, a treaty that established a base of political cooperation among the different
groups for the founding of an independent national state, a common government and
a geographical political entity (Baaklini, 1976). In the creation of a national education system that was not to be based on religious affiliation, the Lebanese government
centralised all education, including the various sectarian schools: new educational legislation was enacted and the use of textbooks was thereafter supervised by the Ministry
of Education (Frayha, 2003). Although private schools continued to operate, they were
required to implement the same curricula as public schools under the supervision of the
government. It was important for the new government to emphasise Lebanese national
principles and values and not religious affiliation. This goal was clearly salient in the
1943 Lebanese Government Platform, which stated the following:
The time of national awakening in Lebanon’s history shall be when we can abolish Taifiyah (sectarian conflict). … From now on, the government will offer the
Lebanese youth an appropriate citizenship education and orient them toward
freedom, independence and national pride. Therefore, the government will
use all necessary means to enhance Arabic, the country’s language, as well as
Lebanon’s history and geography in all educational institutions. (reprinted in
Fraya, 2003, p. 82)
Furthermore, in 1950 a decree was issued that required that all private schools be subjected to national supervision (Abouchedid, 2002).

--- [PDF Page 887 / Book Page 902] ---

902 Ashkenazi

Despite the efforts to centralise state administration and create a national ideology the religious differences proved too convoluted for the sectarian schools to be
effectively governed. Political disagreements between the sectarian groups about the
appropriate formation of a national identity, among other inter-regional conflicts, culminated in a civil war in 1958, and later in 1975. Different educational reforms were
instituted in order to try and surmount the lack of national integration. The most recent
of these plans was the 1989 Ta’if Agreement, approved by the Chamber of Ministers
on 10 November 1993. This agreement stressed the importance of national upbringing
and “essential” values like democracy, tolerance and the elimination of violence. It
called for three main objectives to standardise history and civics textbooks and their
mandatory instruction in Lebanese schools, to protect private education, and to reinforce the public sector of education (Abouchedid, 2002, Frayha, 2003). Despite the
attempts to unify education, the government has been unable to fulfil its goals in education, and there are no clear government directives about the teaching of religion
because of the sensitive nature of the subject (Abouchedid, 2002). Furthermore, the
private schools continue to teach religion according to their sectarian traditions.

Historical Perspective on Western Education
in Nation-Building in the Middle East
In the Middle East and North Africa Western education was seen as an important
tool in the reorganisation and reorientation of traditional Islamic nations to become
part of the ‘West.’ It appears, though, that alongside the major Westernisation reforms
that occurred in Egypt, Turkey and Lebanon, a strong tendency towards Islamic traditions remained, and has continued to exist in the national schools. Formal education
presents a particularly compelling subject to study, as it demonstrates the multiple
factors involved in the negotiations of Westernisation and nationalisation in traditional
Islamic societies.
Formal education has a rich tradition in each of the nation states examined here,
reaching back to the early days of Islam. However, these nation states also share a
similar trajectory of Western educational reforms beginning in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. In the case of Egypt and Turkey, students were sent to Europe to
study for the purpose of strengthening national military power. In all three countries,
a separate, typically secular, school system based on Western European models and
emphasising non-Islamic curricula was set up; and, in the case of Lebanon, a private
system of foreign missionary schools that provided the basic structure of the current Lebanese multi-sectarian educational system was established. Over the course
of many years, the established Islamic educational traditions were undermined by
Western schools the graduates of which created new elites, who were active in the
national development of their respective societies.
Given that formal education had become a prime transmitter of new national cultures, the educational character and the curriculum shared common elements in all
three nation states. In Egypt and Lebanon, the French influence was predominant. In
the Islamic Ottoman empire Western schools and curricula were introduced, and in the

--- [PDF Page 888 / Book Page 903] ---

Reflections on Educational Transitions 903

Turkish Republic that emerged from the defunct Ottoman empire in 1923, a secular
national system of education was established. However, Islamic schools continued to
function and only rarely were they integrated into the Westernised systems.
Although the above case studies share common elements, they also demonstrate
different patterns of educational development. Whereas in Egypt and Turkey educational reform was introduced by the state in order to improve the military and to create
Western-style state administrations, in Lebanon Western education was introduced by
the missionaries. In Egypt Western reforms were uneven and inconsistent. The erratic
reform movements created numerous problems and conflicts between grassroots
Islamic organisations and the government elites. As a consequence, the state included
Islam as part of Egyptian nation-building. Conversely, when Atatürk came to power
in 1923, secularist policies were actively pursued by the Turkish state and since then
a secular nationalism has been widely espoused. The severe sectarian differences in
Lebanon have caused major difficulties in attempts to unify the religious communities,
and a representative nationalist movement did not develop.
In many Middle Eastern societies, a dual-, and in the case of Lebanon, a tri-, system
of education developed. Most governments did not have the resources, or indeed the
incentive, to launch full-scale educational, political, social or economic reforms. In
Lebanon and Egypt, the French and British Mandates simply maintained the inherited
status quo. Hence, the rift between the elite classes and the general population deepened. Specifically for education, this disregard for incorporating the wider national
population into the school system contributed to problems that are still evident today.
Although traditionally Islamic education was the main form of schooling in Egypt,
Turkey and Lebanon, this changed dramatically in the face of Western, often secular,
educational reforms. National education in each of these new nation states developed
concurrently with nationalist movements both of which were greatly influenced by the
West. The new Western-oriented elites sought to develop national state systems, but
each nation state adapted educational reforms to suit its specific needs. Islamic education continued to exist in private and in public schools often contrasting sharply with
the national reforms. However, the Islamic lessons were tailored to accommodate the
state’s objectives, not to recreate the Islamic learning of the former eras. The expansion of national education reflected the unique balance found in each respective nation
between Islamic traditions and Western influences, highlighting how Islam retained an
important presence in society, alongside, sometimes despite, official policies.

References
Abouchedid, K. (2002).The limitations of inter-group learning in confessional school systems: The case of
Lebanon. Arab Studies Quarterly, 1–18.
Acar, F. (2002). Türget Özal: Pious agent of liberal transformation. In M. Heper & S. Sayari, (Eds.), Political
leaders and democracy in Turkey (pp. 163–178). Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Akarsu, F. (2000). Transition and education: A case study of the process of change in Turkey. In K. Mazurek,
M. Winzer & C. Majorek (Eds.), Education in a global society: A comparative perspective (pp. 315–
327). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Akşit, B. (1991). Islamic education in Turkey: Medrese reform in late Ottoman times and Imam-Hatip
schools in the Republic. In R. Tapper (Ed.), Islam in modern Turkey (pp. 145–170). London: I. B. Tauris
& Co Ltd.

--- [PDF Page 889 / Book Page 904] ---

904 Ashkenazi
AMIDEAST. (1993). Lebanon. Education in the Arab world. Washington DC: America-Mideast Educational
and Training Services, Inc.
Asad, T. (2003). Formations of the secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Baaklini, A. (1976). Legislative and political development: Lebanon. 1842–1972. Durham: Duke University
Press.
Barakat, H. (1977). Lebanon in Strife: Student Preludes to Civil War. Austin, TX: University of Texas
Press.
Berkey, J. (1992). Transmission of knowledge in medieval Cairo: A social history of Islamic education.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Berkey, J. (2003). Formation of Islam: Religion and society in the Near East, 600–1800. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Berkes, N. (1998). The Development of secularism in Turkey. New York: Routledge.
Boktor, A. (1936). School and society in the valley of the Nile. Cairo: Elias’ Modern Press.
Bozkurt, G. (2007, August 2) AKP inches closer to electing president. Turkish Daily News. Retrieved 2
August 2007, from http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/vote2007/article.php?enewsid=53
Burgat, F. (2003). Face to face with political Islam. London: I. B. Tauris.
Cochran, J. (1986). Education in Egypt. London: Croom Helm.
Copeaux, E. (2000). Türk tarih tezinden Türk Islam sentezine. Istanbul: Türkiye Ekonomik ve Toplumsal
Tarih Vakfi Yayindir.
Crow, R. (1962). Religious sectarianism in the Lebanese political system. The Journal of Politics, 24(3),
489–520.
El-Solh, R. (2004). Lebanon and Arabism: National identity and state formation. London: IB Tauris
Publishers.
Faksh, M. (1980). The Consequences of the introduction and spread of modern education: Education and
national integration in Egypt. In E. Kedourie & S. Haim (Eds.), Modern Egypt: Studies in politics and
society (42–55). London: Frank Cass.
Frayha, N. (2003). Education and social cohesion in Lebanon. Prospects, 33(1), 77–88.
Grabar, O. (1969). The Architecture of the Middle Eastern city from past to present: The case of the mosque.
In I. Lapidus (Ed.), Middle Eastern cities: A symposium on ancient, Islamic, and contemporary Middle
Eastern urbanism (26–46). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Henze, P. (1998). Turkey and Atatürk’s legacy: Turkey’s political evolution, Turkish-US Relations and prospects for the 21st century. Haarlem: SOTA, Turkestan and Azerbaijan Research Centre.
Hilgendorf, E. (2003). Islamic education: History and tendency. Peabody Journal of Education, 78(2),
63–75.
Hudson, M. (1985). The precarious republic: Political modernization in Lebanon. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
Issawi, C. (1961). Egypt since 1800: A study in lop-sided development. The Journal of Economic History,
21(1), 1–25.
Kadioğlu, A. (1996). The paradox of Turkish nationalism and the construction of official identity. Middle
Eastern Studies, 32(2), 177–194.
Kaplan, S. (2006). The pedagogical state: education and the politics of national culture in post-1980 Turkey.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Karpat, K. (2001). The politicization of Islam: Reconstructing identity, faith, and community in the late
Ottoman state. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kazamias, A. (1966). Education and the quest for modernity in Turkey. London: George Allen & Unwin
Ltd.
Khalifah, B. (2001). The rise and fall of Christian Lebanon. Toronto: York Press, Ltd.
Khashan, H. (2000). Arabs at the crossroads: Political identity and nationalism. Gainesville, FL: University
of Florida Press.
Langohr, V. (2007). Colonial education systems and the spread of local religious movements: The cases of
British Egypt and Punjab. Retrieved 22 July 2007, from http://faculty.virginia.edu/mesp/Langohr-paper.
pdf
Lapidus, I. (1988). A history of Islamic societies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

--- [PDF Page 890 / Book Page 905] ---

Reflections on Educational Transitions 905
Laoudusm, Ira (1969). Middle Eastern cities: A symposium on ancient, Islamic, and contemporary Middle
Eastern urbanism. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lewis, B. (1961). The emergence of modern Turkey. London: Oxford University Press.
Massialas, B., & Jarrar S. (1991). Arab education in transition: A source book. New York: Garland
Publishing.
Nakosteen, M. (1964). History of Islamic origins of Western education, A.D. 800–1350. Boulder, CO:
University of Colorado Press.
Özdalga, E. (1999). Education in the name of ‘Order and Progress,’ reflections on the recent eight year
obligatory school reform in Turkey. The Muslim World, 89(3/4), 414–438.
Pasha, I. (1927, November 14). Address. Vakit Ankara, Turkey.
Saqib, G. (1983). Modernization of Muslim education in Egypt, Pakistan, and Turkey: A comparative study.
Lahore: Islamic Book Service.
Silvera, A. (1980). The first Egyptian student mission to France under Muhammad Ali. In E. Kedourie & S.
Haim (Eds.), Modern Egypt: Studies in politics and society (1–22). London: Frank Cass.
Stanton, C. (1990). Higher learning in Islam: the classical period, A.D. 700 – 1300. Savage, MD: Rowman
& Littlefield.
Starrett, G. (1998). Putting Islam to work: Education, politics and religious transformation in Egypt.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Szyliowicz, J. (1973). Education and modernization in the Middle East. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
Tibawi, A. (1972). Islamic education: its traditions and modernization into the Arab national systems.
London: Luzac.
Tibi, B. (1998). The challenge of fundamentalism: political Islam and the new world disorder. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Turkish News Daily (2007). Repeat of pro-secular rally to be held in Istanbul (2007, April 21). Retrieved
April 21, 2007, from http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/article.php?enewsid=71243
The constitution. (1995). In H. C. Metz (Ed.), Turkey: A country study. Retrieved 21 August 2006, from
http://countrystudies.us/turkey/71.htm
Yavuz, H. (1996). The return of Islam? New dynamics in state-society relations and the role of Islam in
Turkish politics. In Dr. A. Rahman (Ed.), Islamic World Report, Turkey: The pendulum swings back (pp.
74–93). London: Azzan.
Yilmaz, I. (2002). Secular law and the emergence of unofficial Turkish Islamic law. Middle East Journal,
56(1), 113–131.

