================================================================================
Chapter 58: Christianity, Modernities and Knowledge
Author(s): Gerald Grace
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 907–922
PDF Pages: pp. 891–906 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 891 / Book Page 907] ---

58
CHRISTIANITY, MODERNITIES
AND KNOWLEDGE
Gerald Grace

In the notes of guidance to the contributors to this volume, the editors assert that
[a]s the nature of educational sites alters in late modernity, the issue of educational cultures and pedagogic identity becomes powerfully de-linked from
notions of citizenship and more and more powerfully linked to economics or to
religion. The framing of the topics of culture, knowledge and pedagogies is thus
changing rapidly and a comparative education of the future must work out new
ways to analyse the theme of identity.
This chapter will attempt to assess that contention with particular reference to the
socio-theological and educational cultures of two forms of Christianity.

From Sacred Christian Knowledge to Secular Market
Knowledge
In Pedagogy, Symbolic Control and Identity (1996), Basil Bernstein reflected theoretically on the significance of these issues and it is clear that his insights provide a valuable
starting point for a ‘comparative education of the future’.
Bernstein outlines a major cultural transformation which can be discerned in Europe
(and internationally), from a faith-based conception of knowledge and pedagogy to a
secular, market-based conception of education. Historically, official knowledge and
the curriculum and pedagogy derived from it in Europe were realisations of Christian
religious culture in pursuit of a greater understanding of God:
The Christian God was a god you had to think about. It was a god that not only
was to be loved, but to be thought about. And this attitude created an abstract
modality to the discourse. (Bernstein, 1996, p. 83)
Educational discourse in the medieval university or ‘school’ involved exploration of
the Word and exploration of the world, ‘Word and world held together by the unity of
Christianity’ (ibid).

907
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 907–922.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 892 / Book Page 908] ---

908 Grace

The fundamental Christian regulative principle of school knowledge and pedagogy
was the existence of God and the incarnation of Jesus Christ, whose natures could
be partly apprehended by the study of sacred text and partly by exploration of the
created universe. Culture, knowledge and pedagogy were strongly framed within the
Christian revelation and world view as mediated by the Catholic Church as the dominant Christian institution.
This religious regulative principle was, in Bernstein’s view, progressively replaced
during the Renaissance and the Enlightenment by a ‘humanizing secular principle’,
representing the stage of early modernity, but this principle is now being replaced by
a ‘dehumanizing principle’ of market commodification of knowledge and pedagogy in
late modernity. The argument is elaborated in these terms:
Today, throughout Europe … there is a new principle guiding the latest transition of capitalism. The principles of the market and its managers are more
and more the principles of the policy and practices of education. Market
relevance is becoming the key orientating criterion for the selection of discourses. … This movement has profound implications from the primary
school to the university.
There is a new concept of knowledge and of its relation to those who create it
and use it. This new concept is a truly secular concept. Knowledge should flow
like money to wherever it can create advantage and profit. Indeed, knowledge is
no longer like money, it is money. (Bernstein, 1996 p. 87)
Accompanying this secularisation, commodification and marketisation of knowledge in
contemporary settings, there are comparable transformations in pedagogic discourse and
communication. Pedagogy is not simply a means for the transmission of knowledge, it
is also a powerful regulator of consciousness and a formative influence upon personal
identity.1 Pedagogy in the secularised market curriculum has itself become dominated by
output measures of specific competences and skills, by performance models of comparative
achievement levels and by efficiency and effectiveness criteria relating to the ‘delivery’ of
the required objectives of prescribed curricula. It follows from this analysis that student
consciousness and sense of identity and personal worth will be affected in particular ways
by what Bernstein has described as ‘a virtually secular pedagogic discourse’ (p. 80).
Faced with these profound changes in the framing of culture, knowledge and pedagogy in early and late modernity it is important to examine the educational responses
which have been made by both Catholic and Reformed Christianity.2 The development of secularisation in the modern world from the Enlightenment to the present day
presents agencies of sacred culture with a powerful challenge. Secularisation represents the denial of the validity of the sacred and of its associated educational cultures
and its attempted replacement by logical, rational, empirical and scientific intellectual
cultures in which the notion of the transcendent has no place. Secularisation involves
a significant change in the cultural power relations of any society. While secularisation
changes intellectual and cultural power relations it also operates to affect the world
view of many individuals so that religious concepts, religious discourse and religious
sensitivities are simply irrelevant to the everyday business of life. This is what Berger
(1973) has called ‘a secularization of consciousness’.

--- [PDF Page 893 / Book Page 909] ---

Christianity, Modernities and Knowledge 909

Reformation and Counter-Reformation in Education
Giddens (1991) in The Consequences of Modernity argued that secularisation had significant consequences for an understanding of what constituted knowledge:
Religious cosmology is supplanted by reflexively organised knowledge, governed by empirical observation and logical thought and focused upon material
technology and socially applied codes. (p. 109)
What his analysis overlooks is, that while there has been (in the West) what could be
called a secular reformation in the culture of knowledge, pedagogy and educational
processes there has, at the same time, been a religious counter-reformation in which
Catholic Christianity has been prominent.
Commenting on the nature of the current secular reformation (the second reformation), Bauman (2000) argues that its central idea is that of ‘human rights’, especially
as expressed in freedom of choice regarding beliefs, values and actions. A strong form
of autonomous individualism marks this stage of late modernity or early postmodernism. A powerful idea is that the identity of the person can be constructed from
whatever cultural elements the individual chooses – a construct which Gellner (1996)
calls ‘modular man’ (and woman).
Christian educational agencies (and those of other faiths) exist as part of a counter-reformation in modernity which relates the formation of human persons to religiously given
beliefs, values and principles and not to an entirely self-determined modular process.
In terms of identity formation the Enlightenment sought to replace the concept of
religious believer and church member with that of rational citizen and civic participant.
In late modernity, according to Bernstein, the attempted ideological transformation is
from that of citizen to that of consumer and ‘market player’.
Whatever else globalisation represents, it seems clear that it involves an attempted
marketisation of cultures and societies worldwide, with challenging implications for
educational systems. These challenges are especially sharp for faith-based as opposed
to secular schooling systems.

The Challenges of Early Modernity:The Educational Responses
of Catholic Christianity
The challenges of early modernity were constituted for the Catholic Church by the
Protestant reformations of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and by the cultural
effects of the Enlightenment in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The Protestant
reformations threatened the Church’s control of culture, knowledge and pedagogy
and its hegemony in the religious and spiritual domain. The Enlightenment and its
consequences more radically threatened the very idea of the Christian God and of the
culture of the sacred.
In his classic study, The Evolution of Educational Thought (1938) Emile Durkheim
characterised the Society of Jesus as the leading Catholic agency in countering the

--- [PDF Page 894 / Book Page 910] ---

910 Grace

challenges of both Protestantism and secularism in the early modern period. For
this reason he assigned three chapters of his book to a close examination of Jesuit
educational culture – its curriculum, pedagogy and assessment. Durkheim recognised
the remarkable significance of the Jesuits in shaping and forming Catholic curricula
and pedagogy in Europe. Their intention was to create an intellectually stimulating
Christian engagement with classics, theology, philosophy, history, literature, music,
art and drama. An emphasis upon rhetoric, disputation and debate was designed to
produce the ideal Jesuit student who would become a confident apologist for the Faith.
The humane studies of a Jesuit education were intended to form Catholic intellectuals
and men of public affairs whose scholarship confirmed the truths of the Catholic
faith and who could confidently articulate these in exchanges with Protestants, secularists and atheists. While Jesuit pupils, in the words of Durkheim, ‘lived amidst a flurry
of written assignments’ (p. 255), the ultimate purpose of these assignments, whatever
the subject, was to illuminate God’s design for the created world and to form in the
pupil a sense of service in relation to this grand design. This was an education intended
to generate a vocation to serve others – at its best, by commitment to the clerical or
religious life or in various lay professions for the general good.
The year 1999 marked the 400th anniversary of the publication of the Ratio
Studiorum or ‘The Plan and Methodology of Jesuit Education’. In a commemorative
volume published in 2000, various Jesuit scholars reflected upon its significance, its
impact and future in the face of new challenges.3 It was understood that the influence of
the Ratio and its educational culture had spread far beyond Jesuit schools and colleges.
Many subsequent religious orders with missions in education had been influenced to
a greater or lesser extent by Jesuit educational experience. The Institute of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, The Society of the Sacred Heart, and other religious orders were directly
affected by Jesuit educational methodology.4 However, probably the greatest impact
of the Jesuits is to be found in the example they provided of an active religious order
with an educational mission. This set the pattern for the Catholic Church’s response to
the challenges of early modernity. The following centuries witnessed a multiplication
of new religious orders and teaching brotherhoods and sisterhoods dedicated to the
vocation of education. The Catholic response to the challenges of early modernity was
to generate specially trained men and women in organised formations dedicated to the
work of Catholic education. The prime knowledge to be transmitted was the truths and
doctrines of the Catholic faith and the pedagogy of the catechism was the dominant
form. At the same time great emphasis was placed on traditional forms of academic
achievement, moral formation and a strict disciplinary regime. The Catholic religious
orders founded in early modernity were, in effect, missionaries of education against
the twin dangers of Protestantism and secularisation. Their educational regimes were
designed to work at all levels of society, from governing elites to the urban and rural
masses. The range of their operations extended across the whole world as they followed the injunction of their Founder to ‘go and teach all nations’.5
At the heart of this great Catholic educational response to the challenges of early
modernity were concepts of doctrinal certainty and vocational calling. Against the
questioning of secularism, the existence of God was to be asserted and in various ways
‘proved’. Against the innovations of Protestantism, the eternal validity of Catholicism

--- [PDF Page 895 / Book Page 911] ---

Christianity, Modernities and Knowledge 911

and of the Catholic Church was reasserted. Permeating the whole system was the regulative principle of ‘finding your vocation’. Catholic education was the means by which youth
could find their calling from God – their vocational destiny in the service of God.
This destiny might be that of Catholic parenthood and lay occupations of various
kinds (with public service professions strongly favoured) or the ultimate vocation of
service to the Church in clerical or religious life. While so many Catholic teachers of
this era were themselves members of religious orders the concept of a vocation in the
service of God was a daily incarnation in the classroom lives of the pupils and students.
The vocational word was, in this sense, ‘made flesh’ in the presence and the conduct
of their teachers. Everything else in the system, the academic curriculum, the moral
formation, the social and community bonding was there to facilitate the student in
finding his or her approved vocation in the service of God (and the Catholic Church).
This is the essence of a Christian faith-based schooling system, that is, the search for
the nature of God especially as revealed in the Person of Christ and the search for
God’s purposes in vocation for the individual student. This system, as Bernstein (1996)
has argued, was faced with considerable challenges in the cultural transformations of
late modernity.

The Challenges of Late Modernity: The Educational Responses
of Catholic Christianity
In late modernity the Catholic Church faced a world situation characterised by a more
pervasive culture of secularism and materialism than it had ever before encountered.
In particular it faced an international cult of perpetual consumerism propagated by the
many agencies of global capitalism and an international situation marked by sharper
divisions between rich and poor nations.
The Catholic Church, under the inspiration of Pope John XXIII, had itself undergone
an attempted spiritual, religious, moral and social transformation in the proceedings
of the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965). As Adrian Hastings (1991, p. 525) has
argued:
[T]here can be no question that the Vatican Council was the most important
ecclesiastical event of the century. … It so greatly changed the character of by
far the largest communion of Christendom.
The new spirit of Vatican II had considerable radical potential. This potential involved
attempts to develop a new conception of the Church as not simply clerical but constituted as ‘the people of God’; a move away from papal fiat towards greater collegial
authority; a new principle of openness and dialogue with the world, other Christian
denominations, other religious faiths and with ‘all people of good will’ regardless
of faith; a renewed corpus of Catholic social teaching centred upon ‘a preferential
option for the poor’ and a new conception of sin, as not merely individual failings
but also social and structural failings. A changed socio-political stance in international relations involved a move from the traditional denunciations of Marxism and

--- [PDF Page 896 / Book Page 912] ---

912 Grace

of communist regimes (as atheistic and oppressive) to a more extensive criticism of
structures of oppression and exploitation – ‘structures of sin’, constituted in global
capitalism, in race relations (apartheid in South Africa) and discernable in various
parts of the world, for example, Latin America.
In 1977, the Sacred Congregation for Catholic Education issued from Rome a
foundational document, The Catholic School, which powerfully expressed the new spirit
which it was hoped would characterise Catholic education internationally. This document
inaugurated a post-Vatican II conception of what a Catholic Christian education should
be in the era of late modernity. Any attempt in a ‘comparative education of the future’ to
evaluate Catholic school systems from the standpoint of values, knowledge, pedagogy,
identity and social relations, must use as its theoretical framework this ‘foundation charter’
for contemporary Catholic education. As there is little understanding of these principles in
the secular academic world, they need to be stated here in some detail.

Foundation Principles for Catholic Education
in the Era of Late Modernity
On the Distinctive a.nd Necessary Role of the Catholic School
There is a ‘pressing need to ensure the presence of a Christian mentality in the society
of the present day, marked, among other things, by cultural pluralism. For it is Christian
thought which constitutes a sound criterion of judgement in the midst of conflicting
concepts and behaviour: reference to Jesus Christ … teaches the values which ennoble
from those which degrade’.
Cultural pluralism leads the Church to reaffirm her mission of education to ensure
strong character formation. Her children then will be capable of both resisting the
debilitating influence of relativism and of living up to their baptism. For this reason,
the Church is prompted to mobilise her educational resources in the face of the materialism, fragmentation and technocracy of contemporary society’ (pp. 15–16).6
This section of the charter stressed the importance of the critical role of Catholic
schooling in late modernity. The role of the Catholic School was counter-cultural.
Later statements from Rome suggested that modernity has become associated with
the unrestrained pursuit of profit and of technological innovation to the detriment of
the spiritual and moral formation of persons. Catholic schools internationally have
been called upon to be counter-cultural to these tendencies.

Catholic Schools and Human Formation
‘A school is not only a place where one is given a choice of intellectual values, but
a place where one is presented with an array of values which are actually lived. …
Christ is the foundation of the whole educational enterprise in a Catholic school …
the Catholic school aims at forming in the Christian those particular virtues which will
enable him7 to live a new life in Christ’ (pp. 29–33).
Catholic educators are to resist the reductionism of education as academic achievement only. The formation of values and virtues is crucial to human development in the
contemporary world.

--- [PDF Page 897 / Book Page 913] ---

Christianity, Modernities and Knowledge 913

Against the many dramatic and glamorous role models provided by a modern media
culture permeating the world, Catholic schools are encouraged to continue to project
to Catholic youth, the Person of Christ as the most perfect guide for living and human
formation.

Integration of Faith and Life
‘The Catholic school has, as its specific duty, the complete Christian formation of its
pupils and this task is of special significance today because of the inadequacy of the
family and society. … Young people have to be taught to overcome their individualism and discover, in the light of faith, their specific vocation. The very pattern of the
Christian life draws them to commit themselves to serve God … and to make the world
a better place to live in’ (p. 37).
The important role of the Catholic school in assisting young people to find their
God-given vocation is again reasserted. Generating a culture of vocation is seen to
have heightened significance because of contemporary tendencies to think in terms of
‘good jobs’ only, to the detriment of notions of a ‘calling’ or a ‘vocation’.
Catholic schools are expected to develop educational cultures in which faith, reason
and life are brought into an integrated relationship as a holistic educational experience. From this perspective, the understanding of particular academic subjects and of
particular vocational possibilities should be strongly framed within the perspective of
the Faith.

On Knowledge
‘Education is not given for the purpose of gaining power but as an aid towards the
fuller understanding of and communion with man, events and things. Knowledge is
not to be considered as a means of material prosperity and success, but as a call to
serve and to be responsible for others’ (p. 43).
The authors of The Catholic School saw an external world in which knowledge
itself was being transformed into a market commodity associated with power, wealth
and personal status. Their argument in this section was that Catholic educational
knowledge was not to be seen only in terms of individual personal empowerment but
rather as empowerment for social purposes. The commodification of knowledge in late
modernity was to be resisted.
Catholic schools were called upon to resist an individualistic ‘success’ culture and a
market conception of knowledge by holding to traditional conceptions that knowledge
entails service to a larger good.

On Teachers as Witnesses
‘The Catholic school depends not so much on subject matter or methodology as on the
people who work there. The extent to which the Christian message is transmitted
through education depends to a very great extent on the teachers. … The nobility of the
task to which teachers are called demands that, in imitation of Christ … they reveal the
Christian message not only by word but also by every gesture of their behaviour.8 This
is what makes the difference between a school whose education is permeated by the

--- [PDF Page 898 / Book Page 914] ---

914 Grace

Christian spirit and one in which religion is only regarded as an academic subject like
any other’ (p. 36).
Lay teachers were encouraged to follow the example of their predecessors, the religious, in being witnesses for Christ. The transmission of the charisms of religious
congregation to their lay successors would be essential to preserving the distinctive
roles of Catholic schools in society.
In effect, the Church was attempting to encourage Catholic lay teachers and school
leaders, who now constituted the majority of the personnel in schools, to become
inheritors and models of the charisms of the declining religious orders in education.

Catholic Schools and Social Justice
‘Since it is motivated by the Christian ideal, the Catholic school is particularly sensitive to
the call from every part of the world for a more just society. … In some countries, because
of local laws and economic conditions, the Catholic school runs the risk of giving counterwitness by admitting a majority of children from wealthier families. … This situation is of
great concern to those responsible for Catholic education, because first and foremost the
Church offers its educational service to the poor to those who are deprived of family help
and affection or those who are far from the faith’ (pp. 44–45).9
There is evidence here of concern that too many Catholic schools internationally
were in the service of the rich rather than the poor. A danger for Catholic schooling in
late modernity was that despite a rhetoric of service to the poor, it might in practice not
be realising this foundation principle.
Catholic school service to elite students had historically been premised on the belief
that the future leaders of society could be ‘converted’ to the service of the poor by
religious and moral teaching.
The Second Vatican Council called for more direct engagement with the education
of the deprived and the powerless, by a commitment to ‘a preferential option for the
poor’ in schooling.

Catholic Schools and the Common Good
‘The Catholic school community is an irreplaceable source of service. … Today, one
sees a world which clamours for solidarity and yet experiences the rise of new forms
of individualism. Society can take note from the Catholic school that it is possible to
create true communities out of a common effort for the common good’ (p. 47).10
The authors of The Catholic School saw a late modernity marked by the growth of
acquisitive and competitive individualism, encouraged by global capitalism. This was an
attempt to keep Catholic schools in the service of social solidarity and the common good.
The ideological influence of the New Right in politics and economics was becoming
evident to Church leaders and it was seen to be necessary to rearticulate and to re-emphasise
Catholic social teaching about the common good and its relationship to education.

Catholic Schools and Openness
‘In the certainty that the spirit is at work in every person, the Catholic school offers
itself to all, non-Christians included, with all its distinctive aims and means’ (p. 66).11

--- [PDF Page 899 / Book Page 915] ---

Christianity, Modernities and Knowledge 915

Against widely held views that Catholic schools served Catholics only, the
Congregation for Catholic Education made it explicit that Catholic schools were, (subject to available places), at the service of all who wished to enter. The concept of the
ghetto school was replaced by a school at the service of the world.
The Roles of Catholic Schools in Late Modernity
This new ‘openness to the world’ was very much in the spirit of the Second Vatican
Council. However, conservative Catholics feared the potential of such universal open
access to dilute the Catholic ethos and culture of the schools.
This radical and explicit agenda for the transformation of Catholic schooling
worldwide was offered for the consideration of Episcopal Conferences, that is, the
Conference of Catholic Bishops in various parts of the world who are responsible for
the administration, policy and practice of their particular educational systems:
We appeal to each Episcopal conference to consider and to develop these principles which should inspire the Catholic school and to translate them into concrete
programs which will meet the real needs of the educational systems operating in
their countries. (pp. 71–72)
It seems likely that the reforming principles of The Catholic School document may
have been taken up with enthusiasm in some societies, with caution in others, and in
conservative settings, virtually ignored.
At its best, the post-Vatican II version of Catholic Christian education will
be characterised by its counter-cultural stance to the features of late modernity.
Against a confusion of role models for the young, the schools will offer the Person
of Christ; against the hegemonic consumerism of global capitalism, the schools
will attempt to form a spirituality of service and of God-given vocations; against a
reductionist view of knowledge as commodity and of pedagogy as technical delivery, the schools will attempt to hold to humane educational values and a dialogic
learning experience for the students. The ideal post-Vatican II Catholic school will
be an agency for the advancement of social justice and the common good and it
will make its services available to the poor and disadvantaged and to those who
are ‘far from the Faith’.12
That is the new vision for the role of Catholic education system arising from the
deliberation of the Second Vatican Council. However, the question for large-scale
comparative education research in the future is to what extent does this ideal conception of Catholic schooling exist in practice, as opposed to only in the documents and
formal discourse of the Church?
To what extent have the Conferences of Bishops throughout the world taken this
radical vision seriously and sought to transform their educational systems to meet the
challenges of late modernity using the principles of the 1977 foundation charter?
Given that the Catholic educational system is the largest faith-based schooling system in the world with 120,000 schools serving almost 50 million students (Pittau,
2000), it is remarkable how little research and scholarly attention it has received from
the various branches of Education studies, including comparative education studies.13

--- [PDF Page 900 / Book Page 916] ---

916 Grace

This seems to be the result of what Gallagher (1997, p. 23) has referred to as ‘secular
marginalisation’ in the intellectual culture of late modernity:
especially in the academic and media worlds, a secular culture reigns with the
result that religion is subtly ignored as unimportant.
As the editors of this volume assert, one of the paradoxes or contradictions of the
present juncture is that education is becoming more powerfully linked to the economics of global capitalism on the one hand, but also to resurgent forms of religion on the
other.14 The study of how these profound contradictions in the cultures of schooling
are realised in the future becomes a major research project for comparative education.
The fate of post-Vatican II Catholic schooling provides a rich field for investigation as
part of that larger project.

The Educational Responses of Reformed Christianity
Of all the varieties of Reformed Christianity there is only space here to consider one of
them in the context of later modernity – that of Evangelical Christianity. Karen Armstrong
(2001a, p. 140) reminds us that recent events have tended to preoccupy everyone with
notions of Islamic fundamentalism. This, as she points out, is a limited view because
[f]undamentalism is a global fact and has surfaced in every major faith in response
to the problems of our modernity. There is fundamentalist Judaism, fundamentalist Christianity, fundamentalist Hinduism, fundamentalist Buddhism.
Of all the forms of religious fundamentalism, she argues, that of Evangelical
Christianity surfaced first in the Christian world, in the USA at the beginning of the
twentieth century. Although there are different realisations of Evangelical Christianity,
what unites them all is an emphasis upon the literal truths of the Bible as the Word of
God; a belief in the act of personal salvation as an encounter with Christ which does
not depend upon the mediation of a priesthood or an institutional church; a view of
secular society in late modernity as hostile to true religion and as spiritually and morally corrupt and a belief that children and young people must be educated in schooling
contexts which insulate them from an externally decadent world.
Armstrong (2001b, pp. 269–270) reports that
[d]uring the 1970s (in the USA) more parents than ever before removed their children
from the public schools to Christian establishments where they could be instructed in
Christian values … and where all learning was conducted within a biblical context.
Between 1965 and 1983 enrolment in these evangelical schools increased six-fold
and about 100,000 fundamentalist children were taught at home.15
In an era in which the Catholic schooling system sought a new stance of openness to,
and of dialogue with, the external world, committing itself to working for social justice

--- [PDF Page 901 / Book Page 917] ---

Christianity, Modernities and Knowledge 917

and the common good, the Evangelical school network took up a stance of insulating
its young people from the world.16 However, while the young of the community needed
to be protected, it was understood to be the duty of adult Evangelists to campaign
against the forces of corruption. This could be done by mobilising as a political and
pressure group formation which could compel the liberal establishment to make political, educational and social concessions to the demands of Evangelical Christianity.
In the view of Evangelical Christians a new religion was in power in the USA, that of
secular humanism. This false religion of late modernity had to be not only denounced but
actively resisted in community, state and national politics. As a leading USA fundamentalist, Pat Robertson proclaimed, ‘We have enough votes to run this country.’17
The educational consequences of fundamentalist types of Evangelical Christianity in the
USA have been examined by Michael Apple (2001) in his important text, Educating the
‘Right’ Way: Markets, Standards, God and Inequality. Apple’s specific focus is upon the
growing power of the ‘Christian Right’ (evangelists) and ‘the growing influence of authoritarian, populist religious conservatism in education’ (p. 27). The agenda of the ‘Christian
Right’ includes attempts to influence policy by ‘bringing God back into the schools’,
advancing particular views on gender, sexuality and the family and by shaping ideas about
what is to count as legitimate knowledge in the schools. In the absence of a national curriculum in the USA, evangelists have been successful in bringing pressure to bear upon
school textbook publishers and upon state education officials. From this perspective the
subjects of the curriculum and their content must be legitimated by a clear relationship
with the Bible as the framework for all knowledge. In particular, Creation Science (derived
from Biblical accounts) must at least be given equal time in the curriculum with Evolution
Science (derived from Darwinian sources).
The agenda of conservative Evangelical Christianity is powerful in the USA because
of the commitment of its activists, its large financial backing and its creative and extensive use of the mass media to propagate its messages. In noting this, Apple (2001)
highlights the international mission potential of Evangelical Christian educators and
preachers. Evangelicals are active in Latin America, Eastern Europe, Russia, Africa,
India and many parts of Asia. If the Catholic Church responded to the challenges of
early modernity by forming and deploying many religious orders with missions in
education, it can be seen that Evangelical Christianity is responding to late modernity
by sending out its educational and religious missionaries to all parts of the world.
The power of Evangelical Christianity in education is not simply a phenomenon of
the USA; it has worldwide implications for knowledge selection and pedagogical
processes in many societies. The historical irony is that the Catholic Church is now
witnessing a serious reduction in its religious order personnel,18 while the missionaries
of Evangelism appear to be increasing rapidly.

Agendas for Comparative Education Research
This analysis has already suggested some major themes for future research.
For Catholic Christianity, the practical manifestations of a reformed post-Vatican
II version of Catholic schooling requires detailed examination in various parts of the

--- [PDF Page 902 / Book Page 918] ---

918 Grace

world. A particular focus on the nature of knowledge constituted in contemporary
Catholic schools is required. In what senses is this knowledge distinctively Catholic, in
its content, its pedagogy and its evaluation? If the ‘teacher as witness’ is a crucial part of
a Catholic educational formation, to what extent are teachers in contemporary schools
fulfilling that role? Has Catholic pedagogy substantially moved from a ‘pedagogy of the
catechism’ in religious teaching to a ‘pedagogy of dialogue’ about religious and spiritual matters? Has the concept of finding your God-given vocation in Catholic education
weakened in late modernity as a complex result of secularisation, marketisation and the
dramatic decline of vowed religious teachers as living models of vocation?
For Evangelical Christianity, detailed studies are needed of what impact it is having
on curriculum selection and control in a range of countries. Is there a resurgence of
Bible validated knowledge and pedagogy and what does this mean in terms of curriculum structure and process? What effects are the growing number of evangelical schools
having on other schooling systems? Does Evangelical Christianity in its educational
cultures have an essentially conservative and individualising effect on students, as
Apple (2001) suggests, or does it provide students with a commitment to missionary work for the good of communities? In specific regions, such as Latin America,
are evangelical schools beginning to displace the traditional educational cultures of
Catholicism, or are these two agencies working together to strengthen Christian education in that continent?19
The injunction of Jesus Christ to his disciples to ‘go and teach all nations’ has, in
the following centuries, resulted in an extensive Christian network of schools, colleges
and universities in almost every country. In this chapter, because of limitations of
space only the schools of the Catholic and Evangelical traditions have been discussed.
If we add to these, the schools of other Christian communities, for example, Lutheran,
Anglican, Orthodox, Methodist, Baptist, and other churches of Reformed Christianity,
then it becomes apparent that the Christian education network is still a major force to
be reckoned with. It is also a major field for future research by scholars of comparative
education, and of other educational disciplines.20

Reformation and Counter-Reformation in Education:
An Uncertain Outcome
This chapter has used as its theoretical framework the analysis of Basil Bernstein
(1996) which suggests that a major secular reformation of education is taking place in
late modernity in the West.
This reformation involves the potential hegemony of a commodified concept of
knowledge, a marketised form of the curriculum, a virtually secular pedagogic discourse and a conception of education as entirely concerned with the pursuit of material
advantage and of social mobility. While Bernstein observed that, at the same time, ‘a
revival of the sacred’ was taking place, he did not elaborate the nature of what can be
called, the religious counter-reformation in education.
This chapter has tried to explore the nature of the Christian counter-reformation
to these developments in education. Catholic Christian schooling, in the spirit of the

--- [PDF Page 903 / Book Page 919] ---

Christianity, Modernities and Knowledge 919

Second Vatican Council has formulated a charter and a set of principles, which if
implemented, represents a powerful and distinctive oppositional agenda to that provided by economistic ideologies in education across the world.21
Evangelical Christian schooling is involved in a more complex counter-reformation,
resisting secularisation by a strong assertion of the centrality of Bible truth in educational experience and of absolute moral standards derived from this source, while
at the same time appearing more nuanced in its relation to economic structures and
ideologies and their impact on education.
Pope John Paul II in 1994 expressed the Catholic position on these issues in dramatic terms:
Against the spirit of the world, the Church takes up each day a struggle that is
none other than the struggle for the world’s soul.22
While contemporary Catholic education is engaged in a struggle for the world’s soul,
it is not at all clear that it has sufficient resources to be successful in that struggle. The
struggles of early modernity were undertaken by dedicated religious orders with missions in education across the world.
Contemporary struggles depend much more upon Catholic lay school leaders and
teachers who may be less well resourced than their predecessors to maintain a distinctive oppositional agenda.
Evangelical Christian education has adopted a stance of counter-reformation to the
influence of relativistic liberal morality in state schooling systems but in the opinion
of writers such as Martin (1999) and Apple (2001) its individualistic and pragmatic
stance on economic issues make it an ally of corporatism rather than a critic.
We must conclude therefore that ‘the struggle for the world’s soul’, in educational
terms, is an unequal struggle with uncertain outcomes, and as Bernstein (1996, p. 88)
suggested, ‘what is at stake is the very concept of education itself’.

Bernstein on Religion, Identity and Modernity
Bernstein’s conclusions provide a suitable ending to the arguments of this chapter:
What appears to be happening at the end of the 20th century is a weakening of the
location of the sacred. In the beginning of the century, the sacred was centrally
located and informed the collective base of society through the inter-relation of
state, religion and education. Today, this collective base has been considerably
weakened. … The sacred now reveals itself in dispersed sites, movements and
discourses. (1996, p. 81)
However, he also noted that:
Christianity … is a faith where faith cannot be taken for granted; it must be constantly re-won, revitalized, renewed. (1996, p. 86)

--- [PDF Page 904 / Book Page 920] ---

920 Grace

This chapter has demonstrated that the educational cultures of both Catholic
Christianity and of Evangelical Christianity are attempting to defend their respective
conceptions of the sacred in the conditions of late modernity. They are attempting
to defend their understandings of what constitutes a valid conception of knowledge
and the curriculum, a valid conception of the educational process and a distinctively
Christian approach to the formation of students in education.
At the same time they are both working to revitalise and renew their educational
systems in the face of the many challenges which the conditions of late modernity
generate for religious believers and for faith-based education.

Notes
1. For a detailed discussion, see Bernstein (1996, pp. 75–81).
2. Reformed Christianity here refers to all those churches and religious groups which have developed
since the Reformation in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and which are broadly described as
Protestant.
3. See Duminuco (2000), especially Appendix A: ‘The characteristics of Jesuit education’, and ‘Ignatian
pedagogy: A practical approach’ (pp. 162–275). See also Appendix 2 (pp. 276–1291), ‘Ignatian
pedagogy today’, which includes the statement, ‘the goal of Jesuit education is the formation of
men and women for others, people of competence, conscience and compassionate commitment’
(p. 277).
4. For a detailed discussion, see Rosemary DeJulio, ‘The response of Mary Ward and Madeleine Sophie
Barat to the Ratio Studiorum’, in Duminuco (2000, pp.107–126).
5. For one major study of this great educational missionary enterprise, see Murphy (2000).
6. This has been a constant theme in subsequent Vatican pronouncements on Catholic education in late
modernity: ‘Many young people find themselves in a condition of radical instability. … They live in a
one-dimensional universe in which the only criterion is practical utility and the only value is economic
and technological progress. … Not a few young people … trying to find an escape from loneliness, turn
to alcohol, drugs, the erotic, the exotic. Christian education is faced with the huge challenge of helping
these young people discover something of value in their lives’ (The Religious Dimension of Education
in a Catholic School, 1988, pp. 8–10).
7. The spirit of Vatican II did not, unfortunately, lead to the use of gender-inclusive language in the documents of the Church.
8. This emphasis upon the importance of ‘witness’ in Catholic educational formation was strengthened
further by Pope Paul VI’s much quoted (in Catholic contexts) statement: ‘Today, students do not listen
seriously to teachers but to witnesses; and if they do listen to teachers, it is because they are witnesses’.
(Evangelii Nuntiandi, 1975), quoted in Duminuco (2000, p. 285)
9. For further discussion of this, see Grace (2003).
10. The Catholic Bishops’ Conference of England and Wales reiterated the common good objectives of
Catholic social and educational teaching in two publications in 1996 and 1997.
11. Catholic schools in ‘missionary’ contexts such as Africa, the Middle and Far East, India, etc. had
always been open to those of other faiths. This radical development in 1977 extended this openness to
all contexts internationally.
12. For some research studies which have attempted to assess the impact of Vatican II reforms upon t he practice of Catholic schooling, see Arthur (1995), Bryk et al. (1993), Flynn (1993), Grace (2002), Greeley
(1998), McLaughlin et al. (1996), O’Keefe (2000), Sullivan (2000) and Youniss et al. (2000 a,b).
13. Some attempt to remedy this situation will be made in a forthcoming publication, International
Handbook of Catholic Education, edited by Gerald Grace and Joseph O’Keefe, S.J., to be published in
2007.
14. This was also recognised by Bernstein (1996, p. 80): ‘We have produced for the first time a virtually
secular pedagogic discourse and culture, and at the same time, a revival of the sacred.’

--- [PDF Page 905 / Book Page 921] ---

Christianity, Modernities and Knowledge 921
15. Walford (2001) has examined the development of Christian Evangelical schools in England and the
Netherlands.
16. It must be noted however that pre-Vatican II Catholic schools were also insulated from the external
world which was regarded as potentially corrupting for the Faith.
17. Quoted in Armstrong (2001b, p. 267).
18. The seriousness of the situation was recognised by the Sacred Congregation for Catholic Education
publication, Lay Catholics in Schools: Witnesses to Faith (1982). In this document the hope was
expressed that the charism and sense of vocation of the declining religious teaching orders would be
reconstituted in their lay successors.
19. For one discussion of the impact of Protestant evangelisation in Latin America, see Cook (1994). See
especially Chapter 5 (Berg & Pretiz) and Chapter 20 (Bonino).
20. For an attempt to encourage such research, see Grace (2004).
21. Casanova (1994, p. 5) argues, with special reference to Catholicism, that ‘religious traditions throughout the world are refusing to accept the marginal and privatised role which theories of modernity …
had reserved for them. Social movements have appeared … challenging in the name of religion … the
state and the market economy’.
22. Quoted in Grace (2002, p. 21)

Bibliography
Apple, M. (2001). Educating the ‘right’ way: Markets, standards, God and equality. New York and London:
Routledge Falmer.
Armstrong, K. (2001a). Islam: A short history. London: Phoenix Press.
Armstrong, K. (2001b). The battle for God: A history of fundamentalism. New York: Ballantine Books.
Arthur, J. (1995). The ebbing tide: Policy and principles of Catholic education. Leominster: Gracewing
Publications.
Bauman, Z. (2000). In search of politics. Oxford: Polity Press.
Berg, M., & Pretiz, P. (1994). Five waves of Protestant Evangelization. In G. Cook (Ed.). New face of the
Church in Latin America. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.
Berger, P. (1973). The social reality of Religion. London: Penguin.
Bernstein, B. (1996). Pedagogy, symbolic control and identity: Theory, research and critique. London:
Taylor & Francis.
Bonino, J. (1994). The condition and prospects of Christianity in Latin America. In G. Cook (Ed.) New face
of the Church in Latin America. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.
Brouwer, S, Gifford, P., & Rose, S. (1996). Exporting the American gospel: Global Christian fundamentalism. New York: Routledge.
Bryk, A., Lee, V. & Holland, P. (1993). Catholic schools and the common good. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Casanova, J. (1994). Public religions in the modern age. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Catholic Bishops’ Conference of England and Wales (1996). The Common good and the Catholic Church’s
social teaching. London: CBC.
Catholic Education Service of England and Wales (1996). The common good in education. London: CES.
Cook, G. (Ed.) (1994). New face of the Church in Latin America. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.
Dejulio, R. (2000). Women’s ways of knowing and learning: The response of Mary Ward and Madeleine
Sophie Barat to the Ratio Studiorum. Chapter 5 in Duminuco (2000).
Duminuco, V. (Ed.) (2000). The Jesuit Ratio Studiorum: 400th anniversary perspectives. New York: Fordham
University Press.
Durkheim, E. (1977). The evolution of educational thought. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul (first published by Presses Universitaires de France, 1938).
Flynn, M. (1993). The culture of Catholic schools. Homebush, NSW: St. Paul Publications.
Gallagher, M. (1997). New forms of cultural unbelief. In P. Hogan & K. Williams (Eds.), The future of religion in Irish education. Dublin: Veritas.

--- [PDF Page 906 / Book Page 922] ---

922 Grace
Gellner, E. (1996). Conditions of liberty: Civil society and its rivals. London: Penguin.
Giddens, A. (1991). The consequences of modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Grace, G. (2002). Catholic schools: Mission, markets and morality. London and New York: Routledge
Falmer.
Grace, G. (2003). First and foremost the Church offers its educational service to the Poor: Class, inequality
and Catholic schooling in contemporary contexts. International Studies in Sociology of Education,
13(1), 35–53.
Grace, G. (2004). Making connections for future directions: Taking religion seriously in the sociology of
education. International Studies in Sociology of Education, 14(1), 47–56.
Grace, G., & O’ Keefe, J. (Eds) (2007). International handbook of Catholic education, 2 volumes. Dordrecht,
Springer.
Greeley, A. (1998). Catholic schools at the crossroads: An American perspective. In J. M. Feheney (Ed.),
From ideal to action: The inner nature of a Catholic school today. Dublin: Veritas.
Hastings, A. (1991). A history of English Christianity, 1920–1990., London: SCM Press.
Martin, D. (1999). The Evangelical upsurge and its political implications. In P. Berger (Ed.), The desecularisation of the world: Resurgent religion and world politics. Grand Rapids: W. Eermans Publishing.
McLaughlin, T., O’Keefe, J., & O’Keeffe, B. (Eds.) (1996). The contemporary Catholic school: Context,
identity and diversity. London and Washington: Falmer Press.
Murphy, D. (2000). A history of Irish emigrant and missionary education. Dublin: Four Courts Press.
O’ Keefe, J. (2000). The challenge of pluralism: Articulating a rationale for religiously diverse urban Roman
Catholic schools in the United States. International Journal of Education and Religion, 1, 64–88.
Pittau, G. (2000). Education on the threshold of the Third Millenium, challenge, mission and adventure.
Catholic Education, 4(2), 139–152.
Sacred Congregation for Catholic Education (1977). The Catholic School. Homebush,. NSW: St. Paul
Publications.
Sacred Congregation for Catholic Education (1982). Lay Catholics in schools witnesses to faith. London:
Catholic Truth Society.
Sullivan, J. (2000). Catholic schools in contention. Dublin: Veritas.
Vatican Congregation for Catholic Education (1988). The religious dimension of education in a Catholic
school. Dublin: Veritas.
Walford, G. (2001). Evangelical Christian schools in England and the Netherlands Oxford Review of
Education, 27(4), 529–541.
Youniss, J., & Convey, J. (Eds) (2000a). Catholic schools at the crossroads: Survival and transformation.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Youniss, J., Convey, J. and McLellan, J. (Eds) (2000b). The Catholic character of Catholic schools. Notre
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.

