================================================================================
Chapter 60: Pedagogical and Educational Change for Sustainable Knowledge Societies
Author(s): Andy Hargreaves
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 6: Cultures, Knowledge and Pedagogies
Book Pages: pp. 943–958
PDF Pages: pp. 926–941 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 926 / Book Page 943] ---

60
PEDAGOGICAL AND EDUCATIONAL CHANGE
FOR SUSTAINABLE KNOWLEDGE SOCIETIES
Andy Hargreaves

Introduction
We live in perilously unsustainable times. Because of the developed world’s desire for
endless progress and limitless consumption, for immediate pleasure and short-term
reward, for wanting it all and wanting it now, our planet and its people are now imperilled. And the most underprivileged – the poor and the dispossessed – are the most
imperilled of all. Politicians hooked on the instant gratification of short-term elections
and quick fix results have exchanged the moral imperative of long-term climate change
for the immediate popularity of electoral success – and global poverty, widespread
climatological catastrophe, and the migration of millions around the globe are the
consequences that now await them.
Currently fashionable educational change and reform strategies similarly threaten
to treat our teachers and human resources as unsustainable, just as multinational businesses and politicians have undermined the sustainability of our natural resources.
Imposed short-term targets, endless testing and quick political wins at the cost of deep
learning for all students, are the enemy of educational sustainability.
In recent years I have written two apparently contradictory books on pedagogy, leadership and change in knowledge societies. Teaching In The Knowledge Society (A.
Hargreaves, 2003) argues that schools, teaching and learning need to be reconfigured
to prepare all young people to participate in transforming their countries into creative
knowledge economies, and to have opportunities to be employed at the highest levels
of these economies, in high-skill, high-wage societies.
More and more nations are or aspire to be knowledge economies. The knowledge
society is not just a synonym for information society. In an age of electronic, digital
and satellite technologies, knowledge societies address how information and ideas are
created, used, circulated and adapted at an accelerating speed in “knowledge-based
communities”, that is, networks of individuals striving to produce and circulate new
knowledge. In knowledge societies, wealth, prosperity and economic development
depend on people’s capacity to out-invent and outwit their competitors, to tune in to
the desires and demands of the consumer market, and to change jobs or develop new
skills as economic fluctuations and downturns require. In knowledge societies, these
capacities are not just the property of individuals, but also of organizations, which
have the capacity to share, create and apply new knowledge continuously over time in
943
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 943–958.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 927 / Book Page 944] ---

944 Hargreaves

cultures of mutual learning and continuous innovation. Knowledge society organizations develop these capacities by providing their members with extensive opportunities
for lifelong upskilling and retraining; by breaking down barriers to learning and communication and getting people to work in overlapping, heterogeneous and flexible
teams; by looking at problems and mistakes as opportunities for learning more than
occasions for blame; by involving everyone in the ‘big picture’ of where the organization is going; and by developing the ‘social capital’ of networks and relationships that
provide people with extra support and further learning.
The knowledge society is a learning society. Economic success and a culture of
continuous innovation depend on the capacity of workers to keep learning themselves
and from each other, throughout their working lives.
Schools that educate young people for the knowledge society have to break with
many aspects of the past. The agrarian and industrial models of one teacher-one class
schooling need to replace standardized instruction that emphasizes only the basics of
literacy and numeracy, with a broad and more cognitively challenging and creative
curriculum; teachers need to work and inquire into their teaching together rather than
teaching in their classrooms alone; professional learning has to be continuous rather
than episodic; teachers’ judgments should be informed by objective evidence as well
as subjective experience and intuition; and the teaching profession needs to develop
dispositions of taking risks and welcoming change rather than staying with proven
procedures and comfortable routines. Knowledge society schooling, in other words,
demands that we put aside outdated ‘grammars’ of industrial and agrarian models of
schooling. It also requires that we abandon their Anglo-Saxon reinvention in the form
of narrowly focused, overtested and highly intensified standardized educational reforms
that restrict the curriculum, inhibit creative learning, undermine professional morale,
and cut off the supply lines of recruitment to leadership. Teaching in the Knowledge
Society, in other words seems to propose moving forward, by leaving the past behind.
A second book, Sustainable Leadership (Hargreaves & Fink, 2006), seems to advocate the antithesis of this position. Drawing on the development of the concept and
practices of sustainability in the environmental movement, the definition of sustainable
development in the Brundtland Commission Report of 1987 (Brundtland, 1987), and
the beginning of the UN Decade of Education of Sustainable Development 2005–2015
(UNESCO, 2005), the book argues against quick fix Anglo-Saxon reform strategies that impose short-term achievement targets, download a hurried curriculum to
younger-and-younger age groups, encourage teaching to the test in the all-consuming
curriculum of literacy and numeracy, and promote quick fix turnaround strategies for
teachers in failing schools.
Drawing on research of 30 years of educational leadership in eight US and Canadian
high schools, as well as on our engagement with the literature on environmental and corporate sustainability, Dean Fink and I developed a definition of sustainable leadership:
Sustainable educational leadership and improvement preserves and develops
deep learning for all that spreads and lasts, in ways that do no harm to and indeed
create positive benefit for others around us, now and in the future. (Hargreaves
& Fink, 2006)

--- [PDF Page 928 / Book Page 945] ---

Pedagogical and Educational Change 945

From this definition, and our body of research evidence, we then derived seven
principles of sustainability in educational change and leadership: depth, breadth,
endurance, justice, diversity, resourcefulness and conservation. While all of these are
relevant for the future of education and pedagogy in knowledge societies, two are
especially pertinent to this article.
First, in terms of depth, sustainable education matters. It preserves, protects and
promotes what is itself sustaining as an enrichment of life: the fundamental moral purpose of deep, broad and lifelong learning (rather than superficially tested and narrowly
defined literacy and numeracy achievement) for all in commitments to and relationships of abiding care for others.
Second, in relation to the principle of conservation, sustainable education honours
and learns from the best of the past to create an even better future. Amid the chaos of
change, sustainable education is steadfast about preserving and renewing long-standing purposes. Most educational change theory and practice is change without a past
or a memory. Sustainable education revisits and revives organizational memories and
honours the wisdom of their bearers as a way to learn from, preserve, then moves
beyond the best of the past. It defines and delineates lifelong learning as something
that weaves a compelling narrative between past, present and future that binds individuals and society together.
Sustainable knowledge societies seem like oxymorons – as do sustainable knowledge
society schools. Knowledge societies promote innovation, they prize all that is new, they
depend on rapid learning and they champion the pursuit of change. Sustainable schooling, by contrast, values slow and in-depth learning rather than a hurried curriculum; it
asks for patience and endurance in the implementation of change; it calls for prudence
and resourcefulness rather than energetic and profligate investment; and it promotes the
virtues of conserving the past in a world awash with innovation and change. It requires
teaching beyond the knowledge society as well as immediately for it.
How can we reconcile innovation and sustainability in knowledge societies and
their schools? How do we build a future on the foundations of the past? How can
the energetic innovator and the prudent Puritan live and work together, side by side?
This article argues that sustainable knowledge society schools and pedagogies do not
rescind or take refuge in the past, but connect it to a compelling and motivating vision –
economic and social – of where people and their societies are moving in the future.

Past, Present and Future
Educational and pedagogical change often has no place for the past. The arrow of
change moves only in a forward direction. The past is a problem to be ignored or
overcome in the rush to get closer to the future (McCulloch, 1997). For those who are
attracted, even addicted to change, the past is a repository of regressive and irrational
resistance among teachers who like to stay where they are and are emotionally unable
to ‘let go’ of old habits, attachments and beliefs. Or the past is a pejorative, a dim and
Dark Age of weak or bad practice, that leaves negative legacies of regimented factory
models of schooling, or ‘uninformed professional judgment’ in teaching that get in the
way of modernization.

--- [PDF Page 929 / Book Page 946] ---

946 Hargreaves

When change has only a present or future tense it becomes the antithesis of
sustainability. Indeed, Abrahamson (2004) describes how repetitive change syndrome
with its interminable downsizings, restructurings and re-engineerings, leads to massive
haemorrhaging of staff and leadership, and with it, a ‘loss of organizational memory’.
No one is left behind to celebrate the organization’s tradition, to be living bearers of its
purpose and mission, to pass on the knowledge and expertise of how best to do things
or to show new recruits the short cuts and the ropes.
Instead of treating the elders of the education profession as toxic teachers who
are resistant to change, it is important to approach them as renewable and renewing
resources who, through opportunities for mentoring, continuous learning and involvement in improvement, can actually raise the quality of their school’s environment and
its products. In this sense, teacher wisdom and organizational memory have to be part
of the solution to educational change, not just part of the problem. As South Africans
have inspirationally understood, those who embody the past are also an inalienable
part of our common future. There are at least three ways in which this essential educational and societal connection is dismissed or denied.

Present Immersion
Sometimes, the threat to synthesizing the future with the past is not active dismissal of
the past, but indulgent immersion in a present that seems to have no exits or entrances.
In an age of economic insecurity and declining credibility in the commitment and
capacity of politics to control the future, it is little wonder that people invest their passions and purposes in the present. But in the post-industrial knowledge society, the
flight from the future is marked less by fatalistic resignation among the poor than by
energetic indulgence among more socio-economically advantaged groups. At a time of
insecurity, many people deal with the finality of death and the end of the future differently than their generational predecessors. They do not save to leave a legacy, prudently
prepare for the ultimate rewards of religious eternity, or even sacrifice themselves on
the battlefield for the greater good of national identity or security. Rather, they deny and
try to cheat and control death by what Bauman calls the marginalization of concerns
with finality, through the devaluation of anything durable, long-lasting, long-term; the
devaluation of anything likely to outlive individual life. (Bauman, 2006, p. 39)
In post-industrial presentism, people “delay frustration, not gratification” (Bauman,
2006, p. 8). They live on credit, lift their faces, spend their children’s inheritance, and
shop in orgies of consumption where everyone imagines they will be forever young in
a world that gives no thought to tomorrow.
This consumption of the present is supported and stimulated by a workplace environment which values moving on rather than settling in, short-term interactions rather
than long-term relationships, and migration from task to task rather than pride in mastering a challenging craft (Sennett, 2001). In Richard Sennett’s words:
The social skill required by a flexible organization is the ability to work well
with others in short-lived teams, (with) others you won’t have the time to know

--- [PDF Page 930 / Book Page 947] ---

Pedagogical and Educational Change 947

well. Whenever the team dissolves and you enter a new group, the problem you
have to solve is getting down to business as quickly as possible with these new
teammates. (Sennett, 2006, p. 126)
No critical engagement, no challenge to the organization’s purposes, no long-term
thinking or moral depth is required or desired here, for “institutions based on shortterm transactions and constantly shifting tasks … do not breed that depth. Indeed, the
organization can fear it” (Sennett, 2006, p. 105). Seduction by the short-term, immersion in the interactions of the present “divides analyzing from believing, ignores the
glue of emotional attachment, penalizes digging deep” (Sennett, 2006, p. 121–122). In
this all-consuming present-time environment, “your skill lies in cooperating, whatever
the circumstances” (Sennett, 2006, p. 126).
These predilections and preoccupations are evident in a project that my colleague
Dennis Shirley and I evaluated in England in which more than 300 schools that had
a dip in measured performance over 1 or 2 years, were networked with each other,
provided with technical assistance in interpreting achievement results, given access to
support from mentor schools, and offered a modest discretionary budget to spend in
any way they chose provided it addressed the goals of the project (Hargreaves et al.,
2006). Participating schools were also provided with a practitioner-generated menu of
proven strategies that bring about short-, medium- and long-term improvement.
Schools were spectacularly successful in improving in the short term, but few had
begun to engage in longer-term improvement processes. Dialogue about deep transformations in teaching were largely yet to occur. Instead, teachers and schools were
excitedly implementing and exchanging short-term change strategies such as providing
students with test-taking strategies, paying past students to mentor existing ones, feeding students with lettuce, water and bananas before testing events, or collecting mobile
phone numbers to contact students who were not showing up on examination days.
In the past, imposed short-term targets and strategies have been experienced by
many teachers as an unwanted professional intrusion (A. Hargreaves, 2003). But the
underperforming schools project has conquered teachers’ aversion to short-term measurable improvement through peer-supported, professionally validating strategies that
make real differences to the measured attainment of the students that teachers teach in
the here-and-now.
Yet the new short-term strategies and the means of acquiring and exchanging them
are now so satisfying and successful that they have become a form of addiction, rather
than aversion. These strategies are “so gimmicky and great”, as one head teacher put
it, they can be used right away, and do not challenge or encourage teachers to question and revise their existing approaches to teaching and learning. The rush to raise
achievement injects teachers with a repeated “high” of short-term success. The result
is a somewhat hyperactive culture of change that can be exhilarating but also draining
and distracting.
In one of the conferences we observed, the majority of the strategies shared by
heads and assistant heads at their tables were short-term. Not only are these strategies
quick and easy to implement but they are quick and easy to explain – especially in a
setting that has limited opportunity for extended conversations. Those heads who share

--- [PDF Page 931 / Book Page 948] ---

948 Hargreaves

common interests frequently and excitedly exchange ideas and then business cards in
‘speed dating’ exercises just before they leave.
When these excitable exchanges are added to the logic of short-term funding of
proposal bids, of a policy culture characterized by immediacy and a teaching culture
already steeped in a present-time orientation, along with a performance-driven language in which teachers and head teachers refer not to engagement with learning but
to the movement of students into the right achievement cells by ‘targeting’ the right
groups, ‘pushing’ students harder, ‘moving’ them up, ‘raising aspirations’, ‘holding
people down’ and ‘getting a grip’ on where youngsters are, the result is a combined
pressure to preserve and perpetuate the short-term orientation of the present, with no
incentive or encouragement to think about or prepare for the future. In this scenario
of pedagogical change, the future recedes behind a never-ending present of increased
effectiveness that lacks pedagogical transformation.
By contrast, other proposals for pedagogical and educational change neither dismiss
nor deny the past, but return to it as a way to reinvent the future. These ‘back to the
future’ approaches present the future in terms of the past.

Past Restoration
When at the beginning of 2007, the Japanese government led by the grandson of the
nation’s Prime Minister in the Second World War, proposed to reintroduce patriotism
into the curriculum, it was responding to an age of increasing uncertainty and insecurity in family values, cultural identity and an older work ethic by connecting nostalgic
images of a prideful past with the prospect of a more unified future. Similarly, the
British Government’s specification of history as British history and literature as
English literature, in its National Curriculum of the 1990s, sought to restore national
pride and parental confidence in schools, by alluding to ideas and images of imperial
certainty (Goodson, 1994).
One of the most dramatic contemporary examples of this strategy of recycled
change is to be found in the United States. Early in 2007, the US National Center for
Education and the Economy released a report Tough Choices or Tough Times by its
New Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce. In its sequel to its 1990
Commission Report that drove much of the educational standards movement in the
United States, this august body, comprising two former Secretaries of State, several
state and metropolitan Superintendents and Chancellors of Schools, along with an
assortment of business CEOs and union leaders – launched a blistering critique of the
inability of the nation’s underperforming and inflexible public education system to
meet the challenges and seize the opportunities of the contemporary global economy.
Belatedly following (though scarcely acknowledging) the lead of international
policy-steering organizations like OECD (2000); finally heeding the long-standing
prognostications of the late management guru and futurist Peter Drucker (1993), and
eventually coming into congruence with knowledge society analysts such as Phillip
Schlechty (1990) and myself (A. Hargreaves, 2003), the Commission pointed to
America’s declining educational performance compared to other advanced industrial

--- [PDF Page 932 / Book Page 949] ---

Pedagogical and Educational Change 949

nations. The reasons for the decline, the Commission argued, were rooted in the
relatively poor quality of the nation’s teaching force, in a system that had become
skewed by the excesses of narrowly tested standardization that was ill-equipped to
produce the creativity and innovation necessary for a high-skill, high-wage workforce
in a rapidly changing global economy.
In the words of the Commission, establishing economic advantage and leadership
in the global economy
depends on a deep vein of creativity that is constantly renewing itself, and on a
myriad of people who can imagine how people can use things that have never
been available before, create ingenious marketing and sales campaigns, write
books, build furniture, make movies and imagine new kinds of software that
will capture people’s imaginations and become indispensable to millions. (New
Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce, 2007, p. xviii)
Educationally, the Commission argued, these economic demands require much more
than a conventionally and unimaginatively tested curriculum focusing on basic skills
and factual memorization that prepare most people only for the routine work of lowskill economies which other nations or mere machines can now perform more cheaply
than the US workforce. Success in a broader, deeper, more imaginative curriculum for
all is called for instead:
Strong skills in English, mathematics, technology and science as well as literature, history and the arts will be essential for many; beyond this, candidates
will have to be comfortable with ideas and abstractions, good at both analysis
and synthesis, creative and innovative, self-disciplined and well-organized, able
to learn very quickly and work well as a member of a team and have the flexibility to adapt quickly to frequent changes in the labour market as the shifts in
the economy become ever faster and more dramatic. (New Commission on the
Skills of the American Workforce, 2007, pp. xviii–xix)
Yet the specific remedies to bring about this apparent shift towards an agenda of apparent post-standardization in education in order to increase competitiveness in the global
economy seem to lack any semblance of the very creativity that they are supposed to
secure.
The Commission’s retrograde theory-of-action (Hatch, 2002) proposes more and
better educational access and provision for all before and after formal schooling, along
with parallel support for the health and social service needs of children that are integrated into the school setting. Though this is admirable enough, within the school
itself, all that is called for is a more challenging and broad curriculum with demanding
exit exams. This, it is proposed, will cultivate the harder work among students that is
presumed to be lacking in schools’ expectations and student culture. Higher calibre
teachers whose job it is to deliver the more challenging curriculum will be attracted by
higher starting salaries and more flexible pay and pension structures linked to performance rather than seniority. Competitiveness (though not overt selectiveness) among

--- [PDF Page 933 / Book Page 950] ---

950 Hargreaves

schools will be encouraged by detaching them from all but skeletal school district
control, creating opportunities to innovate as well as network with other schools within
and outside the immediate vicinity – with procedures for intervention and takeover
being retained in cases of serious underperformance or crisis. All this will be achieved
by reallocating rather than increasing financial resources.
In effect, the New Commission’s way forward into the age of post-standardization is
an intrinsically, inimically and individually American one that returns to and reinvents
the retrograde solutions of ruthless and rugged competitive individualism that in combination with the strictures of soulless standardization, have brought the United States
to its educational knees in the first place.
Unlike most other countries, the New Commission proposes to retain its inflexible grip on curriculum content and standards, and to devolve only the administrative
means (or blame!) for delivering it. Similarly, its strategy of attracting higher calibre
teachers through restructured, performance-related pay ignores the extensive historical
evidence at home and abroad that it is poor working conditions, excessive outside interference and ineffective leadership that pulls teachers away from the poor, not a lack of
extrinsic or restructured benefits (Lortie, 1975; Nias, Southworth & Yeomans, 1989;
Achinstein & Ogawa, 2006). Moreover, the report’s proposed solutions and the theoryof-action on which they are based raise only half of the educationally pressing issues
posed by a climate of competitive globalization. They pay no attention to reforms that
serve the public good as well as the private economic good, through developing greater
compassion, community, citizenship, democracy and cosmopolitan identity, for example. In short, America’s most influential educational commission proposes to increase
educational innovation and creativity by considering only the economic purpose it
serves, and by clinging even more grimly to the strategies of curriculum centralization
and school competitiveness that have undermined the nation’s educational effectiveness in the first place.

Consuming Customization
Lastly, visions of pedagogical change that do not dismiss, deny or recreate the past
sometimes promise something more radical, innovative and fresh in means as well
as ends. On closer inspection, however, they can turn out to be not powerfully transformative at all. Thus, the UK Gilbert Committee’s report on personalized learning
(Gilbert, 2006; D. Hargreaves, 2004), seems to advocate transformations in learning
and pedagogy that move beyond standardization in a knowledge society age. Yet in
practice, what is advocated is not so much personalization that connects learning to
lifelong narratives and projects of a nation’s learners and citizens, but customization
of that learning so it becomes merely more flexible in how it is accessed, delivered and
packaged – like loading up an ipod or ordering options for one’s car. Learning here
can be accelerated or slowed down, customized and modularized, accessed in school
or online, on-site or off-site, with others or alone, attuned to pre-identified learning
styles and presented in modules assembled for personal preference and customized
choice.

--- [PDF Page 934 / Book Page 951] ---

Pedagogical and Educational Change 951

Like ordering and tailoring soft-furnishings and fashions, this kind of learning is
streamlined and stylized, but it is a learning that is silent about content, purpose or mission in a pedagogical relationship that is disinvested of personal and social meaning.
There is fast and flexible learning for individual creators and consumers of the existing society, not learning that connects individuals to their cultures and their world in
lifelong engagement with their histories, the communities around them, or the futures
that they might create together.

Pedagogical Change and Continuity
Sustainable education and improvement is about connecting the present, the future and
the past in ways that reduce poverty, alleviate inequities, and strengthen communities
and democracies within a context of sustainable economic and social development.
While it should never blindly endorse the past, sustainable educational change should
always respect and learn from it as it strives for a better (though not necessarily bigger)
future. Three examples offer quite differing ways of achieving this.

Indigenous Engagement
World Bank intervention and investment strategies are often seen as providing reform
solutions of standardization, privatization and decentralization that are insensitive
to local cultures which are treated as impediments that are rooted in the past rather
than assets for building a better future. Such strategies dismiss and deny the past as
they engage in the ‘creative destruction’ that brings in their desired future. While this
criticism may hold for many projects, an evaluation that my colleague Paul Shaw and
I conducted of 17 World Bank/DfID projects revealed some interesting outliers of
practices and pedagogies that worked with the local cultures rather than against them
(Hargreaves & Shaw, 2006).
In Namibia, modest and prudent donor support has helped local training centres
collect data about local consumer demand and about market saturation points for
skills, so this can inform and guide discussions about training courses and provision
on a just-in-time, one- or two-year basis, as fluctuating local conditions demand.
In Peru, the asparagus industry has been built on a well-developed formal educational base, at the core of which is a public agricultural university, the Universidad
Nacional de la Molina, in Lima, where most of the entrepreneurs in the asparagus
industry were trained. These entrepreneurs, in turn, learned new techniques in asparagus growing and processing from US (green) and Spanish (white) asparagus growers.
Peruvian entrepreneurs were brought to the United States by USAID to learn these
new techniques. Spanish investors, on the other hand, came to Peru to take advantage of lower wages. In both cases, technology transfer took place and was adapted to
Peruvian conditions. Further, Peruvian entrepreneurs learned (and continue to learn)
advanced techniques of irrigated desert agriculture by taking courses in Israel. Peru’s
asparagus producers are organized into an association that disseminates information and assists with marketing. In addition, the university at La Molina produces
research on new export crops as well as pest and disease control that is made available

--- [PDF Page 935 / Book Page 952] ---

952 Hargreaves

to asparagus producers, constantly adapted to local conditions, and taught by larger
growers to technicians and small farmers. All this lifelong learning has high pay-offs
for economic development. The Peruvian asparagus industry exemplifies the value of
treating the public and private sectors not as opponents but as allies, working together
to support lifelong learning and training that promotes the greater economic and social
good.
One of Unilever’s soap factories in Indonesia treats water from the nearby river to
manufacture soap, toothpaste and shampoo – since they all require clean water. It is
in Unilever’s commercial interest to improve water quality in Indonesia and also part
of its social and environmental responsibility. Unilever Indonesia’s Clean River programme focuses sustainably on involving and training everybody living along the river
to contribute to its improvement and provides training so that the villagers can look
after the river in a self-sustaining way.
All these cases show how local, long-standing, indigenous knowledge need not be
an impediment to knowledge economy development. Rather, traditional culture can be
regarded as cultural capital, whilst also retaining social value in its own right. To say
this is not merely to show tolerance for difference and comparison for the weak. It is to
acknowledge and engage with the strength of traditional knowledge as a firm foundation for innovation and knowledge development in the future.
In Teaching In The Knowledge Society (A. Hargreaves, 2003), I argued that it was
important for teachers and schools to teach beyond the knowledge society as well as
for it – balancing fast-paced knowledge society emphases on innovation and creativity with the development of loyalty, trust and social cohesion. But it is now clear that
connecting the present to the future and the past is more than a matter of compensation
and balance. This connection is at the very heart of what it means to be a knowledge
society that is sustainable as well as successful in a society that develops trust and
loyalty, inclusion and equity, safety and security as foundational qualities of a highfunctioning society and economy. In such a society, cosmopolitan identity promotes
humanitarian understanding as well as the society and economy’s ability to draw on
and develop the talents of all its people. And education for sustainable development
helps preserve the planet without which future economic activity is impossible.
These principles, which illustrate how the social good and economic good are intertwined, are evident not only in the less-developed country examples just described,
but also in some of the highest performing economies and educational systems in the
world. Foremost among these is Finland.

Finnishing School
In January of 2007, with team colleagues Gabor Halasz and Beatriz Pont, I undertook an investigative inquiry for OECD into the relationship between leadership and
school improvement in one of the world’s highest performing educational systems and
economies: Finland. After visiting and interviewing students, teachers, head teachers,
system administrators, university researchers and senior ministry officials, a remarkably unified narrative began to surface about the country, its schools and their sense of
aspiration, struggle and destiny.

--- [PDF Page 936 / Book Page 953] ---

Pedagogical and Educational Change 953

Finland is a nation that has endured almost seven centuries of domination and
oppression – achieving true independence only within the last three generations. In the
context of this historical legacy, and in the face of a harsh and demanding climate and
northern geography, it is not surprising that one of the most popular Finnish sayings
translates as ‘It was long, and it was hard, but we did it!’
Yet it is not simply stoic perseverance, fed by a Lutheran religious ethic of hard work
and resilience that explains Finland’s success as a high-performing educational system
and economy. At the core of this country’s success and sustainability is its capacity
to reconcile, harmonize and integrate those elements that have divided other developed economies and societies – a prosperous, high-performing economy and a decent,
socially just society. While the knowledge economy has weakened the welfare state in
many other societies, in Finland, a strong welfare state is a central part of the national
narrative that supports and sustains a successful economy.
In The Information Society and the Welfare State, Castells and Himanen (2002,
p. 166) describe how
Finland shows that a fully fledged welfare state is not incompatible with technological innovation, with the development of the information society, and with a
dynamic, competitive new economy. Indeed, it appears to be a decisive contributing factor to the growth of this new economy as a stable basis.
The contrast with Anglo Saxon countries where material wealth has been gained at
the expense of increasing social division, and also at the cost of children’s well-being
(UNICEF, 2007) could not be more striking:
Finland stands in sharp contrast to the Silicon Valley model that is entirely driven
by market mechanisms, individual entrepreneurialism, and the culture of risk –
with considerable social costs, acute social inequality and a deteriorating basis
for both locally generated human capital and economic infrastructure. (Castells
& Himanen, 2002, p. 167)
At the centre of this successful integration that, in less than half a century, has transformed Finland from a rural backwater into a high-tech economic powerhouse, is its
educational system. As the respondents interviewed by the OECD team indicated at
all levels, Finns are driven by a common and articulately expressed social vision that
connects a creative and prosperous future – as epitomized by the Nokia telecommunications company whose operation and supplies account for about 40% of the country’s
GDP (Haikio, 2002) – to the people’s sense of themselves as having a creative history
and social identity. One of the school’s we visited was just two miles from the home of
Finland’s iconic composer Sibelius. And the visual, creative and performing arts are
an integral part of all children’s education and lifelong learning all through and even
beyond their secondary school experience.
Technological creativity and competitiveness, therefore, do not break Finns from
their past but connect them to it in a unitary narrative of lifelong learning and societal
development. All this occurs within a strong welfare state that supports and steers

--- [PDF Page 937 / Book Page 954] ---

954 Hargreaves

(a favourite Finnish word) the educational system and the economy. A strong public
education system provides education free of charge as a universal right all the way
through school and higher education – including all necessary resources, equipment,
musical instruments and free school meals for everyone. Science and technology
are high priorities, though not at the expense of arts and creativity. Almost 3% of
GDP is allocated to scientific and technological development and a national committee that includes leading corporate executives and university vice chancellors, and
that is chaired by the Prime Minister, steers and integrates economic and educational
strategy.
As Finnish commentators and analysts have also remarked, all this educational and
economic integration occurs within a society that values children, education and social
welfare, that has high regard for education and educators as servants of the public
good, that ranks teaching as the most desired occupation of high school graduates, and
that is therefore able to make entry into teaching demanding and highly competitive
(Sahlberg, 2006; Aho, Pitkanen & Sahlberg, 2006).
Within a generally understood social vision the state steers but does not prescribe in
detail the national curriculum – with trusted teams of highly qualified teachers writing
the detailed curriculum together at the level of the municipality, in ways that adjust to
the students they know best. In schools characterized by an uncanny calmness, teachers
exercise their palpable sense of professional and social responsibility in their efforts to
care especially for children at the bottom, so as to lift them to the level of the rest. This
is achieved not by endless initiatives or targeted interventions but by quiet cooperation
(another favourite word) among all the teachers involved.
Head teachers in Finland are required by law to have been teachers themselves and
most continue to be engaged in classroom teaching for at least 2–3 hours per week –
which lends them credibility among their teachers, enables them to remain connected
to their children, and ensures that pedagogical leadership is not merely high-flown
rhetoric but a living, day-to-day reality.
It is important to acknowledge that Finland’s integration of the information economy
and the welfare state as a continuous narrative of legacy and progress that defines the
national identity is not without its blind spots. Having been an embattled and oppressed
historical minority, Finland, in comparison to many other nations, remains a somewhat
xenophobic society, suspicious of immigrants and outsiders, and threatened by those who
challenge or diverge from the Finnish way of life (Castells & Himanen, 2002). Without
a willingness to accommodate higher rates of immigration, the impending retirement of
large proportions of Boomer employees (as many municipal administrators described it
to us) will also increase the financial burden on the welfare state, and jeopardize the basic
sustainability of Finland’s economy and society that depends on it.
Nonetheless, Finland contains essential lessons for societies that aspire, educationally
and economically, to be successful and also sustainable knowledge societies. Building
a future without breaking from the past; supporting not only pedagogical change but
also continuity; fostering strong connections between education and economic development without sacrifice to culture and creativity; raising standards by lifting the
many rather than pushing a privileged few; connecting private prosperity to the public
good; developing a highly qualified profession that brings about improvement through

--- [PDF Page 938 / Book Page 955] ---

Pedagogical and Educational Change 955

commitment, trust, cooperation and responsibility; embedding and embodying pedagogical leadership into almost every head teacher’s weekly activity; and the emphasis
on principles of professional and community rather than managerial accountability –
these are just some of the essential lessons to be taken from Finland’s exceptional educational and economic journey.

Activist Engagement
If Finland seems like an exclusionary and atypical exemplar of pedagogical change
within sustainable knowledge societies, the edgy streets of culturally diverse Los Angeles
perhaps provide a sterner test of how to drive pedagogical change within a compelling and
inclusive social vision that is also underpinned by a clear theory of change in action.
Jeannie Oakes and her colleagues at the University of California, Los Angeles,
argue that conventional change and reform strategies fail because the learning and
teaching envisaged do not have clearly articulated goals concerning social justice other
than ones narrowly concerned with tested achievement and achievement gaps (Oakes,
Rogers & Lipton, 2007). Moreover, the strategies for bringing about change are
directed at and driven by school and school system professionals with little involvement of students and parents other than as targets or consumers of the change effort.
In this sense, neither the means nor the ends of most change efforts, nor the theories of
action that underpin them, challenge or confront the structures of power and control in
society that systematically protect the schools, programmes and pedagogical strategies
that are especially advantageous for elites and their children.
In response, Oakes and colleagues (2006) draw on John Dewey’s (1927) principles
of participative inquiry as well as American traditions of community activism and
organizing to propose classroom and school-level changes that raise achievement and
secure wider improvement, by connecting low achieving poor and minority students
to university researchers and teacher networks that train and support them to inquire
into, then act upon the conditions of their own education and lives. Such forms of
collaborative inquiry are not merely culturally responsive pedagogies that respond to
the culturally variable learning styles of diverse students (Ladson-Billings, 1995); nor
are they simply acts of cooperative instruction or intellectual creativity that enhance
cognitive achievement. Rather, in line with the legacy of Paulo Freire (2000), these
practices, which Oakes and colleagues help create in practice as well as in theory,
increase achievement and improve the conditions for other people’s achievement by
helping students inquire into, understand and want to act on the conditions that affect
the lives and education of themselves and their communities – dilapidated buildings,
large class sizes, divisive streaming (tracking), inadequate books and materials, shortages of qualified teachers, and restricted opportunities to learn.
These pedagogically transformative practices are linked to an activist orientation
among involved students and also among parents and local communities who challenge bureaucrats and legislators with evidence-based arguments as well as disruptive
strategies and knowledge, to provide genuinely equal opportunities for the poor as well
as the affluent. In the words of an old Irish rebel song, these strategies are “the wind
that shakes the barley”.

--- [PDF Page 939 / Book Page 956] ---

956 Hargreaves

These living “pedagogies of the oppressed” may not be able to be scaled up everywhere – especially beyond the large urban centres where local research and
philanthropic capacity is strong (an objection that the authors sweep aside a little too
easily) – but networks of advocacy for publicly driven, rather than bureaucratically
imposed reform are spreading rapidly across America (Shirley & Evans, 2007), with
activist pedagogies of inquiry among parents and students alike being a fundamental
factor in this growing arena of influence.

Conclusions
What can we conclude about pedagogical change in sustainable knowledge societies?
Since the publication of Teaching in the Knowledge Society (A. Hargreaves, 2003), the
evidence has persisted that economic success and prosperity still depend on successful
innovation in information-based activity. Success and prosperity also depend on the
capacity, in every sphere, to access and circulate knowledge inclusively and intensively
so as to accelerate the pace of economic competitiveness along with the efficiency of
public services by increasing personal awareness, connectedness and responsibility
– even and especially among the infirm and the elderly (Castells & Himanen, 2002).
The necessity therefore remains of cultivating pedagogies that emphasize creativity;
that develop applied knowledge as a way of increasing problem-solving capacities; that
promote lifelong learning and the capacity to adapt and change as the work environment requires; and that customize teaching and learning so learning can be accessed
in places, styles and genres that are the most effective for every individual student and
that maximize their achievement and ability.
Written and published shortly after 9/11, Teaching in the Knowledge Society raised
parallel problems of justice, humanity and security. These have only increased in intensity. When the world’s wealthiest nation converted its outrage over 9/11 into military
conquest of the planet’s most ancient civilization, and when its Anglo-Saxon allies
across the Atlantic and Pacific determined, almost alone, to join it, it was not democracy and stability but death and displacement of people and their families that spread
across the Middle East in consequence – and increased terrorism, insecurity and fundamentalism, rapidly followed in their wake.
Moreover, a report by UNICEF (2007) of children’s well-being in 21 countries
which ranks two of the world’s wealthiest economies – the United Kingdom and the
United States – at the very bottom of the league table of all the industrialised nations
covered by its survey, demonstrates that wealth and prosperity give no guarantees for
justice and well-being.
As our human and planetary crises become more palpable, new pedagogies of
humanity are beginning to surface – promoting citizenship, fostering emotional literacy and attending to children’s well-being. Curriculum interventions are being made in
history and geography, teaching about environmental sustainability, or what it means to
all cultures within a nation to be American, Japanese or British. But these measures are
typically tacked on to, rather than substituted for existing pedagogical practices. Such
citizenship courses, curriculum changes, emotional literacy programmes and other

--- [PDF Page 940 / Book Page 957] ---

Pedagogical and Educational Change 957

interventions only inundate the system and overwhelm its teachers and leaders with
repeated waves of unwanted initiatives that intensify the repetitive change syndrome
that Abrahamson (2004) has described.
How is it, my OECD colleagues and I in Finland asked, that head teachers could still
teach as well as lead in their high performing educational system on the leading edge
of the global economy? “Because”, one said, “unlike the Anglo-Saxon countries, we
do not have to spend our time responding to long, long lists of government initiatives
that come from the top”.
The pedagogical solutions for a sustainable knowledge society are to be found not in
government obsessions with targets and test scores, nor in the political panics that precipitate endless interventions and initiatives. Nor are they even necessarily to be found
in energetic pedagogical innovations in multiple intelligences, cooperative learning
strategies, or brain-based learning, for example. Finnish teachers, for instance, are
notoriously low key and even a little conservative (though not stubbornly traditional)
in their pedagogical strategies (Sahlberg, 2006; Aho, Pitkanen & Sahlberg, 2006).
Instead, on the world’s economic fringes, we have seen the benefits of connecting
innovative modernization to long-standing indigenous knowledge. In Finland we can also
see how curriculum, pedagogy and counselling, can be woven together in an integrated
educational vision and practice that is also connected to a social vision of where the individual and society have been and are headed – a vision that is steered by a trusted state but
never micromanaged by a meddling political bureaucracy. Last, in the City of the Angels,
we have seen the value of participative inquiry and social activism in engaging students
in understanding, then acting upon the oppressive conditions that restrict their learning –
showing that the teaching and learning strategies of socially sustainable knowledge societies are not just intellectually creative and clever but also morally driven and socially just.
Our past is part of our future. If we try to push our baggage aside in our rush towards
progress, we will only find that we keep falling over it. Prosperity for all is a proper
goal, but not at any price. Sustainability, social justice and sheer survival must now
be our chief priorities. And humanistic, creative, participative pedagogies, in schools
where every child truly matters, that are steered by trusted systems and driven by
parental engagement rather than flooded with unwanted initiatives offer some of the
most promising ways forward.
The knowledge and information society should be able to live with a strong and
supportive welfare state. The lion can lie down with the lamb. Prosperity and security
have to coexist, side by side. The last two decades have been dominated by AngloSaxon strategies of ruthless, measurement-driven improvement and intervention that
have incurred only widespread poverty and inequity and other social waste. It is now
time for other more sustainable sensibilities to take their place.

References
Abrahamson, E. (2004). Change without pain: How managers can overcome initiative overload, organizational chaos, and employee burnout. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Achinstein, B., & Ogawa, R. (2006). (In)Fidelity: What the resistance of new teachers reveals about professional principles and prescriptive educational policies. Harvard Educational Review, 76(1), 30–63.

--- [PDF Page 941 / Book Page 958] ---

958 Hargreaves
Aho, E., Pitkanen, K., & Sahlberg, P. (2006). Policy development and reform principles of basic and secondary education in Finland since 1968. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Bauman, Z. (2006). Liquid fear. Malden, MA: Polity Press.
Brundtland Commision (1987). Our common future. New York: United Nations General Assembly.
Castells, M., & Himanen, P. (2002). The information society and the welfare state: The Finnish model.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Dewey, J. (1927). The collected works of John Dewey: Later works, 1925–53. Carbondale, IL: Southern
Illinois University Press.
Drucker, P. (1993). Post-capitalist society. New York: HarperCollins.
Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed. London: Continuum International Publishing Group.
Gilbert, C. (2006). 2020 vision: Report of the teaching and learning in 2020 review group. London:
Department for Education and Skills.
Goodson, I. (1994). Studying curriculum: Cases and methods. London: Taylor & Francis.
Haikio, M. (2002). Nokia: The inside story. Helsinki: Edita.
Hargreaves, A. (2003). Teaching in the knowledge society: Education in the age of insecurity. New York:
Teachers College Press.
Hargreaves, A., & Fink, D. (2006). Sustainable leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Hargreaves, A., & Shaw, P. (2006). Knowledge and skills development in developing and transitional economies: An analysis of World Bank/DfID knowledge and skills for the modern economy project World Bank.
Hargreaves, A., Shirley, D., Evans, M., Johnson, C., & Riseman, D. (2006). The long and the short of raising achievement: Final report of the evaluation of the “Raising Achievement, Transforming Learning”
project of the UK Specialist Schools and Academies Trust. Chestnut Hill, MA: Boston College.
Hargreaves, D. (2004). Personalising learning: Next steps in working laterally. London: Specialist Schools
and Academies Trust.
Hatch, T. (2002). When improvement programs collide. Phi Delta Kappan, 83(8), 626–639.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American Educational
Research Journal, 33(3), 465–492.
Lortie, D.C. (1975). Schoolteacher: A sociological study. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
McCulloch, G. (1997). Marketing the m illennium: Education for the twenty-first century. In A. Hargreaves
& R. Evans (Eds.), Beyond educational reform. Buckingham: Open University Press.
New Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce (2007). Tough choices or tough times. National
center on education and the economy. San Francisco, CA: Wiley.
Nias, J., Southworth, G., & Yeomans, R. (1989). Staff relationships in the primary school. London: Cassell.
Oakes, J., & Rogers, J. (2007). Radical change through radical means: Learning power. Journal of
Educational Change, 8(3).
Oakes, J., Rogers, J., & Lipton, M. (2007). Learning power: Organization for education and justice.
New York: Teachers College Press.
OECD. (2001). Knowledge management in the learning society. Paris: OECD.
Sahlberg, P. (2006). Education reform for raising economic competitiveness. Journal of Educational
Change, 7(4), 221–365.
Schlechty, P. (1990). Schools for the twenty-first century: Leadership imperatives for educational reform.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sennett, R. (2001). The corrosion of character: The personal consequences of work in the new capitalism.
London: W. W. Norton
Sennett, R. (2006). The culture of the new capitalism. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Shirley, D., & Evans, M. (2007). Community organizing and the No Child Left Behind Act. In M. Orr (Ed.),
Transforming the city: Community organizing and the challenge of political change. Lawrence, KS:
University Press of Kansas.
Shirley, D., & Evans, M. (In press). Community organizing and No Child Left Behind. In M. Orr (Ed.), The
ecology of civic engagement. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.
UNESCO (2005). Asia-Pacific regional srategy for education for sustainable development/UN decade of
education for sustainable development (2005–2014) (working paper). Bangkok: UNESCO.
UNICEF (2007). An overview of child well-being in rich countries. Florence, Italy: United Nation Children’s
Fund.

