================================================================================
Chapter 62: Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity
Author(s): Rolland G. Paulston
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 965–990
PDF Pages: pp. 946–971 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 946 / Book Page 965] ---

62
MAPPING COMPARATIVE EDUCATION AFTER
POSTMODERNITY
Rolland G. Paulston†1

To Isaiah Berlin, in Memoriam
Two extravagances: to exclude Reason, to admit only Reason.
(Blaise Pascal, Pensées)
He who would do good to another must do so in Minute Particulars: General
Good is the plea of the scoundrel, hypocrite and flatterer; For Art and Science
cannot exist but in minutely organized Particulars.
(William Blake, Jerusalem)
This article examines the postmodern challenge to how we have come to see, represent, and practice comparative and international education. More specifically, I ask
three questions: (1) Can a close reading of the relevant literature identify and type
major positions or arguments in the postmodernism debate in our field? (2) How might
these positions or knowledge communities be mapped as a discursive field of diverse
perspectives and relations? Then, using this “heterotopia” of different ways of seeing
Blake’s minute particulars or mininarratives, (3) What might we reasonably conclude
about the postmodern challenge of multiperspectivism and its impact on how we as
comparativists choose to represent our world?
But first a few words concerning key concepts and methods used in this study. I make
no distinction in using the terms postmodern, postmodernism, or postmodernity, although
numerous books have been written that do so.2 My only interest in these terms is to identify
and map some 60 texts, which is all I could find on the topic. By presenting the postmodernity debate in comparative education and its related discourse as an ensemble of
textual relations, I hope to avoid giving the appearance of dualism and a binary struggle of
opposites. On the contrary, I view all positions in the field as interrelated and perhaps best
understood as an intertextual space that allows the negotiation of meanings and values.
In order to type and map, I must first enter into the texts and uncover how reality
is seen (i.e., ontology), on what historical rules or codes truth claims are based (i.e.,
genealogy), and how the narrative framing process chosen produces a perspective, or
narrative of transmission (i.e., narratology). In choosing narrative as a thematic frame,
I seek to highlight specific dimensions of texts in the debate, while acknowledging that
some aspects of the text are foregrounded at the expense of others.
965
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 965–990.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 947 / Book Page 966] ---

966 Paulston

Accordingly, my reading can only be understood in light of the possible heterogeneity of each text. Readings by others, including the authors themselves, would
most likely produce different interpretations and mappings. Sharing and critiquing our
interpretive and cartographic collaborations will help us to better know ourselves,
others, and the world we jointly construct. The point to remember here is that my
purpose is to read and interpret written and figural texts, not authors. This requires
that, to the extent possible, texts be allowed to speak for themselves, to tell, with the
use of quotes, their own stories.
1 have always understood the postmodern condition as ironic sensibility, as a
growing reflexive awareness, as an increasing consciousness of self, space, and multiplicity. Where the Enlightenment project has typically used reason and science in
efforts to make the strange normal, advocates of the anti-Enlightenment,3 and most
recently the postmodernists, have sought to render the familiar strange, or uncertain.
This brings to mind the earlier contrast of Apollonian harmony and rationality and
Dionysian decentering and deconstruction found in classical thought. The specific theses of postmodernist advocates, that is, the present-day Dionysians, tend to focus on
what they have seen as the false certainties of modernity since the 1960s. Perhaps we
might take note of five postmodern theses in particular.4 Foremost is a rejection of the
Enlightenment foundations found in the grand narratives of progress, emancipation,
and reason. These metanarratives are viewed as “terror”, silencing the small narratives,
or in Blake’s terms, the minutely organized particulars of the Other.
A second thesis is the rejection of universal or hegemonic knowledge, any a priori
privileging of a given regime of truth (i.e., functionalism, Marxism, postmodernism,
or the like), and the need for a critical antihegemonic pluralism in social inquiry.
A third thesis critiques attempts to adjudicate between competing cognitive and theoretical claims from a position of assumed or usurped privilege. Rather, postmodern
texts see all knowledge claims to be problematic. The idea of universal unsituated
knowledge that can set us free is seen to be a naive, if perhaps well-intentioned, selfdelusion. Feminist texts, in their rejection of patriarchal truth claims, add the notion of
a heterogeneous self to the postmodernist’s critique. In total contrast to the Cartesian
autonomous actor found in modernity texts, identity in the postmodern era is seen to
be mutable and contextually variable. Bodies are also seen as a contested terrain upon
which to think differently about who we are and who we might become.
A fourth thesis argued in postmodern texts attacks Eurocentrism and seeks to open
knowledge practice to postcolonial experiences and to non-Western cultural codes and
interpretations. The fifth thesis argues for a shift in research from time to space, from
facts to interpretations, from grounded positions to narrative readings, and from testing propositions to mapping difference.
Perhaps the single most important characteristic of postmodern sensibility is an
ontological shift from an essentialist view of one fixed reality, that is, reason as the
controlling principle of the universe, to an antiessentialist view where reality constructs are seen to resist closure and where multiple and diverse truth claims become
part of a continuous agonistic, or contested, struggle.
The central question of social change in the larger postmodernism debate is also
at issue in the more recent debate in comparative education. That is, do contemporary

--- [PDF Page 948 / Book Page 967] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 967

developments – as postmodernists are prone to argue – mark a movement toward a
distinct new form of social conditions characterized by nonmechanical yet complex
relations that “appear as a space of chaos and chronic indeterminacy, a territory subjected to rival and contradictory meaning bestowing claims and hence perpetually
ambivalent” (Bauman, 1992, p. 193)?5 Or, in contrast, as neomodernist texts are prone
to argue, are contemporary developments best viewed as rational processes internal to
the development of a global and reflexive “late modernity”?6
Before examining illustrative texts constructing positions in this debate, we might
first note some foreshadowing of these exchanges during the earlier paradigm wars.
In the 1977 “State of the Art” issue of the Comparative Education Review, edited by
Andreas Kazamias and Carl Schwartz, for example, the cover pictures a broken house
of knowledge, signifying, in my reading, the conflicted state of the field at that time
(see Figure 1). Yet, note that the perplexed egghead professor remains whole and apart,
a senior male in ivy league attire. This image suggests a material world in structural
disarray, and it seems to question whether the power of rational professorial thought
(i.e., theory) can rebuild the field’s foundation.

Fig. 1. A late modernist cartoon portraying the once solid structure of comparative education after the
paradigm wars of the 1970s and structural deconstruction. The question seems to arise regarding how we are
to retain our modern identity yet deal with the crisis.
Source: Comparative Education Review, 21 (June/October 1977): Cover

--- [PDF Page 949 / Book Page 968] ---

968 Paulston

In a contribution to this special issue, I proposed (see Table 1) that comparative
educators make a spatial turn and become more reflexive practitioners. I sought “to
stimulate greater awareness of how individual views of social reality and social change
tend to channel and filter perceptions and to look at alternative possibilities for representing educational change potentials and constraints. To this end, I delineated the
total range of theoretical perspectives that had been used to support educational reform
strategies and to suggest how individual choice behaviors follow from basic philosophical, ideological, and experimental orientations to perceived social reality” (Paulston,
1977). For the first time a phenomenological – albeit conflicted and static – portrait
of how some 320 international texts constructed multiple educational reform realities
appeared in a comparative education journal. In contrast, C. Arnold Anderson, looking
back to 1950, argued in this special issue for a continued orthodoxy of high modernity.
To quote this founding father of the Comparative and International Education Society
(CIES), “I continue to insist that traditional social science disciplines should remain
the foundations for work in this field” (Anderson, 1977). He advocated constructing
theoretical models and formulating sound nomothetic conclusions, and he suggested
avoiding fashionable ideologies and their semantics, clichés, and novelties. He advised
comparative and international educators to produce solid scholarship by avoiding
anthropology and ethnomethodology and embracing sociology and economics. In
conclusion, Anderson offered guarded optimism for continued progress in CIES, but
only if the field “avoids weary new panaceas” and works harder at the “identification
of functional equivalents for the basic structures and functions of educational systems”
(Anderson, 1977, p. 416).
My contribution focused on the space of texts in the literary construction of national
educational reform debates and used what Foucault has called a genealogical approach
to pattern texts as theoretical windows opening to multiple realities. Anderson’s text,
in contrast, argued for an orthodoxy of nomothetic research capable of generating
hypotheses, covering laws, and following modernization theory based on the primacy of autonomous, professional actors measuring the way things really are. Editors
Andreas Kaza-mias and Karl Schwartz stake out a third and more pragmatic position somewhere between my hermeneutical interpretivism and Anderson’s patriarchal
logocentrism. While firmly grounded in a realist ontology, the two editors chart a road
ahead for the increasingly disputatious field of comparative education with their sensible call for a greater openness to cultural and critical approaches (my preference), for
increased attention to pedagogical practice and teacher education (their preference),
and for a view that sees social science (Anderson’s preference) as “pluralistic, modest
and open” (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977, pp. 175–176).
Today, some 22 years later, in our more heterogeneous time, it is possible with
exegetic analysis to identify at least five knowledge communities in comparative education discourse that are more or less favorable to, if not proponents of, postmodernist
views. These are the sites of (1) postmodernist deconstructions, (2) radical alterity,
(3) semiotic society, (4) reflexive practitioner, and (5) social cartography. All five
tend to locate the emergence of postmodernism after the 1970s as a periodizing concept and, accordingly, as external to modernity. Communities defending the grand
narratives of modernity, in contrast, while they may acknowledge the postmodernist

--- [PDF Page 950 / Book Page 969] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 969
Table 1. Relations between theories of social and educational change/“reform”
Illustrative linked assumptions concerning educational-change potentials and processes
Social change
paradigms and
theories

Concerning
preconditions for
educational change

Concerning
rationales for
educational change

Equilibrium
theories:
Evolutionary

State of evolutionary Pressure to move
readiness
to a higher
evolutionary
stage required to
support “national
modernization”
efforts

Neo-evolutionary Satisfactory
completion of earlier
stages

Concerning scope Concerning major
and process of
outcomes sought
educational change
Incremental and
adaptive; “natural
history” approach

New stage of
institutional
evolutional
adaptation

“Institution
New “higher” state
building” using
of education and
Western models and social differentiation/
technical assistance specialization

Structuralfunctionalist

Altered functional
and structural
requisites

Social system
need provoking an
educational
response;
exogenous threats

Incremental
Continued
adjustment of
“homeostasis”
existing institutions, or “moving”
occasionally major equilibrium; “human
capital” and national
“development”

Systems

Technical expertise Need for greater
Innovative “problem Improved
in “systems
efficiency in
solving” in
“efficiency”
management.”
system’s operation existing systems,
regarding costs/
“Rational decision and goal
i.e., “Research
benefits; adoption of
making” and “needs achievement, i.e.,
& Development
innovations
assessment”
response to a system approach”
“malfunction”

Conflict theories: Elite’s awareness
Marxian
of need for change;
or shift of power to
socialist rulers and
educational
reformers

To adjust
correspondence
between social
relations of
production and
social relations of
schooling

Adjustive
Formation of
incremental
integrated workers,
following social
i.e., the new
mutations or radical “Socialist Man”
restructuring
with Marxist
predominance

Neo-Marxian

Increased political
power and political
awareness of
oppressed groups

Demands for social
justice and social
equality

Large-scale national Eliminate
reforms through
“educational
“democratic”
privilege” and
institutions and
“elitism”; create a
processes
more equalitarian
society

Cultural
revitalization

Rise of a collective Rejection of
effort to revive
conventional
or create “a new
schooling as forced
culture.” Social
acculturation.
tolerance for
Education needed
“deviant” normative to support advance
movements and
toward movement
their educational
goals
programs

Creation of
Inculcate new
alternative schools normative system.
or educational
Meet movement’s
settings. If
recruitment, training,
movement captures and solidarity needs
polity, radical
change in national
educational ideology
and structure
(continued)

--- [PDF Page 951 / Book Page 970] ---

970 Paulston
Table 1. (continued)
Illustrative linked assumptions concerning educational-change potentials and processes
Anarchistic
Utopian

Free man from
Creation of
supportive settings; institutional and
social constraints.
growth of critical
consciousness; social Enhance creativity
need for “life-long
pluralism
learning”

Isolated “freeing up” Self-renewal and
of existing programs participation. Local
and institutions, or control of resources
create new learning and community;
modes and settings, elimination of
exploitation and
i.e., a “learning
alienation
society”

Source: Paulston (1977, pp. 372–373)
Note: The table presents a phenomenological comparison of how the international literature may be seen
to construct national educational and social change/reform perspectives.

critique, tend to situate, as with Jürgen Habermas, the postmodern debate as internal to
and only comprehensible in terms of the notion of late modernity. In my close reading
of the 60 or so texts selected, four modernist genres or positions in the debate emerged:
(1) metanarratives of reason, emancipation, and progress; (2) rational actor gaming;
(3) critical modernist appropriations; and (4) reflexive modernity adaptations. These
sites can be characterized, mapped, and compared according to how they choose to
understand reality and how they problematize practice. These differences are represented in Figure 2, where we now turn our attention to the left, or postmodernism side,
of the debate field.

Postmodernist Deconstructions
With the publication of his presidential address in 1991, Val Rust opened CIES discourse to the debate on postmodern ideas, a far-ranging controversy that has energized
and destabilized much of intellectual life in the academy since the 1970s. Rust introduced deconstructivist arguments of the French poststructuralists Jacques Derrida,
Michel Foucault, and Jean Francois Lyotard, ideas that reject the basic language and
realist assumptions of the modern age. Arguing that the comparative education community has played almost no role in this discussion, Rust selected four aspects of
postmodernism that he considered to be crucial for a postmodern understanding of our
field today: (1) the critique of the totalitarian nature of metanarratives; (2) recognition
of the problems of the Other; (3) recognition of the development, through technology,
of an information society; and (4) an opening to new possibilities for art and aesthetics
in everyday life (see Rust, 1991).
While Rust presents a compelling case for the utility of postmodern ideas in our
era, his analysis remains strongly realist, even melioristic: “We comparative educators
must discuss the opportunities of the incipient age. … We must define more clearly the
metanarratives that have driven our field … we must engage in the critical task of disassembling those narratives because they define what comparativists find acceptable
… we must increase our attention to small narratives … we must learn to balance high
and popular culture” (Rust, 1991, 625–626).

--- [PDF Page 952 / Book Page 971] ---

Fig. 2. A metaphorical mapping of knowledge positions constructing the postmodernity debate in comparative
education (and related) discourse. In this open intertextual field, arrows suggest intellectual flows and proper names
refer not to authors, but to illustrative texts cited in the paper and juxtaposed above. In contrast to Utopias (i.e., sites
with no real place) much favored by modernist texts, this figure draws inspiration from Michel Foucault’s notion
of “heterotopias”. These are the simultaneously mythic and real spaces of contested everyday life. Postmodernist
texts favor heterotopias, as above, because they are “capable of juxtaposing in a single real place several spaces,
several sites that are in themselves incompatible”. (see Foucault & Miskowiec, 1986, p. 25)

--- [PDF Page 953 / Book Page 972] ---

972 Paulston

As Rust’s text demonstrates, letting go of modernity’s language, let alone its essentialist and instrumental vision, is more easily advocated than achieved. Despite the
contradictions between his text and his message, Rust’s pioneering call to move away
from a universal belief system toward a plurality of belief systems remains timely and
exciting. Unfortunately, it evoked little if any response in CIES discourse until 1994
when Liebman and I used Rust’s critique to support our invitation to a postmodern
social cartography (Paulston & Liebman, 1994).7
In contrast to the certainty of Rust’s text about the instrumental utility of postmodern
ideas, the British scholars Robin Usher and Richard Edwards, in their 1994 text, advocate a
more ludic or playful approach so as better to avoid creating the monster of a new postmodern metanarrative. To quote their text: “Our attitude to the postmodern is ambivalent. We agree
that to be consistently postmodern, one should never call oneself a postmodern. There is a
self-referential irony about this which we find lucidly apt in encapsulating our relationships
as authors to this text. At the least, we …have let the postmodern ‘speak’ through those
texts [that] exemplify it” (Usher & Edwards, 1994).
Building on Rust’s earlier manifesto, Usher and Edwards problematize and deconstruct the very notion of emancipation in the project of modernity to show what they
see as its oppressive assumptions and consequences, particularly in the field of education. In this, they side with Jacques Derrida, in a desire to dissolve binary oppositions,
to argue that education like power is neither inherently repressive nor liberatory, but
perhaps both – or neither.
Here, there is no Hegelian synthesis where opposition can be transcended by correct ideas or a more logical argument. Rather, they see, as did Friedrich Nietzsche, a
continual and unresolvable tension and struggle of perspectives. Given this scenario,
Usher and Edwards argue for an education of resistance to disrupt metanarrative power.
Or to quote their accessible text:
[I]t is in disrupting the exercise of power rather than in seeking to overcome
it, that resistance can take form. The postmodern moment can enable us to
transgress the boundaries of modernity rather than be contained within them.
Resistance and transgressions, rather than emancipation, signify the possibilities
for challenging dominant forms of power. It is analogous to Gramsci’s war of
maneuver rather than the war of attrition. And it is a war without end, a constant
refusal of mastery, and of being mastered. (Usher & Edwards, 1994, p. 224)
In this, they share James Whitson’s contention that the postmodern is perhaps best seen
as an attempt at the antihegemonic without being counterhegemonic and thus risking
incorporation as a relatively harmless rhetoric – as with much of critical pedagogy
– into the dominant structure of control.8

Radical Alterity
The radical alterity battalions of the postmodernist forces apply Derriderian and
subalterian ideas of the Other and seek to decenter and topple modernist control
structures (i.e., hierarchy and patriarchy) with new possibilities opened by nonessentialist

--- [PDF Page 954 / Book Page 973] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 973

notions of body and identity. Where modernist texts see science, morality, and art
as stubbornly differentiated, advocates of a radical alterity see the self after postmodernity as both a construct of multiple forms of speech, diverse language games,
and variegated narratives, and as action-oriented and self-defined by the ways in
which it communicates. As Calvin Schrag puts it, the self after postmodernity is
open to understanding through its discourse, its actions, its being together in community, and its experience of transcendence. In contrast, “the modernist grammars of
unity, totality, identity, sameness, and consensus find little employment in postmodernist thinking” (Schrag, 1997).9 Instead, texts of the radical alterity community
take up Lyotard’s warning that forced consensus does violence to the free play of
language games and that our new interpretive categories of heterogeneity, multiplicity, diversity, difference, and dissensus are now available to interrogate and
deconstruct modernist views of the autonomous Cartesian self (as represented by
the professor in Figure 1) along with all of its traditional metaphysics and epistemological games.
Radical alterity texts are, understandably, most often found in the discourse of ethnic
and gender movements seeking to oppose the hierarchies and exclusions of modernity.
These are often angry texts seeking to shock, challenge, and defy. I have found only
three examples in our field’s journals. Perhaps the best is a 1994 book review by Diana
Brandi, then a doctoral student at the University of Pittsburgh, which appeared in the
Comparative Education Review. Brandi’s text, in my reading, is first and foremost a
personal attack on the book’s three senior author/editors, well-known and respected
advocates of emancipatory modernity. She characterizes their representations of comparative education as it has emerged in the 1990s as a rehash of Marxist, functionalist,
and structural functionalist perspectives. She finds this uniformity of content, perspective, and analysis not only troubling, but also puzzling. She claims that the chapters
lack diversity, are self-referential, and lack a rich range of theoretical choices and
multidisciplinary approaches, and that the book’s structuralist orthodoxy precludes
any critical reflection on whose views the research reflects or how comparative education can support transformative change for a more humane world (Brandi, 1994).10
Brandi concludes that the central emerging issue for comparative education in the
1990s, and an issue the book virtually ignores, is the need to challenge the dominant
hierarchies that continue to marginalize and silence the greater proportion of humankind. She contends the editors neglected more pluralistic discourses that challenge
international development education and its service to structural adjustment, to militarism, and to the structural violence now being critically analyzed in other fields and
disciplines. Here Brandi also challenges our field to open space for voices of the Other,
antiessentialist voices that will attack and reject our modernist certainties of order and
progress, if not of emancipation.
One year later, Irving Epstein, in a more conciliatory vein, also argued the desirability of realigning comparative studies from the seemingly innocent practice and
critique of educational planning and policy to an opening up of space for cultural studies of contested local knowledge, of ethnicity, gender, disability, and the body. These
issues of the Other are, Epstein complains, rarely addressed in comparative education
discourse, despite a proliferation of just such studies in the academy after the 1980s
(Epstein, 1995).11

--- [PDF Page 955 / Book Page 974] ---

974 Paulston

Semiotic Society
The semiotic society perspective builds upon ideas of Canadian Marshall McLuhan
and Frenchman Jean Baudrillard. In his pioneering 1964 study, Understanding Media,
McLuhan interpreted modernity as a process of differentiation, as a virtual explosion
of commodification, industrialization, mechanization, and market relations. These differentiations produce “hot” media. In contrast, television, as a “cool” medium, is a
site of implosion of all boundaries, regions, and distinctions between high and low
culture (i.e., “the new global village”), between appearance and reality, and between
the binary oppositions maintained by traditional modernist philosophy and modernization theory (McLuhan, 1964).
After first rejecting McLuhan’s thesis during his neo-Marxist phase, Baudrillard
has more recently accepted and extended McLuhan’s “implosion of meaning” argument. Baudrillard’s text now argues that the seemingly endless proliferation of signs
and information obliterates meaning through neutralizing and dissolving all content.
This leads to both a collapse of meaning and the destruction of distinctions between
media and reality, creating what he terms a hyperreality. In Baudrillard’s most recent
texts, political economy, media, and cybernetics are seen to coalesce to produce a
semiotic society far beyond the stage of capitalism described by Marxism. This is the
time of postmodernity in which simulation models come to constitute the world and
finally devour representation. Society thus is seen to move from a capitalist productivist
orientation to a neocapitalist cybernetic order that aims at total control. Much like in
television programs, models and codes come to constitute everyday life and social
relations (see Poster, 1988). As in Brandi’s text, Baudrillard’s analysis sees a society
subject to growing cybernetic control, where critiques that claim to be oppositional,
outside, or threatening to the system become patterned into a society of simulations
(i.e., copies without originals) as mere alibis that only further enhance social control.
Disneyland is Baudrillard’s prime example of a hyperreality, that is, not the unreal
but the more-than-real. In such a universe, there are no explosive contradictions, crises,
or even oppositions because everything is designed and controlled. There is no reality,
or even potentiality, in the name of which oppressive phenomena can be criticized and
transformed because there is nothing behind the flow of signs, codes, and simulacra.
In this nightmare hyperreal society, not even social critique or critical art are possible.
For Baudrillard, “a cool universe of digitality … has absorbed the world of metaphor
and metonymy. The principle of simulation wins out over the reality principle of pleasure.”12 This is Baudrillard’s unsettling fantasy world, and it presents an extreme form
of postmodern nihilism.
In a recent special issue on postmodernity and comparative education – the first in
our field – in the British journal Comparative Education, three texts (none of which cite
Baudrillard) address a number of more practical aspects of the so-called cyberspace
challenge. Ronald Goodenow examines how, the emergence of global communications networks, most notably the information superhighway, have created a new world
of cyberspace. Issues of ownership and power, of how knowledge and services are
defined and distributed, and of how technological have-nots gain access to networks
now become major policy issues. Goodenow also stresses that educators will need to

--- [PDF Page 956 / Book Page 975] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 975

become more interdisciplinary and knowledgeable of trends and debates in many areas
(Goodenow, 1996).
Gunther Kress’s text more specifically asks how the constitutive principles of postmodernity, for example, diversity, multiple reality, alterity, and paralogy, suggest the
need for new representational approaches. Today our theories of meaning making, or
semiosis, are largely grounded in late nineteenth-century notions of stable social systems (e.g., Emile Durkheim and Talcott Parsons), stable signs communicating stable
meanings (e.g., Ferdinand de Saussure), and assumptions of an abstract reified formal
appearance (e.g., C. Arnold Anderson). But now postindustrial societies are struggling
to construct new forms of information-based economies responsive to cultural difference, change, and innovation. Kress challenges comparative educators to join in the
creation of new modes of thinking about meaning and how we might jointly make and
remake our systems of representation “in productive interaction with multiple forms of
difference” (Kress, 1996, quote on p. 196). But one wonders how Kress would interact
with Baudrillard’s destabilizing notions of hyperreality.
Jane Kenway’s text sounds a cautionary note in warning that educators and
students need to question the cyberspace claims of both Utopians (i.e., the likes
of Bill Gates) and Dystopians (i.e., the likes of Baudrillard). While granting the
inevitability of the digital revolution, she draws attention to the way we produce
and consume the new technologies and to associated issues of politics and justice. Teaching students about the consequences of technology is, she notes, perhaps
even more important than teaching them how to operate the machines (see Kenway,
1996). Mary Wilson and colleagues do exactly this in a later political economy
study of the World Wide Web. Their text contends that an overwhelming American
presence on the Web renders “the American perspective” the norm, or center, while
the rest of the world becomes periphery. They argue that cyberspace, with its lack
of boundaries and connection to geographical place, conceals US dominance, and
that astute educators need to recognize these factors and work to circumvent them
(Wilson, Qayyam, & Boskier, 1999).

Reflexive Practitioner
The two remaining camps favorable to a postmodern reading of our time and our field are
the reflexive practitioner and the social cartography textual genres. Both favor a hermeneutics of affirmation, and both are closely linked with the burgeoning qualitative research
tradition in education. The reflexive practitioner genre especially has deep roots in Western
humanism and in the Romantic Movement. In education, it has resisted scientistic and
technological efforts to objectify and commodify the world. During the paradigm wars of
the 1970s and 1980s, the strongly humanistic reflexive perspective successfully defended
Verstehen, or insight, as a key concept and goal for individual learning and knowledge
work. An influential text of that time legitimating reflexive approaches in education is
Donald Schon’s The Reflective Practitioner (Schon, 1983).13 Schon explored the crisis of
confidence in professional knowledge and advocated a solution of moving from technical
rationality to reflection in action. In comparative education, I made the same argument

--- [PDF Page 957 / Book Page 976] ---

976 Paulston

seeking to recognize the value of both imagination and technological reason in 1990, but to
seemingly little effect (Paulston, 1990).
Today, postmodern attacks on modernist ways of knowing grounded in essentialist
views of reality have helped to open a larger space for reflexive perspectives. For many,
a reflexive perspective view of actors and systems offers a reasonable alternative to either
the demanding perspective of radical postmodernity with its hermeneutics of despair or the
perspective of a nostalgic, rule-bound modernity. For example, Patricia Broadfoot of the
University of Bristol chooses this ontological middle ground in her foreword to Qualitative
Educational Research in Developing Countries. Her introduction recognizes both postmodern influences, that is, a plurality of belief systems, a recognition of multiple realities,
and the influence of culture and context, yet retains a clear concern for social scientific
research and “the progress to which it will lead” (Broadfoot, 1997). Variations on this recognition of multiple viewpoints and diverse interests by scholars in the eclectic center are
also becoming increasingly evident in the educational research literature. Elliot Eisner, for
example, advocates a multiplicity in data representations that welcomes artistic, linguistic,
and visual alternatives along with more traditional positivistic choices. But he also warns
that an interpretive multiple perspectives approach may introduce dangerous ambiguity
and a potential backlash:
A genre of work can stand alone without an interpretive context when those
reading, seeing, or hearing it bring that context with them. When they do not
they are likely to be lost. Few people like to be lost. When the terrain is new, we
need context. We also need to be sure …that we are not substituting novelty and
cleverness for substance. In other words, we need to be our own toughest critics.
(Eisner, 1997, quote on p. 9)14

Social Cartography
Texts clustered in the social cartography genre also share a number of defining characteristics, perhaps best captured by Foucault’s notion of heterotopia. In contrast to
the totalizing utopic (i.e., no-place) space of modernity, heterotopic spaces are the
simultaneously mythic and real spaces of everyday life capable of juxtaposing in a
single place a great variety of different sites which in themselves may be incompatible.
As William Blake noted, modernist texts favor idealistic rational Utopias of general
good. In contrast, postmodernist texts favor heterotopias of situated difference and
local knowledge. Figure 2 above illustrates just such a heterotopic mapping of difference. Here, within an intertextual field, all viewpoints producing a text in the CIES
postmodernity debate find space and relation to other similar or totally different ways
of seeing. As such, this tangled and interconnected mapping, or Deleuzian rhizome, of
knowledge positions and relations can be seen as a metaphor of the debate, as a heuristic approach, and as a real site of paralogy and postmodern process. It can also be seen
as a useful new spatial tool specifically created to give visual form to the growing complexity of knowledge work today. Where Pablo Picasso with analytical cubism made it

--- [PDF Page 958 / Book Page 977] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 977

possible to represent many sides of an object at the same time, social cartography also
creates something in the very act of depiction. This is not simply a fragile synthesis,
but a new way of looking at the world and, equivalently, a new aspect of the world at
which to look (Foucault & Miskowiec, 1986).15
The ideas behind heterotopic mappings of perspectival difference began to take form
in my paper “Comparing Ways of Knowing across Inquiry Communities”, presented
at the CIES annual meeting in Pittsburgh in 1991. A number of doctoral students at
the University of Pittsburgh then joined the project, and together we worked to create
a social cartography able to visualize and pattern multiplicity, be it multiple perspectives, genres, arguments, or dreams. In this heuristic, the field is also defined by the
outlying positions. In modern, positivistic representations, in contrast, the opposite is
true, that is, the intention is to plot a central tendency where outliers, such as the Other,
simply disappear.
On the surface, discourse mapping appears to be a fairly simple, if demanding,
process of reading and juxtaposing ways of seeing in texts. I proceed in the following
“cookbook” fashion, much to the horror of my postmodernist colleagues: (1) Choose
the issue or debate to be mapped. (2) Select the widest range possible of texts that
construct this debate and, with close reading, translate their defining rhetorical characteristics, ideas, and worldviews. (3) Identify the range of positions in the intertextual
mix. In Figure 2, for example, these positions are presented on the horizontal axis
as the onto-logical poles of “postmodernist destabilizations” and “modernist certainties”. On the vertical axis, the poles chosen are “actors problematized” and “systems
problematized”. (4) Identify the textual communities that share a way of seeing and
communicating reality; locate them within their space and interrelate communities of
vision with space, lines, arcs, arrows, or the like. While resisting all modernist urges
to box in or lay down a grid, locate coordinates outside the field to allow for a less
restricted space of intersubjectivity, movement, and choice than provided by Table 1.
(5) Field test the map with the individuals or knowledge communities involved. Share
the conflicting interpretations and remap as desired.
As an oppositional postmodern strategy, social cartography translates across interacting
sites of material inscriptions, avoiding the idealist totalities of Utopian modernity. This
process of mapping and translating seeks to open up meanings, to uncover limits within
cultural fields, and to highlight reactionary attempts to seal borders and prohibit translations.
In this lies postmodern mapping’s contribution to an antihegemonic critique.
Social mapping may also be seen as an emergent methodology from within the
hermeneutic mode of inquiry that acknowledges that worlds are constructed and interpreted both objectively and subjectively, that is, that within fields of study or sites of
knowledge, a dialogue is always taking place that involves meaning systems that are
illusive. These meaning systems are formed by those who elaborate them, and an open,
intertextual field is created by the dialogue. For this reason, the comparative researcher
and the reader alike serve as translators within this mode of interpretive inquiry. But,
as Eisner warns, the researcher now has a threefold obligation to explicate what point
of view is being utilized in the study, to disclose the interrelations of the field or site
itself, and to convey something of the personal or professional experiences that have
led her or him to choose a particular point of view.

--- [PDF Page 959 / Book Page 978] ---

978 Paulston

As our social cartography project at the University of Pittsburgh took form, several dissertations and books mapped situated areas of the theoretical and operational
landscapes of comparative and international education. Martin Liebman’s thesis, for
example, expands our understanding of metaphorical analysis in comparative method
(Liebman, 1994).16 Zebun Ahmed’s study maps how village women in rural Bangladesh
view their nonformal educational experiences with Western nongovernmental organizations (Ahmed, 1997).17 Kristiina Erkkilä maps positions in the entrepreneurial
education debates in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Finland (Erkkilä,
2000). Katsuhisa Ito is currently critiquing the project from a human geography viewpoint, Michel Rakatomanana is mapping the debate on new information technologies
and educational development, and Mina O’Dowd is mapping how multiple knowledge perspectives can be seen to construct a longitudinal research study in Sweden
(see Katsuhisa, 1998; Rakotomanana, 1999; Gorostiaga, 1999; O’Doud, 1999). In our
1996 project book, Social Cartography (Paulston, 1996),18 a number of leading US,
Canadian, and international scholars collaborated to demonstrate mapping applications in research practice (i.e., Christine Fox, Esther Gottlieb, Thomas Mouat, Val
Rust, Nelly Stromquist, among others) or to critique and counterargue the book’s
contention that social mapping is a useful tool for comparative analysis today.
Carlos Torres and John Beverley, for example, propose critical modernist and subaltern studies positions that are antithetical to social mapping. Patti Lather interrogates
mapping from a radical feminist view, and Joseph Seppi from a traditional positivist
position. If, indeed, all knowledge claims are now problematic, then opposing views
will need to be consciously incorporated and juxtaposed in any credible argument or
analysis. As we shall see in the following section on modernist orthodoxy, this will be
a hard pill for many true believers to swallow.

Modernist Metanarratives
On the far-right side of Figure 2, I pattern illustrative modernist texts in comparative
education discourse that oppose, in one way or another, the postmodern challenge
within three broad areas: (1) Utopian texts that largely reject postmodernist ideas
and explicitly counterattack to defend a core modernist metanarrative (i.e., universal
reason, or progress); (2) critical pedagogy texts that seek to preserve the modernist
metanarrative of emancipation with the selective appropriation of postmodernist and/
or feminist ideas, and (3) performativity texts that seek to elaborate a new narrative
of reflexive modernity for our time of risk (i.e., what they call “late modernity”) when
the old modernist master stories of certainty and technological progress have less and
less credibility.
In the counterattack category, Erwin Epstein’s chapter “The Problematic Meaning of
Comparison in Comparative Education” presents a spirited defense of totalizing modernist reason and a rejection of what he calls the “challenge of relativism” (Epstein,
1988).19 His text, however, does not recognize postmodernism and its complaints,
although that debate was raging then (1988) at a feverish pitch in the social sciences
and the humanities. Instead, his targets are phenomenological and ethnomethodological

--- [PDF Page 960 / Book Page 979] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 979

additions to the literature and especially my study (summarized in Table 1). These two
perspectives share a nonessentialist understanding of ontology with postmodernism,
and they view reality as a variously situated construct. In a masterly comparison of
what he claims to be incomparable, Epstein’s text contrasts examples of relativist (i.e.,
cultural interpretation and phenomenological readings) and realist (i.e., positivist
theory-development) perspectives in comparative education. He rightly concludes that
they are incommensurable in their assumptions, procedures, and aims. His text fails,
however, to address the core difference of ontology or how reality is variously seen.
His either/or approach, while seemingly evenhanded, has a strong essentialist bias:
Generalizations across societal boundaries define … the comparative method
for positivists. For cultural relativists, comparison is a process of observing the
distinctiveness of individual cultures. These positions are to be sure incompatible, but they both rest on a procedure that requires multicultural analysis and
therefore can said to employ some concept of “comparison”. This is not so for
phenomenological approaches, which carry relativism to a nihilistic extreme
that allows only for interpretation of highly idiosyncratic interactions within
severely limited contextual boundaries. Within such parameters, not even culture
is sufficiently contextually delineated to constitute a basis for analysis. (Epstein,
1988, p. 6)
Thus, from an extravagant logical positivist viewpoint that in Pascal’s term “will
admit only reason,” Epstein’s text contends that one who chooses a phenomenological
approach (as in my Table 1 and Figure 2) cannot be a com-parativist, and he argues that
the challenge of relativism is a threat not only to the metanarrative of reason, but also
to the viability of comparative education as a field. “Only nomothetic explanations—
or the discovery of underlying trends and patterns that account for whole classes of
actions or events [i.e., covering laws] can support comparison capable of theory development and general laws” (Epstein, 1988, p. 22). Epstein’s essentialist text is notable
for its epistemological certainty and faith in the positivist story of social progress with
the discovery of universal regularities—alas, as yet to be seen.
An anti-Enlightenment position might well counterargue Epstein and claim that only
relativists can be comparativists because they alone are open to the indeterminacy of
being. But that would be a modernist either/or argument. Postmodernists would open
to all positions and, as illustrated in Figure 2, turn to a spatial representation of “the
order of things” that moves us a bit beyond the limitations of opaque language. This
would also be my choice, but I must leave it to the reader to assess the comparative
utility of Figure 2 and Hayden White’s claim that “the macroscopic configuration of
formalized consciousness uncovered in language” might be translated into a spatial
visual mode of representation (see White, 1978, quote on p. 239).20
A more focused rejection of postmodern ideas, at least as they are present in our
work on social mapping, can be found in Keith Watson’s recent British Comparative
and International Education Society (BCIES) presidential address and in his review of
Social Cartography. These two texts warn the reader of the intellectual temptations of
such dangerous postmodern ideas as pluralism, multiplicity, and uncertainty—or what

--- [PDF Page 961 / Book Page 980] ---

980 Paulston

Watson erroneously disparages as “New Age Thinking”. His text sees postmodernist
views as fatally flawed because they do not offer testable hypotheses, or criteria for
decision-making, or parameters for interpretation. Such “wooly thinking” is, he complains, written by enthusiasts who are so excited by the novelty of what they are saying
that they do not see the weaknesses. Yet, at the same time, he also makes the odd claim
that “these overly enthusiastic postmodern cartographers are [only] putting into diagrammatic form what most sociologists … have always recognized” (Watson, 1998).21
But Watson’s text sees a flaw in heterotopic mapping more serious than intellectual
excitement and enthusiasm. Watson warns that most administrators and aid agency
officials may well see social cartography as yet one more example of “esoteric comparative education” that is irrelevant for them. While acknowledging that postmodern
mapping can indeed represent the micronarratives of all the players, whether they hold
power or are on the margins, his text dismisses the need for such knowledge, claiming
that educational planners and policy-makers require only “hard data” for rational decision-making.22 Here the term hard data is repeated as a mantra and is not defined, nor
are any data provided to support Watson’s exclusionist claims.
Watson’s text would seem to confuse the postmodern social cartography as practiced in Figure 2 with traditional scientific or mimetic modeling, where the image is
assumed to reflect a positive reality that can be known empirically, or ideologically.
But with our postmodern mapping of metaphors, the map, like the self, can also be
portrayed as in a state of Dionysian dispersal that, as with Foucault’s notion of heterotopia, reconstitutes diversity as a provisional unity.

Rational Actor
The rational actor, or game-theory, position can be seen as a close relation of
Anderson’s and Watson’s modernist metanarrative of progress. Here, texts seek to
develop nomothetic models able to explain and predict economic and educational
behavior in universal terms. Raymond Baudon divides these efforts into two types,
that is, the “determinist” and “interactionist” (Baudon, 1982). Mary Jane Bowman’s
model of 1984 (Bowman, 1984) is cited by David Turner to illustrate the former
because it seeks to explain school attendance rates in terms of prior events and
to support the discovery of uniform covering laws. Using an analysis of variance,
a deterministic approach would suggest that every individual is driven by “the
programming that the social structure imposes on him” (Turner, 1988). In this, modernization and Marxist theories share the same certainty and reductionist view. But
Turner’s text problematizes actors, not structures, and argues that the determinist
model is simplistic and fails to recognize features of free will and capriciousness in
human behavior. Social theories and ultimately social laws are, Turner contends, still
attainable, but only with the use of an interactive model based on empirical studies
of student risk-taking behavior. Only with the scientific study of individual agents
and educational demand, and not just formal structures, Turner’s text argues, will
progress in educational reform be made.

--- [PDF Page 962 / Book Page 981] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 981

Critical Modernist
Texts choosing the critical modernist perspective characteristically maintain a strong
commitment to the modernist metanarrative of emancipation while seeking to breathe
new life and credibility into the Enlightenment project. They do so by selectively
appropriating postmodern ideas from antiessentialist reality positions to shore up
their own essentialist foundations. Clearly, this is a difficult – if not confused – task
and requires a good deal of qualification and rationalization. A recent text by Peter
McLaren presents a prime example of such ontological fancy footwork:
While I acknowledge the importance of recognizing the conceptual limits of Marxian
analysis [i.e., Marxist universals] for reading certain aspects of the postmodern condition, I believe that the main pillars of Marxian analysis, remain intact, i.e., the
primacy of economics and the identification of contradictions and antagonisms that
follow the changing forces of capitalism. It is important that critical educators not
lose sight of these foci [i.e., modernist foundations] in their move to incorporate
[antifoundational] insights from … postmodernism. (McLaren, 1994)23
Here McLaren’s text shares the yearning of positivists for certainty in the form of
hard data: “[W]e need to be able to stipulate in specific contexts which effects are
oppressive and which are productive of social transformation. I believe that to defend
emancipation … we must make certain that not all voices are celebrated” (McLaren,
1994, p. 338).24 Where Erwin Epstein’s counterattack excludes relativism as the enemy
of Enlightenment reason and true comparison, McLaren’s text would, like Watson’s,
silence the ideological Other. In order to avoid just this sort of silencing, I invited
Carlos Torres to provide a concluding chapter for our Social Cartography book using a
critical modernist perspective antithetical to the books uncertainty thesis. This practice
of incorporating oppositional views into intertextual constructions is seen by pluralists and postmodernists not as masochism, but as paralogy where science opens up
from an Apollonian program of testing and verification for truth value to also include
a Dionysian process of paralogical deconstruction and a recycling of all knowledge
claims. In this way, we seek to create a spirited conversation and vouchsafe its continuation.25 With mapping, as in Figure 2, Torres’s self-privileging metanarrative claim is
recognized and reinscribed into the intertextual field/map, not as a master narrative
of “general good,” but as another contending mininarrative, that is, as perhaps useful
“minute particulars” to be assessed in practice.
Torres also recognizes the utility of postmodernist critiques of representation, but
only when they avoid what he sees (but does not illustrate) as the pitfalls of extreme
relativism and solipsism. Torres’s text sees the greatest danger of postmodern views
in their claim that language constructs reality. His text sees this postmodern shift
from hard data and “correct” ideology to metaphor, multiple perspectives, and methodological pluralism as antithetical, even subversive, of the theoretical integrity of his
privileged modernist metanarrative of emancipation. His text defensively calls for a
linguistic hygiene, that is, that “metaphors … should have no place in social sciences if

--- [PDF Page 963 / Book Page 982] ---

982 Paulston

they substitute for social theorizing including metatheory (or epistemology), empirical
theory and normative theory” (Torres, 1996).26 Here, Torres’s text seems to be deeply
suspicious of any but a scientific, analytical method whose goal is not the recovery
and confirmation of its own ideological origins. While Torres, like McLaren, acknowledges that postmodern ideas may help to make Marxist class analysis less totalizing
and deterministic, his text continues to demand a so-called reproduction of the concrete situation in conformance with his ontological choice of theoretical realism and
his claims of a universal truth system.27

Reflexive Modernity
Texts representing the reflexive modernity position share common origins with critical modernist texts. They have, however, been better able – at least superficially – to
let go of fading modernist certainties and master narratives. They seek to survive
the poststructuralist storms by selectively adapting useful interpretations, stories,
and vocabulary from the postmodern literature and choosing the metaphors of late
modernity and reflexive modernity.28 Texts from this burgeoning community retain
modernist notions of a unitary and ideal space of a society that is mapped onto the
body of a population along with territorial claims of a nation state and a national
educational system. At the same time, they seem to have lost all hope for certainty
and selectively attempt to incorporate and adopt postmodern ideas of fragmentation,
polymorphous identity, and discontinuous thought spaces (see, e.g. Welch, 1998).29
In the West, and especially in Western Europe, the reflexive systems view recognizes
a politics of voice and representation that often seeks to displace a welfare state held
to be inefficient and paternalistic. Central to this view, and in marked contrast to the
certainties of critical modernist texts, is the idea that to know how to act we need
to know “what’s happening”. For this we need to develop a language and a space in
which to engage our present willingness to let most, if not all, knowledge perspectives contend and compete.
In comparative education, this reflexive systems view is well illustrated by Robert
Cowen’s recent text, where he claims that Lyotard’s 1979 analysis of the postmodern
condition continues to offer the most accurate assessment of society – and of universities – as they move into “the post-industrial age and as culture moves into what is
known as the postmodern age” (Cowen, 1996, quote on p. 247).30,31 Lyotard’s argument
is that today knowledge is subject to “performativity,” or the optimization of system
efficiency. Knowledge has become a technology, that is, a marketable commodity
subject to performativity as well as truth tests. Cowen perceptively argues that these
changes define a different kind of comparative education predicated not on the tired old
modernist metanarratives of certainty, but on the recognition of a crisis of legitimacy.
Where the modern comparative education of John Dewey and Talcott Parsons and colleagues focused largely on citizen preparation and equality of educational opportunity,
in late-modern educational systems the strongest pairing is seen to be between the
international economy and efforts to gird educational systems for global competition.
Today, Cowen contends, we comparativists will need

--- [PDF Page 964 / Book Page 983] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 983

to specify the patterns of muddle in specific national contexts of transition to
late-modern education. [Today] the common sense categories of analysis – i.e.,
school management and finance, administrative structures, the curriculum,
teacher education – are now dangerous. Even if we could deduce determined
rules from them [as advocates of modernity would have us do] the rules would
be a reading of the wrong world. (Cowen, 1996, p. 167)31

Coda
To conclude, Cowen cites Zygmunt Bauman’s observation that we are no longer legislators, and that we should first look to our interpretations (Bauman, 1987). I can only
concur and further suggest that as comparativists we are, from the look of things, also
well positioned to become social cartographers, able to translate, map, and compare
multiple perspectives on social and educational life. And as our intertextual traveling
in this study suggests, while our collective work is becoming more postparadigmatic
and eclectic, we are, as individuals, also aware of “sweet spots” or favored sites in
knowledge work where we encounter more allies, resources for practice, and options
for movement (Ross et al., 1992).32 At the same time, we are learning to recognize and
include views of the Other, thus enlarging the scope of our vision and the diversity, or
minute particulars, of our representations.
So is there, perhaps, something akin to a general good, writ small, to be found in the
opportunities arising from comparative education practiced as comparative mappings
of disparate world views? This is our challenge today, to understand William Blake’s
belief that truth is particular, not general, while we move beyond his either/or formulation into a more heterotopic space of critically reflexive understanding – as shown in
Figure 2 – open to the essentialist texts of late modernity, to the antiessentialist texts of
the postmodernists, and to all the texts that have yet to claim their agonistic spaces.33

Notes
1

2

3

I thank Professor Roger Boshier and his students at the University of British Columbia who invited
me to present a version of this paper as a keynote address at the Western Regional Meeting of the
Comparative and International Education Society, June 1998.I also thank the three reviewers for their
helpful comments.
For those interested in the intricacies of new social science ideas and terminology in education after
modernity, see, among others, Buenfil-Burgos (1997, pp. 97–107); and English (1998, pp. 426–
463). For an accessible introductory textbook on popular culture and the postmodern condition, see
Anderson, Reality Isn’t What It Used To Be (1990).
See Berlin (1980), esp. pp. 1–24. Berlin identifies the three central ideas of the anti-Enlightenment
as (1) populism, or the view that people can realize themselves fully only when they belong to rooted
groups or cultures; (2) expressionism, or the notion that all human works are above all voices speaking or forms of representation conveying a world view; and (3) pluralism, or the recognition of a
potentially infinite variety of cultures, ways of seeing, and systems of values all equally incommensurable with one another, rendering logically incoherent the Enlightenment belief in a universally valid
master narrative or ideal path to human progress and fulfillment. Berlin identifies leading exponents

--- [PDF Page 965 / Book Page 984] ---

984 Paulston

4

5

6
7

8

9
10

11

12

of the anti-Enlightenment as Niccolo Machia-velli, Giambattista Vico, William Blake, Johann Herder,
Alexander Herzen, and others, including Georges Sorel and Friedrich Nietzche.
A more detailed exposition may be found in Owen (1997, pp. 1–22). Owen suggests that postmodern
“theory” seeks to shift the work of social science from theorizing truth claims to representing new
social and intertextual terrains in constant flux. For a useful guide to exegetic textual analyses as
“close reading,” see Francese (1997, pp. 107–154).
Earlier, Foucault, perhaps anticipating the cyberspace revolution, argued that today there has indeed
been a fundamental change of consciousness from time to space: “the great obsessive dread of the
nineteenth century was history, with its themes of development and stagnation, crises and cycle, the
accumulation of the past, the surplus of the dead. Our own era, on the other hand, seems to be that of
space. We are in the age of the simultaneous, of juxtaposition, the near and the far, the side by side, and
the scattered. A period when the world is putting itself to the test, not so much as a great way of life
destined to grow in time but as a net that links points together and creates its own muddle [as in table
1 and figure 21. It might be said that certain ideological conflicts which underlie the controversies of
our day take place between the pious descendants of time and tenacious inhabitants of space.” See
Foucault and Miskowiec (1986).
For useful discussions of the reflexive modernity – or late modernity – world view, see Beck, Giddens,
and Lash (1994).
Here the authors introduce social cartography to comparative educators as “a new and effective
method for visually demonstrating the sensitivity of post modern influences for opening social dialogue, especially to those who have experienced disenfranchisement by modernism” (p. 232). Their
social cartography text contends that spatial juxtapositioning provides a new way to seek a more
situated truth in a cyberspace era. Now truth is not necessarily grounded in measurable fact alone;
it is also predicated on the acquisition of a generosity of vision composed of many truths, that is,
what postmodern texts call a “multiplicity of witness” and a “democracy of perception”. By opening
comparison in this way, postmodern social cartography helps actors move outward from subjective
truth toward a reintegration of the self into a new social fabric/space composed of multiple voices and
stories. This view is labeled “postmodern multiperspectivism” by Francese (n. 4 above) who advocates
its utility as a safeguard against “any excessively strong, exclusionary reading of the past: the univocal
truth that suffocates all others and quickly transmogrifies into reified myth” (p. 130).
See James Whitson’s somewhat quixotic “Post-structuralist Pedagogy as a Counter-hegemonic Praxis”
(1991). Texts advocating or applying a postmodern deconstruction perspective can also be found in
Weiler (1996), Luke (1995), and others, including Gottlieb (1989).
For the subaltern perspective, see, e.g., Mohanty (1991). For an application of the radical alterity
perspective to probe the trope of space in feminist studies, see Spark (1996).
Brandi claims that the book’s structuralist orthodoxy silences questions of how research reflects the views
of those under consideration and whose voices and what questions direct the evolution of the field (p. 160).
She also contends that the inclusion of feminist theories on structural adjustment and phenomenological
studies of local perspectives would better help oppressed people improve their quality of life.
In contrast to what Epstein’s text sees as my purported optimism for the field, I see my viewpoint more
akin to Berlin’s curious combination of idealism and skepticism. Epstein’s text also makes an argument for measured skepticism in evaluating the field’s future possibilities. The problem, as Epstein
sees it, is that limited understanding of self restricts the scope and possibility of knowledge work
within the comparative education field. But is our lack of reflexive self-knowledge, our naivete, our
bane? If so, could it not be viewed as an educational problem that might be treatable with heterotopic
mapping? A third radical alterity example problematizing actors in comparative education texts can
be found in Moran (1998). Moran compares two life histories, her own and that of Gail Paradise Kelly,
with painful honesty and introspection. Her narrative account of one woman’s struggle with the rules
of patriarchal modernity provides a valuable pioneering contribution to comparative education, to date
a largely logocentric male discourse repelled by the very radical alterity sensibilities that construct
Moran’s story.
See the neo-Marxist critique of Baudrillard’s arguments in Kellner, Jean Baudrillard:From Marxism
to Postmodernism and Beyond (1989). While Kellner seems to be fascinated with the brilliance and
originality of Baudrillard’s ideas, he nevertheless sees him trapped by “the absence of a theory of

--- [PDF Page 966 / Book Page 985] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 985

13

14

15

16

17
18

19

20

21

22

agency and mediation [by] … the impossibility of any sort of agent of political change … by the
metaphysical triumph of the object over the subject” (p. 216). And yet Kellner concludes “the appeal
of Baudrillard’s thinking might suggest that we are [indeed] living in a transitional situation whereby
new social conditions are putting into question the old orthodoxies and boundaries” (p. 217).
For a perceptive examination of different traditions in reflexive thought today, see Potter (1996). For
two imaginative literary attempts to move beyond the tendency of most modern intellectual production
to “state, qualify, and conclude,” see Ermath (1992), and Paulston and Plank (2000).
Anna Sfard, in a related study, warns that the struggle for a conceptual unification of research is not
a worthwhile endeavor and that too great a devotion to one particular metaphor can lead to theoretical distortion and undesirable practical consequences. Instead, she rejects Torres’s stricture (see n. 27
below) and advocates a discursive approach of “metaphorical mappings” and metaphorical pluralism
for conceptual renewal and improved practice. See her study, “On two metaphors for learning and the
dangers of choosing just one” (1998).
(See n. 5 above). In making his shift from time to space in social analysis, Foucault graciously
acknowledges his intellectual debt to Gilles Deleuze with the words “perhaps one day, this century
will be known as Deleuzian” in his Language, Counter-Memory, Practice (1977, p. 76). For their
original and fecund ideas on concepts seen as territory and on the necessity of cartographies as a
strategy to examine discourse with spatial analysis, see Deleuze and Guttari (1980). For the cubism
analogy, see Nehamas (1985). I thank Professor Eugenie Potter for pointing out this relationship.
In postmodern mapping as in postmodern narrative, the effort at estrangement moves in two directions simultaneously: one magnifying the subjectivity of perception, the other diminishing any sense
of mimetic connection between that subjectivity and the world that seemingly remains intact and
apart. Liebman excels in producing this sense of estrangement as a distortion of scale and perception.
In the words of Vladimir Nabokov, the objective is to find “a kind of delicate meeting place between
imagination and knowledge, a point, arrived at by diminishing large things and enlarging small ones,
that [like social mapping] is intrinsically artistic”. See Nabokov (1970).
Ahmed demonstrates how a mapping of women’s stories from the margins can, indeed, provide valuable evaluative data for educational planners – if they will only look and listen.
The interested reader is also directed to a companion project volume by Paulston, Leibman, and
Nicholson-Goodman, Mapping Multiple Perspectives: Research Reports of the University of
Pittsburgh Social Cartography Project, 1993–1996 (1996).
Variations on this metanarrative can be found in Psacharopoulos, “Comparative Education: From
Theory to Practice” (1990, pp. 369–380) and Heyneman, “Quantity, Quality and Source” (1993, pp.
372–388).
White concludes that the key to understanding Foucault’s method of “transcription” is to be found in
how it is used to reveal the inner dynamics of the thought process by which a given representation of
the world in words is grounded in poesis: “[T]o translate prose into poetry is Foucault’s purpose, and
thus he is especially interested in showing how all systems of thought in the human sciences can be
seen as little more than terminological formulations of poetic closures with the world of words, rather
than with the things they purport to represent and explain” (p. 259).
Watson echoes C. Arnold Anderson’s earlier modernization agenda for comparative education: “above
all, the work undertaken should have purposeful reformist and practical goals and should be used to
inform and advise governments” (p. 28). In his text, Watson offers by way of illustration two structural-functionalist figures, one of “the determinants of an educational system” (p. 22) and the other of
“international influences that shape educational systems” (p. 27). However, it is not clear how these
representations meet his criterion for “hard data,” especially the latter figure, which is coded using
world systems ideology and presents a soft critique of international capitalism, in, for example, the
“Role of Stock Markets, e.g., Tokyo’s Hang Seng” (p. 27). But as every Hong Kong schoolboy knows,
the Hang Seng stock market is not in Tokyo, and even supposedly “hard data” may become a bit fuzzy
now and then. The Nikkei is, in fact, Tokyo’s stock exchange.
See also Keith Watson, reviews of Mapping Multiple Perspectives by Paulston, Leibman, and
Nicholson-Goodman (1996); and Social Cartography, edited by Paulston (1998). While statistical
analyses may indeed be useful in technical work, balanced educational assessment requires an alternative practice of formulating judgments not only on assigned numerical ratings, but also on the

--- [PDF Page 967 / Book Page 986] ---

986 Paulston

23

24

25

26

27

28
29

30

31

32

33

characteristics of performance in context. Watson’s text sees useful knowledge from a rather narrow
modernization theory viewpoint (i.e., articulated in simple, essentialist, and mechanistic terms). My
view is broader and also welcomes a perspective that sees knowledge as individually and socially
constructed and as reflected in particular contexts and discourses that can be mapped and discussed
and remapped. See Delandshere and Petrosky (1998).
See also the related studies by Buder (1992) and Stromquist (1995). Stromquist suggests that critical
gender issues can be appropriated from feminist discourse to support a more liberating “manipulation
of gender identities through schooling and the mass media” (p. 454). In this genre, see also Dimitriadis
and Kamberelis, “Shifting Terrains: Mapping Education within a Global Landscape” (1997).
In contrast to McLaren’s call to base critical pedagogy on neo-Marxist theory updated with selective
postmodern appropriations, Jennifer Gore advocates Foucault’s strategy of leaving specific tactics
and strategies of resistance to those directly involved in struggle at the precise points where their own
conditions of life or work situate them. Here the shift is made from a master narrative of emancipation
owned by intellectuals to the mininarratives or small stories arising from situated experiences and
actual power relations. See Gore (1993).
For a valuable study seeking to situate, or map, various contradictory versions of constructivist theory
in educational psychology, see Prawat, “Constructivisms, Modern and Postmodern” (1996). Prawat
uses textual analysis and conceptual mapping, as in this study, to identify and compare different ways
of seeing. This is a fine example of a reflexive practitioner viewpoint at work.
A major problem with the moralistic approach found in many critical modernist texts is that it often
leads to a dead end of author self-centering where the marginalized get marginalized still more. Nast
puts it like this: “Guilt that centers merely on the existence of … inequality and not on how inequality
can be transformed is … unproductively paralyzing”. See Nast (1994).
For a variety of ideas on opening new space for radical critique in a postmodern era, see Simons and
Billig, After Postmodernism: Reconstructing Ideological Critique (1994). I found Richard Harvey
Brown’s chapter “Reconstructing Social Theory after the Postmodern Critique” (pp. 12–37) especially
helpful in its advocacy of self-reflexive talk-about-talk and its advice on teaching debates.
See introduction to Beck et al. (n. 6 above).
Here Welch worries that disruptive postmodern ideas will be used as a stick to drive performativity
efforts in the academy. While this, indeed, seems to be under way, his call to reassert a universal ideal
of Western democracy as an opposing criterion of judgment, as an absolute standpoint to judge the
truth, sounds a bit Eurocentric and nostalgic. For a serious attempt to rethink political space today,
that is, the “hyperspace” of politics in the “global village” in which we all now live, see Magnusson,
The Search for Political Space: Globalization, Social Movements, and the Urban Political Experience
(1996).
For related work framed in this perspective, see also Coulby and Jones (1995, 1996). See also Green
(1994, pp.136–49) and Schriewer (1988, pp. 25–83), where the text ambitiously advocates a “science
of comparative education” based on styles of reasoning, or Denkstile, in “divergent types of theory viz,
scientific theories and reflection theories” (p. 30).
In a related study, Peter Jarvis uses the concept of “late modernity” to situate performativity concerns
of non-Western cultures consuming educational knowledge that can now be packaged and marketed
globally. See his “Continuing Education in a Late-Modern or Global Society (1996).
As in the study presented here, the authors report finding a “fragmented field constituting chaos for
some, and for others a mosaic of diverse and sometimes competing goals, theoretical frameworks,
methodologies and claims” (p. 113). In 1988, they found that CIES members by and large “placed their
hopes in the multiple possibilities of diversity and defended the field’s eclectic stance as a widening
rather than an absence of identity” (p. 127). I locate this view as the “postparadigmatic eclecticism”
position in the center of Figure 2. It is, perhaps, still the favored perspective of most comparative
education practitioners, but a follow-up study is long overdue. For a perceptive review of our Social
Cartography book from this eclectic perspective, see Pickeles, “Social and Cultural Cartographies and
the Spatial Turn in Social Theory” (1999).
Nigel Blake also addresses this challenge in his perceptive study, “Between Postmodernism and Anti
Modernism: The Predicament of Educational Studies” (1996). Blake sees postmodernists resisting the
use of a criterion of validity, as advocated here by Watson (i.e., “hard data”) and Welch (i.e., “western

--- [PDF Page 968 / Book Page 987] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 987
democracy”), to settle a usage (see nn. 22 and 30). This would foreclose other stories and represent
a claim to universal assent for one criterion. As such, postmodern theory impugns the value of all
inquiry frameworks that make an a priori claim to universal validity. Indeed, it is one of postmodernism’s most salient intellectual characteristics to repudiate the notion of uniquely valid or valuable
perspectives on itself, or on anything else (p. 43). Here Nigel Blake reiterates the profound skepticism
found in anti-Enlightenment and postmodern texts about the universal validity of any single master
narrative or grand theoretical story. See Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge
(1984), where, with no little irony, the text might well be read as advocating as a master narrative the
rejection of metanarratives. Social cartography, as practiced here, seeks to avoid this temptation by
recognizing and interrelating all texts and arguments claiming space in knowledge debates.

References
Ahmed, Z. (1997). Mapping rural women’s perspectives on nonformal educational experiences: A case
study in a Bangladeshi village. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh.
Anderson, C. A. (June–October 1977). Comparative education over a quarter century: Maturity and challenges. Comparative Education Review, 21(2/3), The State of the Art. 405–416.
Anderson T. W. (1990). Reality isn’t what it used to be. San Francisco: Harper & Row.
Baudon, R. (1982). The unintended consequences of social action (pp. 155–59). London: Macmillan.
Bauman, Z. (1987). Legislators and interpreters: On modernity, postmodernity and intellectuals. London:
Cambridge University Press.
Bauman, Z. (1992). Postmodernity (p. 193). London: Routledge.
Beck, U., Giddens, A., & Lash, S. (1994). Reflexive modernization. Cambridge: Polity.
Berlin, I. (1980). Against the current: Essays in the history of ideas. New York: Viking.
Blake N. (March 1996). Between postmodernism and anti-modernism: The predicament of educational
studies. British Journal of Educational Studies, 44(1), 42–65.
Bowman, M. J. (November 1984). An integrated framework for analysis of the spread of schooling in less
developed countries. Comparative Education Review, 28(4), 563–583.
Brandi, D. (February 1994). Review: [untitled]. Comparative Education Review, Special issue on schooling
and learning in children’s lives, 38(1), 159–162.
Broadfoot, P. (1997). Introduction. In M. Crossley & G. Vulliamy (Eds.), Qualitative educational research
in developing countries (pp. xi-viii). New York: Garland.
Richard Harvey Brown’s chapter “Reconstructing Social Theory after the Postmodern Critique”
(pp. 12–37)
Buenfil-Burgos, R. N. (February 1997). Education in a post-modern horizon: Voices from Latin-America.
British Educational Research Journal, 23(1), 97–107.
Buder, J. (1992). Contingent foundations: Feminism and the question of ‘postmodernism’. In J. Butler &
J. W. Scott (Eds.), Feminists theorize the political. New York: Routledge.
Coulby, D., & Jones, C. (June 1996). Post-Modernity, education and European identities. Comparative
Education, 32(2), 171–184. Special Number (18): Comparative Education and Post-Modernity.
Coulby, D., & Jones, C. (1995). Postmodernity and European educational systems. Stoke-On-Trent:
Trentham.
Cowen, R. (June 1996). Performativity, post-modernity and the University. Comparative Education, 32(2).
Special Number (18): Comparative Education and Post-Modernity, 245–258.
Delandshere, G., & Petrosky, A. R. (March 1998). Assessment of complex performances: Limitations of key
measurement assumptions. Educational Researcher, 27(2), 14–24.
Erkkila, K. (2000). Mapping the entrepreneurial education debates in the United States, the United Kingdom
and Finland. New York: Garland, in press.
Deleuze, G., & Guttari, F. (1980). A thousand plateaus, vol. 2 of Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Translated
by B. Massumi. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Dimitriadis, G., & Kamberelis, G. (May 1997). Shifting terrains: Mapping education within a global landscape. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 551, Globalization and the
changing U S city, 137–150.

--- [PDF Page 969 / Book Page 988] ---

988 Paulston
Eisner, E. W. (August–September 1997). The promise and perils of alternative forms of data representation.
Educational Researcher, 26(6), 4–10.
English, W. F. (September 1998). The postmodern turn in educational administration: Apostrophic or catastrophic development? Journal of School Leadership, 8, 426–463.
Epstein, H. E. (1988). The problematic meaning of ‘comparison’ in comparative education. In J. Schriewer
& B. Holmes (Eds,) Theories and methods in comparative education (pp. 3–23). Frankfurt am Main:
Verlag Peter Lang.
Epstein, I. (1995). Comparative education in North America: The search for the Other through the escape
from self? Compare 25(1), 5–16.
Ermath, D. E. (1992). Sequel to history: Postmodernism and the crisis of representation. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Foucault, M. (1997). Language, counter-memory, practice (p. 76). Translated by D. F. Bouchard & S. Simon.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Foucault, M., & Miskowiec, J. (Spring, 1986). Of other spaces. Diacritics, 16(1), 22–27.
Francese, J. (1997). Narrating postmodern time and space (pp. 107–154). Albany, NY: SUNY.
Goodenow, R. (June 1996). The cyberspace challenge: Modernity, post-modernity and reflections on international networking policy. Comparative Education, 32(2), Special Number (18): Comparative Education
and Post-Modernity, 197–216.
Gore, J. (1993). The struggle for pedagogies: Critical and feminist discourses as regimes of truth (pp.
65–66). London: Routledge.
Gorostiaga, M. J. (April 1999). Mapping debates on educational decentralization: The case of Argentina
in the 1990s. Paper presented at the Comparative and International Education Society [CIES] annual
meeting, Toronto.
Gottlieb, E. E. (1989).The discursive construction of knowledge: The case of radical education discourse.
Qualitative Studies in Education, 2, 132–44.
Green, W. A. (1994). Postmodernism and state education. Journal of Educational Policy, 9, 136–149.
Heyneman, S. P. (November 1993). Quantity, quality, and source. Comparative Education Review, 37(4),
372–388.
Jarvis, P. (June 1996). Continuing education in a late-modern or global society: Towards a theoretical framework for comparative analysis. Comparative Education, 32(2), Special Number (18): Comparative
Education and Post-Modernity, 233–244.
Katsuhisa, I. (June 1998). The social cartography project at the University of Pittsburgh: A geographer’s
assessment. Paper presented at the Western Regional Comparative and International Conference,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver.
Kazamias, A. M., & Schwartz, K. (June–October 1977). Intellectual and ideological perspectives in comparative education: An interpretation. Comparative Education Review, 21(2/3), The State of the Art.
153–176.
Kellner, D. (1989). Jean Baudrillard: From Marxism to postmodernism and beyond (p. 152). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Kenway, J. (June 1996). The information superhighway and post-modernity: The social promise and the
social price. Comparative Education, 32(2), Special Number (18): Comparative Education and PostModernity, 217–231.
Kress, G. (June 1996). Internationalisation and globalisation: Rethinking a curriculum of communication.
Comparative Education, 32(2), Special Number (18): Comparative Education and Post-Modernity, 185–196.
Liebman, W. M. (1994). The social mapping rationale: A method and resource to acknowledge postmodern
narrative expression. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh.
Luke, A. (1995/1996). Text and discourse in education: An introduction to critical discourse analysis. Review
of Research in Education, 21, 3–48.
Lyotard, J. -F.(1984). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. Translated by G. Bennington &
B. Massumi. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
McLaren, P. (Summer 1994). Critical pedagogy, political agency, and the pragmatics of justice: The case of
Lyotard. Educational Theory 44(3), 319–40.
McLuhan, M. (1964).Understanding media. New York: McGraw-Hill.

--- [PDF Page 970 / Book Page 989] ---

Mapping Comparative Education after Postmodernity 989
Magnusson, W. (1996). The search for political space: Globalization, social movements, and the urban
political experience. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Mohanty, C. T. (1991). Cartographies of struggle. In C. T. Mohanty et al.(Eds.), Third world women and the
politics of feminism (pp. 1–49). Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Moran, J. P. (January 1998). An alternative existence. CIES Newsletter 117, 1, 4.
Nabokov, V. (1970). Speaking memory: An autobiography revisited (p. 167). New York: Capricorn.
Nast, H. (1994). Opening remarks on ‘women in the field’. Professional Geographer, 46(1), 54–66.
Nehamas, A. (1985). Nietzsche: Life as literature (p. 59). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
O’Doud, M. (April 1999). Mapping knowledge perspectives in the construction of Swedish educational
research. Paper presented at the CIES annual meeting, Toronto.
Owen, D. (1997). Sociology after postmodernism (pp.1–22). London: Sage.
Paulston R. G. (June–October 1977). Social and educational change: Conceptual frameworks. Comparative
Education Review, 21(2/3), The State of the Art. 370–395.
Paulston, R. G. (May 1990). Review: Toward a reflective comparative education? Comparative Education
Review, 34(2), 248–255.
Paulston, R. G. (Ed.) (1996). Social cartography: Mapping ways of seeing social and educational change.
New York: Garland.
Paulston, R. G. (November 1999). Mapping comparative education after postmodernity. Comparative
Education Review, 43(4), 438–463.
Paulston, R. G., & Liebman, M. (May 1994). An invitation to postmodern social cartography. Comparative
Education Review, 38(2), 215–232.
Paulston R. G., & Plank, D. N. (2000). Imagining comparative education: Past, present and future. Compare,
30(2), forthcoming.
Paulston, R. G., Leibman, M., & Nicholson-Goodman, J. V. (1996). Mapping multiple perspectives: Research
reports of the University of Pittsburgh social cartography project, 1993–1996. Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh, Department of Administrative and Policy Studies.
Pickeles, J. (January 1999). Social and cultural cartographies and the spatial turn in social theory. Journal
of Historical Geography, 25(1), 93–98.
Poster, M. (Ed.). Jean Baudrillard: Selected writings. Saint Louis: Telos.
Potter, J. (1996). Representing reality: Discourse, rhetoric and social construction (pp. 88–96, 228–232).
London: Sage.
Prawat, R. S. (1996). Constructivisms, modern and postmodern. Educational Psychologist, 31(3), 215–25.
Psacharopoulos, G. (August 1990). Comparative education: From theory to practice, or are you A: .* or
B*. ist? Comparative Education Review, 34(3), 369–380.
Rakotomanana, M. (1999). Mapping the debate on new information and communication technologies
(NICTs) and development: Implications for educational planning in Francophone Africa. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh.
Ross, H., Cho-Yee To, Cave, W. & Blair, D. E. (1992). On shifting ground: The post-paradigmatic identity
of US comparative education, 1979–1988. Compare, 22(2), 113–32.
Rust, V. D. (November 1991). Postmodernism and its comparative education implications. Comparative
Education Review, 35(4), 610–626.
Schon, D. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York: Basic.
Schrag, C. O. (1997). The Self after postmodernity (p. 7). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Schriewer, J. (1988). The method of comparison and the need for externalization (pp. 25–83). J. Schriewer
& B. Holmes (Eds.). Frankfurt am Main: Verlag Peter Lang.
Sfard, A. (March 1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational
Researcher, 27(2), 4–13.
Simons, H. W., & Billig, M. (Eds.) (1994). After postmodernism: Reconstructing ideological critique.
London: Sage.
Spark, M. (1996). Displacing the field in fieldwork. In N. Duncan (Ed.), Bodyspace: Destabilizing geographies of gender and sexuality (pp. 212–233). London: Routledge.
Stromquist, N. P. (November 1995). Romancing the state: Gender and power in education. Comparative
Education Review, 39(4), 423–454.

--- [PDF Page 971 / Book Page 990] ---

990 Paulston
Torres, C. A. (1996). Social cartography, comparative education, and critical modernism: Afterthought.
In R. G. Paulston (Ed.), Social cartography: Mapping ways of seeing social and educational change
(p. 430). New York: Garland.
Turner, D. A. (1988). Game theory in comparative education: Prospects and propositions. In J. Schriewer &
B. Holmes (Eds.), Theories and methods in comparative education (p. 158). Frankfurt am Main: Verlag
Peter Lang.
Usher, R., & Edwards, R. (1994). Postmodernism and education (p. 3). London: Routledge.
Watson, K. (March 1998). Review: [untitled]. Comparative Education, 34(1), 107–108.
Watson, K. (1998). Memories, models and mapping: The impact of geopolitical changes on comparative
studies in education. Compare 28, 1, 5–31.
Weiler, K. (Summer, 1996). Myths of Paulo Freire. Educational Theory, 46, 353–71.
Welch, A. (February 1998). The end of certainty? The academic profession and the challenge of change.
Comparative Education Review, 42(1), Special Issue on the Professoriate, 1–14.
Wilson, M., Qayyam, A. & Boskier, R. (1999). World Wide America: Manufacturing Web information.
Distance Education, in press.
White, H. (1978). Foucault decoded: Notes from underground. In H. White (Ed.), Tropics of discourse:
Essays in cultural criticism (pp. 230). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Whitson, J. (1991). Post-structuralist pedagogy as a counter-hegemonic praxis. Education and Society,
9, 73–86.
Reviewed Work(s): Review: [Untitled]. Emergent Issues in Education: Comparative Perspectives by R. F.
Arnove, P. G. Altbach, G. P. Kelly.
Reviewed Work(s): Review: [Untitled]. Mapping Multiple Perspectives by R. G. Paulston; M. Liebman;
J. V. Nicolson-Goodman Social Cartography Mapping Ways of Seeing Social and Educational Change
by R. G. Paulston.
Reviewed Work(s): Review: Toward a reflective comparative education? New Approaches to Comparative
Education by Philip G. Altbach; Gail P. Kelly Theories and Methods in Comparative Education by
Jürgen Schriewer; Brian Holmes.

