================================================================================
Chapter 63: Politics, Theory, and Reality in Critical Pedagogy
Author(s): Michael W . Apple and W ayne Au
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 991–1007
PDF Pages: pp. 972–988 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 972 / Book Page 991] ---

63
POLITICS, THEORY, AND REALITY IN CRITICAL
PEDAGOGY
Michael W. Apple and Wayne Au

Introduction
Critical pedagogy generally seeks to expose how relations of power and inequality,
(social, cultural, economic) in their myriad forms, combinations, and complexities, are
manifest and challenged in the formal and informal education of children and adults
(Giroux, 1997; McCarthy & Apple, 1988; McLaren, 2005). However, this may actually
be too general a statement, for the term “critical pedagogy” is something of a sliding
signifier that has been used in multiple ways to describe multiple things. Indeed, at
times critical pedagogy seems to have been used in such broad ways that it can mean
almost anything from cooperative classrooms with somewhat more political content
to a more robust definition that involves a thorough-going reconstruction of what education is for, how it should be carried out, what we should teach, and who should be
empowered to engage in it.
This more robust understanding – one in which the two of us are grounded – involves
fundamental transformations of the underlying epistemological and ideological
assumptions that are made about what counts as “official” or legitimate knowledge
and who holds it (Apple, 1979/2004, 2000). This involves a commitment toward social
transformation and a break with the comforting illusions that the ways in which our
societies and their educational apparatuses are organized currently can lead to social
justice. A more robust understanding of critical pedagogy is also based increasingly
in a realization of the importance of multiple dynamics underpinning the relations of
exploitation and domination in our societies. Issues surrounding the politics of redistribution (exploitative economic processes and dynamics) and the politics of recognition
(cultural struggles against domination and struggles over identity), hence, need to be
jointly considered (Fraser, 1997).
At the very root of these concerns is a simple principle. In order to understand and
act on education in its complicated connections to the larger society, we must engage
in the process of repositioning. That is, we must see the world through the eyes of
the dispossessed and act against the ideological and institutional processes and forms
that reproduce oppressive conditions (Apple, 1995). This repositioning concerns both
political and cultural practices that embody the principles of critical pedagogy; but it
also has generated a large body of critical scholarship and theory that has led to a fundamental

991
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 991–1007.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 973 / Book Page 992] ---

992

Apple and Au

restructuring of what the roles of research and of the researcher are (Smith, 1999; Weis
& Fine, 2004). Let us say more about what this implies.

The Tasks of Critical Educational Research and Action
In general, there are five tasks in which critical analysis (and the critical analyst) in
education must engage:
1. It must “bear witness to negativity”. That is, one of its primary functions is to
illuminate the ways in which educational policy and practice are connected to
the relations of exploitation and domination in the larger society.
2. In engaging in such critical analyses, it also must point to contradictions and
to spaces of possible action. Thus, its aim is to critically examine current realities with a conceptual/political framework that emphasizes the spaces in which
counter-hegemonic actions can be or are now going on.
3. At times, this also requires a redefinition of what counts as “research”. Here we
mean acting as “secretaries” to those groups of people and social movements
who are now engaged in challenging existing relations of unequal power or in
what elsewhere has been called “non-reformist reforms” (Apple, 1995; Apple &
Beane, 2007; Gandin, 2006).
4. In the process, critical work has the task of keeping traditions of radical work
alive. In the face of organized attacks on the “collective memories” of difference
and struggle, attacks that make it increasingly difficult to retain academic and
social legitimacy for multiple critical approaches that have proven so valuable in
countering dominant narratives and relations, it is absolutely crucial that these
traditions be kept alive, renewed, and when necessary criticized for their conceptual, empirical, historical, and political silences or limitations. This includes
not only keeping theoretical, empirical, historical, and political traditions alive
but, very importantly, extending and (supportively) criticizing them. And it also
involves keeping alive the dreams, utopian visions, and “non-reformist reforms”
that are so much a part of these radical traditions (Jacoby, 2005; Teitelbaum,
1993).
5. Finally, critical educators must act in concert with the progressive social movements their work supports or in movements against the rightist assumptions and
policies they critically analyze. Thus, scholarship in critical education or critical
pedagogy implies becoming an “organic intellectual” in the Gramscian sense
of that term (Gramsci, 1971). One must participate in and give one’s expertise to movements surrounding struggles over, following Nancy Fraser (1997),
what we have called a politics of redistribution and a politics of recognition. As
Bourdieu reminds us our intellectual efforts are crucial, but they “cannot stand
aside, neutral and indifferent, from the struggles in which the future of the world
is at stake” (2003, p. 11).
These five tasks are demanding and no one person can engage equally well in all of
them simultaneously. However, there is a long tradition of critical scholarship and

--- [PDF Page 974 / Book Page 993] ---

Politics, Theory, And Reality In Critical Pedagogy

993

critical cultural work along multiple dynamics that has sought to “bear witness to
negativity” and to recapture the collective memory of pedagogic work that is genuinely
counter-hegemonic. We shall examine the latter in the next section.

The Political Roots of Critical Pedagogy
Before the term “critical pedagogy” was coined by critical intellectuals and activists in
Latin America such as Paulo Freire, educators from various communities in the United
States and many other nations took up projects that would certainly be considered “critical”.
These early manifestations of critical pedagogy often challenged existing social relations
and power structures, raising substantive critiques of race, class, and gender relations as
well as offering radical alternatives to then-existing educational forms.
For instance, there exists a long-standing tradition in the African American and
Afro-Caribbean communities regarding the aims and nature of their education (Jules,
1992; Lewis, 1993, 2000). At least since the late 1800s, African American intellectuals and activists, for example, have engaged in struggles over the question of just
what the education of Blacks in the United States and the Caribbean should consist
of, particularly given the context of post-chattel slavery and current institutional racism in their countries. As Watkins (1993) explains, this struggle resulted in what he
terms several “Black Curriculum Orientations”: the “accommodationist” orientation – which advocated for the industrial education for African Americans, and was
advanced by community leaders like Booker T. Washington; the “Liberal Education”
orientation – which sought to develop students’ critical thinking with express intent
of increasing social, political, and cultural participation associated with leaders like
Reverend Alexander Crummell and W. E. B. DuBois (Lewis, 1993, 2000); and the
“Black Nationalist Outlook” – which included the nationalist, cultural nationalist, panAfricanist, and Black separatist movements associated with Marcus Garvey, Noble
Drew Ali, Elijah Muhammed, and Malcolm X (Watkins, 1993). In the Caribbean,
the uses of popular cultural forms kept alive what Livingston has called “diaspora
knowledge”. Models of popular education based on such cultural memories and forms
provided powerful resources to counter the dominant colonizing narratives and methods (Livingston, 2003; Jules, 1992).
Another example of counter-hegemonic activity, this time focused on critical public school organizing around issues of race and class, can be found in the history of
Harlem in New York City between 1935 and the early 1950s. The Harlem Committee
for Better Schools (HCBS), a coalition of parents associations, churches, and teacher
and community groups, came together to push for improved schools in Harlem, including free lunches, better working conditions for teachers, and better physical conditions
of the schools themselves. The HCBS is notable for several reasons. One is that it was
interracial. It originated largely with Jewish communists who were teaching in Harlem
schools, and garnered community support through the establishment of parents’ associations and chapters of the Teachers Union, allowing them to develop close ties with
most of the African American schoolteachers in Harlem. Another reason noteworthy
of the HCBS is that it represented educational reform, activism, and organizing across

--- [PDF Page 975 / Book Page 994] ---

994

Apple and Au

constituencies because it included teachers, members of the community, as well as
political organizations (Naison, 1985). These educational forms all represent different
responses to what historian Woodson (1990/1933) called the “mis-education of the
Negro” and signify substantial critical race critiques of public education.
Similar mobilizations in England and elsewhere and around multiple diasporic communities and across other equally oppressive dynamics of differential power involving
gender and class at this time and later on can be found. For example, there has been a
long tradition of critical feminist critiques of education in nations throughout the world.
In the United States, as elsewhere, in the early 1900s several notable women took lead
roles in organizing teachers – a predominantly female workforce (Apple, 1986) – for
improved working conditions. These included Grace Strahan in New York City and
Margaret Haley in Chicago. Others like Kate Ames, who in 1908 challenged the Male
Schoolmasters Association in California, fought against the imposition of patriarchy
in school organizational and pay structures (Weiler, 1989). Although there were justifiable criticisms that critical pedagogical work of this type marginalized women of
color, working-class women, and third-world women, at times these critical efforts did
cut across class lines in the United States, England, and elsewhere (Copelman, 1996;
Gomersall, 1997; Martin, 1999; Munro, 1998; Purvis, 1991).
The issue of class is crucial here. Class relations and struggles against exploitation,
thus, were not invisible in the history of critical education. In fact, they often constituted
a prime focus. Early manifestations of critical pedagogy in the United States reached
beyond power dynamics associated with the politics of race and gender, although at
times these dynamics were also ignored, much to the later detriment of the movement.
Between 1909 and 1911 in the United States, for example, over 100 Socialist school
officials were elected to various school districts across the country. Between 1900 and
1920, Socialist activists established more than 100 English-speaking Sunday schools
in 20 states, ranging in size from classes of 10 students to schools that enrolled more
than 600 students (Teitelbaum, 1993). While these Socialist Sunday schools were not
part of the public school system – and there were constant struggles over the politics
of official knowledge within the public school system as well (Kliebard, 1995) – they
represent a class-based, critical community response to public education in the United
States at the time. The attempts to build an education that actively sought to interrupt class dominance were pronounced across international borders as well. Socialist
educational responses to class relations were mirrored in England and Wales (see e.g.,
Simon, 1965, 1991) and have a powerful history as well in Latin America for example
(Bulhões & Abreu, 1992; Caldart, 2003; Torres, 1997).
This history of critical educational action has parallels in many other nations as well.
Indeed, throughout almost every region of the world, there are powerful movements
and examples of radical pedagogic efforts both within the formal educational sector
as well as in community literacy programs, labor education, antiracist and anticolonial mobilizations, women’s movements, and others (Van Vught, 1991). For example,
in South Korea during the first half of the twentieth century, evening schools were
established to counter the colonizing efforts of the Japanese occupiers. These counter-hegemonic practices have continued through the efforts of the Korean Teachers
Union to build curricula and models of teaching that are based on critical democratic

--- [PDF Page 976 / Book Page 995] ---

Politics, Theory, And Reality In Critical Pedagogy

995

principles. These efforts have had to overcome years of government repression (Ko &
Apple, 1999; Apple et al. 2003). Similar tendencies have recently been seen in Turkey,
where the government attempted to declare the largest teachers union illegal because
of the union’s commitment to both a more culturally responsive pedagogy and a critical
position on neoliberal policies in education and the economy (Egitim Sen, 2004).
So far we have given a brief set of examples of the efforts by some subaltern groups
to challenge dominance in education, efforts that became increasingly widespread even
in the face of what were serious and often extremely repressive consequences. But as we
mentioned earlier, critical education has also involved not only overt political and cultural
action, it has also both generated and been generated by a growing emphasis on research
that both documents reproductive forces in schools and points to possible avenues to challenge such reproductive forces. Thus, the entire range of critical pedagogical movements
and efforts has been complemented by the growth of multiple communities of scholarship
that have sought both to bear witness to negativity and document spaces for counterhegemonic work. At first, the task of bearing witness took center stage and it is to this we
now turn. Once again, in the limited space of a chapter of this size, all we can accomplish is
to provide a brief outline of the development, gains, and tensions within and between these
theoretical and empirical traditions.

Bearing Witness and Expanding Dynamics
The mid-to-late 1970s was a key period in the development of critical analyses of
education, particularly those that addressed how macro-level social, cultural, and economic structures related to school organization and experience (Whitty, 1985). The
central critical research focus of the time revolved around examining the relationship
between schools and social, economic, and cultural reproduction. While the tradition
of critically examining the content and processes of cultural reproduction was already
underway in the new sociology of education in England (Young, 1971), in critical
curriculum studies in the United States (Apple, 1971), and in the work of Bourdieu
and Passeron (1977) in France, much of the debate over this relationship crystallized
around Bowles and Gintis’ (1976) Schooling In Capitalist America. In their book,
Bowles and Gintis asserted a macro-level correspondence principle between the machinations and needs of capitalist production with that of the production of economic
class-based differences in and through education. Further still, this correspondence
was a relatively mechanical process, as the structure and outcome of schools seemed
to be completely determined by capitalist economics and the paid workplace alone in a
largely unmediated way (Cole, 1988). Indeed, as one of us has argued (Au, 2006), this
mechanistic analysis actually falls outside of the “traditionally” Marxist, dialectical
materialist tradition.
Even with its evident problems, Bowles and Gintis’ work did two things. First, it
helped establish the contemporary relevance of Marxist, neo-Marxist, and quasi-Marxist
analyses of schools and education (Whitty, 1985). Second, it sparked a contentious
debate, spurred a number of far-ranging critiques of economic determinist explanations of
inequality in education, and moved critical researchers to go even further in their analyses

--- [PDF Page 977 / Book Page 996] ---

996

Apple and Au

of cultural and ideological reproduction in schooling as well (Apple, 1979/2004; Au,
2006; Cole, 1988). The net result for critical theorists was to continue moving beyond
relatively simplistic versions of class-based analyses of schools came to the forefront
(Bernstein, 1977; Bourdieu, 1984) as did more explicit attention to issues of race and
gender, signalling the growing influence of British and French theories of the relationship among culture, social institutions, and education (Young, 1971).
At the same time, the mobilization and movements that came out of feminist and
racialized populations rightly challenged the emphasis only on class in critical work
in both social and economic reproduction. The very notion of reproduction itself was
dramatically challenged in the process (Giroux, 1983). Issues of contradiction and conflict within and between these dynamics became considerably more significant. Thus,
for instance, McCarthy and Apple (1988) advocated a “nonsynchronous parallelist”
framework for understanding issues of race, class, and gender, one that recognized the
intense and contradictory interactions within and among various dynamics of exploitation and domination and one that asked critical educators to be less reductive in their
assumptions. Hence, for example, it was argued that racial inequality could not solely
be reduced to economic inequality (Apple & Weis, 1983), a position that while not yet
fully developed, prefigures some of the immensely productive arguments of critical
race theory (Gillborn, 2005; Ladson-Billings & Tate IV, 1995).
In order to seek new theoretical directions that addressed the complexities that analyses such as Bowles and Gintis’ (1976) lacked, many critical scholars such as Giroux
turned to the works of Antonio Gramsci, Louis Althusser, Stuart Hall, and Raymond
Williams, as well as to the scholars from the Frankfurt School. Soon an entire series
of insightful analyses based on the relationship among lived culture, schooling, and
the economy developed. Stimulated in part by Willis’s (1977) classic book on youth
cultures, class relations, and masculinity, Learning to Labour and McRobbie’s (1978)
equally thoughtful insights into the ways in which gender and class dynamics interacted
inside and outside of schools, major gains quickly arose and continue to be made in
understanding the ways in which popular cultural forms and practices are dialectically
interconnected with classed, raced, and gendered/sexed practices and dynamics (Arnot,
2004; Epstein & Johnson, 1998; Willis, 1990). These analyses pointed to contradictory
spaces in peoples’ lived experience where cultural work might be able to bring youth
under more progressive leadership (Weis, 1990).
Yet, even with the immense gains that have been made in Marxist and neo-Marxist
understandings and in research based on feminist and antiracist theories, these traditions have come under serious scrutiny. Feminist poststructural approaches and
powerful analyses based on critical race theory have made provocative interventions
into the debates over all of this (Ladson-Billings & Tate IV, 1995; Luke & Gore, 1992).
A focus on indeterminacy, on capillary power, on power as productive not only reproductive, on identity and on its discursive “constitution” often based on Foucauldian
insights (Youdell, 2006) have made critical pedagogy a terrain of rich debate and conflict, giving it a vitality that keeps it alive and growing. While we may have worries
about the ways in which Foucauldian approaches have acted to tacitly depoliticize
the terrain of critical education, to make the world overly discursive, or to de-emphasize the ways in which structural forces actually have immense power (Apple, 1999),

--- [PDF Page 978 / Book Page 997] ---

Politics, Theory, And Reality In Critical Pedagogy

997

we do, however, wish to be respectful of the immense efforts in which deeply committed people have engaged to bring new insights and a broader sense of the political. This
has been especially the case in those nations where the traditional left seemed to have
lost some of its vitality (Dussel, 2004; Gimeno, 2005).
The international nature of these issues has been made more visible by the growth
of analyses based on postcolonial perspectives. Influenced by the work of such figures
as Edward Said, Gayatri Spivak, Ngugi Wa Thiong’o, and Homi Bhabha, postcolonial
theories have proven to be increasingly influential as critical educators attempt to come
to grips with the globalization of neoliberal and neoconservative policies and with
attempts to interrupt them (Burbules & Torres, 2000; Dimitriadis & McCarthy, 2001;
Singh, Kell, & Pandian, 2002). This is what makes the work and influence of Paulo
Freire, a person whose name became nearly synonymous internationally with critical pedagogy, so significant. We shall use the development and status of Freire’s as a
template to continue our discussion here.

Paulo Freire and the Development of Critical Pedagogy
The publication and distribution of Pedagogy of the Oppressed (Freire, 1974) was a
landmark event for critical pedagogy. Building on the postcolonial theories of Franz
Fanon, Amilcar Cabral, and Albert Memmi, and the revolutionary egalitarian vision of
Marx, Engels, and Lenin, Freire and his work are perhaps the most iconic and most
widely used amongst critical pedagogues worldwide. Pedagogy of the Oppressed alone
has sold over 750,000 copies since its publication in 1970, and it would not be an exaggeration to state that Freire represents the growth and influence of critical pedagogy
internationally, particularly in postcolonial contexts (McLaren, 2000).
Freire’s critical pedagogy revolves around the central idea of “praxis”, the unification of critical reflection and critical action. It seeks to be a pedagogy that enables
students and teachers to be “Subjects of their own history”. They become actors (and
it is a constant process of becoming) who can look at reality, critically reflect upon
that reality, and take transformative action to change that reality, thereby deepening
their consciousness and working toward a more just world. Making use of the teaching
methods of problem posing and dialogue, Freire’s critical pedagogy intends for all relationships of hierarchical power to be challenged, including that of the student–teacher
relationship. In this way, Freire’s critical pedagogy invites students and teachers to
become change agents both in their classrooms and in the world around them (Freire,
1974; Shor & Freire, 1987).
In Europe, Africa, Latin America, indeed the world over, the instantiation of critical
pedagogical theory and practice cannot be dealt with without emphasizing the profound influence of Freire and those who have followed in his path. Even in the United
States, a place where critical pedagogy has its own indigenous roots among people of
color in feminist educational activities (Hooks, 1994) and labor education (Horton,
1990), and where there has sometimes been great antipathy toward overtly radical
educational work, Freire’s influences can be seen (McLaren, 2000, 2005; Shor, 1992;
Rethinking Schools, 2005).

--- [PDF Page 979 / Book Page 998] ---

998

Apple and Au

While Freire’s importance to critical pedagogy would be difficult to overstate, his
work was not perfect, and many scholars have sought to critique it, both justifiably
(Weiler, 1991) and mistakenly (Bowers & Apffel-Marglin, 2005), or some measure
of both (see e.g., Ellsworth, 1989). For instance, Weiler (1991), points to Freire’s
lack of specific analysis regarding patriarchy and women’s oppression as they exist
in education generally and within his own theorizing specifically. Others, such as
Ladson-Billings (1997) have critiqued Freire’s critical pedagogy for not adequately
dealing with issues of race (see also Leonardo, 2005). Still others in the more critical
wings of the environmental movement have critiqued critical pedagogy for needing
to be “greened” – that is, needing to include environmental concerns as actively as it
has included social concerns (Au & Apple, 2007; McLaren, 2005). In regard to such
critiques Freire (1997) saw himself as providing “the possibility for the educator to use
my discussions and theorizing about oppression and apply them to a specific context”
(p. 309), which he felt could be applied to deal with racism and women’s oppression in
other contexts (Freire & Macedo, 1995). Indeed, Hooks (1994), Stefanos (1997), and
Weiler (1991) all find affinity between Freire, feminism, and antiracism. Regardless,
these critiques mirror the tensions within the critical educational research community
to which we pointed earlier.
All of this is not to say that critiques of Freire’s critical pedagogy are not warranted,
or that critical pedagogy itself (beyond just that of Freire’s conception) has no need for
growth. Much as some critical scholars and theorists have critiqued and pushed on the
edges of Freire’s work, feminists and critical race scholars have likewise struggled to
make certain that critical pedagogy generally addresses racism, sexism, the realities
of homophobia (Kumashiro, 2002), and other forms of power in education (Erevelles,
2005). Our position is that, when guided by an urge to collectively build a “decentered
unity” that tries to work across differences, critiques of critical pedagogy – feminist,
critical race, and ecological as well as others – are valuable because they generally help
the field evolve and strengthen it as a more viable means for making educational and
social change (Au & Apple, 2007).

Tensions and Contradictions
The picture we have given so far, however, is deceptively linear. Critical traditions are
complicated and filled with tensions and disagreements. Furthermore, there can be a loss
of memory of important gains and as well a return to reductive and essentializing perspectives that have serious deficiencies. For example, economic functionalist perspectives
strikingly similar to Bowles and Gintis (1976), but without their knowledge of economics,
did indeed return. Given the rise of postmodern and poststructural analyses in education in the 1990s, types of analyses which tended to evacuate class from their critical
frameworks – this pull to return to more economistic explanations of schooling and social
reproduction is somewhat understandable – led some Marxist and neo-Marxist scholars to essentially take ideological stands that stressed the importance of the materiality
of class relations (Cole et al., 2001). Unfortunately, in the process many of the gains
that had been made in the critical traditions in our understanding of the complexities of

--- [PDF Page 980 / Book Page 999] ---

Politics, Theory, And Reality In Critical Pedagogy

999

class relations within the state and between the state and civil society were lost – as if
Althusser, Poulantzas, Jessop, Dale, and others had never written anything of importance.
The immensely productive material on the relationship between ideology and identity;
on the relationship among culture, identity, and political economy; on the crucial impact
of politics; and on the power of social movements that cut across class lines, as well as a
number of other issues, is now either seen by some to be a rejection of key tenets of the
Marxist traditions (the plural is absolutely crucial here) or these advances are said to deal
with epiphenomenal concerns.
On both sides of the Atlantic, a number of people have mounted attacks on these
advances in the name of purifying “the” Marxist tradition of the taint of culturalism
and of the sin of worrying too much about, say, gender and race at the expense of class
(Kelsh & Hill, 2006). The British version of this simply does not understand the history of the United States and many other nations and the salience of race as a relatively
autonomous and extraordinarily powerful dynamic in the construction and maintenance of its relations of exploitation and domination (Gillborn, 2005). Like Britain,
in the United States there are crucial reasons to deal absolutely seriously with class
and the materialities of capitalist relations. At times, however, this aim of purification
seems to treat the realities of schools and other cultural and educational sites and the
struggles over them largely rhetorically. It is as if this particular version of Marxism
floats in the air above the material and ideological realities of the object of its analysis
– education. This is a distinct problem, since as we noted earlier, critical analyses that
are cut off from the actual movements surrounding schooling and the realities of pedagogy, curricula, evaluation, policy, and governance simply remain “on the balcony”,
disconnected from material life.
Let us hasten to stress that critical discussions of the social relations of production
and of class antagonism are crucial to our understanding of the limits and possibilities
of critical cultural and educational work. No critical analysis can be complete without
them. But they should be directly connected to something – for example, the specifics of such things as the labor process of teachers, the neoliberal and neoconservative
restructuring of our institutions of education, the racialization of educational policy
and practice, the politics of official and popular knowledge, the complex and contradictory effects of globalizations (there are different processes, not a single process, at
work here) on the ground, and so on.
The above point again speaks to the tasks of critical educational analyses and action
to which we pointed earlier. These tasks cannot be satisfied by rhetorical artifice, nor
can an overly simplistic rejection of the theoretical and political gains that have come
about because of the struggles of multiple movements be a satisfactory response. The
hard work of building a decentered unity that acts on many fronts remains. Can we
continue to build on the gains being made within the Marxist and neo-Marxist traditions and also integrate them with the intellectual tools and political insights within
the growing traditions of critical race theory, feminisms, poststructuralisms, postcolonialisms, queer theory, disability studies, critical environmentalisms, and similar
movements? Critical pedagogy must answer this question as we move deeper into the
twenty-first century.

--- [PDF Page 981 / Book Page 1000] ---

1000

Apple and Au

Critical Pedagogy and Conservative Social Movements
The vitality and the productive conflicts within critical pedagogy we have outlined
here do not guarantee success, however, even as they remain vitally necessary. Done
well, critical pedagogy offers analyses that provide theorists and practitioners a means
to intervene in ongoing, even increasing, social and educational inequalities. However,
critical pedagogy is also sometimes weakened by its tendency toward “romantic possibilitiarianism” (Whitty, 1974), its lack of a sophisticated strategic sense of the power of
social movements, and especially rightist social movements inside and outside of education in a considerable number of nations (Apple, 2006; Takayama & Apple, 2007).
This is a crucial weakness, since the interventions associated with critical pedagogy
are of even greater importance given the recent formation of extremely powerful rightist alliances in the United States, Japan, Australia, and so many other nations today.
As one of us (Apple, 2006) has argued, there exists an alliance of four major groups
in both the United States and an increasing number of other nations in the world. These
groups and the tactical alliance they have formed have varying degrees of power and
effectiveness, depending on regional and national histories and the balance of forces
in each local site. However, it has become evermore clearer that the forces behind this
alliance currently hold hegemonic power by creating connections between people’s
“good sense” and using such connections to disarticulate social groups and individuals
from their previous ideological and social commitments and rearticulate them to new
ideological and social commitments. This is a very creative process, one examined by
such scholars as Hall (1980b), Apple (1996; 2000; 2006; 2003), Apple and Buras (in
press), J. Torres (2001) and a number of others.
In many nations this alliance – part of what has been called “conservative modernization” (Apple, 2006; Dale, 1989–1990) – is made up of at least three and sometimes
four social forces – neoliberals, neoconservatives, authoritarian populist religious
conservatives (particularly powerful in the United States, Pakistan, India, Israel, and
elsewhere), and the professional and managerial middle class. Neoliberals are generally guided by a vision of a weak state, students as human capital, and the world as
a supermarket ripe for consumer (and producer) competition. In education, the neoliberal agenda manifests in closer linkages between schools and businesses as well as
the implementation of “free market” reforms such as school vouchers into education
policy. Neoconservatives, on the other hand, are usually guided by a vision of a strong
state that asserts control over knowledge, culture, and the physical body. In education,
neoconservativism manifests in national and statewide testing and curricula, content
standards, the heralding of the Western canon of knowledge, a relatively uncritical
patriotism, and moral education (Apple, 2006; Buras & Apple, in press).
Authoritarian populists are distinctly different from both neoliberals and neoconservatives. Their sensibility regarding social order comes directly from Biblical
authority and “Christian morality” (although at times its authority may come from
particular readings of the Koran or of, say, Hindu texts as in the Hindutva movement
in India). Inerrantist interpretations of sacred texts provide guidelines for family structure and gender roles – and for what counts as legitimate knowledge and action in
general. In education in the West, the authoritarian populist agenda manifests itself, for
instance, in struggles over the exclusion of evolution and the inclusion of creationism

--- [PDF Page 982 / Book Page 1001] ---

Politics, Theory, And Reality In Critical Pedagogy 1001

and intelligent design in science classes and in the rapid growth of home schooling, a
phenomenon now found in increasing number in countries such as Denmark, Norway,
Germany, Australia, England, Israel, and elsewhere (Apple, 2006).
The fourth part of this alliance is the professional and managerial new middle class.
This class fraction uses its technical expertise in management and efficiency to support systems of accountability, assessment, production, and measurement required
by neoliberal marketization and neoconservative control over knowledge (cf. Clarke
& Newman, 1997). In education, this class fraction supports and benefits from, for
instance, systems of high stakes, standardized testing and educational policies built
upon reductive forms of accountability as they provide the technical means to make
these systems and policies operational. They engage in complicated conversion strategies in which particular kinds of capital (cultural capital) are converted into social
and economic capital (Apple, 2006). While each group of this alliance has its own
internal dynamics and historical trajectories, together it has brought together different
social tendencies and political commitments and organized them under its own general
leadership, and thus represents a “conservative modernization” of social, cultural, economic, and educational policy in multiple nations, including those with a supposedly
social democratic or even socialist past (Apple, 2006, 2003).
There are two reasons to devote critical attention to these forces and movements.
First, whether we like it or not, these movements have been increasingly powerful in
transforming our core ideas about democracy and citizenship. The social, economic,
and educational effects of the policies that have come from the Right often have been
strikingly negative, especially for those who have the least in our own and other societies (Apple, 2006, 2003; Apple & Buras, 2006). And one of the major effects has been
to make it increasingly difficult to maintain the legitimacy of critical educational theories, policies, and practices.
Second, there is much to learn from the forces of the Right. They have shown that
it is possible to build an alliance of disparate groups and in the process to engage in a
vast social and pedagogic project of changing a society’s fundamental way of looking
at rights and (in)justice. Radical policies that only a few years ago would have seemed
outlandish and downright foolish are now accepted as commonsense. While we should
not want to emulate their often cynical and manipulative politics, we still can learn a
good deal from the Right about how movements for social change can be built across
ideological differences (Apple, 2006). Capitalism (as well as the historical regimes
surrounding race and gender, and the intersections and contradictions of these dynamics) plays a major part of the driving force behind these dynamics and movements, but
saying that says very little about why people join rightist mobilizations and movements
and how they might be convinced to join more progressive ones.

Critical Pedagogy and Progressive Social Movements
While it is crucial “bear witness,” to recognize and analyze the strength and the real
consequences of neoliberal and neoconservative policies (Apple, 2006) and to document
the ways in which new social movements can grow and have grown to counter such conservative movements and tendencies, it is also essential to understand the renegotiations

--- [PDF Page 983 / Book Page 1002] ---

1002

Apple and Au

that are made at regional and municipal levels. As Ball emphasizes, “policy is … a set
of technologies and practices which are realized and struggled over in local settings”
(1994, p. 10). Thus, rather than assuming that neoliberal and neoconservative policies
dictate exactly what occurs at the local level, we have to study the rearticulations that
occur on this level to be able to map out the creation of alternatives. It is here that the
critical research tradition(s), the role of the researcher as a “critical secretary”, and the
Freirean emphasis on the politics of interruption join.
Jean Anyon’s (2005) recent book, Radical Possibilities: Public Policy, Urban
Education and a New Social Movement, provides a case in point.1 It describes and
critiques the class and race structuring of schooling in the United States – —and at
the same time in the process ultimately offers possibilities for mobilizing around new
social movements. Anyon recognizes something others have argued at greater length
elsewhere – that it is social movements that are the driving forces behind a good deal of
social and educational transformation (Apple, 2000). Further, she directs our attention
to the historical and current progressive mobilizations that have made a difference in
society. She sets about examining the specifics of such social movements, documenting why and how they pushed this society, sometimes against great odds, toward a
greater commitment to social justice. In the process of telling the stories of different kinds of movements, Anyon also shows how, by participating in political actions,
new activist identities are formed by dispossessed groups at the same time as very
real progress is made culturally, educationally, politically, and economically (Apple &
Buras, 2006). But activist movements do not just help to transform economic, political, cultural, and educational institutions and policies. They also have profound effects
on other sympathetic organizations. Movements making what seem at the time to be
utopian and radical demands historically have pushed more mainstream organizations
along, creating a situation where they too must support fundamental changes in policies that are deeply discriminatory and harmful.
While we concur with Anyon’s claim that schools can play crucial roles in raising
critical questions about, and building movements to challenge, both the ways in which
the economy now functions unequally and the ways in which, say, the politics of race
operates in every one of our institutions, we are not romantic about these possibilities.
Schools are sites of conflict. They embody not only defeats, but also victories in many
countries. Educators in a number of nations have had to cope with the major transformations of ideology, policy, and practice to which we have pointed in this chapter. For
us, it is important to learn two things from the experiences of other educators who are
struggling against the forces of inequality. First, we can learn about the actual effects
of neoliberal and neoconservative policies and practices in education. Second, and
even more important, we can learn how to interrupt neoliberal and neoconservative
policies and practices and how to build more fully democratic educational alternatives
(Apple, 2006; Apple & Buras, 2006).
One of the best examples of this can currently be found in Porto Alegre, Brazil
(Gandin, 2006). The policies that were put in place by the Workers Party, such as
“participatory budgeting” and the “Citizen School”, have helped to build support for
more progressive and democratic policies there in the face of the growing power of
neoliberal movements at a national level. The Workers Party was able to increase its

--- [PDF Page 984 / Book Page 1003] ---

Politics, Theory, And Reality In Critical Pedagogy 1003

majority even among people who had previously voted in favor of parties with much
more conservative educational and social programs because it has been committed to
enabling even the poorest of its citizens to participate in deliberations over the policies
themselves and over where and how money should be spent. By paying attention to
more substantive forms of collective participation and, just as importantly, by devoting resources to encourage such participation, Porto Alegre has demonstrated that it
is possible to have a “thicker” democracy, even in times of both economic crisis and
ideological attacks from neoliberal parties and from the conservative press. Programs
such as the “Citizen School” and the sharing of real power with those who live in
favelas (shantytowns), as well as with the working and middle classes, professionals,
and others, provide ample evidence that thick democracy offers realistic alternatives to
the eviscerated version of thin democracy found under neoliberalism. The administrative, organizational, and curricular reforms – taken together – have helped to create
the beginnings of a new reality for the excluded. They have forged new leadership,
brought about the active engagement of the communities with the communities’ own
situations, and led to much more active participation in the construction of solutions to
these problems (Apple et al., 2003; Gandin, 2006).
Once again, we do not wish to be romantic here. There are problems in Porto Alegre
– political, economic, and educational (Gandin & Apple, 2003). However, in spite of
this, we are optimistic about the lasting impact of its democratizing initiatives and its
construction of a more diverse and inclusive education. By itself, the Citizen School
has been very successful in including an entire population that, if it were not for this
project, would be out of the schools and even further excluded in an already actively
excluding society. But the larger educative aspect of the Citizen School – empowering
impoverished communities where they are situated and transforming both the schools
and what counts as “official knowledge” there – is also of significant moment. The
transformations in Porto Alegre represent new alternatives in the creation of an active
citizenry – one that learns from its own experiences and culture – not just for now, but
also for future generations. For these very reasons, we believe that the experiences
of Porto Alegre have considerable importance not only for Brazil, but also for all of
us who are deeply concerned about the effects of the neoliberal and neoconservative restructuring of education and of the public sphere in general. There is much to
learn from the successful struggles there. Understanding these struggles, documenting
them, and actively supporting them can assist us all in our attempts to live out the tasks
of critical educational analysis and action that we noted at the outset of this chapter.

Conclusion
In this chapter, we have outlined an ambitious agenda. We have suggested a series
of interrelated tasks that are essential to the continual growth and success of critical
education: “bearing witness”; analyzing reality in such as way that spaces for counter-hegemonic work are identified; acting as “critical secretaries” for critical social
movements and practices; keeping alive multiple critical traditions in supportive but
also self-critical ways; and participating in the movements that aim at social and

--- [PDF Page 985 / Book Page 1004] ---

1004

Apple and Au

cultural transformations. Each of these is important, especially in a time both of conservative modernization and of attacks on an education worthy of the term critical.
But we have not been satisfied with simply enumerating a list of “what is to be done”.
We have also pointed to some of the roots of critical education in the practices of subalterns groups in earlier periods of educational actions. In addition, we have surveyed
the field of scholarship that has emerged over decades of work on the relationship(s)
among power, education, reproduction, and transformation. And we have detailed the
efforts of critical educators in policy and practice, in, for example, the work of Paulo
Freire and the continuing possibilities in Porto Alegre. When these examples are connected to many others – the democratic schools movement in the United States (Apple
& Beane, 2007), the critical pedagogical efforts now being built in schools and communities in places such as Spain, Venezuela, and elsewhere – and the list could go on
and on – there is a sense of immense ferment and vitality. None of this is easy. As in the
past, all of this requires constant struggles in both the state and civil society.
There is much more that could be and needs to be said, especially in detailing much
more about the iterations of each of these areas in nations throughout the world. We
are certainly aware of how much more needs to be documented both in terms of critical scholarship and critical policies and practices. However, perhaps this speaks to the
power of the multiple intellectual, political, and cultural/educational projects associated with critical pedagogy in all its forms. It says something about the spread of these
multiple resources and projects that no chapter – no matter how detailed – can do
justice to the labor of so many people and movements. Even in the face of the global
restructurings brought about by neoliberal and neoconservative theories, institutions,
and policies, we remain optimistic that counter-hegemonic movements inside and outside of education will continue to grow and to challenge dominance. Continuing to
take the tasks to which we pointed earlier seriously would be an important step in
making this a real possibility.

Notes
1 We need to openly state that a few of the books mentioned in this essay, particularly the books
by Anyon and Weis, are in a series that one of us (Apple) edits. But since the task we were asked
to take on in this essay was to give a sense of the state of critical work in the United States and
elsewhere, and these books are important statements about this, we felt that to exclude them would
have led to a major silence in such an account.

References
Anyon, J. (2005). Radical possibilities. New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W. (1971). The hidden curriculum and the nature of conflict. Interchange, 2(4), 27–40.
Apple, M. W. (1979/2004). Ideology and curriculum (3rd edn.). New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Apple, M. W. (1986). Teachers and texts. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Apple, M. W. (1995). Education and power (2nd edn.). New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W. (1999). Power, meaning, and identity. New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W. (2000). Official knowledge (2nd edn.). New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W. (2006). Educating the “right” way (2nd edn.). New York: Routledge.

--- [PDF Page 986 / Book Page 1005] ---

Politics, Theory, And Reality In Critical Pedagogy 1005
Apple, M. W., Aasen, P., Cho, M. K., Gandin, L. A., Oliver, A., Sung, Y-K., Tavares, H., & Wong, T-H.
(2003). The state and the politics of knowledge. New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W., & Beane, J. A. (Eds.). (2007). Democratic schools (2nd edn.). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Apple, M. W., & Buras, K. L. (Eds.) (2006). The subaltern speak. New York: Routledge.
Apple, M. W., & Weis, L. M. (1983). Ideology and practice in schooling. In M. W. Apple & L. M. Weis
(Eds.), Ideology and practice in schooling (pp. 3–33). Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Arnot, M. (2004). Male working-class identities and social justice. In N. Dolby & G. Dimitriadis (Eds.),
Learning to labor in new times (pp. 17–40). New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Au, W. (November 2006). Against economic determinism. Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies,
4(2). http://www.jceps.com/?pageID=article&articleID=66.Au, W., & Apple, M. W. (2007). Freire,
critical education, and the environmental crisis. Educational Policy.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1968). Rabelais and his world. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.
Ball, S. J. (1994). Education reform. Buckingham, England: Open University Press.
Bernstein, B. B. (1977). Class codes and control (2nd edn., vol. 3). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction. Cambridge, MA: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bourdieu, P. (2003). Firing back. New York: Verso.
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. (1977). Reproduction in education, society, and culture. Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Bowers, C. A., & Apffel-Marglin, F. (Eds.) (2005). Rethinking Freire. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (1976). Schooling in capitalist America (1st edn.). New York: Basic Books.
Bulhões, M. G., & Abreu, M. (1992). A luta dos professores gaúchos de 1979 a 1991. Porto Alegre, Brazil:
L&PM.
Buras, K. L., & Apple, M. W. (in press). Radical disenchantments. Comparative Education.
Burbules, N. C., & Torres, C. A. (2000). Globalization and education. New York: Routledge.
Caldart, R. S. (2003). Movimento sem terra: lições de pedagogia. Currículo sem Fronteiras, 3(1), 50–59.
Clarke, J., & Newman, J. (1997). The managerial state. London: Sage.
Cole, M. (Ed.) (1988). Bowles and Gintis revisted (1st edn.). Philadelphia, PA: The Falmer Press.
Cole, M., Hill, D. McLaren, P., & Rikowski, G. (2001). Red chalk. Northampton, England: The Institute for
Education Policy Studies.
Copelman, D. M. (1996). London’s women teachers. New York: Routledge.
Dale, R. (1989–1990). The Thatcherite project in education. Critical Social Policy, (9), 4–10.
Dimitriadis, G., & McCarthy, C. (2001). Reading & teaching the postcolonial. New York: Teachers College
Press.
Dussel, I. (2004). Educational restructuring and the reshaping of school governance in Argentina. In T. S.
Popkewitz & S. Lindblad (Eds.), Education restructuring (pp. 3–20). Greenwich, CT: Information Age
Publishing.
Egitim Sen (Ed.) (2004). Demokratic Egitim Kurultayi. Ankara, Turkey: Egitim Sen.
Ellsworth, E. (1989). Why doesn’t this feel empowering? Harvard Educational Review, 59(3), 297–324.
Epstein, D., & Johnson, R. (1998). Schooling sexualities. Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press.
Erevelles, N. (2005). Understanding curriculum as normalizing text. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 37(4),
421–439.
Fraser, N. (1997). Justice interruptus. New York: Routledge.
Freire, P. (1974). Pedagogy of the oppressed. Translated by M. B. Ramos. New York: Seabury Press.
Freire, P. (1997). A response. In P. Freire, J. W. Fraser, D. Macedo, T. McKinnon & W. T. Stokes (Eds.),
Mentoring the mentor (pp. 303–329). New York: Peter Lang.
Freire, P., & Macedo, D. (1995). A dialogue: Culture, language, and race. Harvard Educational Review,
65(3), 377–402.
Gandin, L. A. (2006). Creating real alternatives to neoliberal policies in education. In M. W. Apple & K. L.
Buras (Eds.), The subaltern speak (pp. 217–242). New York: Routledge.
Gandin, L. A., & Apple, M. W. (2003). Educating the state, democratizing knowledge. In M. W. Apple (Ed.),
The state and the politics of knowledge (pp. 193–220). New York: RoutledgeFalmer.

--- [PDF Page 987 / Book Page 1006] ---

1006

Apple and Au

Gillborn, D. (2005). Education policy as an act of white supremacy. Journal of Education Policy, 20(4),
485–505.
Gimeno, J. S. (2005). La educacion gue aun es posible. Madrid: Morata.
Giroux, H. A. (1983). Theories of reproduction and resistance in the new sociology of education. Harvard
Educational Review, 53(3), 257–293.
Giroux, H. A. (1997). Pedagogy and the politics of hope. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Gramsci, A. (1971). Selections from the prison notebooks.Translated by Q. Hoare & G. N. Smith. New York:
International Publishers.
Hall, S. (1980b). Popular democratic vs. authoritarian populist. In A. Hunt (Ed.), Marxism and democracy
(pp. 150–170). London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress. New York: Routledge.
Horton, M. (1990). The long haul (1st edn.). New York: Doubleday.
Jacoby, R. (2005). Picture imperfect. New York: Columbia University Press.
Jules, D. (1992). Education and social transformation in Grenada, 1979–1983. Dissertation: University of
Wisconsin.
Kelsh, D., & Hill, D. (2006). The culturalization of class and the occluding of class consciousness.
Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies, 4(1). Retrieved August 8, 2006 from http://www.jceps.
com/?pageID=article&articleID=59.
Kliebard, H. M. (1995). The struggle for the American curriculum 1893–1958 (2nd edn.). New York:
Routledge.
Ko, J.-H., & Apple, M. W. (1999). Teachers, politics, and democracy. Education and Social Justice, 2(1),
67–73.
Kumashiro, K. (2002). Troubling education. New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1997). I know why this doesn’t feel empowering. In P. Freire, J. W. Fraser, D. Macedo,
T. McKinnon & W. T. Stokes (Eds.), Mentoring the mentor (pp. 127–141). New York: Peter Lang.
Ladson-Billings, G., & Tate IV, W. F. (1995). Towards a critical race theory of education. Teachers College
Record, 97(1), 47–68.
Leonardo, Z. (Ed.) (2005). Critical pedagogy and race. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. L. (1993). W. E. B. DuBois: Biography of a race, 1868–1919. New York: Henry Holt.
Lewis, D. L. (2000). W. E. B. DuBois: The fight for equality and the American century. New York: Henry
Holt.
Livingston, G. (2003). Chronic silencing and struggling without witness. Unpublished dissertation. Madison,
WS: University of Wisconsin.
Luke, C., & Gore, J. (Eds.). (1992). Feminisms and critical pedagogy. New York: Routledge.
Mannheim, K. (1936). Ideology and utopia. New York: Harvest Books.
McCarthy, C., & Apple, M. W. (1988). Race, class and gender in American educational research. In L. M.
Weis (Ed.), Class, race, and gender in American education (pp. 9–39). Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press.
McLaren, P. (2000). Che Guevara, Paulo Freire, and the pedagogy of revolution. Lanham, MD: Rowman
& Littlefield.
McLaren, P. (2005). Capitalists and conquerors. New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
McRobbie, A. (1978). Working class girls and the culture of femininity. In Women’s Studies Group (Ed.),
Women take issue (pp. 96–109). London: Hutchinson of London.
Morley, D., & Chen, K.-H. (Eds.) (1996). Stuart Hall. New York: Routledge.
Munro, P. (1998). Subject to fiction. Buckingham, England: Open University Press.
Naison, M. (1985). Communists in Harlem during the depression. New York: Grove Press. Purvis, J. (1991).
A history of women’s education in England. Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press.
Rethinking Schools (2005). Homepage. Retrieved July 11, 2005, from http://www.rethinkingschools.org
Shor, I. (1992). Empowering education (1st edn.). Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Shor, I., & Freire, P. (1987). A pedagogy for liberation. South Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey.
Simon, B. (1965). Education and the labour movement, 1870–1920. London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Simon, B. (1991). Education and the social order, 1940–1990. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Singh, M., Kell, P., & Pandian, A. (2002). Appropriating English. New York: Peter Lang.
Smith, L. T. (1999). Decolonizing methodologies. New York: Zed

--- [PDF Page 988 / Book Page 1007] ---

Politics, Theory, And Reality In Critical Pedagogy 1007
Stefanos, A. (1997). African women and revolutionary change. In P. Freire, J. W. Fraser, D. Macedo, T.
McKinnon & W. T. Stokes (Eds.), Mentoring the mentor (pp. 243–271). New York: Peter Lang.
Takayama, K., & Apple, M. W. (2007). The cultural politics of borrowing. Unpublished manuscript.
Teitelbaum, K. (1993). Schooling for ‘good rebels’. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Torres, C. A. (1990). The politics of nonformal education in Latin America. New York: Praeger.
Torres, C. A. (1997). Pedagogia da luta. São Paulo: Papirus.
Torres, J. S. (2001). Educacion en tiempos de neoliberalismo. Madrid: Morata.
Van Vught, J. (1991). Democratic organizations for social change. New York: Bergin & Garvey.
Watkins, W. H. (1993). Black curriculum orientations. Harvard Educational Review, 63(3), 321–338.
Weiler, K. (1989). Women’s history and the history of women teachers. Journal of Education, 171(3),
9–30.
Weiler, K. (1991). Freire and a feminist pedagogy of difference. Harvard Educational Review, 61(4),
449–474.
Weis, L. M. (1990). Working class without work. New York: Routledge.
Weis, L. M., & Fine, M. (2004). Working method. New York: Routledge.
Whitty, G. (1974). Sociology and the problem of radical educational change. In M. Flude & J. Ahier (Eds.),
Educability, schools, and ideology (pp. 112–137).
Whitty, G. (1985). Sociology and school knowledge. London: Metheun & Co.
Willis, P. (1977). Learning to labor. New York: Columbia University Press.
Willis, P. (1990). Common culture. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Woodson, C. G. (1990/1933). The mis-education of the negro. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, Inc.
Youdell, D. (2006). Impossible bodies, impossible selves. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer.
Young, M. F. D. (1971). Knowledge and control. London: Collier-Macmillan.

