================================================================================
Chapter 64: The Future of Intercultural Studies in Multicultural Societies
Author(s): Jagdish S. Gundara
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 1009–1026
PDF Pages: pp. 989–1006 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 989 / Book Page 1009] ---

64
THE FUTURE OF INTERCULTURAL STUDIES IN
MULTICULTURAL SOCIETIES
Jagdish S. Gundara

Most of the diverse or multicultural societies have not succeeded in eliminating discrimination and inequalities within their national boundaries. Many of the educational
initiatives have floundered and failed to make any significant difference to the educational outcomes of the poorer groups from diverse groups in society. The capacity
of many national systems to resolve internal socio-economic differences and reduce
disparities has been increasingly diminished as the powers of national governments
to provide constitutional protection to their citizens has decreased. In external terms
economic globalisation has in many cases eroded the powers of national public institutions and there are diminishing levels of trust in communities and increasing levels
of ethnic nationalism in white Anglo-Saxon Protestant America or in an India marked
by Hindu religious fundamentalism. Intercultural initiatives and citizenship and civic
education in most countries draw on the received wisdom of the past. The chapter recognises these current dilemmas but will argue that it is not necessary to go forward into
the future on the basis of the received wisdom of the past. For instance, in the United
States it is not possible to go forward using the purely ‘formal’ institutional conception
of democracy, as an expression of filial piety to America’s Founding Fathers based on
individualistically conceived liberty. The French Republic also needs to ensure that
the public culture and institutions are inclusive of the minority and ‘other’ cultures.
This is necessary to ensure that the corrosive aspects of racism and xenophobia do
not undermine trust in democratic institutions and processes remain vibrant and do
not stultify. This is because a purely formal democracy is culturally unsustainable,
ideologically hollow and can be operationally subverted. To make democratic institutions more viable in the United States and other countries around the world a deeper
conception of democracy that expresses the experience-based deeper conception of
democracy is needed. Such culturally based democratic values would be inclusive of
best values drawn from diverse groups at the local level and strengthen mutualities
of community life which give validity to de Tocqueville’s analytic concept ‘habits of
the heart’ (Green, 1999, p. vi).
This chapter will examine the ways in which the national might be able to act differently within the regional, continental and international legal and institutional
frameworks. It will refer to policies, especially as they pertain to educational rights and
entitlements of citizens. Institutions like the European Commission, the Council of

1009
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1009–1026.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 990 / Book Page 1010] ---

1010

Gundara

Europe and UNESCO have a major stake in these fast-changing times. The continental
and regional organisations like the Organisation of African Unity and Meracuer may
have similar obligations within those regions. Within the Commonwealth, the Heads
of Government meeting in Kampala have addressed the issue of the transformation of
societies to achieve greater political, economic and human development which can
use the stronger Commonwealth networks in education to contribute to these agendas
(Commonwealth Secretariat, 2007).
Modern states confront increasingly serious challenges within their education systems at the present time. In general terms, social exclusion and inequality on various
indices present a threat to the viability of the national political and social systems
because of the ways in which such exclusion leads to injustice being institutionalised
in many societies. Social and public policy-makers and professionals have a role to
play in turning social exclusions into social inclusions using legal and constitutional
powers in democratic contexts. Such professionals, however, confront a number of
problems. For educators, these include the ways in which issues of difference and
diversity have been conceptualised within the recent past, and how in some contexts
difference has become construed as a deficit. Such conceptual distortions have further
diminished the possibilities of improving the educational outcomes of marginalised
and poorer groups in society and this chapter will address some of these issues.
Some of the most intractable problems are found in societies where racism, xenophobia and chauvinism have deepened inequalities in diverse communities which have
thwarted ambitions of groups, communities and individuals who feel inter-generationally
or permanently excluded. Hence, issues of how to bring about equity and deal with
dominant and exclusive ‘national’ knowledge systems require sustained consideration
and a critical appraisal. With the failures of many modern states to provide equity
many groups have reverted to more singular and ethnic or religious identities and there
are very few (if any) well-considered educational measures to address these issues
internationally. Educators need to consider how the failure of the Enlightenment to
deal with issues of racism and xenophobia has contributed to the disenchantment with
national democratic and constitutional systems and international organisations. The
reversion of groups to ethnic and religious identity in singular terms also necessitates
a Renaissance and enlightenment amongst all faiths. This is necessary so that they
can be effective in equipping believers to function as full citizens in the modern world
with all the complexities of the cultural, social, economic and political realities. Single
and singularised identities and communities do not have the wherewithal to cope
with the new and emerging global inequalities and societal complexities. To address
issues of global justice it is necessary to develop cosmopolitan public institutions and
civic citizens (New Humanist, 2006). Secular humanism is now deeply entrenched in
societies following long struggles waged by the subordinated and oppressed groups.
Nevertheless, literalist religions are trying to reverse these victories in various parts of
the world and replace them with religiously based societal values, mores, norms and
institutions (The Economist, 2007, pp. 3–20; Gundara, 2000a).
Education systems can address some of these challenges and educators need to carefully consider these issues, and devise appropriate policies to deal with a range of
problems confronted by social systems. This process needs to be part of much broader

--- [PDF Page 991 / Book Page 1011] ---

The Future of Intercultural Studies 1011

public policy measures to obviate some of the current crises, which have led societies to fragment as has happened in south-east Europe, parts of central Africa and
Somalia. Long-term conflicts also currently afflict countries like Afghanistan where
international agencies and countries like Britain and Canada are trying to rebuild state
institutions and structures especially schools for girls. Since 2001, 6 million children
are in schools and over a third of them are girls (DFID, undated).
From an intercultural perspective and within the field of education a number of
current and future challenges will be discussed in this chapter. These include the liberalisation of the public education systems on the grounds of meeting the prospects
and problems presented by economic globalisation. There will be a discussion on the
inadequate concepts and frameworks used in the field of intercultural education and
how the practice-led initiatives have increased educational inequalities, knowledge
centrism, racism and religious intolerance. This situation is exacerbated by the inadequacy of current teacher education (training) and the powerful negative role that the
increasingly proliferated, privatised and commercial media plays in diverse societies.

The International Context: Globalisation, Diversity
and Uniformity
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Article 26.1 provided for the right to
education for everyone and is one of the building blocks of human rights more generally. Article 26.2 states:
Education shall be directed to the full development of human personality and to
the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall
promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations, racial and
religious groups, and shall further the activities of the United Nations for the
maintenance of peace. (Batelaan, & Coomans, 1999)
This constitutes a good definition for intercultural education but it remains far from a reality
because at least one billion people have largely been by-passed by aspects of globalisation
such as the right to education (Power, 2000). The right to education from the Universal
Declaration is translated into a more precise form in the International Covenant on Social
and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In the
1980s and 1990s the human rights agenda has broadened with recognition of development
rights, environmental rights and a more precise formulation of children’s rights. The UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child devotes two articles, 28 and 29, to the rights to
education and the aims of education (WCCD, 1995).
The Dakar Framework for Action committed signatories to ‘ensuring that by 2015
all children, particularly girls and children in difficult circumstances, and those belonging to ethnic minorities, have access to and complete, free and compulsory primary
education of good quality’. In this sense the challenge for UNESCO’s Education for
All (EFA) is not just limited to the provision of basic and primary education in poor
countries but also quality education to all, which by definition has to be intercultural in

--- [PDF Page 992 / Book Page 1012] ---

1012

Gundara

both the richer and poorer countries. The UNESCO document ‘Education and Cultural
Diversity’ established a principal priority for the year 2002–2003 and stressed that:
UNESCO will encourage issues involving values education in multilingual
and multicultural societies to be included within national EFA action plans.
(UNESCO, 2002)
This focus made the Dakar Framework for Action more intercultural by including provision for the nomadic, traveller and gypsy populations. In the Americas these groups
include the Inuit, Maya and Quechua peoples. The importance of EFA for industrialised countries in many parts of the world has been to ensure that the educational
content is appropriate to the likely future international context. In this sense unless
education is intercultural it cannot provide equality and quality education for all. The
provision of educational measures which is by definition intercultural and leads to
greater levels of equality has been criticised as ‘watering down’ or lowering the quality
of education. Such critiques need to be addressed to ensure that intercultural policies
and practices do not lose credibility, since quality and equality in education go hand in
hand (UNESCO, 2003). Education at the broadest level requires a partnership between
statutory and formal education institutions within the public sector; with the private
sector and voluntary sectors to provide with support for enhancing the informal educational provision for the whole community.
Moreover, there are several other hurdles on the way. Symbolic of such hurdles is
the lack of action following the two major UN Conferences held in Durban on Racism
and in Johannesburg on the Environment. Many member states of the UN marginalised the centrality of these issues, and since the Conference little corrective action has
been taken at national levels. This has represented a lack of political will at both the
national and international levels. Certain thinkers have even become despondent about
the human condition. For instance, John Gray in his pessimistic and depressing book
Straw Dogs indicated that little can be done to change the state of the world. He forcefully makes the following point:
At present there are nearly two hundred sovereign states in the world. Most are
unstable, oscillating between weak democracy and weak tyranny; many are rusted
through with corruption, or controlled by organised crime, while regions of the
world – much of Africa, Southern Asia, Russia, and the Balkans the Caucasus,
and parts of South America – are strewn with corroded or collapsed states. At
the same time, the world’s most powerful states – the United States, China and
Japan – will not accept any fundamental limitation on their sovereignty. They are
jealous of their freedom of action, if only because they have been enemies in the
past and know they may become so in the future. (Gray, 2002, p. 12)
The attempts by the European Union to embed national sovereignties in multiple layers of rules, norms and regulations are an attempt to “obviate the violent history of the
first half of the 20th century as the result of unbridled exercise of national sovereignty”
(The Guardian, 7/9/2002). It is to be hoped that as a result of integrative processes

--- [PDF Page 993 / Book Page 1013] ---

The Future of Intercultural Studies 1013

intercultural relations in twenty-first-century Europe will improve especially if notions
of ‘fortress Europe’ in all areas of public and social policies including education are
obviated. Reduction of inequality between and within richer and poorer countries can
help reduce the likelihood of Europe being constructed as a fortress. Within Europe
high levels of discrimination and inequalities between the immigrant and poorer communities has the potential for intercultural conflict and violence. Fortress mentalities
and societies exist in most parts of the world and in socially diverse communities act
as inhibitors for the provision of equalities in education. Measures to make education
more inclusive and the provision of skills-based learning can obviate some of the brick
walls which thwart ambitions. The DFID report on Afghanistan does indicate a shift in
this direction especially in the education for girls and skills for women (DFID).
Therefore, some of the exclusive rather than inclusive tendencies referred to above
are mirrored in the way in which intercultural relations and understandings at one
level are being enhanced in some societal contexts and levels. In other societies and at
many other levels intercultural conflicts on the grounds of racial, religious, linguistic,
class and nationality are being exacerbated. This is the case in states in south-east
Europe and Somalia where the governments have difficulties in curbing the literalist
instruction (which of course is not very ‘educational’) is provided by many ethnically
based institutions. There are, however, marked differences between an ‘ethnically’
diverse south-east Europe and the fragmentation based on wide-ranging differences,
and Somalia where the ‘ethnic’ differences are very few. Therefore, it can be suggested
that the narcissism of small differences in Somalia has been its continuing ruin.
At the global level many of these issues are not only a result of contemporary globalisation but also of the historical legacies of nationalism and the empires of the
nineteenth century. If international initiatives especially of the United Nations agencies fail to succeed in bridging gaps then increasingly larger numbers of member states
and their governments will have to deal the fragmentation of societies because of the
resultant inequalities, polarisations, conflicts and unregulated competition. This section concludes by arguing that the gaps between people remain because even though
increased multiculturalism within polities creates possibilities of better intercultural
relations, it also increases the prospects of intercultural conflicts unless institutions of
the state take positive measures including educational ones to foster equalities and to
minimise situations of conflict.

Issues and Concepts
One of the problems arising from the complex range of issues causing intercultural
conflicts is that there is very little agreement about the use of terms or a framework
of analysis. In many English-speaking countries, some academics argue that the term
‘multiculturalism’ has been racialised. There is some truth to this assertion; for example, activists and others used issues of discrimination and diversity to only tackle
discrimination against themselves and their particular communities. The ways in which
policies arising from such a narrowly defined political stance were devised tended to
suggest that only certain groups faced exclusion and discrimination. For instance, in

--- [PDF Page 994 / Book Page 1014] ---

1014

Gundara

Britain activists from Asian and Caribbean communities did not consider to make
common cause with the Jewish, Roma and other minorities to deal with educational
inequalities. Many anti-racist policies in education, for instance, tended to stress discrimination against certain immigrant minorities but ignored, for example, the poorer
sections of the dominant community and other nationalities and minorities. Hence,
there have been interminable debates about the ‘politically correct’ nature of such
policies which seemingly favoured and privileged certain groups (Gundara, 2000b, pp.
105–127; Batelaan & Gundara, 1992).
The essentialist rhetoric of such policies has led to some communities being
designated as ‘the other’ and furthered the creation of binary oppositions (e.g., the
majority–minority; immigrant–citizen; white/black; winners–losers; belongers– nonbelongers). These oppositional definitions as well as the hierarchical positioning of
groups within societies have detracted from societies developing inclusive institutions
based on intercultural policies. Measures to experience the educational process as part
of the growing up and learning in a community need to be revisited. This can be done
along the lines of an African adage ‘it takes a whole village to educate a child’. At the
present time however, the village itself may need re-educating thus necessitating the
need for lifelong learning. Lifelong and community-wide learning has to have both
formal and informal dimensions and needs to enhance the capacity building of communities to be sustainable at local levels. The provision of these educational measures
within plural and diverse communities is a human right (Gundara, 1992; Batelaan &
Gundara, 1992). The role of community education in London provides a positive way
forward for such educational initiatives (Gundara & Jones, 1990, pp. 142–154). Further
education colleges in Britain promote common values but in many institutions the
political far right and religiously oriented influences pose a threat to the development
of shared values amongst young peoples (The Education Guardian, 27/11/2007).
There is also another more complex issue of difference and diversity especially
since it is sometimes suggested that we should celebrate diversity. This, rather superficial notion of celebration does not take cognisance of the way in which difference
has been construed as a deficit and as a way of stigmatising groups. For instance, celebrating linguistic diversity without developing multilingual policies can heighten the
lack of access to the curriculum and widen educational inequalities. Hence, policies,
practices and strategies for developing linguistic competences of students are important
(Gundara, 2005, pp. 237–251).
The UNESCO collaboration on the B@bel Initiative to promote multilingualism on
the Internet as well as preventing linguistic segregation and protection of languages
which may disappear is an important development. Initiatives in the fields of interculturalism and multiculturalism need to mirror some of the developments discussed in
UNESCO’s paper ‘Education in a Multilingual World’ (UNESCO, 2003).
Many states especially monolingual English-speaking countries have not taken issues
of linguistic or cultural diversity seriously. They have colluded with the racialisation of
multiculturalism because it was viewed as a way of ensuring that social diversity was
seen as merely a result of post-Second World War migration, particularly for people
who were migrating from countries which had been previously colonised. For instance,
in Britain, statements, like the ones made by the Department of Education and Science

--- [PDF Page 995 / Book Page 1015] ---

The Future of Intercultural Studies 1015

in 1965, in the ‘School Curriculum’ document that ‘our society has become multicultural’,
could only be explained as an attempt to ignore the more complex issues. In official governmental documents the questions about the historically based multicultural
nature of British society were not followed up (Gundara, 1993, pp. 18–31). If one uses
the taxonomy of linguistic, religious, social class and territorial (Hans, 1949) indices
of diversity, then British society has historically been multicultural. The devolution
of power to Scotland and Wales, which has largely been peaceful, is evidence of the
historical multinational nature of the British state.
Intercultural educational policies in European countries until recently have been
informed by a century-old history of international and local perspectives (CIDREE,
2002). Within this diachronic dimension, the dominant cultures of Britain and other
European states are themselves the products of centuries of past and present interactions
between peoples, their cultures and the state. The colonial empires and subordinated
nationalities of the European states are an important part of these interactions. Thus,
contemporary patterns of social and cultural inequality are underpinned by the historical legacies of nationalism, imperialism and colonialism. These are however, very
complex issues for young people to understand in schools and it is important that they
are written in a way which is comprehensible to young people in schools (Gundara
& Hewitt, 1999).
One hundred years ago, after their near defeat in the Boer War, the English government set up the Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration to enquire
into the causes of this failure. Almost inevitably, their message was eugenicist, in
that the lower orders were ‘breeding’ and would swamp the so-called ‘polite society’.
Indeed, the genesis of the social class classification, copied worldwide, was the 1911
Registrar-General’s attempt to combat this position. But education was only seen as
a means of minimum social inclusiveness. On a positive note, the provision of school
meals for all was recommended by this committee.
Deficit and disadvantage models have continued to inform intercultural educational measures. In Britain this meant that those from social classes 4 and 5, using the
Registrar-General’s classification, were considered ‘culturally deprived’ or ‘culturally
disadvantaged’. The conservatives in this debate have continued to postulate an inferiority based on genetic factors. The liberals have tended to stress that the disadvantaged
were the result of past discrimination on sex, race or class group. The IQ debate on
both sides of the Atlantic has further continued to generate controversy, while in the
ex-Communist states, policies to deal with minorities as being defective and therefore requiring special schools have disadvantaged children from the Roma and other
minority communities (Tomasevski, 2003; Wilson, 2002).
This legacy of social inequalities formed the backdrop of the riots in 2000 in the
northern British cities of Bradford, Oldham and Burnley. The riots involved both poor
whites as well as the blacks, and the inequalities were graphically pointed out in the
Cantle, Ritchie and Ouseley Reports (Cantle, 2002; Ritchie, 2001; Ousley, 2001).
The French Enlightenment resulted in the idea of the ‘nation’ which was based on
a social vision of society, and following the French Revolution, was based not on the
ideas of some biological myth of ancestors but on the notions of a social contract. This
nation state included Alsatians and Occitanians, who did not speak French, as well as

--- [PDF Page 996 / Book Page 1016] ---

1016

Gundara

Jews. With the abolition of slavery in San Domingo, black African peoples were also
considered to be ‘citizens’ (Amin, 1997). Hence, the nation was not an affirmation of
the particular but an expression of the universal. While the securing of human rights
was one of the core objectives of the French Revolution, the rights were applied selectively, with women being denied full citizenship rights. The assimilation of ‘other’
peoples and the abandoning of local languages in favour of the French language were
additional indicators that the nation state was to take priority. The role of building the
modern French nation around the new cultural and and linguistic unity was assumed
by the school system under the Republic. The legacy of officially nullifying and overriding differences has had manifestations in the twenty-first century. In 2005 and 2006,
French cities were rocked by riots of young, poor, and disenfranchised French citizens, largely from minority and North African backgrounds. Demonstrations in nearly
half of the 88 French universities have been indicative of the underlying barriers to
equity and the rates of unemployment reaching 21.7% for the under 25. These rates
are high for those who are black or wear head scarves (The Guardian, 10/3/2006).
The challenge for educators is how to use this complex legacy of the universal and the
particular, which provides substantive basis for citizenship, within the unequal nation
state. In the economically unequal societies the basis of difference is a barrier to developing notions of similarity and mutualities based on greater levels of equality.The riots
in France in 2006 and 2007 represent a watershed warning to ensure that integrative
public and social policies, including education, are essential if social and educational
inequalities are to be reversed. The Chirac government did not take these events seriously enough and the death of two young people in Villiers-le-Bel have been worse
than the riots of 2006 and spread to Toulouse. The author of this chapter on behalf of
the Evens Foundation presented an Award for work on intercultural relations one week
before the riots (Even Foundation, 2007). The school in and of itself is not sufficient
to tackle social exclusions at the wider level. In other countries like Britain there is
also a legacy of such divisions and divides, and issues of institutional racism are now
very high on the agenda with the implementation of the Race Relations Amendment
Act (2000) which requires both public and private institutions not to discriminate. The
question is whether these measures are sufficient or they they too weak? What are the
other things that most states ought to be doing in public and social policy and practices
to reduce discrimination and remove high levels of inequalities?

Future for Intercultural Studies
The largely peaceful and democratic transition to devolution in Wales and Scotland
suggests that there is a positive role for interculturalism, especially as the Scottish
and the Welsh peoples recognise their own treatment by the dominant English nation.
Yet, public and social policies and practices are necessary to avoid the ghettoisation of
communities. This is the case because both have guaranteed human rights legislation
and follow a constitutional path in dealing with minority communities and especially
their linguistic rights. Nevertheless, one cannot be sanguine that in devolved polities
like Scotland there is no racism. A report commissioned by the Scottish Executive

--- [PDF Page 997 / Book Page 1017] ---

The Future of Intercultural Studies 1017

indicated that 25% of Scots were racists and about half of them did not consider the
use of terms like ‘Paki’ to be racist (Commission for Racial Equality, 2002).
There are also lessons to be learned from the conflict and conflict resolution in
Northern Ireland which now has the potential of bringing British and Irish polities closer
together after the recent political agreements. The Centre for Cross Border Studies has
been bringing together educators from both the north and the south to develop greater
levels of practical institutional and educational cooperation. This is not an easy task
because politics and identity issues still play a powerful role. Hence, students from the
north see the south as ‘a different country’ and want to complete their education ‘on the
mainland’, while the other sees the north as ‘not quite the same … it’s easier to stick with
people you know best’ (Centre for Cross Border Studies, 2007).
Concepts and analyses need to be developed which draw upon the historical and contemporary aspects of conflict and cooperation in socially diverse societies and which
are relevant in developing an inclusive curriculum, and intercultural citizenship education. Within complex societies where technological changes may be leading to high
levels of unemployment, greater stress needs to be placed on citizenship engagement
with democratic institutions. The need to deepen democracy entails a critical appraisal
of issues of societal concern and the development of community participation as well
as curricular and pedagogic changes to enhance such collaboration.
Also, it is not only what children are taught and what they learn but also their actual experiences at school, which contribute to their understanding of their rights and responsibilities
as future citizens. So, a democratic school ethos is important and this needs to be experienced through active citizenship and engagement in the context of the wider community.
For the older groups the role of youth work, further and other formal and non-formal lifelong learning are all important in ensuring that sustained educational experiences enhance
the skills, knowledge and abilities of citizens and capacities to improve their life chances in
the context of diverse communities (Bourne & Gundara, 1999).

Barriers to Equity
In many societies another dilemma needs to be dealt with, because the old solidarities
based on social class as antecedents of a class-divided society, whilst providing a clear
role for different groups in society created the divisions between classes that have been
the subject of confrontations over the last 150 years. The divides based on race, religion and gender have led to the creation of ‘seige mentalities’ and siege communities
which thwart the safety and security of many communities around the world that have
become socially divided. Instead of social cohesion in these liquid times as Bauman
describes them, the communities are becoming divided (Bauman, 2007). Now that
there is no preordained class basis to solidarity the younger generation is faced with
much clearer patterns of polarisation by being divided into winners and losers without
any class referent. This poses a new challenge for intercultural education because of
the exclusivity of identities. Of course the reverse is also true if the winners refuse to
acknowledge any debt to society especially as groups from different backgrounds do
not share solidarities or a set of resemblances. Intercultural education, therefore, has a

--- [PDF Page 998 / Book Page 1018] ---

1018

Gundara

complex role of addressing the sense of exclusions and loss amongst all young people
and creating a sense of shared values and citizenship.
In countries like India and the United States policies of ‘positive discrimination’
and ‘affirmative action’ were enacted to provide equity to the hitherto disadvantaged
groups. Over a longer period of time these groups are now perceived as being privileged and are perceived as such by the dominant groups. Hence, unless such policies
are carefully devised, target actually disadvantaged groups and have limited time span,
they become counterproductive by exacerbating differences and reducing features
of commonality amongst different groups. This, therefore, presents a challenge of
rethinking of policies like affirmative action or positive discrimination so that they
do not exacerbate differences and have divisive implications but develop policies that
include the disadvantaged from all communities, including those who are poor from
within majority or dominant communities.
If some groups are excluded from or marginalised within the education system and
schools due to lack of social cohesion, should the state stay neutral or should it intervene? In other words should the state be fair or impartial? Rawls using the difference
principle argues that the better off should not have special advantages than the worst off
(Rawls, 1997). So to accord equity, the state is ‘fair’ but not impartial. In a democratic
state, citizens should have access to education and knowledge in order to equalise
their life chances. If the state remains impartial it cannot create level playing fields in
educational terms. It can only do so by intervening. The state, however, is not the only
agency in this sphere of social change. The private sector has social responsibilities
and the voluntary agencies themselves have a powerful role to play in the development
of active civic citizenship at the grass roots and community levels. This is especially
the case, if the communities are to harness all the local resources and develop microeconomies to enhance the local economies (Pike, 2003).
One of the challenges for education systems and the diverse communities is to
build inclusive polities, which can accommodate notions of differences. This could be
achieved by:
Creating conditions for equity and belongingness of diverse groups from an educational perspective
● Developing integrative mentalities based on difference not as disadvantage, and
lessening levels of inequalities and providing multiple options
● Education systems building a set of mutualities amongst multi-divided groups in
society so they can have ‘ownership’ of these affinities
● Policies to bridge gaps between groups at different levels and nurture notions of
human rights and citizenship for the disenfranchised and excluded groups
● Inclusive affirmative action and positive discrimination and time-limited policies
● The development of universally inclusive feminism especially to ensure equity in
public life and public institutions
● Diverse communities need to become active citizens and develop CAN DO mentalities and action
●

--- [PDF Page 999 / Book Page 1019] ---

The Future of Intercultural Studies 1019

Centric Knowledge
At an even broader level these issues raise problems of centric knowledge, which
according to COD 1990 is defined as ‘having a (specified) centre’. There are however, multiple sources of knowledge and there are many narratives and not a singular
narrative about knowledge and hence ‘centric’ knowledge systems operate on simplified and exclusive criteria of official school curriculum. The criterion for selecting
the curriculum from multiple sources in diverse polities presents a complex challenge
to curriculum planners. This is especially the case because a curriculum centred on
knowledge of dominant groups does not serve the needs of socially diverse polities. A
non-centric or an inclusive curriculum which draws from different sources is needed
within national, regional and local contexts (Gundara, 2000, pp. 161–205).
One of the problems in the implementation of intercultural education is that the
languages, histories and cultures of subordinated groups in Europe are not seen as
having equal value with those of dominant European nationalities. Such an entitlement
to a non-centric or inclusive curriculum is perhaps one of the greatest challenges to
actualising the development of an intercultural education. This exercise would entail
a major intellectual challenge, as was the case when UNESCO undertook to write the
history of Africa in an eight-volume series. The series largely has not been integrated
within the main body of universal historical knowledge. There are also other important UNESCO projects on the Slave Trade, The Silk Route, The Culture of Peace and
Education for International Understanding which have implications for developing
intercultural education within the mainstream of national educational systems.
UNESCO proposes in the Guidelines on Intercultural Education over the next biennium to:
Contribute to the improvement of curricula and textbooks for the teaching of
history
● Promote dialogue on the role of language and culture as key factors in the development through education of understanding among people within and between
Member States
● Support the educational activities of the International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous People
● Disseminate new approaches to language education
● Support the production of guidelines on mother tongue and multilingual
education
● Encourage the preparation of culturally appropriate materials in local languages
●

This UNESCO agenda should enable countries in Africa, Asia and the Americas to
address issues of societal diversity through intercultural education policies (UNESCO,
2006). To maintain safety and security within their diverse polities, states in these
continents need to develop curricula that avoid centrisms of their own. Devising the
necessary basis of knowledge in a national and civilisational context presents curriculum planners with a difficult but essential challenge. Shared knowledge and habitués

--- [PDF Page 1000 / Book Page 1020] ---

1020

Gundara

can assist in the process of the development of shared and common democratic value
systems in the public domain and public institutions.
A non-centric curriculum would enable teachers, students and other learners to
develop the inclusive and shared value systems which are necessary for the development of democratic societies. For instance, in Taiwan the democratic cultures and the
education system are able to withstand pressures of not teaching the superficial notions
of Asian values. As Amartya Sen states:
An attempt to choke off participatory freedom on grounds of traditional values (such as religious fundamentalism, or political custom, or the so-called
Asian values) simply misses the issue of legitimacy and the need for the people
affected to participate in deciding what they want and what they have reason to
accept. (Sen, 1999)

Intercultural Learning Societies
One aspect of the curriculum, which illustrates the issue of knowledge centrism, is the
teaching of the history curriculum. The teaching of history from an inclusive perspective needs to be developed at a much wider level internationally. In Europe one attempt
has been made through the Tiblisi initiative of the Council of Europe in Armenia,
Georgia and Azarbijan. Similarly, given the political agreement in Northern Ireland,
are there ways in which the selective memories of the 1916 rising in Dublin and the
Battle of the Somme be taught and learnt by both the Catholics and Protestants to give
shared educational substance and meanings to the recent political agreements? Such
curricular developments should not only be part of mainstream education, but also
build on the basic education and the acquisition of histories. Such an integrated system
would enhance the intercultural competencies of active European, African, American
and Asian citizenship within multicultural democracies. Subjects like the humanities
and the social sciences particularly need to be appraised for their relevance to the contemporary needs of societies.
This is especially the case because 130–145 million people, at least, live outside
their countries of origin. These figures would be higher if undocumented migrants
were included. Over 21 million refugees live in other developing countries. Many subsist in ‘twilight zones’ and border areas of state boundaries and continue to remain
ignored. Many young people grow up in these violent and displaced areas with no
hope for a meaningful future within either one or the other state. The Afghanistan-Pakistan
border and the Burmese-Thailand borders represent the ‘twilight zones’ and they are
indicative of the permeability of borders and the lack of a singular regime of law
and national institutions. Sassan explores the complexity of the border issues with
the emergence of the global capital and electronic market and their implication for
national borders (Sassan, 2006).
The development of an inclusive educational provision and a shared and meaningful
curriculum is necessary for the creation of future belongingness to stable communities. Such

--- [PDF Page 1001 / Book Page 1021] ---

The Future of Intercultural Studies 1021

educational initiatives may help to provide these young people with bases to understand
the meaning of democratic processes, modernisation and development. Such issues ought
therefore to include relevant consideration of participatory pedagogies. In marginalised
communities learning and teaching should be progressive and not constrained by a reactive traditional African, Asian and American-centric curriculum, which tend to inhibit
questioning. This in turn allows Euro-centrism in knowledge to prevail and perpetuate its
dominance at the global level. In reality, it is both the dominant and the subordinate, the
majority and the minority, which need to define new dimensions of knowledge to make the
futures more comprehensible (Gundara, undated).
To install the ‘voice’ of the disenfranchised in the curriculum will require a great
deal of delicacy, diplomacy, persistence and sophistication, particularly if the desired
changes are not to be relegated to the margins of academic life. Reactive, rhetorical
and rebellious responses in curricular terms are not only inadequate but also counterproductive. While action is needed across all European, American, African and Asian
societies, those in the poorer parts of these continents have greater levels of difficulties, and may require support from international agencies. Hence, the more affluent
and experienced educational agencies like the European Commission and UNESCO,
and its regional centres, can also be helpful in lending them non-directive support for
educational change and development.

Secularism and Religious Armageddon
In historical terms Emperor Ashoka (BC 272–232 ) was driven to remorse by the
slaughter, death and devastation his conquests had caused in India. This made him
turn the victory column to a column of peace and non-violence. This historical example is indicative of many contemporary monuments which carry similar messages.
These monuments are used by teachers and schools to deliver messages of peace rather
than those of war, which most of the columns in squares of cities all around the world
largely represent.
If one walks out of the UNESCO headquarters in Paris, into the Place Joffre in the
Eiffel Tower Park there is a monument to peace. In Tavistock Square, London there is
a monument for Mahatma Gandhi and the victims of Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic
bombs. After the bombing of a bus in this Square on 7 July, it is also a monument to
those who died there more recently and it has a more poignant meaning to those who
live and work in the Bloomsbury area and the whole of London. These are two of the
many sites and symbols in Paris and London amongst those in other cities around
the world which educators can use to teach about democratic, non-violent, peaceful
and inclusive secular states. There are other monuments which share grief caused by
national traumas include the Yad Vashim in Jerusalem, the Vietnam Wall in Washington
and the Okalahoma City memorial. These symbols provide examples of the ways in
which grief and being a victim are selectively portrayed and need to be used to read the
stories of the past critically which help to disarm history. Most monuments, however,
only continue to mark the triumph of one group and the Valle de los Caidos continues
to celebrate Franco’s victory and not commemorate the death of all who died in the

--- [PDF Page 1002 / Book Page 1022] ---

1022

Gundara

Spanish Civil War. Most educational materials also continue to represent the voices
of the victors, the powerful and the dominant. There are, however, currently projects
which deal with re-examining the ways in which textbooks have been written as well as
the ways in which names on maps have been exclusive and not representing complex
pasts. The Eckhart Institute in Germany and UNESCO have devoted time and expertise to these initiatives.
The tensions between secular and religious ideologies perhaps raise the gravest
warning to multicultural and multi-faith polities and need to be addressed by educators and curriculum planners in a non-nationalistic and creative manner. While religion
and personal beliefs may belong to the private domain there are issues from religious
systems and knowledge, which can impinge on the national and global minds and the
development of critical and democratic citizens of the future. It is a matter of grave
importance that the role of religion in multi-faith, constitutional and democratic states
is clearly defined to avoid being led to a societal abyss by fundamentalist and dogmatic
notions of ‘truth’ fuelled by faith.
The importance of Gandhi and his protégé Nehru is that they had a genuine
intercultural understanding of Western and Indian civilisations. They personified a
creativity and determination which is currently lacking in many political and educational leaders. The ex-President of Tanzania Mwalimu (teacher) Nyerere, was
usually simply called teacher and through his policies he unified the multicultural
Tanzanian society. Perhaps, it is in his footsteps Nelson Mandela has formed a
group of Elders which include former leaders and Nobel Prize winners and they
may help provide influence to resolve intercultural conflicts and other crises in
the casino of the unregulated global market. How can these initiatives be used by
the educators to enchant the disenchanted with inclusive, democratic and active
engagements?
At the underlying level a question has to be asked about the educational implications
of President Mbekis ‘African Renaissance’ and what role the academic institutions
will play in it. Unless it is able to build a more equitable and inclusive South Africa
the Renaissance will remain a chimera (The Observer, 24/11/2007). There is also a
question about how much the rise of fundamentalism is also a result of the failures
of governments to modernise societies and provide equity in public and social policy
generally. If governments are failing in this role there is not much that the education
systems can do in muting religious conflict.
In Nigeria, Wole Soyinka regrets the way in which the proselytising religions are
eroding local traditions and faiths like the Orisa, and also disrupting education within
schools and universities (The Guardian, 6/8/2002). In the West African context, the
implementation of intercultural policies and practices may be one way of avoiding
religious strife in educational institutions.
At the academic level, scholars such as Inayatullah in Pakistan and others argue
for an alternative social science, which is not based on the nation state as a model of
analysis but on notions of a ‘layered sovereignty’ (Inayatullah, 1998). Inevitably it
poses complex issues not just for educational policy but also for curricular reform in
deepening and raising the quality of education.

--- [PDF Page 1003 / Book Page 1023] ---

The Future of Intercultural Studies 1023

The Role of Media and Intercultural Relations
The media have an important role to play in enhancing intercultural relations because
of their power to mislead or to educate. However, during the current period of globalisation the media have been constrained by market forces as far as programming is
concerned. For many people in the world the media may be a more influential source
of information than the classroom. When not concerned with redecorating or tidying
the garden their focus has shifted to the exotic, travel and wildlife programmes instead
of programming about development, poverty, intercultural issues, politics, history,
economics or the environment (Nason & Redding, 2002). These issues only receive
perfunctory treatment as part of news and current affairs programmes. However, such
programming ought not to be paternalistic as it was in the past and ought to address
issues to ordinary citizens.
Televisual audiences are largely committed to entertainment and do not watch documentary programmes, which either lecture or hector them. Viewers prefer a story, a
good narrative and strong characters. At least two sets of actions may be necessitated.
Firstly, the media and communication industries need to adopt a strategic and integrated approach, which is discourse- and content-strengthened. How can various forms
of new media be used in teaching and learning? On issues of intercultural understandings, educators at all levels have a major role to play in using the media for educating
viewers not only to become visually literate but also to acquire a critical understanding
to distinguish between hype, rhetoric and productive or progressive discourse.

The Role of Intercultural Teacher Education
Teacher education institutions have a continued and major role to play in enhancing
intercultural education because as multipliers the teachers educated by them affect the
lives of many generations of those they teach.
In many countries around the world teacher educators need to revisit the Carnegie
Foundation’s Report of 1986, which recommended making the teaching profession
a high status profession and on a par with other professions. Most higher education
institutions both educate and train doctors, architects and lawyers but only train teachers. This is an important issue because there is a difference between ‘training’ and
‘education’. Higher education institutions cannot ignore the same broadly based rigorous education for teachers. If the Harvard Business School, as Professor Colin Power
former Director of Education, UNESCO, in a lecture at the Institute of Education
University of London pointed out, educates barracudas, then teacher education institutions should not merely train teachers as social workers to pick up the pieces that the
barracudas leave behind.
The key question is whether the issues are about teacher training or teacher education. ‘Training’ implies a lower order of knowledge and skill.
In order to get the best educated and professionally qualified teachers, their education should be undertaken at universities or institutions with comparable standards.

--- [PDF Page 1004 / Book Page 1024] ---

1024

Gundara

Teachers, therefore, as autonomous professionals should join a teacher education institution after an undergraduate degree, and have a professional education similar to
those in other professions (Carnegie, 1986); of course the circumstances do vary in
different countries.
A high level of professionally and rigorously educated teachers who have a postgraduate accredited qualification is essential to raise the competences of the teaching
profession. As a part of this accreditation there is a need for intercultural dimensions
of courses to be built into the teacher education process. This in itself raises some
complex issues. Students from minority communities who have done well at university
tend to join other professions and not the teaching profession. Yet to make intercultural
teacher education effective both teacher education institutions and schools need to have
a diverse student body and teaching members of staff. Not only does teaching have to
be made an attractive profession but education of the underclass, minority and smaller
nationalities needs to be improved, and measures instituted to ensure that a number of
them do join the teaching profession. One of the advantages of interculturally educated
and a multicultural teaching force is not only that it enables the negotiation of complex
social values in schools and higher education institutions but also provides multilingual skills and knowledge for competent and professional teaching force.
In intercultural terms teacher skills ought to include expertise in interpersonal relations, the conduct of conversations, moderation of difficult discussions, dealing with
conflicts and working with parents. Teachers confront the most complex task of tackling student racism and autonomous peer cultures. The need for communicative skills
can only be met if teachers have the necessary experience and skills and understandings which cut across student–teacher and school–community divides.
Teachers can acquire knowledge, skills and understandings to deal with racism during their initial teacher education, which needs to be further refined on a continuing
basis as part of their professional development. The complexity of the processes, of
racism and class-based exclusions as well as the lethal mixture of these with religious divides demands a high level of skills and professionalism. It also demands
institutional policies and support within schools. Teacher education institutions have a
fundamental role to play in unpicking these complex issues and enabling all teachers
to deal with them competently.

Communities of Development and Hope
One of the main reasons for developing an inclusive democratic framework is the
fact that 10,000 distinct societies live in 200 states and may be denied equity and
protection. The International Commission on Education for the 21st Century set up by
UNESCO placed the issue of learning to live together not only as one of the four pillars
of education for the future but as the greatest challenge facing education.
Both formal and informal lifelong learning has a major role in developing intercultural understandings among citizens in socially diverse societies. This needs to involve
the non-governmental sector so that citizenship in such societies does not remain passive. It requires citizens to become active so that they can improve their own and their
communities’ lives for the better.

--- [PDF Page 1005 / Book Page 1025] ---

The Future of Intercultural Studies 1025

However, unless there are concerted efforts to develop democratic engagements
and build ‘communities of development and hope’ intercultural conflicts are bound
to increase. The creation of active citizens in poorer communities can only take place
if there are deeper intercultural engagements both within and outside educational
institutions.
Democratic and shared political cultures go hand in hand with greater levels of
legitimate economic activities for all communities. Income inequalities are associated
with increases in education and social inequality. From amongst the OECD countries
Britain has the largest income gaps and the highest proportion (19.4%) of young people aged 16–19 who are neither attending school nor employed. Many of these young
people are not only functionally illiterate and manifest anti-social behaviour but are
also a threat to the security and lives of others. The thwarted ambitions of these young
people form the basis of grave intercultural conflicts. A massive effort is necessary to
create the preconditions for safer and securer communities in Britain as well as most
other countries of the world.
In many of the crises referred to in this chapter there is an essential role of education
as part of public policy provision to proactively deal with inequalities of educational
opportunities and outcomes in multicultural societies. Educational initiatives based
on currently developed policies and practices can also help in creating a new society which not only recognises differences but also helps in developing commonalities
and shared citizenship values that can provide futuristic legitimacies in confederal
communities.

References
Amin, S. (1997). Capitalism in the age of globalisation. London: Zed.
Batelaan P., & Coomans F. (1999). The international basis for intercultural education including anti-racist
and human rights education, IAIE, IBE and Council of Europe. Geneva: IBE.
Batelaan, P., & Gundara, J. (1992). La diversité culturelle et la promotion des valeurs à travers l´éducation.
Questions de Formation, IV(8), 23–53.
Bauman, Z. (2007). Liquid times: Living in an age of uncertainty. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourne, R., & Gundara, J. (1999). Human rights education: Learning human rights in secondary schools;
curricular framework. London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
Cantle, T. (chair) (December 2000). Community cohesion: A report of the independent review team. London:
Home Office; Ritchie, D. December 2001. The Oldham One Future, Oldham Independent Review Panel
Report; Ouseley, H. July, 2001. Community pride not prejudice – Making diversity work in Bradford.
Carnegie Forum on Education (1986). A nation prepared: Teachers for the 21st century. New York: Carnegie
Corporation.
Centre for Cross Border Studies (November 2007). A note from the next door neighbours. 15. Belfast:
Centre for Cross Border Studies.
Commission for Racial Equality (2002). Images of race in 21st century Scotland. Edinburgh: CRE 2002.
Commonwealth Secretariat, Report of the Commonwealth Commission on Respect and Understanding
(2007). Civil paths to peace. London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
Department for International Development (2007). Afghanistan: Development in action. London: DFID.
Evens Foundation (13–14 November 2007). A vision of “Europe of the Future”.
Fukuyama, F. (7–9–2002) ‘The transatlantic rift’, The Guardian, London.
Gray, J. (2002). Straw dogs: Thoughts and human and other animals (p.12). London: Granta Books.
Green, J. M. (1999). Deep democracy: Community, diversity and transformation. Lanham, MD: Rowman
& Littlewood.

--- [PDF Page 1006 / Book Page 1026] ---

1026

Gundara

Gundara, J. (1992). Permettre à des citoyens d’origines différentes de participer à la société démocratique et
pluraliste. Questions de Formation, IV(8), 55–75.
Gundara, J. (1993). Multiculturalism and the British nation-state. In J. Horton(Ed.), Liberalism, multiculturalism and toleration. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Gundara, J. & Hewitt, R. (1999). Life files: Racism. London: Evans Brothers.
Gundara, J. (2000a). Religion, human rights and intercultural education. In Intercultural education. Vol. 11,
no. 2. Basingstoke: Taylor & Francis
Gundara, J. (2000b). Interculturalism, education and inclusion. London: Paul Chapman.
Gundara, J. (2002). Social diversity, intercultural and citizenship education in European Union. Le Metais
(Ed.). Enschede: CIDREE/SLO.
Gundara, J., & Jones, C. (1990) Education in urban communities: A London case study. In C. Poster & A.
Kruger (Eds.), Community education in the Western world.
Gundara, J. (March 1999). Multiculturalism in Asian societies: Issues for intercultural education. Washington
D.C.: Sasakawa Peace Foundation.
Gundara, J. (2005). The global and the national: Inclusive knowledge and linguistic diversity. In D. Coulby
& E. Zambeta (Eds.), World Yearbook of Education, Globalization and nationalism in education.
Abingdon: RoutledgeFalmer.
Hans, N. (1949). Comparative Education. London: Routledge.
Inayatullah (1998). Imagining an alternative politics of knowledge: Subverting the hegemony of international relations theory in Pakistan. Contemporary South Asia, 7(1), pp. 27–43.
Interview with Hall, S. (8–3–2006). London: New Humanist.
Nason, S., & Redding, D. (2002). Losing reality. London: 3WE.
Paris: Musée de l’Homme. www.evensfoundation.be.ef10.org
Pike, M. (2003). CAN DO citizens: Re-building marginalised communities.
Power, C. N. 30–3–2000. Learning to live together: Interculturalism in the 21st century (Mimeo). London:
ICIS, ULIE.
Rawls, J. (1997). Theory of justice. Cambridge: Belknap Press.
Report of the World Commission on Culture and Development (1995). Our creative diversity (President
Javier Perez de Cuellar). Paris: WCCD.
Sassen, S. (2006). Territory, authority, rights. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sen, A. (1999). Development as freedom (p. 32). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
The Economist (3 November 2007). A special report on religion and public life (pp. 3–20). London.
The Guardian (27 November 2007). Education (p. 2) London.
The Guardian (10 March —2006) London.
The Scarman Trust Report. London: SES.
Tomasevski, K. (2003). Education denied: Costs and remedies. London: Zed.
UNESCO (2003). Education position paper: Education in a multilingual world. Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO. (2002). Preface Sir John Daniel. Education and cultural diversity . Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO (2006). UNESCO guidelines on intercultural education. Paris: UNESCO, Section of Education
for Peace and Human Rights, Education Sector.
UNESCO (2003). Education global monitoring report. Gender and education for all: The leap to equality.
Paris: UNESCO.
Wilson, D. (2002). Minority rights in education: Lessons for the European Union from Estonia, Latvia,
Romania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Lund: Raoul Wallenberg Institute.

