================================================================================
Chapter 65: Feminism, Liberation, and Education
Author(s): Nelly P . Stromquist
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 1027–1043
PDF Pages: pp. 1007–1023 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1007 / Book Page 1027] ---

65
FEMINISM, LIBERATION, AND EDUCATION
Nelly P. Stromquist

Unquestionably, feminism will be seen by historians as one of the strongest social
movements of the twentieth century. Ideas that the rights of women should be included
among the rights of all people existed as a coherent set since the late 1860s and culminated in women’s right to vote in the early twentieth century, with New Zealand being
the first country to grant them that right. However, it was not until the 1960s that the
feminist movement spread out to the corners of the globe. This effort, now called the
“second wave” of feminism, endorsed the term “liberation” and sought to free women
from economic oppression, cultural subordination, and political marginalization. The
second wave documented the situation of men and women at all levels of society, from
the household to the place of work and government, and concluded that it had to change
to make both women and men benefit from those social arrangements. Liberation, in
other words, implied a political movement toward changing the social order, but in
ways that meant not the replacement of men by women in the existing hierarchies but
the creation of other kinds of social relations, less characterized by rigid and arbitrary
hierarchies. The ultimate goal was not always stated but it often involved the reduction
of social differences between men and women.
Feminist groups today comprise various kinds: those that fight patriarchy, those that
engage in academic and cultural production, groups that are pro-human rights, and
community-based organizations working on the satisfaction of basic needs of poor
women. They have been unified in the past by universalist approaches to human development and social justice. Many scholars recognize the family and the body as sites of
the politics of power (Molyneux, 1985; Connell, 1987; Messner, 1992). Most recognize
the issue of domestic and sexual violence as a deeply rooted feature of women’s subordination and a growing set considers the recognition of sexual orientation – all issues
linked to social change and national development (Subrahmanian, 2005).
Liberation in the early days meant moving away from definitions of women as
weak, docile, passive, with mothering instincts and responsibilities, assigned to caring
tasks, and responsible for the general functioning of the household. It also meant moving away from dependence on men due to low salaries, temporary employment, and
dead-end jobs. A goal not envisaged initially was the freedom of sexual orientation;
another goal, which came to divide the movement in many countries, has been control
over one’s own body, which includes abortion rights. Today, liberation as a mantra has
1027
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1027–1043.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1008 / Book Page 1028] ---

1028

Stromquist

been lost, as different types of women have emerged and see reality in different ways
and may seek different goals. Lazar summarizes the situation well when she states:
“Gender oppression is neither materially nor discursively enacted in the same way for
women everywhere” (Lazar, 2005, p. 10).
As action has followed new ideas, it has become manifested in four separate arenas:
the efforts conducted by women themselves in their various terrains of social life; the
lines of action undertaken by international development agencies – of critical importance for developing countries; the public policies enacted by governments in response
to feminist and global pressure; and the theoretical and analytical work contributed by
feminist researchers in the academy.
Globalization trends, with the shrinking of state-provided social services and
emphasis on market forces as the best processes for social functioning (Krieger,
2006; Arrighi & Silver, 1999; Falk, 1999), have contributed to the weakening of feminism. Intense competition between firms as well as between individuals does little
to foster social solidarity. Furthermore, harsh economic conditions among poorer
populations, particularly in developing countries, demand time and effort for one’s
survival that cannot be sacrificed for community or altruistic work. Consequently,
women activists find increasingly difficult environments in which to operate. In
the academic work, another group of women, those who are sympathetic to the
feminist cause, have become more immersed in theoretical constructions in which
power and material conditions take second place to cultural issues as explanatory
variables. There is an increasing distance between feminist academics and women
activists in NGOs. The latter include many more women from developing countries and are interested in such issues as poverty, trade, debt, and human rights.
They work in independent organizations and community-based organizations that
either specialize in gender issues or address broader development issues such as
poverty and human rights. Women in some academic disciplines approach gender
as a subject of interest, not as a dimension of political transformation (Mohanty,
2006). Their work, consequently, is not linked to a movement that seeks intervention in the political arena by pressing for specific policies or bringing women to
political office so that they represent women’s interests.
This chapter considers how theoretical thought about gender and education has
advanced in recent decades. To do so, it begins with a discussion of women and men’s
education, then presents the various strands of feminist thought, and finishes with a
discussion of what might constitute effective interventions, given the lessons learned
over time.

Conditions of Women and Men in Education
In the early 1970s, when looking at the situation of women’s education, the general
concern was for their access to formal education, especially primary and secondary
education, two basic gateways to advanced knowledge. Girls’ access to schooling was
lagging behind that of boys, especially in developing countries; thus, a crucial education objective became parity in access to schooling.

--- [PDF Page 1009 / Book Page 1029] ---

Feminism, Liberation, and Education 1029

Over time, indeed, there has been an improvement in the proportion of girls attending
primary and secondary schools although it is not clear that this is the result of specific
governmental strategies or rather the collateral effect of expanding access to formal
schooling by establishing more schools or moving them into shorter daily shifts so
they could accommodate more students. Girls’ enrollment has indeed been edging
toward parity with boys although at the global level girls still represent 46.5% of the
primary enrollment. Inequalities are greater in South and West Asia, the Arab States,
and sub-Saharan Africa, where girls constitute 44.1%, 46.0%, and 46.5% , respectively
(UNESCO, 2003). About 115 million children of primary school age were not enrolled
by 2000, with girls representing 57% of those out of primary school in developing
countries, particularly in Pakistan, Nepal, and India. Secondary school enrollment has
also been improving though in the majority of countries women have not reached
gender parity. In tertiary education, the picture is reversed, with higher male enrollment in 24 countries but higher female enrollment in 72 countries – an outcome that
suggests that women finishing secondary schooling have a greater chance of moving
into further education than men. On the other hand, university enrollment by field of
study shows still a strongly gendered pattern, which raises the question of whether it
is by personal choice or is rather the consequence of cultural and social beliefs and
expectations about occupational roles for men and women. Substantial and persistent
differences also exist between urban and rural educational enrollment – a reflection of
development models that exploit the rural areas while benefiting the urban population.
Yet, within these geographical areas, women constantly stand as inferior to men in educational attainment – further corroboration that gender disparities operate irrespective
of location and wealth (Stromquist, 2007).
One wonders why women have been gaining greater access to education. Perhaps
what is at work is more the widespread notion that the modern citizen in general
needs education rather than specifically that women need education to transform their
lives. Some observers consider that another reason might be that basic education is
increasingly seen as a global public good, but this explanation would be limited to the
wealthier nations since at least in 101 developing countries charge school fees at the
primary level (UNESCO, 2003), a practice made necessary by the low budgets allocated for public education, caused in turn by structural adjustment programs, imposed
by international financial agencies.
Some governments have taken statistics on access and completion as indications
of their efforts to achieve gender equality. This is almost always an erroneous claim
because equality of opportunity as a policy calls for specific measures to help a targeted group. Unless there is evidence that particular efforts were deployed to facilitate
women’s access to formal schooling, equality of opportunity cannot be assumed to
have been a conscious state effort. Educational budgets in most countries rarely consider funds or personnel for gender-focused strategies.
Feminist ideas in education in the mid-1970s examined issues of access and practices
in the classroom. They also addressed gender inequalities in terms of field-of-study
choices and expressed concern with the lack of effort to question the messages that
lead girls and women into those choices. With the passage of time, among feminist
thinkers, there has developed an increasing realization that access to schooling and

--- [PDF Page 1010 / Book Page 1030] ---

1030

Stromquist

successful completion, important as they are, do not guarantee that ideological beliefs
about gender will change. Numerical gender parity may have little to do with cultural,
economic, and political change. For instance, we need to interrogate ourselves, what
has it meant to have more women doing better in access and retention in high school in
Latin America and the US? Research studies do show that educated women do better
than uneducated women in the labor market and in a number of social situations and
decisions, yet detrimental notions of femininity and masculinity are imbued in society
and affect most women, regardless of educational levels.
Aided by an extensive critical theory on the nature of schooling as sites for reproduction of social classes and hierarchies, feminist educational theory recognizes schools
as sites where cultures and subcultures are created and in which systems of gendered
power and gender meaning-making are maintained. By looking at school access as
an end in itself, one becomes oblivious to the substantial gender differentiation that
occurs through schooling, particularly in the creation of notions of masculinity and
femininity. Access as an objective implies that schools are neutral environments for
everybody and that those environments do not create gender hierarchies and differential treatment of girls and boys within classrooms and schools.
Girls’ access to education remains a critical problem in parts of the developing
world, especially in sub-Saharan Africa and in West and South Asia. In many developing countries, serious gaps exist in girls’ access in rural areas. On the other hand,
in a growing number of countries, girls are moving toward parity in terms of school
access and they show a tendency toward greater success than boys in completion of
primary and secondary education. Unfortunately, a number of governments are conflating equality of access and completion with gender equality, which leads them to
assert that there are no gender problems in their respective societies.

Changes in Textbooks and the School Environment
Regardless of whether one adopts a feminist position or not, the relationship between
education and democracy involves two aspects: how the educational structures and
practices promote democracy in society, and to what extent schools function democratically (Perry, 2003/2004). The first implies access to school and learning and the
second how practices in the classroom foster tolerance, recognition of the other, human
rights, and democratic agency.
Important messages are assimilated through textbooks; therefore, feminist attention
soon centered on these and, as a result of this interest, educational materials have been
improving over time. Across most countries, there has been a reduction in the use of
sexist language (usually expressed in the use of the masculine form as the key referent)
or (in languages where this is applicable) in using only masculine pronouns for occupations and roles that can equally be fulfilled by women. Problems with illustrations,
historic figures, and depictions of certain characters in stereotypic ways with women
as mothering, sweet, abnegating and men bold, leading, intelligent, remain but they are
certainly fewer than they were in the early 1960s.
What remains problematic in textbooks and curricula is the absence or the partial
treatment of subjects central to altered conceptions of gender. Increasingly, schools

--- [PDF Page 1011 / Book Page 1031] ---

Feminism, Liberation, and Education 1031

offer more programs dealing with sex education. Yet, their approach to the subject continues to be one based on anatomy, physiology, and the threat to health that sexuality
poses. Very few are the programs that deal with sexuality, sexual orientation, gender
and citizenship, gender-based violence (domestic violence, sexual harassment, rape,
prostitution, pornography), and legal rights among others.1 Seldom do they include
this knowledge within the treatment of social studies or citizenship education (Arnot,
2006). Consideration of sexual abuse and sexual violence occurring within schools
is notoriously ignored. In short, significant improvements could still take place in the
content of knowledge and the context in which it is presented in school system. The
curriculum still favors male knowledge and continues to convey the notion of women’s
comparative advantage in the domestic sphere.

Public Policies: Global and National
It has been through action at the international level, first through feminist organizations
in industrialized countries in close alliance with feminist NGOs in developing countries, and later through the action of UN organizations, that significant attention has
been given to women’s and gender issues. A notable piece of global legislation was the
enactment of the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW). First adopted in 1979, CEDAW had been ratified by more
than 180 nations by 2006. During the 1990s there were several international conferences that further placed the issue of women’s advancement on the public agenda.
Notable among these conferences was the 1994 International Conference on Population
and Development (held in Cairo). All of these conferences highlighted the importance
of women’s education and the imperative for girls and women to have equal access to
education. The Fourth World Women’s Conference (held in Beijing in 1995) adopted
an educational plan of action that revealed sophistication in defining educational issues
and proposed a very complete set of measures to deal with gender issues in educational
systems. This document has been signed by virtually every nation in the world.
UNIFEM, UNICEF, and UNESCO have emerged as major advocates of women’s
issues. A number of bilateral agencies focusing on national development have also
adopted substantial programs of action to advance women’s conditions; notably among
them are the Swedish, Norwegian, Dutch, and US development agencies. Major international lending organizations, such as the World Bank and the various regional
development banks, such as the Inter-American Development Bank, have also become
active in promoting consideration of women and gender in national development.
It has been the commonalities among women regardless of class, ethnicity, race, and
age that have led to the formulation of public policies on gender and the justification
of intervention. Since the adoption of public policies implies a role for the state, it has
been liberal feminism – building on the notion of equality of opportunity – which has
promoted these policies. Liberal feminism centers on individual rights and endorses an
unproblematized view of agency, assuming that women have the autonomous capacity
to modify existing relations. It is also optimistic about state behavior and assumes that
the governmental machinery as well as the power of the law will be used to advance
women’s issues.

--- [PDF Page 1012 / Book Page 1032] ---

1032

Stromquist

Public policies – and official discourse as well – have shown confusion between the
concepts of equality and equity. While in the social sciences, particularly in education,
there is an understanding that equality is the presence of identical conditions in certain
social indicators (e.g., salary, political representation, access to university) and equity
the measures taken to reach equality, several international organizations and national
governments use the terms indistinctly, thus conflating desired outcomes with means.
Subrahmanian (2005) suggests that equality be used to indicate parity and equity the
result of “actions to translate equality into meaningful distributions of resources and
opportunities, and the transformation of the conditions in which women are being
encouraged to make choice” (Subrahmanian, 2005, p. 29). To this helpful definition,
one could add the notion that, while equality may be the final objective, equity by force
requires measures to intervene and that these measures require specific identification
of groups to benefit, financial resources, and the allocation of personnel to accomplish
the anticipated tasks.
Moreover, while education is essentially a form of social distribution (i.e., giving
people certain forms and levels of education), equity in education involves some form
of redistribution insofar as it involves the reallocation of goods or services so that the
intended beneficiaries obtain more or a better good or during a longer or better service.
Most gender policies build upon distribution rather than redistribution strategies.
Two current global policies that address the intersection of women and education
are Education for All (EFA) and the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Enacted in Jomtien in 1990, EFA was restated in Dakar in 2000, following limited
achievement of its stated goals. EFA calls for universal access to basic education for
both boys and girls by 2015 and gender parity in primary and secondary education
by 2005. The MDGs (approved in 2000) incorporate these two EFA goals and add
the objective of women’s empowerment, in which women’s power is equated to parity
access to education, participation in the remunerated employment, and their proportion
in political representatives. The MDGs are backed by international financial organizations and the UN itself; as such they stand to be more fully implemented than EFA.
Several feminist writers have noted with concern that the MDGs reduce the definition
of basic education to four completed years – something that may be high for certain
sub-Saharan countries and perhaps West and South Asia, but is low for East Asia and
Latin America, where higher levels of education have already been attained by both
girls and boys. According to UNESCO (2003) 60% of the 128 countries with data
available for primary and secondary indicate that they are going to miss gender parity
at primary and secondary levels by 2015.
Both the EFA and MDGs documents are infused with a discourse of equality and
empowerment, but concrete action to move away from negative situations is missing. While assistance by international development organizations to basic education
increased from 0.1% from their total in 1993 to 2.2% in 2002 (EFA Monitoring Report,
2003), action at the national level is either lacking or weak. For instance, though EFA
agreements call for the production of plans of action by EFA country signatories and
the subsequent implementation of these plans, very few countries have complied with
such promises. By June 2005, the web site of UNESCO reported that national action
plans existed in only 43 countries. Follow-up activities on MDGs objectives have

--- [PDF Page 1013 / Book Page 1033] ---

Feminism, Liberation, and Education 1033

also been slow. In early 2006, UNIFEM reported that only 55 countries had presented
their required annual progress reports. Global public policies in education (and other
sectors as well) rarely include women’s groups or feminist academics in the elaboration
of objectives and procedures to reach them, with the exception perhaps of the participation of FAWE in the African region. However, to attain gender equality the
participation of women through transformed basic rules, hierarchies, and practices of
public institutions is necessary. Women therefore have to be present in public spaces
where debates about a new governability are elaborated (Guzmán, 2003).
The move toward global economies, with rapid advance in technology as a facilitator, has created a hypercompetitive context for economic growth that has resulted in
the intensification of hegemonic masculinity. It has resulted as well in the continued
dominance of men in powerful institutions that prevail in the global economy such as
the World Trade Organization, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and
the US Treasury (Kenway, 2005). Such conditions are not conducive to address gender
and social justice. Although today many international institutions express an interest
in poverty, their studies and policies rarely consider poor women, who constitute the
poorest at every class, race, or ethnic level. On the other hand, when their interest is
directed toward gender, they pay attention only to poor women. On the part of the state
and its agencies, therefore, there is no proper consideration of how gender functions
in society and how it intersects with social class beyond simply low-income women.
Summarizing current global trends, Mazur notes that, “symbolic policies and nondecisions, policies without outputs, are a common type of feminist policy” (Mazur,
2002, p. 180).

National Interventions
The enactment of substantial educational policies containing a gender perspective has
occurred in several industrialized countries, notably Australia, the UK, and the US.
These policies have usually undergone revisions to expand objectives from the prohibition of discriminatory practices in admissions or provision of scholarships and
loans to the creation of more girl-friendly environments to protection against sexual
harassment and sexual orientation. The successful reform in Australia, characterized
by several iterations of educational laws, has been attributed to joint action by teacher
unions, teachers, feminist academics who had researched gender issues in education,
and activists placed within the education system and other highly strategic places
(Kenway, 2005).
Educational policies in developing countries increasingly consider the gender dimension. The prevailing pattern in these policies is to concentrate on universal access to
basic education, which is acknowledged as a human right and therefore applicable
also to women. These policies respond mostly to issues of access and retention, but
do so through the use of statistics rather than a clear intervention to help women.
As educational systems expand, women do benefit, usually as a side effect of overall
expansion and changes in social mentalities, aided by, albeit contradictory, media messages. The main principle of these policies is equality of opportunity, which focuses

--- [PDF Page 1014 / Book Page 1034] ---

1034

Stromquist

on equal access rather than on equal treatment within schools or on knowledge that
will transform gender-domination patterns. As a concept, equality of opportunity faces
limitations because it assumes fair rules while not considering that previous and current inequalities would have to be corrected if transformations in the social order of
gender are to be attained. Equality of education, from a gender perspective, reduces
concern for the ideological context of education, a reduction that tends to reproduce
the social relations of gender (Blackmore, 1999). Consequently, many policies show
limited attention to teacher training and to the development of new curricula.
A number of small interventions on gender and education have been put in place
in several countries, while large-scale educational policies – characterized by greater
investment and stability – are much more sensitive to issues of poverty than to gender.
A major exception to this pattern is PROGRESA (now Oportunidades) in Mexico,
which provides significant subsidies to poor families as part of an integrated approach
that includes nutrition and health, and offers stipends slightly larger for girls than
for boys in secondary school.2 Another intervention of significance is the Female
Secondary School Stipend Program in Bangladesh, which reached about 500,000 girls
by 1995, and provides girls with small stipends to attend and complete their high
school studies. Measures that have promoted girls’ success in schooling also include
the provision of nonformal education, such as those of Bangladesh’s BRAC schools
in small rural communities, which attempt to enroll at least 70% girls3; the Mahila
Samakya program in India to help rural girls; and the Quetta Girls’ Fellowship program in Baluchistan, Pakistan, that provides subsidies for private schools to offer basic
education for low-income students.4 All these programs have succeeded in increasing
girls’ school attendance and completion, even though domestic divisions of labor have
changed little. A cross-national study of three Latin American countries (Brazil, Costa
Rica, and Peru) found that educational policies increasingly include gender issues
(Stromquist, 2006b). These policies continue to do so primarily from the perspective
of parity of access, although progress in the conceptualization of gender has emerged,
particularly in Brazil. Overall, there tends to be little attention to the implementation
of new practices regarding an empowered citizenship for women or to issues regarding
one’s body in a social and cultural context.
In part because of the very successful indoctrination that occurs through formal education, schooling is not grasped by the majority of people as an essential and profound
setting for the transmission of ideological messages. Mazur (2002) notes that the content of feminist policies among Western governments does not often coincide with any
particular current of feminist ideas in Western political thought, and that these policies
tend to offer a fragmented incorporation, frequently incorporating liberal feminist ideas
regarding the political representation by women and the adoption of women-friendly
issues into the political process, and at times adopting radical feminist positions present
in sexuality and violence politics (as happens in Sweden and Scotland). Mazur further
contributes to the understanding of feminist policy by proposing a typology that identifies democratic representation, reproductive rights, family law, equal employment, and
reconciliation of spouses. In her typology, Mazur includes “public service delivery policies”, which she defines as those that exist in public services such as health, housing,
education, and transportation. This view of education as merely a “public service” and
not a major means by which ideologies are transmitted is fairly typical.

--- [PDF Page 1015 / Book Page 1035] ---

Feminism, Liberation, and Education 1035

Theoretical Understandings of Gender Inequality5
Both first-wave feminism (culminating in women’s right to vote in the early 1900s) and
second-wave feminism (roughly from the 1960s to the present) saw women as a group with
little differentiation among its members. Therefore, it theorized subordination and oppression as standing for all women. Third-wave feminism (perhaps since the mid-1980s and
predominant in industrialized countries) sees major differences among women.
Initial arguments about the differential status and conditions of women were attributed to the socialization of men and women into complementary functions or social
roles. This line of reasoning, broadly termed liberal feminism, assumed a simple
correction in which the state played a major role enacting and enforcing antidiscriminatory laws to modify the sexual stereotyping of women and men. This perspective
was later found limited because it perceived gender as acquired preferences and norms
and avoided its examination as the expression of power of one group over another
(Williams et al., 2004). To a growing group of activists and some feminist academics, patriarchy (i.e., the diffuse ideology across most societies that accepted men’s
superiority, their cultural and economic privileges, and their responsibilities as heads
of household) emerged as a more powerful explanation for the creation of arbitrary
dichotomies between men and women, and between masculinity and femininity (Daly,
1978; Pateman, 1988). Connell (1995) introduced the notion of the patriarchal dividend to highlight the reality that all men benefit as a social group in terms of access to
symbolic, social, political, and economic capital. The recognition of patriarchal ideologies also led to the studying of the household as a social setting that brings uneven
burdens and rewards to its members.
Critical analysis, which assumed greater force in the 1990s, showed that “women”
is not a unidimensional category, for gender intersects with other social markers
(race, ethnicity, social class, sexual orientation, and age among others) to create compounded ways of experiencing gender, what in 1997 Fraser termed “differences among
females”. From one perspective it could be asserted that women cannot be seen as a
totalizing category. From another perspective it could be argued that gender differentiation occurs regardless of the experience of additional and multiple permanent
social markers. As political and theoretical work has advanced, it is clear that there is a
critical interface between gender and social class, as well was between gender and ethnicity, but that individual- and group-life outcomes cannot be reduced to social class
or ethnicity alone. The theoretical understanding that gender inequality is located in a
wider terrain of inequalities has had a concomitant challenge in practical action: how
to recognize variability in the experience of gender without losing track of gender as
a major form of inequality.
Toward the mid-1990s there emerged in industrialized countries a feminist interest
in masculinity/masculinities and the education of boys. According to Kenway (2005),
this emphasis has been less interested in human rights than in documenting the various manifestations of masculinity and their implications for boys and men as well as
for girls and women. Such emphasis has also contributed to understanding gender
violence and harassment in much more subtle ways. The description of multiple and
intersecting differences and complex subjectivities was often the subject of research on
gender and education. A parallel emergence of cultural feminism celebrated femaleness

--- [PDF Page 1016 / Book Page 1036] ---

1036

Stromquist

(Kenway, 2005). In recent decades, gender discussions have moved away from the
consideration of power and collective means to achieve change. Thus, while Molyneux
(1985) spoke about the practical and strategic interests of women in the 1980s, the discourse moved in the 1990s to intersectionality and performativity, the former referring
to the multiple intersection of social markers (e.g., being a woman, white, wealthy, and
with a Ph.D.) and the second alerting us that gender is performed in everyday life by
our micro-level actions – and thus the implication that gender can also be transformed
at that level. Collins (2000), from her Afro-American experience, contested notions of
individual acts of resistance and highlighted the weight of structural inequalities such
as racism, capitalism, and sexism.
In contemporary feminist work, explanatory frameworks that deal with power, especially those that address the question of nondecision-making and the tendency of the
mobilization of bias to block challenges to the prevailing allocation of values and
interests – as proposed by Bachrach and Baratz (1970) – are no longer being used.
Thus, there is a scarcity of studies concerned with the limited formulation of public
policies to modify oppressive aspects of gender. Power, however, is present in all areas
of decision-making and in the creation of systems of inclusion and exclusion (Lynch,
2001). Some scholars have challenged the nondecision-making framework and argued
that it cannot be tested. In reply, Chilton (2005) notes that such a framework gives rise
to two alternative hypotheses: a policy may have been either suppressed expressly or
it was foolish to begin with and therefore was not considered at all. However, having a
normative position on a given problem does enable researchers to pursue a given issue
and trace the attention it receives in the policy arena.
Since the 1990s, postmodernism has brought a great deal of subtlety to the consideration of gender issues. Its main exponents are West and Zimmerman (1987) and
Butler (1990). Among the notions proposed by postmodernism: identities are fluid and
changing; power is diffused and relational, with micro-power playing crucial functions; performativity or how gender is constructed daily through social reenactment of
practices and expectations; and metanarratives present truths from the perspective of
those building them. Postmodern thought has been quite influential among educational
researchers dealing with gender issues, although certainly there have been criticisms to
it: moving away from binary and arbitrary categories such as woman and man sounds
reasonable, except that doing so leaves the researcher or the policy-maker without
a subject to refer to, much less to defend. Performativity places much emphasis on
individual agency, when it is precisely at that level, in the face of powerful norms
and the costs for alternative behavior, that people find it most difficult to act differently. Multiple and intersecting differences do create complex subjectivities, but if
one carries this diversity to a logical conclusion, it serves more to paralyze than mobilize. Bradley (2004) contends that instead of looking at gender and gender and class,
postmodern gender studies have delinked gender from social class and focused instead
on sexuality, the body, representation, the media, identity, and nationality. Overall,
postmodern ideas ignore the collective notion of the political, underestimate economic
factors, and do not sufficiently consider the influence of the state, related social institutions, and diffuse structural forces. In short, postmodernism tends to take its diagnosis
of gender problems as the solution itself.

--- [PDF Page 1017 / Book Page 1037] ---

Feminism, Liberation, and Education 1037

Also, since the early 1990s, there has been a theoretical move toward issues of recognition; exponents of this thought include Fraser (1997, 1998) and Phillips (1999).
Fraser (1998) has made major contributions to feminist theory by bringing up the
distinction between redistribution and recognition, arguing that both a just share of
economic resources and the recognition of distinct cultural identities must be involved
in the elimination of gender differences in society. Redistribution in this case refers
to material injustice, associated with economic exploitation, deprivation, and marginalization; recognition refers to cultural injustice, which in this case means women’s
cultural domination, denigration, and lack of recognition and respect. Implicitly, cultural injustice includes the nonrecognition or low recognition of feminine values. It
also includes the failure to value properly the roles that women perform on a daily
basis – those linked to caring and household management and to private sphere work in
general. The notion of recognition seeks to rescue positive self-representations of one’s
own making (Lynch, 2001); in other words, recognition is the acknowledgment by
society that women’s attributes are valuable and that they have right to their own identities. Fraser (1995, 2000) cautions against an identity politics that is divorced from
institutionalized status inequalities; both Fraser (1998) and Phillips (1999) underscore
the need to link problems of recognition to problems of redistribution, or access to
material goods and services. Kenway (2005) feels that perhaps today there is too much
emphasis on aspects related to cultural injustice at the expense of material injustice.
While there is much validity to the assertion that the recognition and the redistributive
aspects of social justice are greatly pertinent to the understanding and modification of
gender relations, this link has not been paid much attention in education although there
has been some effort in several industrialized countries to address issues of difference
and identity (Lynch, 2001) as well as interventions to eliminate sexual stereotypes from
the curriculum. Educational policies have emphasized parity or equal participation of
women and men in schooling. These policies have shown weak admission of the gendered character of society and schooling, and ignored feminist theories that deal with
ideological issues such as patriarchy, material inequality, and identity-based conceptions. Implicitly, educational policies have been based on a theory of gender that relies
on education as the means to foster the economic and social improvement of women
regardless of underlying and pervasive historical and cultural forces. Consequently,
educational policies have followed distribution (the provision of formal schooling)
rather than redistribution (reallocation of resources) and recognition (reallocation of
values and statuses) approaches to gender.

Countervailing Forces
As a movement that seeks major changes in the norms and beliefs that shape society,
feminism has had to contend with several institutional and social responses against
it. Significantly, prevailing feminist theories seldom conceptualize the emergence of
groups that will fight against the introduction of changes in gender ideologies.
In the Latin American context, the Catholic Church has been decisive in preventing
modifications in the curriculum in favor of introducing sex education and the treatment

--- [PDF Page 1018 / Book Page 1038] ---

1038

Stromquist

of sexuality as a cultural practice with differential attributions and consequences for
men and women. Its arguments have usually been that the family is under attack and
that the questioning of the “natural differences between men and women” will lead
to homosexuality (Bonder, 1998). Similar experiences have been documented in the
Dominican Republic, Peru, Costa Rica, Chile, and Mexico. The Church’s tactic of
removing certain issues from discussion resonates with the observations made decades
ago by Bachrach and Baratz (1970), who introduced the idea that when the power of one
set of interests or perspectives prevents fundamental questions from being introduced
into the political agenda, citizens remain ignorant of such issues. In regions influenced
by Islamic norms, women’s place is preponderantly in the domestic sphere.
A more diffuse but widespread force operating against gender issues has been that
of globalization. By fostering the strategy of market-driven solutions and the role of
individuals in moving ahead as opposed to a caring state or solidarity in the resolution of social problems, globalized competitiveness has fostered a climate that both
exalts individualism and limits state participation in the consideration of social issues.
Market-driven (neoliberal) policies, by reducing social services provided by the state,
has shifted burdens to women (Subrahmanian, 2005; Kenway, 2005; González de la
Rocha, 2006), an effect not recognized by state agencies. It could be argued that the
subjugation of women, expressed in their ascribed role in the domestic space, is needed
to subsidize costs for the elderly and the young through care, costs that the state,
especially the neoliberal state, is not willing to pay (Odora-Hoppers, 2005). Despite
these facts, many governments refuse to recognize that neoliberalism disadvantages
women as the welfare state retreats. It has also been noted that many governments
refuse to “grow conceptually” (Kenway, 2005, p. 50), failing to reflect on masculinity and
femininity.6 The competition for survival or for one’s own livelihood has been sharply
reflected in the slowing activism of women-led NGOs, whose levels of funding from
external support have already diminished. Against the less-than-desirable funding of
public schools by many governments, civil society has mobilized to demand greater
state investment in education. In the case of Latin America, for instance, there is a substantial social movement in favor of public schooling of high quality. This movement
has been quite visible in recent World Social Forums and yet it has little to say about
gender issues in education. Consequently, today, civil society has been unable to exert
sufficient pressure from civil society upon states to conduct themselves differently
from a gender perspective.
In industrialized countries, following some limited support for a feminist agenda in
education during the 1980s and 1990s, a backlash against girls’ education has emerged.
This has been observed in Australia (Kenway, 2005), US (Stromquist, 2006a, Nash
et al., 2007), and the UK (Arnot et al., 1999). Essentially, this backlash, known also
as “the boys movement”, argues that there have been “gender wars in the classroom”,
a result of which is that boys are suffering in terms of school access and performance.
The complaint now is that all the attention to assist girls has resulted in a disregard
of boys, who have been falling behind in terms of academic achievement and college
completion. The arguments here move along the lines of boys and men in crisis rather
than on the examination of the nature of gender cultures or the formation of pluralistic notions of masculinity; it tends them to see men as victims of feminist action

--- [PDF Page 1019 / Book Page 1039] ---

Feminism, Liberation, and Education 1039

(Kenway, 2005). In the US, the backlash against girls and women has also taken the
form of the “homosexual threat”, with sex education programs delivered by religious
groups with federal government support to promote the notion of sexual abstinence
and the labeling of masturbation as a “gateway drug” (Kendall, 2006). This backlash
is also occurring in a climate that provides little attention to the differences in the
labor market and political representation and their connection to gender ideologies.
Several explanations for the reduced presence of men in education exist. Some observers assert, without evidence, that schools are becoming more girl- than boy-friendly.
Others argue that it is easier for boys than for girls to join the labor market at lower levels of education, in such occupations as construction, mechanics, and transportation.
Still others think that women tend to persist more in education because they realize
they need more leverage to compete in the labor market. In any case, it seems that reindustrialization (in developed countries) and deindustrialization (in many developing
countries) has affected working-class men, leaving many without work and without the
traditional working-class culture that supported their masculinity (Kenway, 2005).

Conducting Institutional Change
The experience across several decades of efforts to improve school experience and
content so that gender issues may be properly treated tells us change is possible but
difficult. At present, the dominant school culture presses toward high performance,
as manifested in individual achievement scores and, from those, in the production of
school rankings. Efforts to address gender today face a hostile environment and the
spaces where women can negotiate and even resist are increasingly more limited.
Various complementary strategies could be put in place, from mainstreaming gender
in all educational functions, to building capacity among those in charge of implementing gender equity policies and programs, to altering educational materials and
curricula to incorporate gender issues, to modifying school environments so that most
of their physical spaces are conducive to supportive environments for the re-creation
of gender along less polarized lines.
Gender mainstreaming is a comprehensive strategy that has been tried in very few
countries (notably, South Africa7) and is one that demands solid commitment for it
to work. Training is indispensable and it is clear that it cannot be limited to teachers.
Principals, high-level education authorities, and policy-makers in general must have
exposure to systematic knowledge about gender. Teacher training, crucial as it is, is
seldom explicitly considered in policy documents, nor is it considered in the regulations that follow them. From a gender perspective, the absence of pre-service and
in-service training is one of the major weaknesses of public policies.8
Gender-related knowledge should be incorporated into formal education via two
main types of courses: those dealing with sex education and those dealing with social
studies (including civic education). Such courses should consider themes common
to all countries as well as those relevant to specific countries. For instance, students
across the world should receive knowledge about sexuality, masculinity, gender, and
responsible sexuality, but sexuality in serious matters such as HIV/AIDS should receive

--- [PDF Page 1020 / Book Page 1040] ---

1040

Stromquist

major importance in the southern Africa region. In some countries, especially in rural
areas, there are substantial problems with the sexual abuse of girls in schools, so this
issue should receive clear attention. Civic education should include discussion of citizenship and how it still has many gendered features; in particular, it should foster the
recognition of human differences and promote solidarity and collective action. More
state-guided interventions would be needed to engage in tangible forms of affirmative action in favor of women’s employment in administrative positions. Such policies
should consider the complete cycle: preparation for the job, help at the entry phase,
and assistance for proper performance. Most affirmative action policies at present
limit themselves to entry.
Efforts to work on gender issues have been too centerd on formal education and thus on
young women to the detriment of adult women. Outside schools, away from the gaze of
the state and the strictures of long-established bureaucracies, women’s groups have been
able to attain significant personal change and social modifications through self-organizing
and applying pressure on the state to enact public policies in areas that involve domestic
violence, health, jobs, and political representation. Women’s and feminist organizations
have been working on important gender issues through nonformal education and informal
learning. Usually, these groups have been able to attain more changes than has formal education. As nonformal education serves adults, it incorporates women with varying degrees
of experience in their private and public lives – experience that makes them receptive to
transformative knowledge (Stromquist, 2006c).

Conclusions
The framing of a problem shapes its solution. At present, in different arenas and
for different reasons, there is limited analysis of the gendered nature of social
problems and only modest solutions designed to redress gender-based inequities.
While the state in its national and international forums has been able to produce
global agreements to work on gender and women’s issues, these instruments have
proven to be double-edged. On the positive side, the state has admitted that it
should be responsible for its citizens, and that includes the provision of benefits
and services to women. Global policies have brought salience to issues of gender
and education and have led to the adoption of policies by governments that may
otherwise have done little in that respect. On the negative side, the state has tended
to co-opt the movement and its key concepts, and made its measures devoid of
transformative purposes. State responses are often rhetorical and more recent global
goals have even diminished previously achieved feminist agendas (as has occurred
through several of the MDGs).
Discourses accomplish many tasks. They serve to present certain voices and by
omission to silence others. Those most often presented become more legitimate and
authoritative. Today, governments emit contradictory messages, extolling the values
of individualism and competition and coupling them with declarations in favor of
social inclusion and democracy building. Examined from a sociological perspective,

--- [PDF Page 1021 / Book Page 1041] ---

Feminism, Liberation, and Education 1041

in which issues of content and power differentials are analyzed, it can be concluded
that critical issues of the educational system are not treated. Public policies do not generally dismiss such issues as nonimportant after due consideration; rather, they tend
to ignore controversial gender issues from the beginning. This occurs primarily by the
failure of officials in governments and bilateral organizations to take the educational
feminist literature into account. It also occurs through the co-opting of terms such as
gender, gender equity, and women’s empowerment without a serious effort to deal with
such powerful concepts.
Further compounding the negative situation is the fact that the terrain of gender
politics and education is not very active at present. Moreover, organized women rarely
participate (nor claim to be included) in educational forums. It is difficult to receive
a benefit from bodies in which women do not have a voice and when women’s voices
are too varied. It would seem, therefore, essential to encourage dialogue and alliances
between the academy, civil society organizations, and sympathetic governmental units
to stimulate greater attention to gender in education.
Our contemporary world is characterized by contradictions. Governments now call
simultaneously for market-led development (assumed to take care of everything) and
for human rights and democratization, especially in developing countries. The first,
however, implies no state resources while the second makes them indispensable. While
governments do express contradictory objectives at the discursive level, at the practical
level, the emphasis is clearly on market-led efforts. Although public policies are being
constantly enacted, the use of policy instruments such as material resources, legislation, equity plans and reports, and the establishment of gender machineries within the
state lag well behind the use of symbolic politics.
The issue of gender in education has reflected considerable shifting in its ideological treatment. Among women-led NGOs, especially in developing countries, there is
a concern with access to education and ensuring that gender parity is attained at all
levels of education. Women’s groups are concerned with the MDGs and would like
to see them become a reality. Among women in academic spaces, gender is being
conceptualized in forms that derive more from the humanities (philosophy and literary theories) than from the social sciences and that seek to understand gender in its
full and elusive complexity rather than linked to making interventions to address
the asymmetrical power consequences of gender. As postmodernism has become
stronger in the academy, it has provided a bonus in the formulation of new ideas and
perspectives without having solved old problems. In some ways, theory functions
as a refuge from action. And, yet, as Lynch reminds us: “It is increasingly recognized that unless research on inequality develops some means of working towards an
emancipatory goal for those with whom or about whom it speaks, there is a very real
sense in which the research process becomes another tool of oppression.” (Lynch,
2001, p. 243). Looking ahead, the real challenge for feminism lies in its ability to
present a united front, both theoretical and practical, in its strategies to persuade men
to join a struggle for ideological transformation, and in its ability to enter a negotiation for policy purposes that includes a recognition of the Other, one that nonetheless
represents more than half of humanity.

--- [PDF Page 1022 / Book Page 1042] ---

1042

Stromquist

Notes
1 Not surprisingly, pregnancy and motherhood are significant determinants among girls for dropping
out of school.
2 By the end of 1999, PROGRESA covered 2.6 million families, or about 40% of all rural families
and one ninth of all families in Mexico, operated in almost 50,000 communities, and represented
an annual investment of $777 million (or 0.2% of Mexico’s GPD (Behrman & Skoufias, 2006). Its
successor, Oportunidades, was reaching about 5 million families by 2005.
3 The BRAC schools, in existence since 1985, now number 40,000 and have served close to 8% of
the primary school population in the country.
4 The Quetta program is small, reaching some 10,000 students in schools that comprise about 30%
girls.
5 This section is a highly personal account of how theoretical issues have evolved. Several others are
possible. The one I present emphasizes the trajectory within the educational sector.
6 Over the past decades, governments have come to recognize as problematic certain situations that
had once been deemed normal and thus beyond legal action. These issues include child abuse
(which was not recognized until 1965), domestic violence, sexual harassment, and marital rape.
7 In South Africa, success has been reported in setting up gender desks in teachers unions to achieve
parity in salaries, intervening in curriculum development to employ a human rights framework
(covering issues of sexual harassment), and promoting more women to management positions
(Mannah, 2005).
8 Given low salaries and poor working conditions in many countries, teachers are generally mobilized by
economic improvement rather than social transformation.

References
Arnot, M. (2006). Freedom’s children: A gender perspective on the education of the learner-citizen.
International Review of Education, 52, 67–87.
Arnot, M., David M., & Weiner G. (1999). Closing the gender gap in education. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Arrighi, G. & Silver, B. (1999). Chaos and governance in the modern world system. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Bachrach, P. & Baratz, M. (1970). Power and poverty. Theory and practice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Behrman, J. & Skoufias, E. (2006). Mitigating myths about policy effectiveness: evaluation of Mexico’s
antipoverty and human resource investment program. Annals of the American Association of Political
and Social Sciences, 606, 244–275.
Blackmore, J. (1999). Troubling women. Feminism, leadership and educational change. Buckingham, UK:
Open University Press.
Bonder, G. (September 1998). La equidad de género en las políticas educativas: La necesidad de una
mirada reflexiva sobre premisas, experiencias y metas. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
Latin American Studies Association, Chicago.
Bradley, H. (2004). Catching up? Changing inequalities of gender at work and in the family in the UK. In
F. Devine & M. Waters (Eds.), Social iunequalities in comparative perspectives (pp. 257–282). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble. Feminism and the subversion of identity. New York: Routledge.
Chilton, S. (November 2005). Does the empirical study of non-decision-making require a normative position? Draft.
Collins, P. (2000). Black feminist thought. Knowledge, conciousness, and the politics of empowerment (2nd
edn.). New York: Routledge.
Connell, R. (1995). Masculinities. St. Leonards: Allen & Unwin.
Connell, R. (1987). Gender and power: Society, the person and sexual politics. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Daly, M. (1978). Gyn/Ecology. The methaethics of radical feminism. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Falk, R. (1999). Predatory globalization: A critique. Cambridge: Polity Press.

--- [PDF Page 1023 / Book Page 1043] ---

Feminism, Liberation, and Education 1043
Fraser, N. (1998). From redistribution to recognition? Dilemmas of justice in a “post-socialist” age. In
A. Phillips (Ed.), Feminism and politics (pp. 430–460). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fraser, N. (1997). Justice interruptus: Critical reflections on the “postsocialist” condition. New York:
Routledge.
González de la Rocha, M. (2006). Vanishing assets: Cumulative disadvantage among the urban poor. Annals
of the American Association of Political and Social Sciences, 606, 68–94.
Guzmán, V. (October 2003). Gobernabilidad democrática y género, una articulación posible. Santiago:
Unidad Mujer y Desarrollo, UN Economic and Social Commission.
Kendall, N. (2006). Intersection of sexuality and public schooling. Paper presented at the American
Education Research Association annual meeting (7–11 April). San Francisco.
Kenway, J. (2005). Gender equity in education: The Australian experience. In L. Chisholm & J. September
(Eds.), Gender equity in South African education 1994–2004 (pp. 39–54). Cape Town: Human Sciences
Research Council.
Krieger, J. (Ed.) (2006). Globalization and state power. New York: Pearson Education.
Lazar, M. (2005). Politicising gender in discourse: Feminist critical discourse analysis as political perspective and praxis. In M. Lazar (Ed.), Feminist critical discourse analysis. Gender, power and ideology
in discourse (pp. 1–28). Houndsmills, UK: Palgrave MacMillan.
Lynch, K. (2001). Creating a dialogue between sociological and egalitarian theory in education. International
Studies in Sociology of Education, 11(3), 237–261.
Mannah, S. (2005). The state of mobilisation of women teachers in the South African Democratic Teachers’
Union. In L. Chisholm & J. September (Eds.), Gender equity in South African education 1994–2004
(pp. 146–155). Cape Town: Human Sciences Research Council.
Mazur, A. (2002). Theorizing feminist policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Messner, M. (1992). Power at play: Sports and the problem of masculinity. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Mohanty, C. (2006). US empire and the project of women’s studies: Stories of citizenship, complicity and
dissent. Gender, Place and Culture, 13(1), 7–20.
Molyneaux, M. (1985). Mobilization without emancipation? Women’s interest, state and revolution in
Nicaragua, Feminist Studies, 11(2), 227–254.
Nash, M., Klein, S., Bitters, B., Howe, W., Hobbs, S., Shevitz, L., & Wharton, L. The role of government in
advancing gender equity in education. In Klein, S. (general Ed.), Handbook for achieving gender equity
through education (pp. 63–101, 2nd edn.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Odora-Hoppers, C. (2005). Between “mainstreaming” and “transformation”: Lessons and challenges for
institutional change. In L. Chisholm & J. September (Eds.), Gender Equity in South African Education
1994–2004 (pp. 55–73). Cape Town: Human Sciences Research Council,
Pateman, C. (1988). The sexual contract. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Perry, L. (2003/2004). Education for democracy: Some basic definitions, concepts, and clarifications.
Political Crossroads, 10–11, 33–43.
Phillips, A. (1999). Which inequalities matter? Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Stromquist, N. (2006c). Feminist organizations and social transformation in Latin America. Boulder, CO:
Paradigm Publishers.
Stromquist, N. (2007). Gender equity education globally. In S. Klein (general Ed.), Handbook for achieving
gender equity through education (pp. 33–42, 2nd. edn.). Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stromquist, N. (Ed.) (2006b). La construcción del género en las políticas públicas. Perspectivas comparadas desde América Latina. Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.
Stromquist, N. (2006a). The dismantling of tools by the master: Evaluating gender equity by the state. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Education Research Association, 7–11 April San Francisco.
Subrahmanian, R. (2005). Gender equity in education: A perspective from development. In L. Chisholm
& J. September (Eds.), Gender equity in South African education 1994–2004 (pp. 27–39). Cape Town:
Human Sciences Research Council.
UNESCO (2003). EFA global monitoring report 2003/4. Gender and education for all. The leap to equality.
Paris: UNESCO.
West, C. & Zimmerman, D. (1987). Doing gender. Gender in Society, 1, 125–151.
Williams, C., Giuffre, P., & Dellinger, K. (2004). Research on gender stratification in the U.S. In F. Devine
& M. Waters (Eds.), Social inequalities in comparative perspectives (pp. 214–236). Oxford: Blackwell.

