================================================================================
Chapter 66: Comparative Education, Postmodernity and Historical Research: Honouring Ancestors
Author(s): Marianne A. Larsen
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 1045–1059
PDF Pages: pp. 1024–1038 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1024 / Book Page 1045] ---

66
COMPARATIVE EDUCATION, POSTMODERNITY
AND HISTORICAL RESEARCH: HONOURING
ANCESTORS
Marianne A. Larsen

The field of comparative education has been particularly slow to get ‘past the post’
(Cowen, 1996) and actively engage with the ideas of postmodernism.1 Over 15 years
ago, Rust, who was then the President of the Comparative and International Education
Society (CIES), commented on our reluctance to consider the implications that new
feminist, postmodern and post-structural theories present for comparative education.
Rust (1991) claimed that postmodernism should be a central concept in our field’s
discourse and called upon comparativists to
define more clearly the metanarratives that have driven our field [and] engage
in the critical task of disassembling these narratives because they define what
comparativists find acceptable, desirable, and efficient in education. At the same
time, we must increase our attention to small narratives [and] the far-ranging
Others of the world. (p. 625–626)
During the 1990s, we began to notice a tentative shift as a few creative comparativists engaged with the ideas of postmodernism. Ninnes and Burnett (2003) traced the
slight increase in the number of citations of post-structural scholars in the comparative
education literature during this period. Comparative education conference themes also
began to reflect an interest in ideas and concepts associated with postmodernity (e.g.,
CIES Western Regional Meeting, 1998; World Congress of Comparative Education
Societies, 2000). Some comparativists used the onset of the new millennium as an
opportunity both to reflect upon our traditions and actively engage with new challenges that the ‘posts’ pose to our field (Cowen, 2000; King, 2000; Koehl, 2000; Mehta
& Ninnes, 2000; Paulston, 2000). Since 2000, there have also been a few publications in the field with a clear postmodern bent, the most obvious being Ninnes and
Mehta’s (2004) edited book Re-imagining Comparative Education: Postfoundational
Ideas and Applications for New Times. We have also seen an increase, albeit a small
one, in publications engaging with post-colonial theory (e.g., Crossley & Tikly, 2004;
Hickling-Hudson, 2006).
However, these shifts have been limited ones and comparativists who explicitly
position themselves as postmodern, post-colonial or post-structural researchers continue to remain on the fringes of our field. Arguably, the relatively late onset of this
1045
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1045–1059.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1025 / Book Page 1046] ---

1046

Larsen

debate within comparative education and relative lack of engagement with postmodernism over the last 15 years is surprising given the related interest in interpretivist and
phenomenological research, and supposed commitment to valuing diversity, pluralism
and heterogeneity within our field.
Despite the marginal position of postmodern thinking within comparative education,
some comparativists have sounded alarm bells over the epistemological and methodological challenges that postmodernism poses for our research and the boundaries of our field
(Crossley, 2000; Epstein & Carroll, 2005; Torres, 1997; Watson, 1998; Welch, 2003). One
critic noted that as a result of these and past methodological debates, our discipline has
lost some of its credibility and become “rootless and directionless”(Watson, 1999, p. 240).
Others have gone so far as to decry the perils and dangers of postmodern thinking, claiming that postmodern comparativists are guilty of perpetuating a hegemonic and totalising
discourse that is “plausibly the most serious challenge ever to boundary stability” that our
field requires (Epstein & Carroll, 2005, p. 63). These critics would concur with Crossley’s
earlier contention that our field has responded too directly to changing disciplinary fashions, with the result that the stages of its own development indicate a rejection of past
practices, rather than a “cumulative advancement” (Crossley, 2000, p. 327).
I disagree with these claims. Contrary to what some of these critics claim, postmodern thought within comparative education is not (yet) a “force to be reckoned
with”; nor have we been witnessing extraordinary growth (Epstein & Carroll, 2005,
p. 64) in postmodern or post-structural thinking within our field. Further, I agree with
Rust and others who believe there is room for a wide range of approaches within our
field. Specifically, as a historian, I am particularly interested in how we can reinvent or
rethink the role of historical research within our field to include the ideas of postmodernism, post-colonialism and post-structuralism.
What I intend to do in this chapter is explore three key ideas. In the first section,
I challenge the claim that historical research has been waning in our field since the early
days of historical comparative education studies. I then turn my attention to the value
of historical research within the field and finally to the specific value of a postmodern
form of historical research for comparative education, drawing upon some of the ideas
and concepts of the French social philosopher Michel Foucault. Finally, I believe that
the work of Foucault provides us with ways to engage with postmodernism, shorn of
some of the excesses its critics so readily point out. In this respect, we can engage with
existing possibilities to rethink historical comparative education research, through a
critical, reflective, multi-interpretive postmodern lens.

A Discontinuous History of Historical Research
in Comparative Education
Contemporary comparativists have noted their concern about the paucity of historical
research within the field since the 1950s (Kazamias, 2001; Sweeting, 2005). Indeed,
this would appear at first glance to be the case. A study of research strategies in comparative education from 1955 to 1994 revealed that there were only a small number of
journal articles which relied on historiography and historical research. Studies based

--- [PDF Page 1026 / Book Page 1047] ---

Comparative Education, Postmodernity and Historical Research

1047

on literature reviews, history and comparative methodology dominated in the field in
the 1960s, but historical studies and literature reviews decreased significantly in the
1980s and 1990s (Rust et al., 1999).
The authors of this study conclude that very few comparative education researchers
note where their work is located within the methodological debates that characterised
the field in the 1960s and 1970s. They suggest that contemporary authors may be
unaware of those debates because they have little historical sense of the field to which
they belong or contribute (Rust et al., 1999). This shift has caused one commentator to
note that our field now suffers from “historical amnesia” (Watson, 1999, p. 235). These
concerns speak to the necessity of having histories of our field written and available for
both new and more well-established comparative education scholars.
Some existing histories provide an overview of comparative education research and
emphasise the centrality of historical perspectives and methods in the field’s early days
(Altbach & Kelly, 1986; Crossley & Broadfoot, 1992; Epstein, 1994; Sweeting, 1999).
These accounts are primarily written as chronological histories of the development of
the field along an evolutionary path. However, as I argue later in this chapter, there is
much to be said for a history that emphasises beginnings, not origins; small stories,
not meta-narratives; and discontinuity over evolutionary principles. Within our own
history, there has been considerable chaos, discontinuity and non-linearity, which this
following short account of the role of historians and historical research within comparative education will attempt to illustrate.
Where one starts one’s history is an act of interpretation. In effect, as historians
we are always constructing the past through the narrative strategies that we adopt,
usually intuitively, to communicate our findings. Like other comparative historians of
education, I choose to start with Sadler, whose words at the turn of the last century
clearly demonstrated the need for comparativists to take into account factors beyond
the school in order to understand education:
In studying foreign systems of Education we should not forget that the things
outside the schools matter even more than the things inside the schools, and govern and interpret the things inside. … A national system of Education is a living
thing, the outcome of forgotten struggles and difficulties, and “of battles long
ago”. (Sadler, 1979, pp. 49–50)
After Sadler’s 1900 speech emphasising the need to take historical contexts into
consideration, there is a long 30-year break until the emergence of works by comparative educationists who were either historians or who explicitly integrated a historical
perspective into their research. Individuals such as Kandel, Hans, Mallison, Schneider
and Ulich approached comparative education from a contextual framework, which
included among other factors the role that history played in the development of educational systems. However, it is important to point out the differences in how each of
these comparativists approached the study of history. Schneider, for example, rejected
the national case studies favoured by Kandel and Hans, emphasising instead the notion
of historical immanence, a kind of ideational and institutional cumulative tendency
possessed by societies (Schneider, 1961).

--- [PDF Page 1027 / Book Page 1048] ---

1048

Larsen

Kandel, Hans and Ulich can be located within the ‘forces and factors’ tradition of
comparative education. They wrote not only about past events, but identified antecedent factors and forces that influenced educational forms, policies, and practices,
and ‘determined’ the evolutionary development of educational systems. The historian
Hans concluded that historical background (complemented by other approaches) is
indispensable to any interpretation of comparative data (Hans, 1959).
Despite claims to the contrary, historical comparative research did not wane during
the 1960s search for a scientific comparative education. Like Hans, Bereday used history as an analytic tool to understand contemporary events. On the other hand, rather
than seeking to uncover historical causes from which explanation and prediction could
be derived, Holmes used history pragmatically through his problem-solving method.
In stark contrast to Holmes’ positivist position, King’s work during that same period
seemed decidedly postmodern for its time. In 1958, he wrote:
In much present day examination of technological, social and educational development we often suppose that a continuous growth or historical ‘evolution’ has
taken place. We also tend to suppose that different levels or stages correspond
fairly closely to chronological periods. We often forget that at any one given
time of considerable change several distinct educational idioms or assumptions
may co-exist for a considerable time. These are not always compatible with one
another. They may be in direct conflict. (King, 1958, p. 169)
Although King contended that most comparative histories assumed continuous growth
and progress in educational development, C. Arnold Anderson noted only 2 years later,
in 1961, that extreme historicism was on the wane, as comparativists were beginning to
reject the unilinear evolutionary orientation which had characterised our early days. Yet,
in that very same year, Ulich’s broad, evolutionary historical analysis The Education of
Nations: A Comparison in Historical Perspective appeared. The contradictions within
our history of historical comparative research are evident here: ambiguities and inconsistencies in how comparative educationists approached the study of the past.
Other historical accounts were published in the 1960s and 1970s, reflecting again
the diversity of historical approaches within the field. We witnessed the publication of Anderson and Bowman’s (1965) Education and Economic Development, and
Kazamias’ (1966) Education and the Quest for Modernity in Turkey. Numerous other
broad-based meta-narratives of historical research appeared soon after by authors such
as Archer, Foster and Zohlberg, Husén, King, Paulston, Ringer and Whitehead, attesting
to the continuing interest in history within comparative education research, even during the ‘science of comparative education’ days.
Another break occurred in the 1970s with the emergence of dependency, world systems and neo-Marxist theorising, which led to further historical studies, positioned
apart from previous accounts in the field. During this period, comparative historical
work shifted to include research on colonialism and cultural imperialism. Shifting
forward 30 years we see both connections to these studies and marked differences in
theoretical perspectives with the emergence of recent post-colonial research, which
has also been framed within historical contexts.

--- [PDF Page 1028 / Book Page 1049] ---

Comparative Education, Postmodernity and Historical Research

1049

Although there was a decrease in comparative education journal articles from historical perspectives throughout the 1970s, we would do ourselves a disservice to ignore
the many thorough histories of education written by comparativists and comparative
accounts of education written by historians from the 1970s through to today. Further, it
is important to point out the historical studies by comparative educationists published
in history journals and overlaps between those who worked within the field of comparative education and those within the discipline of history (Schuster, 2003). Indeed,
one of my own comparative historical studies of education was published in a history
journal (Larsen, 2002) and Cowen (2002) chose the journal History of Education to
expand upon his ideas about time as a key ‘unit idea’ of comparative education.
Although there have been a number of recent calls for the reintegration and reinvention of historical studies within comparative education research (Kazamias, 2001;
Sweeting, 2005), I would argue that there was never an end to history within our field.
I have presented a brief overview of some historical comparative education studies over
the last 75 years. Most of these reflected the dominant paradigm of historical research
focusing on evolutionary principles, grand narratives and seeking to uncover the truth
about the past. However, they approached their topics with varying perspectives and
our own historiography of comparative historical research has been characterised by
its discontinuities, differences and uneven development.

Rationale for Historical Research in Comparative Education
There are numerous reasons to continue our rich tradition of historical research within
comparative education. Addressing the historical contexts in educational policy
research can lead to more sensitively refined recommendations for the improvement
of educational systems. Historical analyses can also better enable us to understand the
educational systems under study. Lastly, and I would argue most significantly, historical research allows us to move towards developing a better understanding of ourselves
and the world.
The use of the historical method within comparative education by individuals such
as Kandel, Schneider, Hans and Ulich was meant to increase understanding of the
development and present status of educational systems. Hans (1959) contended that
the differences of denominational attitudes, national aspirations or what he called
‘national character’ are located deep in the past and sometimes subconsciously determine
our present. Only through historical investigation can we “bring them to the surface,
illuminate their potency in the cultural lives of nations and make comparative education really educative” (p. 307).
Hans was following Kandel’s lead in adopting a historical-functional approach to
the study of comparative education. Kandel argued that comparativists must examine
the “causes” that explain differences between national systems of education. In the
introduction to his 1933 book, he wrote:
In order to understand, appreciate and evaluate the real meaning of the educational system of a nation, it is essential to know something of its history and

--- [PDF Page 1029 / Book Page 1050] ---

1050

Larsen

traditions, of the forces and attitudes governing its social organization, of the
political and economic conditions that determine its development. (p. xix)
Although Kandel’s ‘forces and factors’ approach was intended to facilitate greater
understanding of educational systems, his approach was also melioristic (Kazamias,
1971). Such has been the case with most of the comparative-historical research even
up until today. In this light, comparative educationists have been called upon by international agencies and different levels of governments to suggest improvements for
educational systems. Most of this research, however, is void of historical context.
While most policy research faces financial and time constraints, resulting in little indepth, historical analysis, an argument can be made that we need historical approaches
in order to develop policies that are sensitive to local cultural, social, and economic
concerns. In this light, Watson argues that “comparative historical experience of what
has been tried elsewhere and with what success and failure … is rarely called upon
in policy recommendations, often with depressing consequences. … There is a real
challenge for comparative education to re-establish its unique role in providing comparative historical insights for future policy action” (Watson, 1999, p. 235).
While there might be value in reintegrating historical methods into comparative
education research for problem-solving, policy purposes, others have noted the problems with this direction. We need to be cautious about blending the descriptive, ‘what
is’ approach with a ‘what ought to be’ approach. The comparative education historian
Kazamias (1971) suggests that before one embarks upon the ‘ought’, one should, as
objectively and as dispassionately as possible, investigate what the problem is. Thus,
the historian’s task should not be to prescribe, but rather to describe and illuminate
certain phenomena.
While comparative education has been used as a tool of explanation, prediction
and scientific enquiry, I agree that our field should be more interpretive. We can,
and I would argue, ought to use history to illuminate particular events, contextualise
analyses, and most importantly to understand and problematise not only educational
practices and systems, but the world itself. Indeed, if comparative education is to move
away from prescriptive policy proposals to genuine understanding or Verstehen, then
we need to reconsider Sadler’s idiographic approach (Epstein, 1994). We need to shift
beyond the idea that the task of comparative research is to understand educational
systems to thinking about how our work allows us to “read the world” (Cowen, 2000,
p. 334). In this respect, there is much to learn from historical research. As Bloch (1964)
wrote in The Historian’s Craft, history is animated not by the love of the past, which is
antiquarianism, but by a passion for the present. It is this “faculty of understanding the
living [that] is, in very truth, the master quality of the historian”(p. 43). The question is
how can this be done while taking into account the criticisms, which are outlined next,
that postmodernism has launched against traditional historical research.

Postmodern Critiques of History
Postmodernism is very much a contested terrain between those who would define and
occupy it, and those who would discredit or demolish it. The discipline of history has been

--- [PDF Page 1030 / Book Page 1051] ---

Comparative Education, Postmodernity and Historical Research

1051

actively engaging with these debates for many decades now. As early as the 1930s the
discipline of history faced challenges to its commitment to objectivity from progressive
US historians Beard and Becker who argued that since each individual had his/her own
version of history, history functioned as a cultural myth rather than as an objective account
of the past. They claimed that the ideal of a definitive, objective reconstruction of the past
was chimerical. Facts did not present themselves directly to the historian. Rather, the historian picked and chose among them, guided by his ideological presuppositions, making
it impossible for historians to escape the dominance of practical problems of the present
in determining their interests, values and presuppositions. This relationship to the present
made historians unable to achieve an objective approach to the past or to ever know it as it
actually was (Beard, 1983; Becker, 1983).
The debate over the scientific status of the study of history continued among philosophers throughout the United States and Britain throughout the 1940s and 1950s.
The discussion re-emerged in 1988 with the publication of Peter Novick’s That Noble
Dream: The “Objectivity Question” and the American Historical Profession, in which
he concluded that objectivity is not only a delusion but also an essentially confused
concept (Novick, 1988).
Into the twenty-first century, history’s attempt to follow Herodotus’ goal, “to record
the truth about the past” continues to be challenged by the discourses of postmodernism, post-structuralism, and post-colonialism. Historians have responded in different
ways to postmodern incursions into their field. Some have considered postmodern
challenges as threatening the very existence of history as an intellectual discipline
and consider themselves defenders of history against the relativist onslaught of
postmodernism (e.g., Himmelfarb, 1997; Roberts, 1998). Others, while considering
postmodern contributions to the field of history, maintain a commitment to history’s
objective search for truth (e.g. Appleby, Hunt & Jacob, 1995; Evans, 1997). Lastly,
there have been a few historians and historiographers who have, to varying degrees,
embraced postmodernism as providing exciting new opportunities for their discipline
(e.g., Ankersmit & Kellner, 1995; Berkhofer, 1997; Poster, 1997).
Some postmodernists have identified the end of history with the end of meta-narratives
and traditional ways of knowing. Foucault, Baudrillard, Lyotard, Derrida, Deleuze,
Barthes, Bourdieu and to some degree even Lacan and Althusser all demonstrate in their
work a sense that modernity is coming to an end and that something new is emerging
(Poster, 1997). In this respect, unlike modernists such as Fukayama, who also proclaim the
end of history, they are expressing a postmodern or post-structuralist ‘end of history’ argument. In the contemporary field of historiography, Jenkins (1997) epitomises this approach.
In his introduction to the Postmodern History Reader, he writes:
[T]he whole modernist History/history ensemble now appears as a self-referential,
problematical expression of interests, an ideological – interpretative discourse
without any non-historicized access to the past as such. In fact history now
appears to be just one more foundationless, positioned expression in a world of
foundationless, positioned expressions. (1997, p. 6)
Jenkin’s argument is not so much an end of history as such, but an end of grand narrative history and the more familiar history produced by academic historians.

--- [PDF Page 1031 / Book Page 1052] ---

1052

Larsen

Others who have not gone so far as to proclaim the end of history, view the discipline
as fundamentally flawed. Some have critiqued traditional or ‘normal’ history’s attempt
to provide some kind of true representation and understanding of the past (Berkhofer,
1997). Indeed, in the place of traditional history, postmodernism posits that the past
cannot be the object of historical knowledge, or more specifically that the past is not
and can never be the referent of historical statements and representations.
Like traditional historians, new social historians, including the Annales school,
assume the historian as a stable knower of an objective world, whereby truth is viewed
as the unmediated relation of the historian to the past. Poster’s (1997) critique of the
work of both ‘old’ political-intellectual history and ‘new’ social history demonstrates
how both still seek to attain the truth about the real. Poster, like other postmodern historians, draws largely upon the ideas of the French historian Foucault who provided a
comprehensive critique of the discipline of history.

What Can We Learn From Foucault?
Foucault critiques the discipline of traditional or what he interchangeably calls ‘total’
or ‘continuous’ history for focusing on overarching principles which govern the development of an epoch; its concern with notions such as evolution, development, spirit
of the age or the mentality of a civilisational tradition; the emphasis upon historical
continuity, series, periodisation; and the conception of time in terms of totalisation.
The project of total history, according to Foucault, is:
one that seeks to reconstitute the overall form of a civilization, the principle
– the material or spiritual – of a society, the significance common to all the
phenomena of a period, the law that accounts for their cohesion – what is called
metaphorically the ‘face’ of a period. (1972a, p. 8)
Furthermore, the teleological focus of total history means that it attempts to provide
a direct link between origins and the present in order to legitimise the present as a
continuation of the past.
The historical approach known as archaeology was developed by Foucault in a
number of his earlier writings as an alternative to total history (Foucault, 1972a, b,
1986). The concept of discourse, defined by Foucault (1972b) as systems of statements whose organisation is regular and systematic, consisting of all that can be said
and thought about a particular topic, as well as who has permission to speak and with
what authority, is central to archaeology. Archaeology involves describing recurrent
statements, understood as units or parts of knowledge, found in the archive related to
a topic or theme.
The process of examining texts for recurrent statements on a particular topic or
theme is one aspect of the archaeological method. Archaeological investigation then
involves determining whether or not a statement has fulfilled a set of conditions that
allow it to be considered an instance of a particular discourse. These conditions consist
of the rules, relations, and patterns that connect, relate, and divide what can be said

--- [PDF Page 1032 / Book Page 1053] ---

Comparative Education, Postmodernity and Historical Research

1053

and repeated about a topic (e.g., in The Order of Things, Foucault (1986) attempts to
analyse the rules of formation that regulated the emergence of the human sciences).
Description can therefore allow the historian as archaeologist to establish an open, theoretical model to understand the rules, relations, and procedures between and amongst
statements. This highlighting of the way that knowledge is organised or systematised
makes discourse an analytic tool.
In analysing a group of statements unified by a common theme, archaeological
research does not attempt to smooth over the apparent differences, aberrations, and
inconsistencies between statements. Foucault cautions that the archaeologist should
not force unity and coherence on a group of statements. Rather, archaeology involves
the process of studying forms of division and dispersion. Foucault (1972a) explains
how this process is not an attempt to locate the hidden meaning of contradictions
within documents:
In archaeological analysis, contradictions are neither appearances to be overcome, nor secret principles to be uncovered. They are objects to be described
for themselves, without any attempt being made to discover from what point of
view they can be dissipated, or at what level they can be radicalized and effects
become causes. (p. 151)
From this it is possible to see that archaeology involves the dual process of attempting to locate unity and cohesion, while simultaneously destabilising that same unity.
Discontinuities, divisions and breaks are highlighted, opening up spaces for a more
careful analysis of how a series of statements becomes a recognisable object of discourse. Discontinuity, as I have tried to demonstrate in the above account of historical
research in comparative education, becomes a problem to be investigated. Foucault
(2000) explains:
History becomes “effective” to the degree that it introduces discontinuity into
our very being – as it divides our emotions, dramatizes our instincts, multiplies
our body and sets it against itself. Effective history … will uproot its traditional
foundations and relentlessly disrupt its pretended continuity. (p. 380)
As events, discontinuities are the moments when the normal course of things is interrupted.
Unlike the traditional or social historian who aims to place and order events in a linear,
continuous pattern in order to understand historical laws or phenomena, archaeological research leaves these breaks exposed.
Archaeology points to the specificity of each moment or period in time. Each historical period is viewed as different from our own, but not necessarily better or worse
than the present. Foucault demonstrated this in his book Madness and Civilization,
reversing the traditional narrative of madness and its treatment and showing how the
contemporary situation is neither better nor worse than the past. In his examination of
the ways in which the treatment of the mad has changed, he looked not for some original essential meaning of madness, but how the idea of madness was reinvented over
specific times and places in history for different purposes.

--- [PDF Page 1033 / Book Page 1054] ---

1054

Larsen

Each moment in time is considered within its own specificity, and described without
attempting to connect it in a linear, developmental pattern to that which went before
and that which followed. This process, according to Foucault (2000), entails cultivating “the details and accidents that accompany every beginning” so that the historian
can “recognize the events of history, its jolts, its surprises, its unsteady victories, and
unpalatable defeats” (p. 369–92).
In emphasising the specificity of each moment in time and place, historical events
are described as contingent, meaning that the emergence of any particular event was not
necessary, but only one possible result of a whole series of complex relations between
other events. Thinking causally privileges determinism where the existence of certain
factors, in and of themselves, leads directly to or determines certain outcomes. With
this type of thinking comes the correlative focus on predictability and inevitability. For
if it can be determined that certain events inevitably cause or determine other events to
unfold, then the historian, as social scientist, can predict the likelihood or probability
of a similar event occurring if the correct conditions are met. In many respects, this
form of thinking has characterised much comparative education research, especially
within its international and policy-oriented manifestations.
An examination of conditions rather than causes eliminates the inevitable nature of
how events unfold over time and place. Understanding how a certain discourse arose
out of series of conditions means that there is nothing necessarily inevitable about the
unfolding of historical events. This type of historical research is less certain and predictable, and acknowledges the possibility of a range of different ideas and practices
emerging at any one time and place. In thinking about history in terms of conditions
of possibility, the concern is not to explain why individuals start to think, speak, and
write about educational topics or themes in new ways. Rather, the focus of attention
shifts to how it became possible for new ideas and practices to emerge and new truths
to be invented.
Here we can speak about the productive power of discourse to construct truths
about, for example, educational practices, systems and actors. This conception of discourse moves away from a linguistic approach that concentrates solely on language
as constitutive of truth towards an analysis of the relationship between disciplinary
practices (technologies) and disciplines (bodies of knowledge). Discourse as a practice
creates objects, and by creating them, determines their nature. In other words, objects
determine our behaviour, but our practice determines its own objects in the first place.
Given that there are no things, only social practices, we need to understand the sense
in which language, or discourse speaks through us.
The notion of practice is not mysterious or vague. Foucault, according to the historian Paul Veyne (1997), attempts to see people’s practices as they really are: things
that people do. The difference is that he speaks about practice “precisely” and does
not say:
I have discovered a sort of historical unconscious, a preconceptual agency, that
I call practice or discourse, and that provides the real explanation for history.
Ah yes! but how am I going to manage to explain this agency itself and its trans-

--- [PDF Page 1034 / Book Page 1055] ---

Comparative Education, Postmodernity and Historical Research

1055

formations?” No: he is talking about the same thing we talk about, for example,
the practical conduct of a government; only he shows it as it really is, by stripping
away the veils. (p. 156)
Ideas are only correlatives of corresponding practices, and it is this shift to the notion
of practice and the effects of discourse, which is so powerful in Foucault’s histories.
Finally, Foucault’s archaeological history is a ‘history of the present’ not because
understanding an ideal present is what stimulates investigation, but because history
can be used as a means for diagnosing the present. Understanding of the present as
historical can be best achieved through a process of making the past strange. Perhaps
the best rationale for undertaking historical research then is that is allows us to disturb and shake up that which we recognise as given. Foucault (1980) has stated that
when we use history, we must not allow this history to end, to rest comfortably in its
strangeness, but rather we should attempt “to use it, to deform it, to make it groan and
protest” (p. 54).
Foucault challenges our preconceptions about history and historical research, presenting histories that often confront our taken-for-granted assumptions about the past.
The present appears that much more unsettling, as Foucault attempts not to demonstrate the similarities between the past and the present, but the differences between
the two. In his work, he seeks to isolate past moments of difference or strangeness to
destabilise our present moment and “undercut the sense of naturalness and legitimacy
that surrounds present-day customs” (Poster, 1997, p. 28).
It may seem difficult to grasp Foucault’s concepts such as discourse, archaeology
and genealogy because they are so unfamiliar and removed from the normal procedures of the discipline of history. Yet, as Poster (1997) explains,
when the veils of unfamiliarity are stripped away, however briefly, one can see
that his project does make sense and does offer a new notion of what intellectual history could be about. The texts of the past can be viewed without resort
to the subject and can reveal a level of intelligibility all their own. The problem
of reading Foucault is not that his writing is abstract, or that his style is elusive
… It is rather that he speaks from a place that is new and strange and perhaps
threatening (p. 143)

Conclusion
Like the discipline of history, the field of comparative education requires new cognitive
maps, methodologies and strategies to get us through the next century. Paulston (2000)
has claimed that we ought to become social cartographers, to enable us to reflexively
step out of or into different reality constructs or ways of seeing. Those comparativists, he writes, “who learn to negotiate … the new spaces of knowledge … will have
unprecedented opportunities to imagine and help to shape an interactive postmodern
comparative and international education beyond our understanding today” (p. 363).

--- [PDF Page 1035 / Book Page 1056] ---

1056

Larsen

We have much to learn from the variety of historical approaches that former and
contemporary comparativists have deployed in their research. We also have much to
learn from historians who have actively engaged with the challenges that the ‘posts’
pose to their discipline. And in particular, I would argue that Foucault provides a provocative and powerful postmodern approach to historical studies that would enhance
comparative education research. Indeed, Foucault’s historical, methodological, and
epistemological writings are so compelling because they provide a theoretical bridge
between ideas and practices, and new ways of understanding the past and our present.
Within the wider discussions about the future of comparative education, I contend
that there are multiple methodological and epistemological choices for all comparative researchers. At the 2000 CIES conference, sitting side by side on the same panel,
Rolland Paulston encouraged us to use our imaginations to envision new spacial, visual
and discursive forms of truth, while Andreas Kazamias proclaimed that we needed to
reinvent the historical in comparative education to better understand the world. While
one may initially conclude that these two approaches are divergent, this is not entirely
the case. We have much to gain from challenging the barriers that limit wider debate
and dialogue. Comparative education could benefit from imaginatively adopting the
pluralistic stance, multi-interpretive strategies and general incredulity towards totalising meta-narratives that postmodernism brings to the social scientific tradition.
As noted earlier, there are some who express reservations about the shifts that have
been made within our field towards postmodernism. They argue that in embracing new,
popular trends we threaten the stability of our field’s boundaries and reject our best past
practices. However, our field’s boundaries have never been stable and fixed and there is
no reason why postmodernism should force us to abandon our best practices, including
historical comparative work. We can continue historical research, but need not return
to the modernist-inspired educational histories of our past. Why not risk undertaking
historical comparative education research within a postmodern framework? As Cowen
(1999) has noted, “rather than an acceptable invitation to escape from it into the ludic
or nihilistic, the interstitial or the despairing … the literature on postmodernism and
postmodernity reminds us forcibly of the possibilities of tragedy and chaos and invites
us to step away from our earlier confidence about the possibilities of knowing, with
certainty.” (p. 80)
Foucault’s historical and methodological work provides a cutting edge and crucial
means by which we can engage in historical research. For example, by adopting the
strategies of archaeological research, we can better understand the discursive effects
of classroom, school and community practices on students, their parents and teachers.
Within a postmodern framework, there is also much more to learn from post-colonial
theorising to problematise the legacies of colonialism. Moreover, identifying the ways
that statements produce subject identities can assist in historical research on the construction of gender, race and the ‘Other’ within educational contexts.
Foucault can help us rethink how we have seen the past and its relations to our
present, rather than providing us with prescriptive answers about what to do in the
future. Foucault’s work, according to Rorty, can be read as “exhibiting the unexpected
and painful consequences of our ancestors’ attempts to do the right thing, rather than

--- [PDF Page 1036 / Book Page 1057] ---

Comparative Education, Postmodernity and Historical Research

1057

as explaining the inadequacy of our ancestors’ concepts to the great big object they and
we are trying to grasp.” (1995, p. 225)
In writing about ancestors, Epstein and Carroll (2005) assert that the postmodern incursions into our field are an “abuse” to the historical ancestors of comparative education,
and that certain postmodern thinkers are nothing more than “abusing our ancestors”.
I could not disagree more with their conclusions. Proposing that we engage with postmodern ideas and concepts is no more an abuse to our ancestors than is the suggestion
that we engage with ethnographic research or any other research methods that were foreign to early comparativists. Furthermore, it is an overstatement to accuse postmodernists
such as Foucault of abusing us. Indeed, by allowing ourselves as comparative education
researchers to consider the potentials of postmodernism in our historical research we
honour our ancestors who drew upon a multiplicity of approaches in their research and
we honour those postmodern ancestors who dared to do history differently.

Note
1. Postmodernism is a slippery concept, making it difficult, if not impossible, to define. Briefly, I am concerned here primarily with postmodernism as representing the idea that Western society has undergone
a major shift, which has been characterised by a repudiation of the Enlightenment project of progress,
evolution and commitment to reason. Postmodernism seeks to replace the grand narratives of modernity
with a multiplicity of discourses, a questioning of the legitimacy of knowledge and power, along with a
critique of the idea of truth. Lyotard’s (1984) statement that postmodernism is an expression of “incredulity towards meta-narratives” (p. xxiv) best exemplifies this stance. I use the term postmodernism
throughout the chapter as an umbrella under which fall the related concepts: post-colonialism and poststructuralism.

References
Altbach, P. G., & Kelly, G. P. (1986). New approaches to comparative education. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Ankersmit, F., & Kellner, H. (1995). A new philosophy of history. London: Reaktion Books.
Appleby, J., Hunt, L., & Jacob, M. (1995). Telling the truth about history. New York: W. W. Norton.
Beard, C. A. (1983). “Written history as an act of faith” Annual address of the President of the American
Historical Association, delivered at Urbana. December 28, 1933. American Historical Review, 39(2),
219–231.
Becker, C. (1983). “Everyman his own historian” Annual address of the President of the American
Historical Association, delivered at Minneapolis. 29 December 1931. American Historical Review,
37(2), 221–236.
Berkhofer, R. (1997). The challenge of poetics to (normal) historical practice. In K. Jenkins (Ed.), The postmodern history reader (pp. 139–157). London: Routledge.
Bloch, M. (1964). The historian’s craft. New York: Vintage.
Cowen, R. (1996). Last past the post: Comparative education, modernity and post modernity. Comparative
Education, 33, 131–170.
Cowen, R. (1999). Late modernity and the rules of chaos: An initial note on transitologies and rims. In R.
Alexander, P. Broadfoot & D. Phillips (Eds.), Learning from Comparing: new directions in comparative
education research (Vol. 1, pp. 73–87). Oxford: Symposium Books.
Cowen, R. (2000). Comparing futures or comparing pasts? Comparative Education, 36(3), 333–342.
Cowen, R. (2002). Moments of time: A comparative note. History of Education, 31(5), 413–424.
Crossley, M. (2000). Bridging cultures and traditions in the reconceptualising of comparative and international education. Comparative Education, 36(3), 319–332.

--- [PDF Page 1037 / Book Page 1058] ---

1058

Larsen

Crossley, M., & Broadfoot, P. (1992). Comparative and international education research in education: Scope,
problems, potential. British Journal of Educational Research, 18(2), 99–112.
Crossley, M. & Tikly, L. (2004). Postcolonial perspectives and comparative and international research in
education: a critical introduction. Comparative Education, 40(2), 147–156.
Epstein, E., & Carroll, K. T. (2005). Abusing ancestors: Historical functionalism and the postmodern deviation in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 49(1), 62–88.
Epstein, E. (1994). Comparative and international education: Historical overview and development. In T.
Husen & N. Postlethwaite (Eds.), International Encyclopedia of Education (2nd edn., pp. 918–923).
New York: Pergamon.
Evans, R. J. (1997). In defence of history. London: Granta.
Foucault, M. (1972a). The archaeology of knowledge and discourse on language. New York: Pantheon
Books.
Foucault, M. (1972b). The discourse on language. In M. Foucault (1972), The archaeology of knowledge and
discourse on language. New York: Pantheon Books.
Foucault, M. (1980). Prison talk. In C. Gordon (Ed.), Michel Foucault: Power/Knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings 1972–1977. Brighton: Harvester.
Foucault, M. (1986). The order of things: An archaeology of the human sciences. London: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (2000). Nietzsche, genealogy, history. In J. D. Faubion (Ed.), Aesthetics, method and epistemology: Essential works of Foucault: 1954–1984 (vol. 2, pp. 369–392). London: Penguin.
Hickling-Hudson, A. (2006). Cultural complexity, post-colonialism and educational change: Challenges for
comparative educators. Review of Education, 52, 201–218.
Hans, N. (1959). The historical approach to comparative education. International Review of Education,
5(3), 299–309.
Himmelfarb, G. (1997). Telling it as you like it: Postmodernist history and the flight from fact. In K. Jenkins
(Ed.), The postmodern history reader (pp. 158–174). London: Routledge.
Jenkins, K. (1997). Introduction: On being open about our closures. In K. Jenkins (Ed.), The postmodern
history reader (pp. 1–35). London: Routledge.
Kandel, I. L. (1933). Studies in comparative education. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Kazamias, A. M. (1971). Some old and new approaches to methodology in comparative education. In K.
I. Gezi (Ed.), Education in comparative and international perspectives. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Kazamias, A. (2001). Re-inventing the historical in comparative education: Reflections on a protean episteme by a contemporary player. Comparative Education, 37(4), 439–449.
King, E. (2000). A century of evolution in comparative studies. Comparative Education, 36(3), 267–277.
King, E. J. (1958). Other schools and ours: Comparative studies for today. New York: Rinehart.
Koehl, R. (2000). Toward an archaeology of comparative education. In J. Bouzakis (Ed.), Historical-comparative perspectives: Festschrift for Andreas M. Kazamias (pp. 123–136). Athens: Gutenberg.
Larsen, M. (2002). Pedagogic knowledge and the Victorian Anglo-American teacher. History of Education,
31(5), 457–474.
Lyotard, J. F. (1984). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press.
Mehta, S., & Ninnes, P. (2000). Postpositivist debates and comparative education: Resistance, reinvention,
revolution. Paper presented at the CIES Annual Meeting, San Antonio.
Ninnes, P., & Burnett, G. (2003). Comparative education research: Poststructuralist possibilities. Comparative
Education, 39(3), 279–297.
Ninnes, P., & Mehta, S. (Eds.) (2004). Re-imagining comparative education: Postfoundational ideas and
applications for new times. New York: Routledge.
Novick, P. (1988). That noble dream: The “Objectivity Question” and the American historical profession.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Paulston, R. (2000). Imagining comparative education: Past, present, future. Compare, 30(3), 353–367.
Poster, M. (1997). Cultural history & postmodernity: Disciplinary readings and challenges. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Roberts, D. D. (1998). Postmodern continuities: Difference, dominance, and the question of historiographical renewal. History and Theory, 37, 388–400.

--- [PDF Page 1038 / Book Page 1059] ---

Comparative Education, Postmodernity and Historical Research

1059

Rorty, R. (1995). The end of Leninism and history as comic frame. In A. M. Melzer, J. Weinberger & M. R.
Zinman (Eds.), History and the idea of progress (pp. 211–226). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Rust, V. D. (1991). Postmodernism and its comparative education implications. Comparative Education
Review, 35, 610–626.
Rust, V. D., Soumare, A., Pescador, O., & Shibuya, M. (1999). Research strategies in comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 43(1), 86–109.
Sadler, M. (1979). How far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of foreign educational
systems? Paper presented at the Guildford Educational Conference, Christ Church, Oxford, 1900. In J.
H. Higginson (Ed.), Selections from Michael Sadler: Studies in World Citizenship. Liverpool: Dejall &
Meyorre International Publishers.
Schneider, F. (1961). The immanent evolution of education: A neglected aspect of comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 4, 136–139.
Schuster, K. (2003). Comparing histories of comparative educational research: Trends from the pages of
the comparative education review and the history of education quarterly. Paper Presented at the CIES
Annual Meeting. Salt Lake City, March 2003.
Sweeting, A. (1999). Doing comparative historical education research: Problems and issues from and about
Hong Kong. Compare, 29(3), 269–286.
Sweeting, A. (2005). The historical dimension: A contribution to conversation in comparative education.
Comparative Education, 41(1), 25–44.
Torres, C. A. (1997). Social cartography, comparative education and crititical modernisms: An afterthought.
In R. G. Paulston (Ed.), Social cartography: Mapping ways of seeing social and educational change
(pp. 417–434). New York: Garland.
Ulich, R. (1961). The education of nations: A comparison in historical perspectives. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Veyne, P. (1997). Foucault revolutionizes history. In A. I. Davidson (Ed.), Foucault and his interlocutors (pp.
146–182). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Watson, K. (1998). Memories, models and mapping: The impact of geopolitical changes on comparative
studies in education. Compare, 28(1), 5–31.
Watson, K. (1999). Comparative education research: The need for reconceptualisation and fresh insights.
Compare, 29(3), 234–248.
Welch, A. (2003). The triumph of technocracy or the collapse of certainty? Modernity, postmodernity, and
postcolonialism. In R. F. Arnove & C. A. Torres (Eds.), Comparative education: The dialectic of the
global and the local (2nd edn., pp. 25–49). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

