================================================================================
Chapter 67: Aspects of Educational Transfer
Author(s): David Phillips
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 1061–1077
PDF Pages: pp. 1039–1055 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1039 / Book Page 1061] ---

67
ASPECTS OF EDUCATIONAL TRANSFER
David Phillips

There has always been much agonising and disagreement about the definition, purpose, and methods of comparative education. But there might be general agreement on
one thing, namely, that among the aims of comparative inquiry in education should be
the intention to learn from the foreign experience, to identify aspects of educational
provision ‘elsewhere’ that might serve as lessons for the ‘home’ situation, that might
be ‘borrowed’ or ‘copied’, ‘emulated’, ‘imported’, ‘appropriated’ – the vocabulary is
both diverse and in various ways problematic – that might result, in Michael Sadler’s
words, ‘in our being better fitted to understand our own [system]’ (Sadler, 1900, in
Higginson, 1979).
The idea that policy and practice might be ‘borrowed’ or ‘transferred’ from other
locations has, then, been a continuing theme – both enthusiastically embraced and
dismissed as a simplistic notion – since the early days of comparative inquiry in
education.
In this chapter I shall be concerned with ways in which notions of policy transfer
have developed and in turn been analysed over the past 200 years or so. I shall refer
to ‘policy borrowing’ as meaning the ‘conscious adoption in one context of policy
observed in another’ (Phillips & Ochs, 2004a, p. 774). ‘Borrowing’ is therefore seen
as a deliberate, purposive phenomenon in educational policy development. Borrowing
in this sense is a part of ‘educational transfer’, which can be seen to cover a range of
possibilities for the movement of ideas and practices (see Figure 2).
First, I shall consider the place of borrowing in the work of some key figures in the
development of comparative education since the beginning of the nineteenth century.
Then I shall describe some examples of borrowing over a long historical period and
in various contexts. Next, I shall sketch some of the most important recent research
into this general field of inquiry in comparative education. Finally I shall look at some
present and future developments.

Borrowing
Marc-Antoine Jullien in his Plan for Comparative Education of 1816/17 had the
implicit aim of identifying practices that might be transferable from one system to
others:

1061
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1061–1077.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1040 / Book Page 1062] ---

1062

Phillips

One could judge with ease those [European nations] which are advancing; those
which are falling back, those which remain stationary; what are, in each country,
the deficient and ailing sections; what are the causes of internal defects which
one would have noticed; or what are the obstacles to the ascendancy of religion, ethics, and social advancement, and how these obstacles can be overcome;
finally, which parts offer improvements capable of being transposed from one
country to another, with modifications and changes which circumstances and
localities would determine suitable. (Fraser, 1964, p. 37)
This curiously modern ambition reminds us, incidentally, of the information collected
in the OECD’s Education at a Glance surveys and of the use that might be made of
the PISA data.
If we jump ahead a few decades we can see much in the work of Matthew Arnold
as Inspector of Schools that would lend itself to notions of borrowing. In his various
writings it is clear that he found a lot to commend in what he observed in educational
provision in Prussia and in France especially. But he was sanguine about the use that
might be made of his findings:
‘I hope with time to convince people,’ he wrote in a letter of April 1868, ‘that I
do not care the least for importing this or that foreign machinery, whether it be
French or German, but only for getting certain English deficiencies supplied’.
(Murray, 1997, p. 240)
Arnold’s scepticism about educational ‘import’ is mirrored in a comment by the Oxford
academic and one-time Rector of Lincoln College Mark Pattison, who wrote a report
on education in Germany for a government commission in 1861 (Arnold had reported
on France at the same time):
The utility of … study of a foreign system does not depend on the question:
Are the German primary schools or training colleges better than our own? …
But the same difficulties in the way of national education with which we have to
contend have to be met in the several countries of Germany, only under conditions so altered and infinitely varied as to afford a most instructive lesson. … In
this country we are little likely to err on the side of a hasty imitation of foreign
modes, or to adopt a usage from a neighbouring country, forgetful that its being
successful there is no guarantee that it will adapt itself to our climate. … Much
rather is everyone, who has any information on foreign systems to give, called
upon to come forward with it, not as precedent to be followed, but as material for
deliberation. (Pattison, 1861, vol.4, p. 68)
And no brief survey of the early comparativists and their views on borrowing would be
complete without a reminder of Michael Sadler’s much-quoted speech of 1900:
In studying foreign systems of Education we should not forget that the things
outside the schools matter even more than the things inside the schools, and

--- [PDF Page 1041 / Book Page 1063] ---

Aspects of Educational Transfer 1063

govern and interpret the things inside. We cannot wander at pleasure among the
educational systems of the world, like a child strolling through a garden, and
pick off a flower from one bush and some leaves from another, and then expect
that if we stick what we have gathered into the soil at home, we shall have a
living plant. A national system of Education is a living thing, the outcome of
forgotten struggles and difficulties, and “of battles long ago”. It has in it some
of the secret workings of national life. It reflects, while it seeks to remedy, the
failings of the national character. By instinct, it often lays special emphasis on
those parts of training which the national character particularly needs. Not less
by instinct it often shrinks from laying stress on points concerning which bitter
dissensions have arisen in former periods of national history. (Sadler, 1900, in
Higginson, 1979, p. 49)
So, between Jullien and Sadler, the aims had shifted from reasoned faith in the notion
of educational transfer to balanced scepticism about the possibilities (emphasising in
particular problems of context) and an explicit desire to use the foreign example as
a means by which a ‘home’ system might be better understood. The understanding
thus engendered would then lead to reform which would take into account the home
context. The foreign example could be used as an argument in the policy discussion,
as Zymek demonstrated in a seminal study of 1975, a theme later developed by Gonon
in 1998.
Transfer was a topic frequently addressed by some of the leading middle-to-late
twentieth-century comparativists, among them Brian Holmes and Edmund King.
Holmes (1965), outlining his ‘problem approach’, talks of ‘cultural borrowing’ and
of the force of comparative inquiry as an instrument in educational reform. In attempting ‘the anticipation or prediction of the outcomes of policies’ the comparativist will
want to identify “the universal, vaguely perceived problem, to intellectualise (or analyse) it in general terms, and then to reveal its specific features in selected contexts”
(1965, pp. 34–35). The revelation of such features would not result in their being
directly borrowed but rather would facilitate prediction on the basis of potential reform
which would draw on an analysis of them. In a later study Holmes asks if ‘selective
cultural borrowing is theoretically justified and practically feasible’ (1981, p. 33). He
sees value in ‘ideal-typical models in the light of which a clash of cultures can be analysed’ and argues for “appropriate normative patterns, which will permit us to weigh
all the fruits and educative values of innovation and which will enable us to predict in
known circumstances the outcomes of policy” (!981, pp. 33–34). Implicit in Holmes’s
approach is a rejection of the methods associated with attempts at cultural borrowing
unless the processes involved assist in the identification of general principles on which
prediction might be based.
Edmund King disagreed with Holmes on the subject of prediction, preferring
instead to think in terms of hypotheses. The very way that King would formulate problems indicates a fundamentally different approach. In writing of borrowing he talks in
terms of ‘living examples … elsewhere, which might be in comparable circumstances.
Or they might give some indication of why expected results did not follow apparently
comparable practices’ (King, 1968, p. 87). The foreign example thus helps to explain,

--- [PDF Page 1042 / Book Page 1064] ---

1064

Phillips

to inform and to provide a basis for speculation rather than forms of scientifically
arrived-at prediction.

Historical Perspectives
As I have indicated, it would be wrong to regard ‘borrowing’ as a naïve phase through
which comparative studies have passed, belonging only in stages 1 and 2 of Noah and
Eckstein’s five-stage sequence for the development of the subject.
The first stage for Noah and Eckstein, we may recall, represents the time when
travellers brought back ‘tales’ of what they had observed. Such reports formed ‘the
most primitive… observations’, originating in curiosity and emphasising the exotic
so as to produce stark contrast with the norm at home: ‘Only the rare observer could
extract systematic conclusions with explanatory value from a mass of indiscriminately
reported impressions’ (Noah & Eckstein, 1969, p. 5). British and other travellers who
come into Noah and Eckstein’s first stage were visiting Prussia, for example, out of
cultural and general intellectual curiosity, and they constituted a large group of commentators whose work was very variable in quality.
The second stage covers travellers who had an educational focus to their investigations. These visitors came in order to learn from a foreign example and thereby to help
improve the circumstances ‘at home’. But their reports were ‘rarely explanatory’; they
tended to concentrate on “encyclopedic descriptions of foreign school systems, perhaps enlivened here and there with anecdotes” (Noah & Eckstein, 1969, p. 5).
But another way of looking at phases or stages in the development of comparative
inquiry is to describe, as Michele Schweisfurth and I have attempted, a ‘sequential
chain of emphases beginning at certain broadly defined historical points and continuing alongside the already existing emphases, while modifying them in various ways’.
This is depicted in Figure 1.
This ‘chain of development’ (Phillips & Schweisfurth, 2006, p. 28) starts with a
period limited for the most part to description, as seen in the ‘travellers’ tales’ to be
found in many early accounts of political and social conditions in other countries.
Next, it envisages an overlapping time when observers had a clear political purpose
in mind in their investigations, a desire to influence the policy debate in their home
countries and to suggest aspects of provision elsewhere that might be borrowed. An
example of this approach would be the work of William Howitt (1792–1879) on
Germany, designed to dissuade his British readers from espousing the notion of state
control of education: “The free spirit of England and private interests will never permit
government here, as in Germany, to take charge of, regulate, and enforce the education
of every class of the community” (Howitt, 1844, p. 310). The third major development
came with advances in the collection of statistical data allowing a more sophisticated
analysis of socio-economic conditions and their relationship to educational provision.
German governments were especially adept at the collection of statistics, and by the
time of the setting-up of Michael Sadler’s Office of Special Inquiries and Reports
in London (1895), it was possible to produce authoritative accounts of education in
other countries based on something approaching ‘scientific’ evidence. At the same

--- [PDF Page 1043 / Book Page 1065] ---

Aspects of Educational Transfer 1065
description
- - - - - - - - - --------------------------------------------------------------------------------->

political analysis
------------------------------------------------------------------------->

use of statistical evidence, systematic data collection
----------------------------------------------------------->
------

socio-economic evidence/understanding
------------------------------------------------------->

outcomes analysis
------------------------------------------->

globalised context
------------------------------------------>

postmodern approaches
-------------------------->

Fig. 1. Historical emphases in comparative analysis
Source: Phillips & Schweisfurth (2006, p. 28)

time, as Figure 1 describes, reporting within other traditions continued. Nearer to our
own time we have seen growth in large-scale international surveys of pupil achievement and of the performance of national systems of education, as undertaken by the
International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA) and
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), as well as the
continuing work of theorists who monitor globalising trends and explore postmodern
themes in education (Phillips & Schweisfurth, 2006, pp. 28–29). Policy borrowing
would be a feature of each of these overlapping periods of emphasis.
Almut Sprigade has shown that in the early decades of the nineteenth century there
was far more sophistication than is usually supposed in the reporting of the foreign
example in education. Her study confirms, as she puts it,
the existence of a broad spectrum of information about education abroad in a variety
of sources and [it] supports assertions of expertise in educational comparison and an

--- [PDF Page 1044 / Book Page 1066] ---

1066

Phillips

active involvement of groups and politicians in the exchange and generation of
information about educational provision elsewhere. (Sprigade, 2005, p. i)
In view of this and other evidence, it would be wrong in my view to dismiss interest
in ‘policy borrowing’ as a manifestation of a phase of comparative education through
which we passed long ago.
If a principal purpose of comparative inquiry in education is, to use a term favoured
by W. D. Halls, ‘meliorist’, that is, to improve things (Halls, 1990, p. 23), then (as I have
argued above) it involves ‘learning lessons’, seeking out good practice, identifying educational policy and practice that might be emulated, copied, ‘borrowed’, if you will.
But if the endeavour to learn lessons does result in attempts to borrow, comparativists need to understand the processes involved, to monitor what happens at the policy
level, and to warn appropriately. On a previous occasion I listed some of the forces
which might produce the conditions for an intention to borrow:
Serious scientific/academic investigation of the situation in a foreign
environment
● Popular conceptions of the superiority of other approaches to educational
questions
● Politically motivated endeavours to seek reform of provision by identifying clear
contrasts with the situation elsewhere (what Steiner-Khamsi calls ‘scandalising’
the situation at home)
● Distortion (exaggeration), whether or not deliberate, of evidence from abroad to
highlight perceived deficiencies at home (a common feature of reporting in the
popular press) (Phillips, 2000b, p. 299)
●

Below I shall look at examples of actual and potential transfer – at various levels of
sophistication – between countries (with a particular focus on British interest in educational provision in Germany over a long period) and point to some heuristic devices
to aid analysis of the processes involved.

Examples
An early example of serious attraction to a foreign example is to be found in an
account written by John Quincy Adams of his travels in Silesia in 1800 and 1801 and
published in London in 1804. Adams (1767–1848) was at the time the US Minister
Plenipotentiary in Berlin; the son of an American President, he was to hold among
other offices the post of Ambassador to Great Britain, to be elected to the Senate,
and to become the sixth US President in 1825. Adams’s description of progress in
elementary education in Prussia was later to be cited in England in a 1839 report of the
Committee of Council, Recent Measures for the Promotion of Education in England,
and is worth quoting in part as a good example of early interest in educational provision ‘elsewhere’ and the lessons to be learnt from it:
Adams writes appreciatively of the educational reforms of Frederick the Great: it
was due to ‘the zeal with which he pursued the purpose of spreading useful knowledge
among all classes of his subjects’, that compared to the United States,

--- [PDF Page 1045 / Book Page 1067] ---

Aspects of Educational Transfer 1067

[p]robably, no country in Europe could so strongly contest our pre-eminence in
[elementary education] as Germany. (1804, p. 362)
He mentions in particular the training of teachers:
The teachers are directed to give plain instruction, and upon objects applicable to
the ordinary concerns of life; not merely to load the memory of their scholars with
words, but to make things intelligible to their understanding; to habituate them to the
use of their own reason, by explaining every object of the lesson, so that the children
themselves may be able to explain it, upon examination. (1804, p. 366)
And he cites the regulations in place for compulsory attendance and for inspection:
The school-tax must be paid by the lord and the tenants, without distinction
of religions. In the towns, the school must be kept the whole year round. It is
expected that one month shall suffice to make a child know the letters of the
alphabet; that in two it shall be able to join them; and in three, to read. The boys
must all be sent to school, from their sixth to their thirteenth year, whether the
parents are able to pay the school-tax or not. For the poor, the school-money
must be raised by collections. Every parent or guardian who neglects to send
his child or pupil to school, without sufficient cause, is obliged to pay a double
school-tax, for which the guardians shall have no allowance. Every curate must
examine, weekly, the children of the school in his parish. A general examination
must be held annually, by the deans of the districts, of the schools within their
respective precincts; and a report of the condition of the schools, the talents and
attention of the school masters, the state of the buildings, and of attendance by
the children, made to the office of the vicar-general, who must transmit all these
reports to the royal domain offices. From these, orders are issued to the respective landraths, to correct the abuses and supply the deficiencies indicated in the
reports. (1804, p. 367–368)
This relatively enlightened reporting covers matters of great concern in the early decades
of the nineteenth century, as the debate began about the nature of educational provision and
in particular the involvement of the state in it. The detail here is important, since it provides
a blueprint for possible emulation and can thus be seen as an early example of identifying
‘what works’ in another system. There is of course no intention to ‘borrow’ from experience in Silesia, but information of the kind collected by Adams was routinely fed into the
policy discussion and was used by others advocating reform.
Let us move from the personal to the official. A 1834 House of Commons Select
Committee Report on the promotion of education in England was to include evidence
from witnesses who could give testimony on the basis of first-hand experience of education in Germany. Here is what appears to be a verbatim record of an interview with
William Davis, who ran a school in Whitechapel, London (on the lines of Bell’s monitorial
system). The context is a discussion about expanding educational provision in England
and exploring ways in which such expansion had occurred in Germany.

--- [PDF Page 1046 / Book Page 1068] ---

1068

Phillips

Are you of opinion that it is exceedingly desirable that a more extended system of
education should be established?
– Yes, if possible.
And that with that system of education a system of employment should be combined,
so as to give children useful habits?
– Yes; perhaps it may not be irrelevant to observe I have known much about foreigners of the lowest class, who have come to England for employment, and I have
scarcely known an instance where one of them (Germans) could not write his
name and read his Bible.
You mean to say that there is a much larger proportion of foreigners than of English
who can do that?
– I have scarcely found one in my own experience, among many hundreds whom I
have known, who could not read and write.
Are the class of foreigners with whom you have been conversant as low as those in this
country whom you have known?
– They come from the class of peasantry of their own country, and are here chiefly
labourers to the sugar refiners.
Have you found the German sugar bakers who have come to this country better educated than men of similar stations of life, and similar occupations in this country?
– I should think upon the whole they are better educated. (Report from Select
Committee, 1834, p. 215)
This exchange is also worth quoting in detail, since it provides evidence of serious
official endeavour at an early period – a time when there was serious debate about the
need to consider state intervention in education in England – to identify evidence that
might account for the perceived superiority of provision elsewhere. It is an example of
what Steiner-Khamsi calls ‘scandalising’ the home system.
Thereafter many official reports in England throughout the nineteenth century devoted
much space to consideration of foreign examples in education, a habit which continued in
the twentieth century. Michael Sadler’s Office of Special Inquiries and Reports produced a
remarkable range of studies on multifarious aspects of foreign systems of education in the
period 1895–1905, an initiative which was emulated from 1989 by successive ministries
of education in London which published reports on education in other countries (including no fewer than eight on education in Germany). These reports can be related directly or
indirectly to decision-making in the policy realm.
The London Borough of Barking and Dagenham provides an important modern case
study of borrowing in England on a local scale. The Chief Education Officer of this
local education authority (LEA) initiated an extraordinary plan to improve teaching in
local schools by learning from foreign examples. A special study was made of mathematics teaching in Swiss schools where good practice was observed and analysed and
then ‘copied’ by teachers in the LEA. This involved the active cooperation of schools
and the training of staff in new teaching techniques, together with the development
of explanatory handbooks. This unusual example of the successful ‘transplanting’ of
good practice identified elsewhere into the home environment resulted in observable
improvement in standards in mathematics in the LEA (Ochs, 2006).

--- [PDF Page 1047 / Book Page 1069] ---

Aspects of Educational Transfer 1069

In the United States we might mention the important work of Horace Mann,
whose account of education in Germany was widely influential, that of Calvin
Stowe (1838) and of Henry Barnard (1861, 1876), as well as William Torrey
Harris’s vast ‘International Education Series’. Notably in the twentieth century there
were important reports from the US Department of Education on education in Japan
(1987) and Germany (1999), countries whose educational provision has attracted
much attention around the world.
In France, the report on education in Prussia by Victor Cousin was hugely influential. Translated into English (by Sarah Austin), it received widespread coverage in
reviews and reports and was used both positively and negatively in the policy debate
over a long period (Cousin, 1864).
In Japan we can cite the curious instance of the Iwakura Mission. Led by Iwakura
Tomoni, a Japanese delegation set sail for Europe and the United States in 1871 and
spent 1 year and 9 months away from Japan. It comprised half the government of
the day. The mission was huge (107 in all), and its objectives were wide-ranging: to
present credentials to countries with which treaties had been concluded; to begin treaty
revisions; and to observe and investigate advanced societies in order to determine what
features of those societies might assist the modernisation of Japan. This latter objective became the principal aim of the mission. The embassy visited the United States,
Britain, France, Belgium, The Netherlands, Germany, Russia, Denmark, Sweden,
Italy, Austria, and Switzerland. It included an investigation of educational provision in
the countries visited. A detailed report on the Embassy’s travels and findings was put
together by the Confucian scholar Kume Kunitake (1839–1931) and published in 1878
(Tokumei zenken taishi Beiõ kairan jikki) (Kume, 2002).
In South Africa since the end of Apartheid we have seen the problematic import of
‘outcomes based education’ (OBE), despite worries about this style of teaching and
learning in ‘exporter’ countries. This provides a good example of failure to learn from
the foreign example and of insufficient attention to the importance of context. For
OBE to work there has to be at an appropriate infrastructure in place to support it. To
move swiftly from traditional modes of teaching and learning to a situation where a
teacher could say to pupils ‘I’m not the sage on the stage but the guide on the side’ was
seriously mistaken (Jansen, 2004; Spreen, 2004).
Elsewhere (Phillips, 2000b, pp. 302–303) I have listed the positive and negative use
made of the German example during the nineteenth century in Britain. The positive
features of German provision in education which attracted observers were:
The coherent systematic nature of educational provision
The unambiguity of the role of the state
● The high standards of basic education
● The long history and developing importance of vocational education
● The attention to technological education and research in the Technische
Hochschulen
● The conceptualisation of the ‘modern’ university
●
●

--- [PDF Page 1048 / Book Page 1070] ---

1070

Phillips

On the negative side, there was concern about:
The intervention of the state in matters which were seen by some observers to be
quintessentially the concern of the people
● The overbearing nature of bureaucratic administration
● The overloaded curriculum and its departure (in the case of the Gymnasium) from
the ideals of Wilhelm von Humboldt
● The tendency towards blind obedience which encouraged the state to be manipulative
of education for its own political and military ends
●

The official voice has therefore been consistently heard pronouncing on positive and negative features of education elsewhere for the past 200 years and more. The task for analysts
of policy transfer is to identify instances of actual ‘borrowing’ of policy and practice and
then to attempt to explain the processes involved. There are some potentially very informative instances of transfer at various stages of what Kimberly Ochs and I have seen as a
‘spectrum’ (Figure 2) ranging from imposition to general influence.
At the extreme (‘imposed’) end of the spectrum we might look at instances of the
imposition of foreign models on countries coming under authoritarian influence from
outside, as in the case of the Soviet bloc countries after the Second World War, or in
the case of colonised countries required to adopt approaches to education common in
the countries of the colonisers. Next we can examine conditions in countries defeated
in war and required by the occupying victors to introduce new measures – the cases of
Germany and Japan after the War are relevant here. Further along the spectrum we can
identify instances of countries being required to change policy and practice in return
for aid of various kinds, from the World Bank, for example. Next comes the deliberate
and voluntary ‘borrowing’, which we have defined as ‘the conscious adoption in one
context of policy observed in another’ (Phillips & Ochs, 2004a, p. 774). Finally, there
is the general influence of educational ideas, ranging from the power of theories of
education developed by such figures of international status as Pestalozzi or Dewey or
Piaget to the forces of educational globalisation.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Totalitarian/authoritarian rule, inc.
Defeated/occupied countries
Required by bilateral and multilateral agreements
Intentional copying of policy/practice observed elsewhere
General influence of educational ideas/methods

Fig. 2. Spectrum of educational transfer
Source: Phillips & Ochs (2004b, p. 9)

--- [PDF Page 1049 / Book Page 1071] ---

Aspects of Educational Transfer 1071

Research
Given this rich historical background, there is a need to develop ways of analysing
what happens in policy transfer of various kinds, and this is what many comparativists and others have been preoccupied with in recent years. In 1989, a special issue of
Comparative Education investigated cross-national attraction in education (Phillips,
1989). The rationale for the papers included was that a commentator from country a,
would write about that country’s apparent interest in aspects of education in country b,
while a knowledgeable observer from country b would react to the nature of country
a’s attraction. Not surprisingly, there was considerable scepticism about the particular
foci of attraction, as an OECD report had argued in a different context: “in nearly all
countries, the reformers advocate following foreign models which their counterparts
in the foreign country themselves criticise in the light of their experience of them” ’
(Grégoire, 1967). Torsten Husén’s contribution spoke of the example of reform in
Sweden being ‘exemplary both ways’:
The reform-minded, particularly in Britain and the Federal Republic of Germany,
who wanted to change in the same direction as Sweden, tended to regard the
reform as exemplary. Those of a more conservative disposition were on the [look
out] for weaknesses and failures, and tended to view it as exemplary in a negative sense. (Husén, 1989, p. 346)
This reminds us of Steiner-Khamsi’s descriptors ‘glorification’ and ‘scandalisation’
in order to illustrate ways in which the foreign example might be used in the policy
debate.
More recently Jürgen Schriewer and others in Berlin have investigated the internationalisation of educational ideas in connection with world system theory (Schriewer,
2000; Caruso & Tenorth, 2002). Schriewer’s concept of ‘externalisation’ involves the
use of foreign models in attempts to legitimise controversial reform proposals ‘at
home’ (Schriewer, 1990).
Steiner-Khamsi has looked at policy borrowing using in particular examples from
Mongolia and Ghana (Steiner-Khamsi & Stolpe, 2006; Steiner-Khamsi & Quist,
2000).
Beech (2005, 2006a, b), Tanaka (2003), Ochs (2005), Sprigade (2005) and Rappleye
(2006) have examined a wide range of instances of policy transfer in many different
contexts and at various times.
Kimberly Ochs and I have described models and other devices designed to analyse
processes of policy borrowing, using for the most part British attraction to educational provision in Germany (Ochs & Phillips, 2002a, b; Phillips, 1989, 1993, 1997,
2000a, b, 2002, 2004, 2005, 2006b; Phillips & Ochs, 2003a, b, 2004a, b). Other edited
volumes (Finegold et al., 1993; Steiner-Khamsi, 2004; Phillips & Ochs, 2004b; Ertl,
2006; Phillips, 2006c) have covered policy transfer issues in a variety of present-day
and historical contexts. The historical approach is especially important, since it allows
us to analyse completed processes: the work of Caruso (2002) on foreign adoption of
the Bell-Lancaster (‘monitorial’) system in the nineteenth century is a good example.

--- [PDF Page 1050 / Book Page 1072] ---

1072

Phillips

The devices which Kimberly Ochs and I have produced in Oxford have been concerned with the description and analysis of stages in the policy-borrowing process.
We have postulated a four-stage model describing processes of attraction, decision,
implementation, and internalisation (Phillips & Ochs, 2003a, 2004a, b), and we have
described ‘filters’ or ‘lenses’ through which policy (or practice) might pass as it transfers from one location to another: ‘ideas move and morph’, as Cowen puts it (2006,
p. 567). These devices are not supposed to be applicable to each and every case of borrowing/transfer, but simply to serve as a tool for researchers to use as they trace what
has happened or is happening in cases of educational transfer in a variety of contexts.
They have been described at length in the papers cited above and are reproduced here
as Appendices 1 and 2.

Prospects
I began by asserting the significance of policy borrowing as a theme in comparative
education and the importance of the aim of ‘learning lessons’ through comparative
inquiry in education. So far I have not touched in detail upon globalisation, but it is
clear that more than ever against the background of globalising tendencies there will
be instances of the transfer of educational ideas – deliberately or not – between locations. There will be cases of seemingly irresistible imperatives driving such transfer,
as has been seen in the interesting situation with the Bologna Process in education
in Europe, where long-standing traditions are potentially giving way to a consensual
standardisation.
Here the aim is the creation, by 2010, of a ‘European Higher Education Area’, with
comparability and compatibility of provision from country to country. Ministers of
Education met in Bologna in 1999 and have had a series of meetings since in order to
take forward a programme involving the adoption of a three-cycle system of bachelor,
master, and doctoral degrees and to agree on common approaches to quality assurance
and the mutual recognition of qualifications and their associated periods of study. They
agreed a remarkable series of objectives and declared:
We hereby undertake to attain these objectives – within the framework of our
institutional competences and taking full respect of the diversity of cultures,
languages, national education systems and of University autonomy – to consolidate the European area of higher education. To that end, we will pursue the
ways of intergovernmental co-operation, together with those of non governmental European organisations with competence on higher education. We expect
Universities again to respond promptly and positively and to contribute actively
to the success of our endeavour. (Bologna Declaration, 1999)
The stage is set for an extension of processes observable since the creation of the
European Community towards an ever-closer degree of cooperation, of convergence,
between the member states and the nations of Europe beyond the European Union. It
is this kind of convergence that it will be important for comparativists to monitor, in

--- [PDF Page 1051 / Book Page 1073] ---

Aspects of Educational Transfer 1073

particular to test Cowen’s notion of ‘moving and morphing’ – to what extent will the
notions underpinning the agreement be affected by local contexts?
Contexts are of course the key factor in analyses of policy transfer. Sadler reminded
us of this in 1900, and others had done so in various ways before him. A difficult but
important task for future research is to disentangle the contextual factors that aid or
hinder educational transfer. This will involve detailed investigation of the ‘internalisation’ stage in the model described in Appendix 1.
Equally important will be an investigation of the roles of what in that model are seen
as ‘significant actors’ (individuals and institutions) in promoting or hindering the transfer
of policy and practice. Reportage in all forms will play a part in transfer processes, as we
have seen in the case of worldwide interest in Finland, following that country’s egregious
success in the PISA surveys, or in the case of Germany, as a result of very disappointing
performance in PISA. This too needs to be monitored and critiqued.
There is now a rich body of work on educational transfer upon which to build, and the
further development of case-based theory in this important area of comparative inquiry
will no doubt help to underline the continuing importance of the study of comparative education and the relevance of comparative data to the processes of policy making.

Summary
This survey of aspects of policy transfer in education has attempted to cover a lot of
ground in a short space. In summary, I may attempt some conclusions:
It is important to be clear about the terminology used when discussing transfer,
much of which is potentially problematic; ‘borrowing’ is only one feature in a
spectrum of possibilities for educational transfer.
● ‘Borrowing’ should be seen as a purposive phenomenon, where deliberate attempts
are made to learn from the foreign example and to ‘import’ ideas in the shape of
policy and practice into the ‘home’ system.
● A significant feature of the examination of foreign approaches to educational
problems, whether or not they are ‘borrowable’, is that they help us to better
understand problems ‘at home’.
● In analysing ways in which borrowing takes place it is essential to tackle the
difficult question of context and its appropriateness in terms of accommodating
imported policies and practices.
● An important task for comparativists is to uncover the motives of those advocating the borrowing of aspects of educational provision elsewhere.
● With a seemingly irresistible and increasing convergence in education in a
globalising context, tensions between the global and the local, between standardisation and tradition, will be evident and will constitute a rich area for future
investigation.
●

The centrality of educational transfer as a field of analysis and inquiry in comparative
education is established. It is the task of comparativists to make sure that it continues
to be researched in ever-new contexts.

--- [PDF Page 1052 / Book Page 1074] ---

1074

Phillips

Appendices
1. Four stages of policy borrowing (Phillips & Ochs, 2003a, b; 2004a, b)

IMPULSES
-INTERNAL DISSATISFACTION
-SYSTEMIC COLLAPSE
-NEGATIVE EXTERNAL
EVALUATION
-ECONOMIC CHANGE / COMPETITION
-POLITICAL AND OTHER IMPERATIVES
-NOVEL CONFIGURATIONS
-KNOWLEDGE / SKILLS
INNOVATION
-POLITICAL CHANGE

EXTERNALIZING
POTENTIAL
-GUIDING PHILOSOPHY
-AMBITIONS/GOALS
-STRATEGIES
-ENABLING STRUCTURES
-PROCESSES
-TECHNIQUES

FOUR STAGES
OF POLICY
BORROWING
IN EDUCATION

-IMPACT ON EXISTING
SYSTEM/MODUS OPERANDI
-ABSORPTION OF
EXTERNAL FEATURES
-SYNTHESIS
-EVALUATION

-THEORETICAL
-REALISTIC/PRACTICAL
-‘QUICK FIX’
-‘PHONEY’

-ADAPTATION
-SUITABILITY OF CONTEXT
-SPEED OF CHANGE
-SIGNIFICANT ACTORS
SUPPORT
NATIONAL/LOCAL

RESISTANCE
‘NON-DECISION’
REJECTION

2. Filters in the policy-borrowing process (Phillips & Ochs (Eds.), 2004b)

‘Filters’ in the Policy Borrowing Process
INTERPRETATION

TRANSMISSION

RECEPTION

IMPLEMENTATION

F1

F2

F3

F4

PRACTICE1

PRACTICE2

TIME FLOW/PROGRESSION

ACTORS
ORGANIZATIONS

AGENCIES
MEDIA
PUBLICATIONS

INDIVIDUALS
INSTITUTIONS

CONTEXTS
PRACTITIONERS

--- [PDF Page 1053 / Book Page 1075] ---

Aspects of Educational Transfer 1075

References
Adams, J. Q. (1804). Letters on Silesia, written during a tour through that country in the years 1800–1801.
London: J. Budd.
Barnard, H. (1861). German schools and pedagogy: Organization and instruction of common schools in
Germany, with the views of German teachers and educators on elementary instruction. New York: F.C.
Brownell.
Barnard, H. (1876). German pedagogy: Education, the school, and the teacher, in German literature.
Hartford.
Beech, J. (2005). International agencies, educational discourse, and the reform of teacher education in
Argentina and Brazil (1985–2002): A comparative analysis, unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of
London.
Beech, J. (2006a). The theme of educational transfer in comparative education: A view over time. Research
in Comparative and International Education, .1(.1), 2–13.
Beech, J. (2006b). Redefining educational transfer: International agencies and the (re)production of educational ideas. In J. Sprogøe & T. Winther-Jensen (Eds.), Identity, education and citizenship – Multiple
interrelations (pp. 175–196). Frankfurt am Main, etc.: Peter Lang.
Bologna Declaration (1999). Accessible via http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/educ/bologna/bologna_
en.html
Caruso, M. (2004). Locating educational authority: Teaching monitors, educational meanings and the importing of pedagogical models, Spain and the German States in the nineteenth century., In D. Phillips & K.
Ohs (Eds.), Educational policy borrowing: Historical perspectives (pp.59–87). Didcot: Symposium.
Caruso, M., & H. –E. Tenorth (Eds.) (2002). Internationalisierung: Semantik und bildungssystem in vergleichender perspektive. Frankfurt am Main, etc.: Peter Lang.
Cousin, V. (1864). Report on the state of public instruction in Prussia. London: Effingham Wilson.
Cowen, R. (2006). Acting comparatively upon the educational world: Puzzles and possibilities. Oxford
Review of Education, 32(5), 561–573.
Ertl, H. (Ed.) (2006). Cross-national attraction in education. Accounts from England and Germany. Didcot:
Symposium.
Finegold, D., McFarland, L. & Richardson, W. (Eds.) (1993). Something borrowed, something learned? The
transatlantic market in education and training reform. Washington, D.C.: The Brooking Institution.
Fraser, S. (1964). Jullien’s plan for comparative education, 1816–1817. New York: Teachers College Press.
Gonon. P. (1998). Das internationale Argument in der Bildungsreform. Bern: Peter Lang.
Grégoire, R. (1967). Vocational education (p. 34). Paris: OECD.
Halls, W. D. (1990) (Ed.). Comparative education: Contemporary issues and trends. London: Jessica
Kingsley/UNESCO.
Hayden, M., Levy J., & Thompson J. (Eds.) (2006). The Sage handbook of research in international education. London: Sage.
Higginson, J. H. (Ed.) (1979). Selections from Michael Sadler. Studies in world citizenship. Liverpool:
Dejall & Meyorre.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education. A comparative approach. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Holmes, B. (1981). Comparative education: Some considerations of method. London: Allen & Unwin.
Howitt, W. (1844). German experiences. London: Longman, Brown, etc.
Husén, T. (1989). The Swedish school reform – Exemplary both ways. Comparative Education, 25(3),
345–355.
Jansen, J. (2004). Importing outcomes-based education into South Africa: Policy borrowing in a postCommunist world. In D. Phillips & K. Ochs (Eds.), Educational policy borrowing: Historical
perspectives. Didcot: Symposium.
King, E. J. (1968). Comparative studies and educational decision. Indianapolis and New York: The BobbsMerrill Company.
Kume K. (2002). The Iwakura embassy, 1871–73. A true account of the ambassador extraordinary & plenipotentiary’s journey of observation through the United States of America and Europe, 4 volumes. Chiba
(The Japan Documents).

--- [PDF Page 1054 / Book Page 1076] ---

1076

Phillips

Matlin, S. (Ed.) (2003). Commonwealth education partnerships 2004, edited by S. Matlin, Commonwealth
Secretariat, The Stationery Office.
Murray, N. (1997). A life of Matthew Arnold. London: Sceptre.
Noah, H. J., & Eckstein, M. A. (1969). Toward a science of comparative education. London: Macmillan.
Ochs, K., & Phillips, D. (2002a). Towards a structural typology of cross-national attraction in education.
Lisbon: Educa.
Ochs, K., & Phillips, D. (2002b). Comparative studies and ‘cross-national attraction’ in education: A typology for the analysis of English interest in educational policy and provision in Germany. Educational
Studies, 28(4), 325–339.
Ochs, K. (2005). Educational policy borrowing and its implications for reform and innovation: A study
with specific reference to the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham. Unpublished D.Phil. thesis,
University of Oxford.
Ochs, K. (2006). Cross-national policy borrowing and educational innovation: Improving achievement in
the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham. Oxford Review of Education, 32(5), 599–618.
Pattison, M. (1861). Report of the Rev. Mark Pattison, B.D., Reports of the assistant commissioners
appointed to inquire into the state of popular education in England and Wales (The Newcastle report,
pp. 161–266). London: HMSO. pp.161–266.
Phillips, D. (1989). Neither a borrower nor a lender be? The problems of cross-national attraction in education, Comparative Education, 25(3), 267–274.
Phillips, D. (1993). Borrowing educational policy. In D. Finegold, L. McFarland & W. Richardson (Eds.),
Something borrowed, something learned? The transatlantic market in education and training reform
(pp. 13–19). Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Phillips, D. (1997). Prolegomena to a history of British interest in education in Germany. In C. Kodron
et al. (Eds.), Vergleichende erziehungswissenschaft: Herausforderung – Vermittlung – Praxis. Cologne:
Böhlau.
Phillips, D. (2000a). Beyond travellers’ tales: Some nineteenth-century British commentators on education
in Germany. Oxford Review of Education, 26(1), 49–62.
Phillips, D. (2000b). Learning from elsewhere in education: Some perennial problems revisited with reference to British interest in Germany. Comparative Education, 36(3), 297–307.
Phillips, D. (2002). Reflections on British interest in education in Germany in the nineteenth century. (A
Progress Report). Lisbon: Educa.
Phillips, D. (2004). Toward a theory of policy attraction in education. In G. Steiner-Khamsi (Ed.), Lessons
from elsewhere: The politics of educational borrowing and lending (pp. 54–67). New York: Teachers
College Press.
Phillips, D. (2005). Policy borrowing in education: Frameworks for analysis. In J. Zajda (Ed.), International
handbook on globalisation, education and policy research (pp. 23–34). Springer.
Phillips, D. (2006b). Investigating educational policy transfer. In M. Hayden, J. Levy & J. Thompson (Eds.),
The Sage handbook of research in international education (pp. 450–461). London: Sage.
Phillips, D. (Ed.) (2006c). Comparative inquiry and educational policy making, special issue of Oxford
Review of Education, 32(5).
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (2003a), Processes of policy borrowing in education: Some analytical and explanatory devices, Comparative Education, 39(4), 451–461.
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (2003b): Educational policy borrowing: Some questions for small states. In S.
Matlin (Ed.), Commonwealth Education Partnerships 2004 (pp. 131–136). Commonwealth Secretariat,
The Stationery Office.
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (2004a). Researching policy borrowing: Some methodological challenges in comparative education, British Educational Research Journal, 30(6), 773–784.
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (Eds.) (2004b). Educational policy borrowing: Historical perspectives. Didcot:
Symposium.
Phillips, D., & Schweisfurth, M. (2006). Comparative and international education. An introduction to theory, method, and practice. London: Continuum.
Rappleye, J. (2006). Theorising educational transfer: Towards a conceptual map of the context of crossnational attraction. Research in Comparative and International Education, 1(3). (www.wwwords.
co.uk/RCIE)

--- [PDF Page 1055 / Book Page 1077] ---

Aspects of Educational Transfer 1077
Report from Select Committee on the State of Education (1834). London: House of Commons.
Schriewer, J. (1990). The method of comparison and the need for externalization: Methodological criteria
and sociological concepts. In J. Schriewer & B. Holmes (Eds.), Theories and methods in comparative
education (pp. 25–83). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Schriewer, J. (Ed.) (2000). Discourse formation in comparative education. Frankfurt am Main, etc.: Peter
Lang.
Shibata, M. (2005). Japan and Germany under the U.S. occupation: A comparative study of the post-war
education reform. Lanham, etc.: Lexington Books.
Spreen, C. A. (2004). The vanishing origins of outcomes-based education., In D. Phillips & K. Ochs (Eds.),
Educational policy borrowing: Historical perspectives (pp. 221–236). Didcot: Symposium.
Sprigade, A. (2005). Where there is reform there is comparison. English interest in education abroad, 1800–
1839. Unpublished D.Phil. thesis, University of Oxford.
Sprogøe, J. & Winther-Jensen T. (Eds.) (2006). Identity, education and citizenship – Multiple interrelations.
Frankfurt am Main, etc.: Peter Lang.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2000). Transferring education, displacing reforms. In J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse
formation in comparative education (pp.155–187). Frankfurt am Main, etc.: Peter Lang.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2002). Re-framing educational policy borrowing as a policy strategy. In M. Caruso
& H. –E. Tenorth (Eds.), Internationalisierung: Semantik und bildungssystem in vergleichender perspektive (pp.57–89). Frankfurt am Main, etc.: Peter Lang.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (Ed.) (2004). Lessons from elsewhere: The politics of educational borrowing and lending. New York: Teachers College Press.
Steiner-Khamsi, G., & Quist, H. O. (2000). The politics of policy borrowing: Reopening the case of
Achimota in British Ghana. Comparative Education Review. 44(3), 272–299.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. & Stolpe I. (2006). Educational import. Local encounters with global forces in Mongolia.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Tanaka, M. (2003). The transfer of university concepts and practices between Germany, the United States,
and Japan: A comparative perspective. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of London.
US Department of Education (1987). Japanese education today. Washington, D.C.
US Department of Education (1999). The educational system in Germany: Case study findings. Washington,
D.C.
Zymek, B. (1975). Das Ausland als Argument in der pädagogischen Reformdiskussion. Ratingen: Aloys
Henn Verlag.

