================================================================================
Chapter 68: Agamemnon Contra Prometheus: Globalisation, Knowledge/learning Societies and Paideia in the New Cosmopolis
Author(s): Andreas M. Kazamias
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 1079–1111
PDF Pages: pp. 1056–1088 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1056 / Book Page 1079] ---

68
AGAMEMNON CONTRA PROMETHEUS:
GLOBALISATION, KNOWLEDGE/
LEARNING SOCIETIES AND PAIDEIA
IN THE NEW COSMOPOLIS
Andreas M. Kazamias

Introduction: The Hypothesis/Plot and the Mythical
Way of Knowing
This presentation “theorizes” about, and views critically, the undemocratic and dehumanizing consequences of the unfolding “Brave New Cosmopolis of Globalization” (BNCG)
and the Information/Technological Knowledge/Learning Society (ITKLS)”. Using
the ancient Greek myths of Agamemnon and Prometheus, it is presented as a duology
(a two-episode performance) whose “hypothesis-plot” is twofold: (a) the “dehumanizing” and “depoliticizing” consequences of globalisation and the ITKS on knowledge,
learning, education, society and the individual, and (b) the “reinvention” or “re-enchantment” of humanistic paideia through the cultivation of what may be called Promethean
Neo-Humanism, in order to “humanize” the anthropos-politis (citizen-person/human) in
what may otherwise be referred to as the Knowledge/Learning Cosmopolis (KLC).
In the first episode, entitled “Globalisation, Knowledge Society, and the Sacrifice
of Humanistic Paideia —The Agamemnon Syndrome”, I shall use the myth of
Agamemnon, as dramatised in Euripides’ Iphigenia at Aulis to view critically the
“dehumanizing” effects of globalisation and Information Technological Epistemological
Paradigm (ITEP), specifically the danger of constructing a homo faber/homo fabricatus
(Jurgen Habermas) or homo barbarus (Heideger) and a homo economicus type of citizen,
rather than a homo civilis/homo humanus citizen (Martha Nussbaum). In the second
episode, “Prometheus Unbound: Promethean Neo-Humanism and the Reinvention of
Humanistic Paideia”, I shall use the myth of Prometheus as dramatised in Aeschylus’
Prometheus Bound to argue for the “re-enchantment” or “reinvention” of humanistic
paideia/learning as a means of empowering, liberating and “humanizing” the anthropos politis (citizen-person) in the emerging Knowledge/Learning Cosmopolis (KLC).

The Mode of Analysis: Combining Mythos with Episteme
The mode of analysis in this duology combines mythos (myth) with episteme (human
science) and uses symbolic representations or images. We make use of two classical
Greek myths for a twofold purpose: (a) as a device or tool to dramatise a particular
1079
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1079–1111.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1057 / Book Page 1080] ---

1080

Kazamias

problem or human condition – this, hopefully, being the emotionally stirring element;
and (b) as a way of knowing, thinking and expressing, in order to “theorize” and interpret a problem the full significance of which can be revealed symbolically through an
imaginary or transcendent form of discourse. Myths, icons (representations or images)
and symbols constitute, in the words of Vitsaxis, a Greek scholar, “that transcendent language which extends reflective thinking and leads it to imaginary spaces”. A
myth, according to the same writer, “is nearer to the intuitive and aesthetic rather
than the ‘logocratic’ approach or understanding of the phenomenological world”. Also,
myth can even be ‘unorthological’, in the sense of not obeying certain “fixed” rules,
without, of course, being “irrational”. Myth, according to Claude Levi-Strauss, the
eminent social anthropologist, is an ‘aesthetic’ way of knowing, parallel or analogous
to an ‘objective’ way of knowing. “Through myth, an aesthetic access to knowledge
is realized” (Vitsaxis, 2002, pp. 15–21). And, according to P. Feyerabend: “The sharp
distinction between science and non-science is not only artificial but also catastrophic
for the progress of knowledge. If we want to understand nature … we must make use
of all methods and ideas and not just a small selection. The assertion that there cannot be knowledge outside science – extra scientiam nula salus – is but a useful myth”
(Feyerabend, 1975; also see Bowra, 1957, pp. 127–128).

Episode One: The Agamemnon Syndrome, Globalisation,
Knowledge/Learning Society and the Sacrifice of Humanistic
Paideia in the Brave New Cosmopolis
Prologue – the Myth of Agamemnon
In Iphigenia at Aulis, Agamemnon of the House of Atreus and King of Argos, the commander-in-chief of the Greek expedition to Troy was enjoined by the gods to sacrifice his
daughter Iphigenia so that favourable winds would blow and the huge armada, anchored at
the port of Aulis, could set sail on its deadly voyage. The expedition to sack Troy was ostensibly for the purpose of avenging the insult to the Achaeans (the Greeks) and the House of
Atreus that was perpetrated by the abduction (not unwilling) of Helen, a “civilised” Greek
princess and Agamemnon’s sister-in-law, by an oriental “barbarian,” the Trojan prince Paris.
But there was more to the expedition than mere retribution for an insult. The Trojan War
was also sparked by the Greek arrogance of power as personified in the imperious Argive
King, and was waged for national pride, aggrandizement, wealth, power and glory, “for
the common good of Hellas”, as the transformed heroine Iphigenia declared on the way to
the altar to be slaughtered. The dramatic poet Euripides uses the myth of Agamemnon to
“theorize” and critically interpret the politico-social conditions and problems of the democratic city of Athens during a turbulent period of its history, that is, towards the waning
years of the fifth century BC.
Like Euripides, but without his dramaturgical artistry, I shall use the myth of
Agamemnon and the sacrifice of Iphigenia as a methodological device to make a
comparative and critical interpretation of a politico-economic and sociocultural phenomenon that is in the forefront of contemporary discourse and social policy worldwide.

--- [PDF Page 1058 / Book Page 1081] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1081

This, simply stated, is the problem of education and more broadly paideia/culture/Bildung
in the New Cosmopolis of what may be called “Neo-Liberal Modernity”. Reflecting on
contemporary trends in this sociocultural area, I shall try to unfold the following plot.
In order for contemporary nation states and “international regimes” like the European
Union (EU) to participate effectively and competitively in the New Cosmopolis, as
a globalized Knowledge Society (KS) and a world economic system, modern systems of education, as state-steering mechanisms, are called upon to emphasize certain
types of knowledge and culture at the expense of conventional others. In order to
respond effectively to the demands and challenges of globalisation and the associated
Information/Technological Epistemological Paradigm (Castells), secondary schools,
and more so universities are being transformed in their identity and role. From sociocultural enclaves, a main function of which has been a holistic/well-rounded education
or paideia – intellectual, moral and civic – they are being metamorphosed into sites
for the production of instrumental knowledge, techno-science and the acquisition of
marketable skills. In such transformation, their mission becomes less the formation
of the anthropos-politis (citizen-person), with a cultivated “mind and soul”, and more
the construction of the informed, efficient and skilled “knowledge worker” for the
competitive world economic markets. Schools and universities are being transformed
from sites of paidiea to places for what Jane Roland Martin, an American educational
philosopher, has called education for mainly “productive processes” (Martin,
1994, p. 78), and what Aronowitz, an American sociologist, has called “Knowledge
Factories”. Especially in the case of the modern university (the European and the
North American), the “Idea of the University” has been changing from one whose
function has been mainly “educational” and “cultural” – the provision and cultivation of “liberal education”, Bildung, culture generale or paideia – to one whose main
function is developing to be the promotion of “instrumental rationality” and what the
postmodernist French thinker Lyotard has called “performativity” (Lyotard, 1984). To
use Robert Cowen’s apt terminology, the modern university is being transformed to
“the market-framed university” (Cowen, 1996, 2000).

The Brave New Cosmopolis of Globalisation and the
Information-Technological Knowledge/Learning Society
In theorising about the new cosmos that is unfolding before us, as we enter the third
millennium, social theorists have constructed various and in some respects overlapping
conceptual-epistemological schemata. One of the most illuminating such constructions is that of the Spanish sociologist Manuel Castells, who wrote:
A new world is taking shape at this turn of the millennium. It originated in
the historical coincidence, around the late 1960s and mid-1970s, of three independent processes: the information revolution; the economic crisis of both
capitalism and statism, and their subsequent restructuring; and the blooming
of cultural social movements, such as libertarianism, human rights, feminism,
and environmentalism. The interaction between these processes, and the reasons

--- [PDF Page 1059 / Book Page 1082] ---

1082

Kazamias

they triggered, brought into being a new dominant social structure, the network
society; a new economy, the informational/global economy; and a new culture,
the culture of real virtuality … [defined] as a system in which reality itself (that
is, people’s material/symbolic existence) is fully immersed in a virtual image
setting, in the world of make believe, in which symbols are not just metaphors,
but comprise the actual experience (Castells, 1998, 2000, pp. 367, 381).
Central in much of the relevant discourse about the new world that is taking shape
at this turn of the millennium are concepts such as: ‘globalisation, ‘global society’,
‘global informational economy’, ‘knowledge societies’ and ‘knowledge-based
economies’, ‘learning and information societies’, ‘network society’, ‘global education’, ‘culture of real virtuality’, and the like (Castells, 2000; Lofstedt, 2001;
Barney, 2004). And among such constructions, the concepts of “globalisation” and
‘knowledge/learning society/societies’ seem to be particularly prominent (Waters,
1995; Lofstedt, 200l).

Globalisation – Blessing or Curse?
Globalisation is a protean concept, not amenable to essentialist definitions or interpretations. Like the mythical demigod Proteus it wears different conceptual and
ideological attire, depending on one’s theoretical and ideological orientation. And like
other all-encompassing cosmic theoretical constructions globalisation is a contested
and controversial concept. Some social theorists have questioned its very authenticity, calling it a “chimera” (Vergopoulos, 2000), or a “mythology” (Tombazos, 1999).
To such skeptics, globalisation has deep historical roots. It has always been there,
at least since the advent of modernity in the eighteenth century, even earlier. The
majority of scholars, however, social theorists and informed observers, to a degree
more or less, have accepted globalisation as an economic, social and cultural historical reality, whose scope and intensity are quite recent. For example, in his recent
political manifesto The Third Way, Anthony Giddens, the English sociologist, has
written:
Economic globalization therefore is a reality, and is not just a continuation of,
or a reversion to the trends of previous years. While much trade remains regionalized, there is a ‘fully global economy’ on the level of financial markets …
Globalization … is not only, or even primarily, about economic interdependence,
but about the transformation of time and space in our lives. (Giddens, 1998,
pp. 30–31; 1999/2000, p. 28)
In the same vein as Giddens, Anthony McGrew, has conceptualized globalisation as
an all-encompassing social, economic and cultural reality. According to McGrew,
“Transnational networks, social movements and relationships are extensive in virtually all areas of human activity from the academic to the sexual” (McGrew, 1992,
pp. 65–66; also see Scholte, 2000, pp. 15–16). Ka Ho Mok’s definition appears to command
wide acceptance:

--- [PDF Page 1060 / Book Page 1083] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1083

While there is not a single, consensual definition of globalization, it is evident
that the whole world is undergoing ‘a set of processes which in various ways
– economic, cultural, and political – make supranational connections.’ In addition, the impact of globalization has not only been felt in the economic realm
but, indeed, has also caused significant changes in the ideological-cultural realm
and in the transformation of time and space. Even though no country is immune
from the impact of globalization, heated debates have been held about the positive and negative consequences of globalization (Mok, 2000, pp. 148–49).
Within the category of globalisation theorists, however, there are different assessments as to the effects of globalisation on the economy, the polity, society, education
and culture, and, more generally, on “human life”. Some critical social theorists and
intellectuals tend to emphasize what may be called the “discontents” of globalisation,
namely, its negative and ‘dehumanising’ effects on society and human existence. Thus,
for example, in a study bearing the telling title of Predatory Globalization, Richard
Falk examined “the effects of economic globalization on the capacity of the state to
contribute to human well being”, and concluded:
Yet, despite these encouraging tendencies the structural and normative foundations of world order seem increasingly unable to provide minimum security for
many of the peoples of the world. The state is being subtly deformed as an instrument of human well being by the dynamics of globalization, which are pushing
the state by degrees and to varying extents into a subordinate relationship with
global market forces. Partly in reaction to these developments and partly as a
result of the shortcomings of secularism as a source of human fulfillment, the
state is also losing its capacity in many settings to provide the social, economic,
and physical ingredients of security within its own borders (Falk, 1999).
According to the French political philosopher Pierre-Andre Taquieff, globalisation
can be described as an “empire of liberalized markets” which, while contributing to
the increase of the world product on the one hand, has negative socio-economic and
political consequences, on the other, such as a widening of the gap between the economically developed rich North and the underdeveloped poor South, and internally in
the wealthiest nations, an increase in inequalities and social exclusion. In the political realm, Taquieff comments further, globalisation transforms the physiognomy of
democracy and democratic citizenship to a “market democracy”, and restricts the public sphere (Taquieff, 2002, p. 107; also see Bauman, 1998, p. 66).
Other social theorists conceptualize globalisation as ‘neo-liberal globalization’ with
all that ‘neo-liberalism’ as a politico-economic doctrine or ideology connotes and/or
denotes. Thus, for example, according to Nelly Stromquist, “neo-liberalism emphasises
three policy prescriptions: deregulation, privatisation, liberalisation” (Stromquist, 2002,
pp. 25–26; also see Slaughter, 1998, p. 52). Finally, T. Fotopoulos brings out the corrosive effects of neo-liberal globalisation on ‘democracy’. He notes that “in contrast to
the Liberal Old Right that was founded on tradition, hierarchy and political philosophy,
the Neo-Liberal New Right’s credo was based on blind belief in the market forces,

--- [PDF Page 1061 / Book Page 1084] ---

1084

Kazamias

individualism, and economic ‘science’ ”. According to Fotopoulos, “the neoliberal movement … represented a powerful attack against social-democratic statism”. The main
policies proposed by neo-liberals first in England and the United States by the administrations of Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan, and “later by governments all over
the world”, have included: “Liberalisation of markets; privatisation of state enterprises;
reduction of the welfare state into a safety net and parallel encouragement of the private
sector’s expansion into social services (health, education, pension schemes and so on);
redistribution of taxes in favor of high income groups” (Fotopoulos, 1997, pp. 33–36).
We tend to concur with the aforementioned views about the empirical reality of
globalisation. In any case, whether it exists in reality or not, globalisation has become a
legitimization concept in contemporary discourses and policies relating to national economies, and to national-state management of public services, in general. Unsurprisingly,
and more pertinently for our purposes here, it has also been used as a legitimization concept in discourses and policies in the restructuring and reform of systems of education be
it the school curricula and pedagogies, assessment and evaluation, student achievement
or school governance. In this sense, therefore, that is, as part of the rationale that is often
used to justify reforms in education, globalisation may be said to have indeed acquired
an “ontological” existence (see Davies & Guppy, 1997, p. 435).

Knowledge Society (KS)
As with globalisation, Knowledge Society (KS) has become a dominant discourse in
the unfolding New Cosmopolis. The significance of ‘knowledge’ and ‘information’,
as activating forces in the New Cosmopolis, has been stressed by several social and
political analysts of different ideological and epistemological persuasions (Bell, 1976,
1980; Castells, 1989; Drucker, 1993). Andy Hargreaves has recently conceptualised
KS in terms of three dimensions:
First, it [KS] comprises an expanded scientific, technical and educational sphere.
… Second, it involves complex ways of processing and circulating knowledge
and information in a service-based economy. Third, it entails basic changes in
how corporate organizations function so that they enhance continuous innovation
in products and services, by creating systems, teams and cultures that maximize
the opportunities for mutual, spontaneous learning (Hargreaves, 2003, p. 9).
KS, in short, and such other coextensive concepts as ‘Information Society’ and
‘Learning Society’, could be said to be societies where the promotion of knowledge
has become a dominant discourse as a determining factor in economic, social and individual development, and where “the fundamental distinction among people will not be
between the haves and the have-nots, but between those who know and those who do
not know” (Stamatis, 2005, p. 115; Kladis, 1999, p. 82; Kazamias, 1995; Commission
of the European Communities, 1993).
As with globalisation, there are variations in the conceptualisation of KS. However,
in the prevalent discourse on the subject, the following epistemic elements appear to
be salient and given greater emphasis:

--- [PDF Page 1062 / Book Page 1085] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1085

-

-

Enormous development of ICTs and sophisticated learning technologies; the
rise of the Network Society (Castells, 1996, 2000)
Increasing importance of information technologies and “codified knowledge”
for the accumulation of capital and for sustainable development in a competitive
global economy
Techno-scientific instrumental rationality
Knowledge as a trading commercialised commodity
Changing forms of organisation of living and work (a ‘learning organization’, a
‘flexible workforce’, a ‘knowledge worker’)
The emergence of new patterns of exclusion/inclusion (e.g., the “digital
divide”)

Globalisation, therefore, as well as KS, whether real or imaginary, is quite germane
to our saga. It constitutes the context/matrix in the transformation of educational discourses (policy talk and policy practice), and what we may call ‘educational cultures’.
But from our mythical way of thinking – the Agamemnon Syndrome – globalisation,
particularly its “economistic” and rationalistic aspects, is also metaphorically viewed
as a “curse” or as an anomia (anomie) that propels into action certain choices in education at the sacrifice of long-cherished others. Such choices may indeed bring about glory
and benefits. Some, for example, have argued that globalisation contributes to ‘wellbeing’, that it blurs ‘inequalities’, and that it makes countries economically stronger
and more competitive (Andrianopoulos, 2004, p. 14). In the same vein, OECD, the
powerful Organization for European Cooperation and Development, sees nothing but
good benefits accruing from the evolving global economy and the concomitant global
market space: economic growth, material progress, increased prosperity and human
welfare, political stability and greater equality (Spring, 1998, p. 160).
In the Greek myth, Agamemnon’s decision to sack Troy resulted in benefits and
spoils – mostly material, but also glory. But, such benefits accrued at a very high human
cost. In addition to impelling the sacrifice of his daughter Iphigenia, Agamemnon’s
course of action had other tragic consequences: the complete destruction of the city of
Troy, the rape and enslavement of the Trojan women, the slaughter of noble men and
women and, after Troy, the murder of Agamemnon himself by Clytemnestra, his wife,
and then Clytemnestra’s murder by her son Orestes. In our story, educational policies, as impelled by globalisation and the KS, could also have dire and dehumanising
consequences.

Conquering Troy and Gaining the World – Educational Reform
Discourses in the Knowledge/Learning Cosmopolis – Towards
the Homo Economicus and the Cyborg Citizen?
As indicated in recent studies, as well as in important texts by international organizations such as the EU, OECD, the World Bank and UNESCO, the dominant educational
reform discourse, as rhetoric (logos) and as framework for praxis at the macro level
of public policy and the micro level of schooling, is pervaded by a predominantly
economistic “ethos”, instrumental rationality, neo-liberal values and a business ethic.

--- [PDF Page 1063 / Book Page 1086] ---

1086

Kazamias

These ideas and values can be said to inhere in such terms as efficiency, competition,
output, yield, markets, liberal individualism, destatisation/ deregulation, privatisation,
marketization, entrepreneurship, and the like. Below we refer to only a few such narratives from the international world of education.
(a) In an international survey of “new educational proposals for the global
economy,“involving the geo-cultural regions/rims of North America (the United
States), Europe (the United Kingdom and the European Community), and East
Asia (Japan and Singapore) and international organisations such as the OECD,
the World Bank and UNESCO, Joel Spring documents the contemporary dominant discourse (policy talk and policy practice) on the interdependent relationship
between education and the global economy as follows:
Education and the global economy are envisioned as having an interdependent
relationship. Competition in the global economy is dependent on the quality of
education, whereas the goals of education are dependent on the economy. Under
these circumstances, education changes as the requirements of the economy
change. As a result, human capital theory now dominates discussions of education for the global economy (Spring, 1998, p. 6).
Referring to certain educational reform discourses and policies, e.g., school or parental
choice, national curricula, national and world-class academic standards, and national
achievement tests during the heyday of neo-liberalism and the New Right in the United
States and the United Kingdom in the 1980s and early 1990s, Spring has written: “The free
market ideas of Friedrich von Hayek provided the underpinnings for discussions of school
choice, national standards and curricula, eliminating the welfare state, and lifelong learning in the United States and the United Kingdom” (Spring, 1998, pp. 123, 128).
(b) Similar discourses and policy statements are reflected in texts on the larger
European scene. Of relevance in this connection, is the educational discourse in the
various texts (white papers, green papers, resolutions, directives, circulars, conclusions and programmes) of the EU. In many of these EU “education and training”
documents emphasis is placed on the development of skills and “competencies”
to meet the needs of the Single European Market, an integrated European “knowledge society” and a European “knowledge-based competitive economy”. Although
in some of the texts reference is made to “solid broad-based education” and to a
“broad knowledge base”, what is also salient in them is the privileging of certain
kinds of knowledge, skills and competencies (e.g. education in ICTs, techno-scientific
instrumental rationality and vocational skills) for “competitive advantage”, that is, for
the EU “to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge economy in the
world, capable of sustainable economic growth accompanied by quantitative and
qualitative improvement of employment and of greater social cohesion”. Such an
instrumentalist knowledge bias can easily be inferred from the “Communication to
the Council and the European Parliament”, entitled Towards a Europe of Knowledge
that was issued in 1997:

--- [PDF Page 1064 / Book Page 1087] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1087

Noting that we are entering the “knowledge society”, the Commission in its
Agenda 2000 proposes making the policies which drive that society (innovation, research, education and training) one of the four fundamental pillars of
the Union’s internal policies … Economic competitiveness, employment and the
personal fulfillment of the citizens of Europe is no longer mainly based on the
production of physical goods, nor will it be in the future. Real wealth creation
will henceforth be linked to the production and dissemination of knowledge and
will depend first and foremost on our efforts in the field of research, education and training and on our capacity to promote innovation. This is why we
must fashion a veritable ‘Europe of Knowledge’ (Commission of the European
Communities, 1993).
The focus on “instrumentalism” and the “technological option” in the EU discourse
on education and training, while at the same time emphasising “through symbolism”
attachment to the humanistic cultural and epistemological tradition, is also evident in
the various EU Action Programmes, namely, SOCRATES, LEONARDO DA VINCI,
ERASMUS, ARION and COMENIUS. These initiatives, which covered virtually every
aspect of the education and training systems, induced students, educators, education
officials and policy-makers in the member states into the logic of seeking European
funds to fulfil their educational expectations, in order to comply with the instrumental
rationality of the EU guidelines. For the countries of the European South, the dependence on EU subsidies was enhanced even further by the funding channelled to national
education systems from the European Cohesion Funds (the European Social Fund
and the European Fund for Regional Development) on the basis of state-proposed
“Community Support Frameworks”. These mechanisms subsidise national education
policies which fall directly within the logic of the previously mentioned White Papers,
promoting certain types of economic and social development and leading towards the
envisaged ‘knowledge society’ and the ‘knowledge-based economy’.
In grappling with the putative commitment of developing an active European citizen
in the globalised new European Cosmopolis, the European Commission was clearer
about the cognitive and instrumental competencies than the ‘character’ traits and
civic virtues or dispositions of the imagined/constructed citizen in the new ‘Europe
of Knowledge’ (The European Commission, Education and Active Citizenship –
Learning for Active Citizenship, 2001; Commission of the European Communities,
1995; Field, 1998).
(c) Several of the aforementioned core ideas and values are to be found in texts and
pronouncements by other international organisations such as the OECD and the
World Bank. The OECD, for example, has accepted globalisation “as the dominant trend in the world economy “and the creation of “a borderless global market
system”. More than that, as noted above, the OECD sees nothing but good benefits
accruing from the evolving global economy and the concomitant global market
place. OECD’s educational discourse and policies are connected to what we have
previously referred to as the economistic and rationalistic aspects of globalisation.
These are well summarized as follows:

--- [PDF Page 1065 / Book Page 1088] ---

1088

Kazamias

Education plays a dual role in OECD’s plans. First, education is to aid the development of market economies through human resource development and lifelong
learning. Second, education is to remedy problems resulting from globalization such as unemployment, increasing economic inequality, and fears of social
and economic change. This dual role is similar to the function of education in
European Union policies (Spring, 1998, p. 160).
More recently (2002), OECD’s economistic and instrumentalist approach to education
and training was reiterated in a policy text published on the occasion of the creation
of a separate Directorate for Education by the OECD Secretary-General “in recognition of the increased importance of education policy by member governments”. In the
words of Barry McGaw, the Director of this unit:
Contemporary societies demand high levels of knowledge and skills. Individuals
without them have difficulty in participating effectively in social and economic
life, so equity in education is as much a concern as quality. The knowledge and
skills demanded [in a global economy] also change, making lifelong learning an
increasing necessity. The OECD’s work on education uses a lifelong perspective,
shifts the focus from teaching to learning and connects education policy with
economic and other social policies (OECD, 2002, p. 7).
(d) Educational reform discourses and policies that put high premium on efficiency,
performativity, instrumental rationality and knowledge production, marketable schooling and values can also be seen in such differing countries as Japan,
Singapore, Hong Kong, Greece, Cyprus, and Turkey (for Greece, see Kazamias,
1998; for Cyprus, see Kazamias, 1994, 1999; for Hong Kong and Singapore, see
Mok, 2000, pp. 150–151,172 and Spring, 1998, p. 86; for Turkey, see OECD, 1989,
pp. 12–14, 93–99; Zorlu-Durukan, 1999 and Turkish Ministry of Education, 2006;
for Japan, see Green, 1999).
(e) It is pertinent here to refer to Andy Hargreaves’ insightful observations about
the contemporary reform discourses on teaching {and education} in the ‘knowledge society’ and the related ‘knowledge-based economy.’ In his Teaching in the
Knowledge Society: Education in the Age of Insecurity (2003), Hargreaves argues
that contemporary capitalist societies that are also knowledge-based economies
serve primarily the private good, and their schools are geared to develop primarily
cognitive learning, instrumental skills and competencies for a KS and a knowledge economy. But a knowledge-based economy, according to him, is “a force of
creative destruction”. On the one hand, “it stimulates growth and prosperity,” but
on the other, “its relentless pursuit of profit and self-interest also strains and fragments the social order”. In the knowledge-based economy, school systems “have
become obsessed with imposing and micromanaging curriculum uniformity”,
instead of “fostering creativity and ingenuity”. Hargreaves continues: “In place
of ambitious missions of compassion and community, schools and teachers have
been squeezed into the tunnel vision of test scores, achievement targets and league

--- [PDF Page 1066 / Book Page 1089] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1089

tables of accountability. And rather than cultivating cosmopolitan identity and the
basic emotion of sympathy, which Adam Smith called the emotional foundation of
democracy, too many educational systems promote exaggerated and self-absorbed
senses of national identity” (Hargreaves, 2003, pp. xvi–xvii).
(f) Lastly, some additional observations regarding the transformation of higher education in the epoch of globalisation are pertinent here. A recent OECD study has
noted that “tertiary education is changing to address client and stakeholder expectations, to respond more actively to social and economic change, to provide for
more flexible forms of teaching and learning, to focus more strongly on competencies and skills across the curriculum” (OECD, 1998, p. 49). To these characteristics
one could add related ideas such as Cowen’s “market-framed university”, Lyotard’s
“performativity”, and others, for example, ‘entrepreneurial university’, and the
‘commercialization of university education’. Cowen’s characterisation of the market-framed university is illuminating:
Epistemologically, the market-framed university must deliver marketable, saleable, pragmatically useful knowledge. The market-framed university exists
within a knowledge-market, and it must respond to the demands of its clients
and customers (e.g., students; research funders). The knowledge production
of the university must also be measurable—otherwise performance cannot be
judged. Thus managerial decisions must be taken about the differential worth of
knowledge products, against rules and criteria which are externally mandated”
(Cowen, 1996; also see Cowen, 2000).

The Agamemnon Syndrome – An Epimythion
In the ‘Brave New Cosmopolis of Globalisation’ and the ‘Information/Technological
Knowledge Society’, particularly economically advanced societies such as the
United States, Germany, England, Australia, Japan and the other so-called Asiatic
tigers (Singapore, Hong Kong, Korea and Taiwan), which depend more and more
on scientific and technological knowledge, in order to participate effectively and
competitively in the New Cosmopolis, are called upon to put most of their ‘knowledge eggs’ in the ‘techno-scientific basket’. As a consequence, they put pressure
on those educational institutions traditionally responsible for the production and
dissemination of knowledge, namely, the schools but more so the colleges and
universities, to put a heavier premium on ‘techno-scientific’ knowledge and instrumental rationality. In turn, the university becomes hitched onto the wagon of the
economy, its traditional autonomy is eroded, and so is the modern liberal-cultural
‘idea of the university’. In short, we observe the transformation of the modern
university from a studium generale to a studium speciale, where narrow technoscientific specialism and instrumentalism have supplanted and overshadowed what
in English has been known as ‘liberal education’, specifically the ‘liberal humanistic canon’, in German as Bildung und Wissenschaft, and in Greek as paideia
(Kazamias, 1997, pp. 39–42).

--- [PDF Page 1067 / Book Page 1090] ---

1090

Kazamias

The ‘Humanistic Sacrifices’: Social Justice, Citizenship
and the Paideia of the ‘Soul’
The crisis and reform discourse in education–‘policy talk’ and ‘policy practice’ – presented above, provide us with an excellent modern scenario to use the ancient myth of
Agamemnon in our critical interpretation of this contemporary politico-economic and
sociocultural phenomenon. In the ancient myth, Agamemnon was ‘cursed’ because of a
family ‘hubris’ which, as dramatised by Euripides, meant that for revenge, but also for
glory, aggrandizement and the ‘good of Hellas’, he had to follow a course of action that
necessitated the sacrifice of his daughter with ultimately tragic consequences. For such a
quest, the human soul, personified in Iphigenia, had to be sacrificed. In our ‘drama’, we
look at globalisation as a ‘curse’ or an ‘anomia’, as an imperial ‘knowledge power’ which
enjoins the construction of a certain reform discourse in education. We hypothesise that
in the Brave New Cosmopolis of globalisation and the Information-Technological KS,
the hegemony of this educational discourse – as logos and as praxis – may indeed bring
about wealth and “sumptuous spoils”, as in bidding farewell to Agamemnon in the closing stanzas of Euripides’ tragic drama, the chorus of Greek women had enigmatically
intoned. But, we further argue, the type of education and I may add pedagogy demanded
for such global knowledge cornucopia exacts several negative, in our judgment, costs or
‘discontents’. Among such ‘discontents’, or, from our mythical way of thinking, ‘sacrifices’, three ‘humane/ humanistic’ sacrifices are especially noteworthy: (a) the erosion
of the public sphere, democracy, and democratic citizenship; (b) the ‘de-professionalisation’ and ‘deskilling’ of teachers; and (c) the sacrifice of humanistic knowledge and what
may metaphorically be called ‘the paideia of the soul’.
The erosion of the public domain, democracy and democratic citizenship; possessive
individualism and the “Faltering” of Democracy” (Jean Elshtain, 1995).
As analysed above, many social theorists, political economists and other commentators
conceptualise globalisation as emphasising “markets, the private sector, and possessive
individualism” as engines of economic growth in an increasingly competitive world.
Hence the appellations “neo-liberal globalization” (e.g., Stromquist, 2002, Fotopoulos,
1997, Giroux, 2002), “market fundamentalism” (e.g., Soros,1998) and “McWorld” (e.g.,
Barber, 1995), and such policy prescriptions as “deregulation”, “loss of nation-state
sovereignty” (Bauman, 1998 and 2002), “liberalization”, and “privatization”. As a consequence of this emphasis, as Falk has argued, “the political is erased in the face of the
economic”, and, among other things, “the state is being subtly deformed as an instrument
of human well-being”. The state is also “losing its capacity in many settings to provide
the social, economic and physical ingredients within its own borders”, the public domain
is being restricted, and democratic institutions are weakened (Falk, 1999, pp. 49–51).
In a similar vein, Taquieff, the already referred to French political philosopher, has
written:
The process of globalization, which is always accompanied by the symbolic
representation of a messianic and pale utopian ideology of salvation through
techno-commercial action, renders illegal the political while legitimizing absolutely

--- [PDF Page 1068 / Book Page 1091] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1091

the technical/ technological, the economic and monetary. The social fabric/cohesion is dissipated, and is only replaced by the interactions of free exchanges. The
political is erased in the face of the media and the market, while the democratic
institutions are weakened (Taquieff, 2002, p. 16).
According to Benjamin Barber, in the McWorld “justice yields to markets”. McWorld
“eschews civil society and belittles democratic citizenship”, and is indifferent to “civil
liberty”. In metaphorical language, Barber adds: “If the traditional conservators of
freedom were democratic institutions and Bills of Rights, the new temples of liberty,
George Steiner suggests, will be McDonald’s and Kentucky Fried Chicken” (Barber,
1995, pp. 6–7; also see Fotopoulos, 1997, pp. 33–36).
The critical pedagogue Henry Giroux castigates the global neo-liberal discourse as
“the most dangerous ideology of the current historical movement”, and explains:
It [neo-liberalism] assaults all things public, mystifies the basic contradiction
between democratic values and market fundamentalism, and weakens any viable
notion of political agency by offering no language capable of connecting private considerations to public issues … Under the rule of neo-liberalism, politics
are market driven and the claims of democratic citizenship are subordinated to
market values … The good life, in this discourse, ‘is constructed in terms of our
identities as consumers – we are what we buy. The good life means living inside
the world of corporate brands … corporate culture rests on the dystopian notion
of what he calls marketopia and is characterized by a massive violation of equity
and justice (Giroux, 2002, pp. 428–430, underlining mine).
The weakening of the state and the concomitant erosion of the public sphere and of
democratic citizenship, is having, as one would expect, negative effects on education.
It should be noted here that, since the Enlightenment and the onset of modernity as
well as the emergence of the nation state, public education has been considered to be an
important ideological apparatus in the building of nations and in state formation (Green,
1990). In today’s global neo-liberal market-driven New Cosmopolis, in which possessive
individualism and the private good supersede participatory citizenship, it appears that the
wise counseling of the ancient sage Aristotle and the modern educational philosopher
John Dewey about the inextricability of public education and democracy has been set
aside, smothered or ‘sacrificed’ for the sake of ‘economic efficiency’, competitiveness,
privatisation and the accumulation of wealth. Speaking generally about the effects of
neo liberal globalization on public educational provision in ‘central’, that is, developed
societies, Nelly Stromquist and Karen Monkman have observed:
[E]ducation is losing ground as a public good to become rather a marketable
commodity. The state has become limited in its responsibility to schooling, often
guaranteeing basic education but extracting in turn user fees from higher levels
of public education, as any other service in the market … The new outlook
has made social policy secondary to the market and has ‘atomized the social’,
centering on the interests of the individual as consumer rather than as citizen
(Stromquist & Monkman, 2000, pp. 12–13, 15).

--- [PDF Page 1069 / Book Page 1092] ---

1092

Kazamias

In more alarmist language, Nicholas Burbules and Carlos Torres have noted: “Public
education today is at a crossroads … in our view, nothing less is at stake today than the
survival of the democratic form of governance and the role of public education in that
enterprise” (Burbules & Torres, 2000, p. 23).
In 1995, Jean Elshtain, a distinguished political scientist, in her important book
Democracy on Trial noted that in the United States the civic realm was characterised
by cynicism, boredom, apathy, despair, violence, “exhaustion, opportunism, atomism, and … a gradual loss of civil society”. She lamented whether democracy would
prove sufficiently robust and resilient to survive. She counseled Americans to heed
Aristotle’s words that the viability of a democratic polity and the democratic ethos
presupposed an education or, more broadly, a paideia that, above all, aimed at political virtue (arete). In Elshtain’s own words, attention in America should be paid to
“liberal learning and the cultivation of civic virtue” (Elshtain, 1995, p. 2). In the same
wavelength, Benjamin Barber, has argued that public education and democracy are
inextricably linked and that “public schooling and the public weal are intimately bound
together”. Referring to the American tendency in education to emphasise instrumental
rationality and vocational skills “to keep workers competitive in an economy increasingly dominated by what Robert Reich has called “symbolic analyst professionals”,
Barber has argued that Americans needed to recall that education also had “a central
civic mission”. And, like Elshtain, he has urged that “liberal arts education” must be
taken more seriously in the United States, for “liberal arts education and civic education share a curriculum of critical reflection and autonomous thought” (Barber, 1997,
p. 5). More recently, a collection of studies appropriately titled Schools or Markets?
Commercialism, Privatization, and School-Business Partnerships (2005), documents
the corrosive effects on the civic mission of public schools and democratic citizenship
of the increasing involvement in public education of corporate America and the concomitant commercialisation of American schools and higher educational institutions
(Boyles, 2005).

‘De-Professionalization’ and ‘De-skilling’ of the Teacher
– from a Relatively Autonomous Professional Pedagogue
to a Master Technocrat?
Paralleling the erosion of the public domain and the arresting of the ‘democratisation of democracy’, one observes a tendency towards the ‘de-professionalization’,
or what is referred to as ‘de-skilling’ of the teacher. From a relatively autonomous
‘pedagogue’ and ‘public intellectual’, the teacher is developing into a ‘master
technocrat’, whose job becomes one of how to organise and teach effectively, but
uncritically, officially prescribed knowledge (curricula) and methods for high measurable achievement in examinations (Stromquist & Monkman, 2000, p. 13), and as
Boyles would add “grading and preparation for future life-oriented curricula, i.e.,
pro-consumerism, job and workforce preparation, and skills-oriented approaches”
(Boyles, 2005, pp. 220–221).

--- [PDF Page 1070 / Book Page 1093] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1093

In countries like the United States, Canada and England, according to Hargreaves,
the work of the teacher has been “intensified”, “formalized” and “technicized”.
It “resembles more the work of a miserable manual laborer, and less that of an autonomous professional, whom we trust for the responsible exercise of authority and for
straightforward judgment in the classroom, which he knows better than anyone else”
(Hargreaves, 2003, p. 119; also see Apple, 1986). Essentially the same notion about
the uncritical “technicization” and “bureaucratization” of teaching is implied by the
Freirean-inspired critical pedagogue Donaldo Macedo in a provocative critique of the
“instrumentalist” and “competency-based banking approach to literacy” – in its lower,
that is, school, and higher, that is, university forms. According to Macedo:
For some, the instrumentalist approach to literacy may have the appeal of producing readers who are capable of meeting the demands of our ever more complex
technological society. However, such an approach emphasizes the mechanical
learning of reading of reading skills while sacrificing the critical analysis of the
social and political order that generates the need of reading in the first place …
The instrumentalist approach has led to the development of ‘functional literates’
… [it] also champions literacy as a vehicle for economic betterment, access to
jobs, and increase in the productivity level. (Macedo, 1993, p. 189)
In another context, in a dialogue published in the Harvard Educational Review, Donaldo
Macedo and the influential critical pedagogue Paulo Freire argue that the developing “objective” and uncritical “bureaucratized” teacher who “denies the oppressed
the pedagogical space to develop a critical posture towards the world, particularly the
world that has reduced them to a half-human object, exploited and dehumanised, is
an educator who is complicit with the ideology of the oppressor” (Freire & Macedo,
1995, pp. 388–389).
And, as D. R. Boyles has pertinently claimed:
Schools [in the United States] are currently places where commercialism is
rapidly intruding. Students, teachers, and leaders rarely critique commercial intrusion (resulting in uncritical consumers and uncritical citizens) …
Unfortunately, opportunities for questioning are limited as testing-, grading-,
and preparation for future life-oriented curricula (i.e., pro-consumerism, job and
workforce preparation, skills-oriented approaches) crowd out chances for such
investigation. The concern here is that business partnerships inherently inhibit
questioning and instead develop uncritical consumers rather than critically transitive citizens (Boyles, 2005, p. 220–221).

The ‘Sacrifice’ of Liberal Humanistic Paideia/Culture
The third significant ‘discontent’ of globalisation, about which there has been very
little written or said, has been its effect on the ‘epistemic-cultural’ content of education,

--- [PDF Page 1071 / Book Page 1094] ---

1094

Kazamias

especially on ‘liberal humanistic paideia/culture’, and more generally the ‘liberal
educational tradition’. An illustration of this idea or ‘sacrifice’ is iconographically portrayed in a cartoon, which appeared in the English newspaper The Times (22 August
2000). The cartoon shows a young girl sitting on a sofa in front of a computer, and
busily punching on the keyboard. By her side, there is a wastepaper basket with papers
titled “history”, “religion”, and “theatre”. The caption below the picture reads: “History
and Culture? Not Now!”
Permit me here to elaborate somewhat on this important historical development of the
fortunes of “liberal humanistic paideia” from its construction in post-Enlightenment
Europe and America – the nineteenth century – to today’s Brave New Cosmopolis of
Globalisation and the Information/Technological Knowledge Society.

Phase I.

Constructing the Classical Elitist and ‘Sexist Eurocentric Liberal
Humanistic Canon/Liberal Humanistic Paideia
in the Post-Enlightenment Europe and America

The classical concept of liberal humanistic paideia (LHP) or what has been called “The
Liberal Humanistic Canon (LHC)”, first with classical studies as its core and later with
a broader epistemic and cultural content, with a ‘non-practical’, ‘non-utilitarian’ and
non-economic instrumentalist orientation, was constructed in the post-Enlightenment
period – in the nineteenth century – and was promoted in the European and American
secondary and higher education (in schools, colleges and universities). In England
it was referred to as ‘liberal education’, in France as ‘culture generale’, in Germany
as Allegemeine Menshenbildung, and in Greece as “classical humanistic paideia”
(Kazamias, 1960, p. 264; Arnold, 1875, p. x; Halls, 1965, p. 2; McClean, 1995, p. 24;
Sorkin, 1983, p. 63; Dimaras, 1973, pp. 60–67; Antoniou, 1987).
Turning to post-secondary education, the historical experience of ‘college education’ in the United States in the nineteenth century is especially noteworthy. A recent
study by Caroline Winterer documents the central place that classical humanism
(Greek and Roman) had in the curriculum of American colleges “from the founding
of Harvard College in 1636 to the 1880s, when colleges across the nation began to
drop their Greek and Latin requirements”. According to Winterer, “the schools and
colleges were the nurseries of classicism until the late nineteenth century”, a classicism not defined narrowly but in the broader holistic sense of paideia, namely,
“the process of realizing the full potential (intellectual and moral) in human nature
through education”. It was believed that classical humanistic education in the broad
meaning of paideia was fundamental in cultivating the minds and “in forming ethical
human beings and upright citizens”. Further, it was believed that classical humanistic paideia would help combat the worst effects or “cancers” of “modernity”, such as
“industrialization, materialism, civic decay, specialization, and anti-intellectualism”
(Winterer, 2002, pp. 1–4).
As with the European secondary schools and the American colleges, the liberal
humanistic canon of paideia (LHP) pervaded the idea of the modern European
university, as developed in the post-Enlightenment epoch by the German neohumanist Wilhelm von Humboldt and the English Cardinal John Henry Newman. In

--- [PDF Page 1072 / Book Page 1095] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1095

Newman’s idea of a university, the object of study was not “practical” or “useful”, that
is, utilitarian knowledge, but strictly “educational” and “intellectual”. For Newman,
the university was a site for “liberal education” and the cultivation of “cultured gentlemen” with “philosophic habits of mind” (Readings, 1996, pp. 65–75).
Humboldt’s idea of liberal humanistic education was broader than Newman’s.
Key concepts in the Humboldtian idea of the German neo-humanist “University
of Culture” were Bildung (the harmonious character development of man),
Wissenschaft (scientific study), and Kultur (culture/national culture). Bildung,
according to Gert Biesta “refers … to the cultivation of the inner life, that is of the
human soul, the human mind and the human person; or, to be more precise, the
person’s humanity”. Furthermore, the same author has noted, “Bildung was more
than only an educational ideal”. It was also “and perhaps even primarily, an answer
to the question about the role of the subject in the emerging civil society, viz., as
a subject who can think for himself (not herself) and who is capable of making his
own judgements … In this respect the modern conception of Bildung has a political history as well” (Biesta, 2003, p. 62, underlining mine).
In both the German and the English idea of the modern university education, as
conceptualised by Humboldt and Newman respectively, one discerns a clear preference for ‘culture’ and episteme (‘science’) – in German Bildung und Wissenschaft
– as the university’s defining mission and raison d’être. In both ideas, “intellectual
culture”, the quintessential element of a university education, emphasised the ‘liberal
philosophical’ aspect rather than the ‘mechanical’ or ‘useful’. And within this culturalepistemological framework, in both cases, “national literary culture” gradually gained
ascendancy (Readings, 1996, p. 75ff.).
Contesting the Hegemony of Liberal Humanistic Culture Paideia
With the advent of modernising developments such as industrialisation and democratisation, and the consequent political, economic, intellectual and sociocultural changes,
the hegemony of the Eurocentric and elitist liberal humanistic paideia/culture, defined
mainly in terms of the classical humanistic education, as the staple of the secondary
school and university curriculum, began to be contested. At the same time, the concept
of ‘liberal education’ was being re-examined and redefined. ‘Modern’ subjects, for
example, modern languages, modern literature, history and the natural sciences, laid
claim to liberal education and even ‘humanistic’ culture (Kazamias, 1960; also see
Jordan & Weedon, 1994, p. 23ff.).
The questioning of the hegemony of the liberal humanistic canon, with classical
education as its core, was also evident in France, Germany and the United States (for
France, see Talbott, 1969, p. 14; for Germany, see Albisetti, 1987, pp. 182–183; and
for the United States, see Tozer, Violas & Senese, 2002).

Phase II. What Knowledge Is of Most Worth in a Free and Democratic
Society? A Modern Sequel
In Western Europe and America, the knowledge controversy and the associated conflict of studies, as well as the related concept of “liberal education” and the “liberally

--- [PDF Page 1073 / Book Page 1096] ---

1096

Kazamias

educated person”, continued to be subjects of discussion and controversy at different historical junctures in the twentieth century. Such discourses have been especially
manifest in the post-Second World War decades, and more recently, in the New
Cosmopolis of late modernity, even postmodernity. The literature on this theme is vast
and even a cursory examination of it is beyond the scope of this presentation. Here
we shall merely highlight some key developments and discourses in the Anglo-Saxon
world in the post-war period (the 1950s and 1960s), and the more recent period of
globalisation and the information/technological knowledge society, that are relevant to
our argument. First we shall highlight key discourses in the years following the Second
World War.
In the United States, major universities grappled with the related questions: What
should the intellectual and, more broadly, the educational experience of a college or
university student consist of? What knowledge, intellectual/mental skills, and character traits should a college or university graduate possess in order to be called “an
educated person and citizen in a free democratic society”? Harvard and Columbia
Colleges/Universities and the University of Chicago, for example, but also other liberal arts colleges and universities, produced influential reports and books in which
they developed an expanded concept of “liberal education”, which in America was
viewed as being coextensive with “general education”. Specifically for our purposes
here, both the famous Harvard Report, General Education in a Free Society (1947) and
the Columbia Report, Reforming of General Education (1966) strongly recommended
the preservation of general/liberal education as “the foundation of college education”
(Bell, 1966, p. xix). According to the Harvard Report: “The task of modern democracy
is to preserve the ancient ideal of liberal education and to extend it as far as possible to
all the members of the community” (General Education in a Free Society, 1952, p. 53).
During the same period, Robert Hutchins of the University of Chicago (UC), who had
also placed the “liberal arts” – with a heavy emphasis in the humanities – as the core of
the much publicised undergraduate curriculum of UC, decried what he had perceived
as being a pragmatist “service-station” conception of the American university and
its instrumental vocational orientation. In his many writings and speeches Hutchins
advocated vigorously an education in the “liberal arts” as being “indispensable” and
“unavoidable” for an “effective democracy” (Hutchins, 1936, 1952, 1953; Lyford,
1962/1986. For a more detailed analysis of the controversies about liberal education in
the United States in the post-Second World War period, see Kimball, 1986).
In Britain, one hundred years after Spencer penned “What Knowledge Is of Most
Worth?, C.P. Snow, another Englishman – renowned scientist, novelist and public figure
– gave the famous 1959 Rede lecture The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution.
Like Spencer’s essay, Snow’s lecture sparked widespread and heated debate that,
according to a recent critic, “is still raging in the media today” (van Dijck, 2002). C.P.
Snow’s provocative thesis was stated unequivocally as follows:
I believe the intellectual life of the whole of western society is increasingly being
split into two groups … literary intellectuals at one pole – at the other scientists.
… Between the two a gulf of mutual incomprehension – sometimes (particularly
among the young) hostility and dislike, but most of all lack of understanding.

--- [PDF Page 1074 / Book Page 1097] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1097

… This polarization is sheer loss to us all. To us as people, and to our society.
(Snow, 1959, p. 2ff.)
From the perspective of this study, the American and the English discourses in the
post-Second World War period illustrate the changing conceptions of what types of
knowledge and culture constituted “liberal or general education” and concomitantly
an educated citizen should possess in an advanced capitalist democratic society
where science and technology were considered to be basic desiderata for progress and
economic development. They also show that in the twentieth century, the nineteenthcentury concept of LHP with a “classical humanistic curriculum” as its core, was no
longer dominant in education, although an expanded concept of humanistic education
that, in addition to the classics (particularly Latin) included history and literature, was
emphasised in the British secondary Grammar and Public schools, and was still considered to be “high status knowledge” in the British universities and in some American
Liberal Arts Colleges (for Britain, see McLean, 1990, p. 26). In the United States the
“humanistic curriculum” in the secondary schools all but disappeared. The “struggle
for the American curriculum”, as Herbert Kliebard has shown, was won over by the
“social efficiency” advocates (Kliebard, 1995).
From the review of the discourses above, the comparative historian can draw
certain inferences that are germane to this study. First, it is clear that by mid-twentieth century (the 1950s and 1960s), at least in the Anglo-Saxon world, “liberal or
‘general’ education/culture” was being re-conceptualised, and its epistemic space
or content expanded. No longer could one say that “humanistic paideia/culture”,
either in the classical meaning (cf. Winterer’s “culture of classicism”, in Winterer,
2002), or indeed in the modern broader sense of “education in the humanities”,
held a pre-eminent position in the “liberal or general education” of citizens in
a free democratic society. The classics – Latin and Greek – all but disappeared
in the United States, while the “humanities” in traditionally “humanist Europe”,
were “demoted” at best to an equal status with the natural sciences and “social
studies”. At worst, humanistic paideia/culture was devalued in terms of its “usefulness” and instrumental worth in the developing post-industrial and increasingly
techno-scientific world, compared to the ascendant “sciences”. Even in traditionally
“humanist” England, where the humanistic liberal arts – the Trivium – “dominated
the university” as Basil Bernstein had later noted, “what we are seeing is the growing development of the specialized disciplines (science and mathematics) of the
Quadrivium” (Bernstein, 1996). A second inference is that despite its broader “twoor three-culture” epistemic content and orientation, “liberal/general education”
continued to be elitist and basically Eurocentric.
Contesting the ‘Modern Sequel’, and the ‘Crisis’ in the Humanities
The conflict of studies and cultures and the related discourse about the epistemic
content of liberal education, indeed the place of liberal education/culture in schools,
colleges and universities, and the ancillary question of the place of “humanistic education/paideia”, continued to characterise the knowledge and pedagogical controversies,
with varying degrees of intensity, in the ensuing decades of the twentieth century.

--- [PDF Page 1075 / Book Page 1098] ---

1098

Kazamias

In the 1960s, the “Students for a Democratic Society” questioned the value of
humanistic studies in American education. They considered such studies as being
“elitist” and tied to the past, and not relevant for the burning questions of the present.
These students were calling for “knowledge relevance” (Rasis, 1988, pp. 135–136).
At the same time, however, Mario Savio, the leader of the student protest at Berkeley
in 1964, criticised the developing idea of the University as a “knowledge factory” that
emphasised “socially and economically useful knowledge” and privileged “the scientific and technical disciplines” at the expense of the “human sciences”, particularly
the “humanities”. It should be noted here that Savio’s protest occurred one year after
Clark Kerr, the President of Berkeley, first published his influential book The Uses of
the University where he had “posited the production of useful knowledge as the core of
the university’s mission (Kerr, 1963; Aronowitz, 2000, pp. 30–35). Also, in the ensuing
years, the “two- and three- culture” conception of liberal/general education was criticised by “multi-culturalists” as being elitist and Eurocentric (see Dijeck, 2002).
The value of humanistic studies and their role in contemporary society as well as
their future, were also a subject of wider discussion and concern. Humanist scholars
were already talking about a developing “crisis” in this area, which they deplored, a
crisis that became more acute in the last quarter of the twentieth century. Calling the
tradition of the humanities “education’s great amnesia”, Robert Procter, an American
scholar, in a well-documented historical study has written that “[t]he humanities have
had a strangely cyclical history: they degenerated in the late Renaissance, came back
to life in the early eighteenth century, and have degenerated again in our own time”
(Procter, 1988/1998, pp. ix, 87). And, according to Graham Good, a Canadian scholar,
in the contemporary “inclusive university”, humanism has been “betrayed”; the liberal
humanist ideal is being eroded (Good, 2001, p. 103; also see Schein, 2001, p. 213).

Phase III. What Knowledge Is of Most Worth in the Brave New Cosmopolis
of Globalisation and the Information/Technological Knowledge
Society – a Post-Modern Sequel?
In North America – the United States and Canada – the decline of “classical liberal
humanism” (CLH), and the concomitant dethronement of Liberal Humanistic Paideia/
Culture (LHP) from its privileged position in education have been attributed to a concatenation of factors. As higher education was being further expanded and democratised,
CLH and LHP were criticised for being elitist, racist, male-dominated/patriarchal, culturally restrictive and Eurocentric. At the same time, as noted above, liberal humanistic
knowledge was seen as being “non-relevant” and non-practical in the capitalist world
of late modernity. Equally important, the deteriorating fortunes, nay what we have here
metaphorically referred to as the “sacrifice” of CLH and LHP, must also be sought in
the changing Idea of the University, its mission and its role in the unfolding Brave
New Cosmopolis of Globalisation and the Knowledge Society. Speaking about higher
education in North America, Graham Good has attributed the “betrayal of humanism”
to the “politicization and commercialization of the university”:
The university no longer adheres to the central defining purpose of its liberal
humanist phase – the disinterested pursuit and preservation of knowledge.

--- [PDF Page 1076 / Book Page 1099] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1099

Instead it caters to, and tries to reconcile, a plurality of interests: individuals
want marketable skills, employers want suitably trained employees, and political and economic forces want their agendas and preferences represented. In the
absence of a common end, the university can only be governed by bureaucratic
rationality. … Thus, the university can be simultaneously commercialized (by
the quest for corporate sponsorship for professorships, buildings, and research
programs) and politicized (by the new sectarianism and its group politics, equity
officers, and pressure groups). (Good, 2001, pp. 103–104)
Related to the above, the American university, in the second half of the twentieth century, was being transformed into what Robert Hutchins, earlier in the century, had called
“a service station” educational establishment that over-emphasised the “empirical sciences”, and instrumental knowledge with a vocational orientation, at the expense of the
classics and the liberal arts (see Hutchins, above). A similar Idea of the University, that
emphasised the production of “socially and economically useful new knowledge”, as
mentioned earlier, was propounded by Clark Kerr, the President of the University of
California at Berkeley. “New knowledge”, according to Kerr, was virtually identical with
scientific and technical knowledge. In Kerr’s New Idea of the University, the humanities
were accorded a secondary place (Kerr, 1963; Aronowitz, 2000, pp. 32–34).
In one of the most severe critical analyses of the nature, the structure, the curriculum
and the intellectual orientation of the changing university and college education in the
United States the critical sociologist Stanley Aronowitz has boldly claimed: “With
only a few partial exceptions, there is little that would qualify as higher learning in
the United States. … By ‘higher learning’ I mean places where students are broadly
and critically exposed to the legacy of Western intellectual culture and to those of the
Southern Hemisphere and the East” (Aronowitz, 2000, pp. xvii–xviii). Some of the
key ideas in this indictment of American higher education, that are relevant for us in
this presentation, may be summarised as follows:
-

-

-

-

Vocationalisation of public colleges at the expense of liberal arts and sciences, as
shown by the growth of “enrollments in business, accounting, education, engineering, and other technical areas, including media technology at the expense of
the arts and sciences” (Aronowitz, 2000, pp. 55–56).
Privileging of “instrumental reason/rationality” and “training in undergraduate
“core curricula” of general education: for example, according to Aronowitz,
“Harvard’s twenty-year old educational reform is, at the bottom, profoundly
ensconced in instrumental reason” (Aronowitz, 2000, p. 139).
Related to the above, Aronowitz criticised “the academic system of American
society” for being “geared to practical ends”, namely, “the production of useful knowledge” and “supplying the vast but segmented market for intellectual
labor”, instead of “being the home of scholars engaged in the disinterested pursuit of truth” (Aronowitz, 2000, p. 38).
Dismantling the American “corporate university”, and a “new vision for
true learning”: for the reasons adumbrated above, Aronowitz argues that the
American “corporate university” should be “dismantled”. Instead, in “an era
of globalisation and rapid technological change”, he offers “a vision for true

--- [PDF Page 1077 / Book Page 1100] ---

1100

Kazamias

learning that places a well-rounded education back at the center of the university
mission”. He elaborates:
The fundamental mission of higher education should be to play a leading role,
perhaps the leading role, in the development of general culture. … Colleges
and universities] must be centers of learning, but also sites of discovery, not
only in the natural sciences but also in the natural sciences and the humanities.
(Aronowitz, 2000, p. 172.)
Similar observations and critiques, as the above, have been made about contemporary
university education in the West. In his book The University in Ruins (1996), Bill
Readings claims that the University “no longer participates in the historical project
for humanity that was the legacy of the Enlightenment: the historical project of culture” (Readings, 1996, pp. 5, 74–75). In today’s world of economic globalisation, the
rise of transnational corporations (TNCs) and the concomitant “decline of the nationstate”, the university”, Readings argues, “is a “ruined institution”, for it “has been
stripped of its cultural mission”. It has been forced to abandon its historical cultural
mission. Instead, it has become “a bureaucratic arm of the unipolar capitalist system”
and “ensconced in consumer ideology. … It is no longer called upon to train a citizen
subject” (pp. 14, 44–48).
The “instrumentalist pressure on knowledge production” in the contemporary university, and the corrosive effects on liberal culture, the arts and “the life of the mind”
by the “instrumentalist ethos of the market”, and by “pragmatic” and “philistine” concerns, are discussed in another pungent critique of contemporary cultural institutions,
including the universities of Europe and North America. In a controversial volume
entitled Where Have All Intellectuals Gone? Confronting 21st Century Philistinism
(2004), the English sociologist F. Furedi claims that “the philistine ethos … informs
much of educational and cultural policy”, where the term “philistine” is defined as
“a person deficient in liberal culture; one whose interests are material and commonplace” (Furedi, 2004, pp. 1, 3). He characterises university life as “banal”, while real
scholarship, namely, “the pursuit of excellence and truth, is frequently represented as
a bizarre, self-indulgent and irrelevant pursuit” (p. 2).
Furedi criticises the conformism and passivity of today’s critical intellectuals. He
urges that intellectuals should “reconstitute themselves through reclaiming the autonomy for which their predecessors fought in previous years”. And he concludes his
critical diatribe with the following thought:
There is very little we can do to force the elites to give up the instrumentalist
and philistine world view. But we can wage a battle of ideas for the hearts and
minds of the public. How we can do it is one of the key questions of our time.
(Furedi, 2004, p. 156)
Essentially the same idea about the corrosive effects of Globalisation on Liberal
Humanistic Paideia/Culture is implied in judgmental statements made by others.
For example: (a) Stephen Ball has argued that “problems of globalization frame and

--- [PDF Page 1078 / Book Page 1101] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1101

produce the contemporary problems of education” and “new orthodoxies”, one of
which, according to him, is “the increasing colonization of education policy by economic policy imperatives” (Ball, 1998); (b) John Field has commented that the “EU’s
action programmes are relentlessly vocational, utilitarian and instrumental in their
emphasis”, a “technological option” that has created a tension between “instrumentalism” and the European “attachment to the humanistic tradition of education” (Field,
1998, p. 8); (c) referring to “schooling and the free market” in the United States and
the United Kingdom, Spring has exclaimed in obvious despair: “The bean counters
are taking over! Accountants and economists are replacing Confucius, Buddha, Plato,
John Newman, Robert Hutchins and the many others who have discussed the meaning
of a good education and the good life” (Spring, 1998, p. 149); and (d) according to
Robert Cowen: “The contemporary crisis – globalization and the relative increase in
powerlessness of the ‘nation-State’ – is not merely an economic crisis. It is a cultural
one, which requires historical, sociological, anthropological, cultural and philosophical analysis. If the social and human sciences are impoverished by technicization – by
performativity, by pragmatism, by an excessive concern for the immediate and the
useful – then one of the defences of nations to understand what is happening to them
will be dramatically weakened” (Cowen, 1999).
Finally, it would be relevant here to note that the drive towards instrumental and
“techno-scientific” forms of knowledge can be interpreted as a contributing factor to a
“shift in values and social ethic”, whereby, according to Neave, education is “increasingly viewed as a sub-sector of economic policy”, and less as “part of social policy”
(Neave, 1988, p. 274).

The Sacrifice of Liberal Humanistic Paideia/Culture:
An Epimythion
In Euripides’ play Iphigenia at Aulis, when Agamemnon’s daughter Iphigenia is brought
to the altar to be sacrificed, she is snatched by the goddess Artemis and taken to join the
gods as a high priestess. Agamemnon is elated and hastens to comfort his distraught
wife Clytemnestra that they should feel happy because their daughter is alive among
the company of the gods. He then bids her farewell telling her that he looks forward
to seeing her again when he returns from Troy. Clytemnestra, however, remains ominously silent. And the curtain falls after these rather sibylline stanzas by the chorus:
Farewell, son of Atreus, I wish you good voyage to Phrygia
and a good return, bringing with you sumptuous/beautiful spoils from Troy!
Of course, the Athenian audience knew the myth and what these words portended: triumph and spoils, but also tragic consequences. Agamemnon’s pillaging of Troy, and his
triumphant return to Argos “bringing with him sumptuous spoils”, as the Chorus enigmatically had prophesied, were accomplished at heavy “human” cost: the sacrifice of his
own “flesh and blood”, the raping and enslavement of the Trojan women, the slaughter
of the finest Greek and Trojan youth, and the killing of innocent people. And after Troy:

--- [PDF Page 1079 / Book Page 1102] ---

1102

Kazamias

the butchering of Agamemnon himself by his wife Clytemnestra, who never forgave
him for the hubris he had committed, Clytemnestra’s murder by her own son Orestes for
the hubris his mother had committed, and, in turn, the vengeful pursuit of Orestes by the
bloodthirsty Furies for his equally condemnable act, the hubris of matricide.
As in the Agamemnon myth, in the first episode above, we have argued that discursive
statements and practices in education (logos and praxis) that are constructed and legitimised in response to and through the prism and the imperatives of the globalisation of
capitalist “market fundamentalism” and the associated Knowledge/Learning Society
may indeed bring wealth, blessings and “beautiful Trojan spoils”. But, as the myth of
Agamemnon presaged, they will also exact a heavy “human” price and necessitate
“humanistic sacrifices”, namely, violence, competitiveness, possessive individualism,
the “economic colonization of people” (Korten, 1995, p. 245), the loss of social justice
and other democratic civic virtues, and most pertinently for our purposes here, liberal
humanistic culture and anthropocentric pedagogies, what we have called “Paideia of
the Soul”, with ultimate dire consequences.
Now, if (a) being human creatures quintessentially signifies having minds as well as
souls, (b) the imagined “Brave New Cosmopolis of Globalisation and the InformationTechnological Knowledge/Learning Society”, as presented in the first episode of this
duology, can be said to be not “wholly human”, (c) the role of education is, among
other things, the cultivation of minds and souls, and what Martha Nussbaum has called
“humanity” (Nussbaum, 1997), and (d) one agrees with Sophocles’ paean to man,
namely, that “he is the greatest wonder on earth” and “for every ill he hath found
a remedy” (chorus in Antigone), or, in the same vein, with Shakespeare’s Hamlet,
namely, “What a piece of work is man! How noble in reason! How infinite in faculty!
In apprehension how like a God!” (Hamlet in Hamlet), then, one may legitimately pose
the question: What can the contemporary human (the politician, the intellectual, the
scientist, the artist, the educator, the pedagogue, the citizen) do “to arrest” the “dehumanizing” tide of economic globalisation and “market fundamentalism?”
In the second episode, I try to answer this question by using another ancient Greek
myth, the Myth of Prometheus as dramatised by Aeschylus in Prometheus Bound.

Episode Two – Prometheus Unbound: Promethean
Neo-Humanism in the Brave New Cosmopolis
of Globalisation and the Information/Technological
Knowledge Society
Prologue – The Myth of Prometheus
In Aeschylus’ Prometheus Bound, Prometheus the Titan, son of Earth, creator and
friend of “mortal man” as a superior being blessed with a “higher soul” than an
animal, and with the ability “to reason”; Prometheus the “foreteller”, germ of intelligence and moral order in a brute, chaotic and violent universe, had sided with
Zeus in his overthrow of Cronos, the Olympian lord of the gods, and with Zeus’
subsequent succession as the undisputed master of the universe. But when Zeus, the

--- [PDF Page 1080 / Book Page 1103] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1103

dynastic Olympian planetarch (ruler of the planet), wanted to destroy the “miserable
race of men” and replace it by another – by a race of fettered and servile “sub-human”
creatures – over whom he would rule with brute force, Prometheus the philanthropos
(lover of mankind) stole Fire, the source of all civilisation, wisdom and all human arts
from heaven, and bestowed it as a gift to humanity. Fearing that this act of philanthropia would increase the power, the confidence and the wisdom of mortals, Zeus
condemned Prometheus to be nailed by the mighty fire-god Hyphaestus (Vulcan) to
a rock in the Caucasus, where an eagle continually preyed on his liver. Sympathisers
with Prometheus visited him and urged him to accept the sovereignty of Zeus – the
new master of Olympus – to cease acting as the champion of freedom, justice and
the human race, and to recant. But despite his agonising ordeal, Prometheus did not
compromise; he continued his defiance of Zeus’ tyrannical power, until in the end Zeus
released him (Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound).
In Aeschylus’ drama, Prometheus symbolises the rebellious and creative human being
who possesses an acute mind and, as a benefactor of humanity, the will to rebel against
absolute sovereignty, tyrannical power and violence and the dehumanising enslavement
of mortals. As the foreteller, he could foresee that the almighty hegemon Zeus would create “humanoid” rather than “human creatures” devoid of human “minds and souls”.

Prometheus Unbound: Promethean Neo-Humanism and Paideia
In the second episode of this duology, globalization, through stakeholders like the
Transnational Corporations (TNCs), is presented as an imperial “knowledge power”.
Like the newly enthroned planetarch Zeus in Prometheus Bound, globalization is bent
on constructing not wholly human creatures, what otherwise could be referred to as
cyborg citizens (Mann, 2001), without the quintessential human minds, feelings and
“souls”, as symbolically represented in a brilliant advertisement of Johnny Walker
whiskey. The videoed advertisement shows a talking anthropoid (with a human façade,
a mechanical neck and backside head), which in successive dramatic scenes emits
audibly the following thoughts and sentiments:
-

I am faster than you; I am stronger; certainly I will last much longer than you.
You may think I am the future, but you are wrong.
You are.
If I had a wish, I wish to be human: to know how it feels, to feel, to hope, to
despair, to wonder, to love.
I can achieve immortality by not wearing out.
You can achieve immortality.
Simply by doing one great thing – keep walking!

To recollect Plato’s famous allegory of the Cave, in a Cyborg Cosmopolis the human
being is placed in a modern “virtual cave”, a site of “non-paideia”, where he/she is
held captive of a “virtual reality” devoid of human qualities, dispositions and aesthetic
skills. Such an imagined Brave New Cosmopolis may indeed be a rational techno-scientific and an economically hegemonic Cosmopolis. But, we have argued, it will be a
Dehumanised Knowledge Dystopia (DKD) – a Post-Human Empire (PHE)?

--- [PDF Page 1081 / Book Page 1104] ---

1104

Kazamias

What Is to Be Done?
In the second episode, Prometheus Unbound, we argue that what could be done to
“cultivate humanity” (Nussbaum) in the “dehumanizing” Knowledge/Learning
Cosmopolis, the Post-Human Empire, or to use Furedi’s terminology, the Philistine
Empire (Furedi, 2004), is to re-conceptualise/re-imagine/reinvent and promote Liberal
Humanistic Paideia, by which we mean an education that refers to and cultivates human
attributes and qualities, namely, the mind, the virtues, the passions, the feelings (in the
words of the anthropoid above, “to know how it feels, to hope, to despair, to wonder, to
love”), the problems, man’s and woman’s human condition. Such an intellectual, epistemological and pedagogical project would entail the creation of “humanist learning
societies” or in O’Sullivan’s terminology, “human communities” (O’ Sullivan, 2001),
through the promotion of a humanist Paideia and Pedagogy, with a re-conceptualised and
reconstituted humanistic learning occupying a prominent place in the curriculum of
schools, colleges and universities.
By re-conceptualising Liberal Humanistic Paideia we do not mean reviving the narrow concept of classical humanistic Paideia that was centred in the classical literary
and philological disciplines (see Jaeger, 1939; Papathanasopoulou, 1987). Nor do we
mean exclusively the Trivium – Grammar, Rhetoric and Logic – plus Music, of the
Septem Artes Liberales (The Seven Liberal Arts) of the Medieval University (Kimball,
1995). We argue for the reinvention of a Promethean neo-Humanism in education, that
questions the hegemony of the Information/ Technological Epistemological Paradigm
(Castells) and rejects all constraints on the humanness, the free spirit and the imagination of man, by cultivating “all the human arts”, especially the broad epistemic
space of the Arts and the Humanities. We would argue for a Humanistic Paideia and
Pedagogy, based on the broad spectrum of what has come to be known as Liberal Arts
(the artes humanitatis/studia humanitaties), and among them, the broad concept of
humanistic education, that includes Language, Literature, Poetry, Drama, Philosophy,
History, Music and the Arts (see Procter, 1988/1998). Contrary to possible criticisms
that such an education would be conservative and not devoid of Eurocentric elitist, sexist, racist, and “classist” elements, our re-conceptualised Paideia and Pedagogy could
indeed be “empowering”, “emancipatory”, “transformative” and, above all, humanising to all, including the poor, the oppressed and the underprivileged. In support of
this idea, it would be relevant here to refer to the much-acclaimed Clemente Course
in the Humanities (CCH), as expounded in Earl Shorris’ book Riches for the Poor
(2000). The CCH started on an experimental basis in the Lower East Side of New York
and then it expanded to 17 sites in the United States, Canada and Mexico. Its aims,
according to Shorris, were: “through the humanities to enable poor people to make the
journey into the public world, the political life as Pericles defined it, beginning with the
family, and going on to neighborhood, community and state”. By the “political life as
Pericles defined it” Shorris meant vita activa – active, reflective citizenship – and, we
might add, what Aristotle meant by “man” being a “political animal” (zoon politikon),
as exemplified by Socrates, the “philosopher citizen”. (Shorris, 2000, pp. 4–10). As to
the aforementioned possible criticisms of humanistic education, Shorris’ comments
about the study of the humanities would be quite in order here:

--- [PDF Page 1082 / Book Page 1105] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1105

To call for the study of the humanities now as an answer to the problem of poverty in the United States contravenes the views of both the left and the right. The
left abandoned the study of the humanities as the cultural imperialism of dead
white European males, giving it over to the conservatives, who have claimed it
as their own. In fact, the humanities should belong to the left, for the study of the
humanities by large numbers of people, especially the poor, is in itself a redistribution of the wealth. The right, on the other hand, has had no use for the living
humanities since Plato banned poets from The Republic. (Shorris, 2000, p. 105)
Epistemic areas such as the arts and the humanities represent different forms of knowledge from techno-scientific studies and empirical social sciences, which, more than
ever, are needed in the dehumanising Brave New Cosmopolis of Globalisation and
the Knowledge/Learning Society. In an enlightening essay on “Aesthetic Modes of
Knowing”, Elliot Eisner has argued that areas such as Literature, Music and Art represent “aesthetic forms of knowledge” that is different from the most widely accepted
“scientific knowledge”. Viewed this way, “both artist and scientist create forms through
which the world is viewed … both make qualitative judgments about the fit, the coherence, the economy, ‘the rightness’ of the forms they create”. And in support of the
“aesthetic mode of knowing”, Eisner avers:
The aesthetic is not only motivated by our need for stimulation; it is also motivated by our own need to give order to our world. To form is to confer order. To
confer aesthetic order upon our world is to make that world hang together, to fit,
to feel right, to put things in balance, to create harmony. … The aesthetic, then, is
motivated by our need to lead a stimulating life … the aesthetic is also inherent
in our need to make sense of experience. (Eisner, 1985, pp. 26–30)
In the same vein, the epistemological, the liberatory-humanistic and the aesthetic
value of the Arts, particularly “during this period of global change”, was unequivocally
declared by the editors of the Harvard Educational Review (HER) in a published symposium on “Arts As Education” in 1991. The editors averred that “learning in the arts
is fundamental to education because the arts are an essential aspect of human knowing
and being in the world”, and “educational reform and debate without the arts is incomplete reform”. Their reasoning behind this claim is worthy of quotation in full:
We perceive the arts to be a fundamental way of knowing, or, as first-grade
teacher Karen Gallas puts it in her essay’s title: Arts as Epistemology. The arts
can be, for both students and teachers, forms of expression, communication, creativity, imagination, observation, perception, and thought. They are integral to
the development of cognitive skills such as listening, thinking, problem-solving,
matching form to function, and decision making. They inspire discipline and
dedication. The arts can also open pathways toward understanding the richness
of peoples and cultures that inhabit our world, particularly during this period of
global change. The arts can nurture a sense of belonging, or of community; they
can foster a sense of being apart, or of being an individual. The arts give rise to
many voices. By acknowledging the role of the arts in our lives and in education,

--- [PDF Page 1083 / Book Page 1106] ---

1106

Kazamias

we acknowledge what makes individuals whole. (Harvard Educational Review,
1991, p. 25)
The epistemological, ethical, aesthetic and a fortiori humanising potential for the study
and teaching of Literature – poetry, drama, novel, biography, essay – in a democratic
society, especially in the contemporary turbulent, uncertain, insecure and problematic
world, has been presented eloquently by Louise Rosenblatt in her classic and influential Literature as Exploration (1938/1965/1968/1976/1995). Echoing Henry James,
the province of literature, according to Rosenblatt, is the human experience, “everything that human beings have thought or felt or created”. And she explains: “The
lyric poet utters all that the human heart can feel. … The novelist displays the intricate
web of human relationships with their hidden patterns of motive and emotion. … The
dramatist builds a dynamic structure out of the tensions and conflicts of intermingled
human lives” (Rosenblatt, 1995, pp. 5–6).
Promethean neo-Humanism through the Arts and the Humanities has the potential
not only of developing cognitive skills and “forming minds”, which are necessary
qualities of being human. As conceptualized here, more than the “sciences”, it also
has the potential of cultivating the “human soul” – the social, ethical, emotional and
aesthetic attitudes, the skills, dispositions and virtues, and the character traits that are
quintessentially human (also see Cohen, 2006, and O’ Sullivan, 2001). In the opening
essay in the aforementioned HER symposium (1991) on “Arts As Education”. Maxine
Greene, the distinguished American philosopher of Education, argued that imagination, which is “at the core of understanding” and responsible for “the very texture of
experience”, and the emotions, including taste and sensibility, “can be and ought to be,
educated … through initiation into the artistic-aesthetic domains” (p. 31), by which
she meant the Arts, namely, the spectrum that includes Dance, Music, Painting and the
other graphic arts, Literature and Poetry. The arts, according to her, “offer opportunities for perspective, for perceiving alternative ways of transcending and of being in
the world, for refusing the automatism that overwhelms choice” (p. 32). And speaking about the “transformative” pedagogical potential of the arts, Greene asserts that
“one of the functions of the arts is not only to make us see (as Joseph Conrad wrote)
‘according to our deserts’ … not only to change our everyday lives in some fashion,
but to subvert our thoughtlessness and complacencies even about art itself ” (p. 33).
And again: “At the heart of what I am asking for in the domains of art teaching and
aesthetic education is a sense of agency, even of power. Cockburn’s notion of the power
of folk music ‘as a means of individual expression and a tool for social change’ suggests possibilities in the main domain of the arts. Painting, literature, theatre, film; all
can open doors and move persons to transform” (p. 38, underlining mine).
An illustrative example of an Art that represents a different form of knowledge from
the “sciences”, and has the twofold potential of developing the “mind” and “cultivating
the soul” is that of Music. In a recent study titled “The Neglected Muse: Why Music is
an Essential Liberal Art,” Peter Kalkavage, a musician and a teacher of music, argues
that Music “is the union of the rational and irrational, of order and feeling. … Even
apart from its profound connection with mathematics, music is pre-eminent among

--- [PDF Page 1084 / Book Page 1107] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1107

the arts for the order and clarity, the sharply defined character, of its elements.” Music,
he further explains, “is an essential part of who we are as human beings … ultimately,
by shaping feeling, music shapes the whole human being”. And in bolstering his argument about the educational value of Music, Kalkavage refers to the Greek philosopher
Aristotle, for whom Music, as an ingredient of Paideia was crucially useful for the
intellectual, moral and political development of the virtuous anthropos-politis (citizen-person)
(Kalkavage, 2006, p. 16).
Another example of the difference between the approach of the “social sciences”
and that of the Arts is provided by Literature. According to Rosenblatt:
In contrast to the analytic approach of the social sciences, the literary experience has immediacy and emotional persuasion. Will President Madison or
Rip Van Winkle live more vividly for the student? Will the history of the Great
Depression impress him as much as Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath? Will the
theoretical definitions of the psychology textbook be as illuminating as Oedipus
or Sons and Lovers? Obviously, the analytic approach needs no defense. But
may not literary materials contribute powerfully to the student’s images of the
world, himself, and the human condition? (Rosenblatt, 1995, p. 7)

Epilogue/Epimythion – Tending to the ‘Mind’ and the ‘Soul’
In his defense/apology at the trial at which he was indicted and condemned to drink
the hemlock for his alleged “impiety”, specifically for preaching “new demons/ ideas”,
different from those of the State, and for “corrupting the youth”, Socrates the “humanist philosopher-citizen” of democratic Athens, like the mythical humanist Prometheus,
refused to obey the dictates of those in power and give up philosophy, which he considered to be a sine qua non for the cultivation of the “minds” and “souls” of the
democratic anthropoi-polites (citizens-persons). In his defiance at the trial, he reiterated that he would prefer to die rather than cease to say to whomever he met: “How
can you, my friend, an Athenian citizen of the greatest, wisest, most glorious and most
powerful city, not be ashamed for caring more about how you acquire honor, glory and
riches, and not be interested in your intellectual development, in truth and in tending
to your soul?” (Plato, Apology).
Our re-conceptualised humanist Paideia/Pedagogy for the creation of democratic
citizens with “minds and souls” in the Knowledge/Learning Cosmopolis of the twentyfirst century may be epitomized in terms of the following key ideas and human values:
Character, Community, Inclusiveness, Integrity, Cosmopolitan Identity, Sympathy,
Caring and Democracy (Hargreaves, 2003; Nussbaum, 1997, Noddings,1984), but
also Justice, Wisdom, Responsibility, Friendship, and Critical Thinking.

References
Aeschylus. Prometheus Bound.
Apple, M. (1986). Teachers and texts. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

--- [PDF Page 1085 / Book Page 1108] ---

1108

Kazamias

Aronowitz, S. (2000). The knowledge factory: Dismantling the corporate university and creating true higher
education. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Albisetti, J. (1997). The debate on secondary school reform in France and Germany. In D. Muller, F. Ringer
& B. Simon (Eds.), The rise of the modern educational system: Structural change and social reproduction, 1870–1920. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Antoniou, D. (Ed.) (1987). Ta programmata tes meses ekpaideusis,1833–1929 [The programs/curriculum of
secondary education]. Athens: Historical Archives of the Greek Youth-General Secretariat of the Young
Generation.
Apple, M. (1993). Official knowledge: Democratic education in a conservative age. London and New York:
Routledge.
Ball, S. J. (1998). Global citizenship, consumption and education policy. Unpublished paper.
Ball, S. J. (1998). Educational studies, policy entrepreneurship and social theory. In R. Slee & G. Weiner
with S. Tomlinson (Eds.), School effectiveness for whom? Challenges to the school effectiveness and
school improvement movements. London: Falmer Press.
Barber, B. R. (1995/1996). Jihad vs. McWorld: How globalism and tribalism are reshaping the world.
New York: Ballantine Books.
Barber, B. R. (1997). Education for democracy. The Good Society, 7(2), 3–7.
Barnett, R. (1994/1999). The limits of competence: Knowledge, higher education and society. Buckingham:
The Society of Research into Higher Education and Open University Press.
Barney, D. (2004). The network society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bauman, Z. (1998). Globalization: The human consequences. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bauman, Z. (2002). Society under siege. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bell, D. (1968). The reforming of general education: The Columbia college experience in its national setting. Anchor Books.
Bell, D. (1976). The coming of post-Industrial society. New York: Basic Books.
Bell, D. (1980). The social framework of the information society. In T. Forester (Ed.), The microelectronics
revolution. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Bernstein, B. (1996). Pedagogy, symbolic control and identity: Theory, research, critique. London: Taylor
& Francis.
Biesta, G. (2003). How general can bildung be? Reflections on the future of a modern educational ideal. In
L. Lovlie, K. P. Mortensen & S. E. Nordenbo (Eds.), Educating humanity: Bildung in postmodernity.
Blackwell.
Bowra, C. M. (1957). The Greek experience. Mentor Books.
Boyles, D. R. (Ed.) (2005). Schools or markets? Commercialism, privatization, and school-business partnerships. Mahwah and London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Burbules, N. C. & Torres, C. A. (Eds.) (2000) Globalization and education: Critical perspectives. New York
and London: Routledge.
Carr, W., & Hartnett, A. (1996/1998). Education and the struggle for democracy: The politics of educational
ideas. Buckingham and Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Castells, M. (1989). The information city. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Castells, M. (1998, 2000). The information age: Economy, society and culture, Vol. III, End of millenium.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Chrysostomou, K. (2005). Law-plan for the establishment and operation of private universities. Comparative
and International Education Review, 4, 185–191 (in Greek).
Cohen, J. (2006). Social, emotional, ethical, and academic education; creating a climate for learning, participation in Democracy, and well-being. Harvard Educational Review, 72(2), 201–237.
Commission of the European Communities (1993). Development, competitiveness, employment. COM (93), 457.
Commission of the European Communities (1995). Teaching and learning: Toward the learning society.
Commission of the European Communities (1997). Towards a Europe of knowledge, COM (97).
Commission of the European Communities (200l). Education and active citizenship – Learning for active
citizenship.
Cowen, R. (1996). Performativity, post-modernity and the university. Comparative Education, 32(2), 245–258.
Cowen, R. (2000). The Market-framed university: The new ethics of the game. In J. Cairns, R. Gardner &
D. Lawton (Eds.), Values and the curriculum. London: Woburn Press.

--- [PDF Page 1086 / Book Page 1109] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1109
Davies, S., & Guppy, N. (1997). Globalization and educational reforms in Anglo-American democracies.
Comparative Education Review, 41(4), 435–459.
Dimaras, A. (Ed.) (1973). He metarrythmisi pou den Egine [The reform that never was]. Athens: Hermes.
Disraeli, B. (1926). The two nations. London: Oxford University Press.
Elshtain, J. B. (1995). Democracy on trial. New York: Basic Books.
Drucker, M. (1993). Post-capitalist society. Butterworth.
Editorial Board (1991). Symposium: Arts as education. Harvard Educational Review, 61, 25–26.
Eisner, E. (1985). Aesthetic modes of knowing. In National Society for the Study of Education, Learning
and teaching the ways of knowing – Eighty- fourth yearbook of the national study of education, Part II.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Euripides. Iphigenia at Aulis.
Falk, R. (1999). Predatory globalization: A critique. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Feyerabend, P. (1975). Against method. New York: Humanities Press.
Field, J. (1998). European dimensions: Education, training and the European Union. London and
Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley.
Flouris, G., & Pasias, G. (2000). On the way to the ‘Knowledge Society’: What question is of most worth?
That of ‘Knowledge’ or that of ‘Society’? In S. Bouzakis (Ed.), Historical-comparative perspectives,
Festschrift in Honor of Andreas M. Kazamias. Athens: Gutenberg (in Greek).
Fotopoulos, T. (1997), Towards an inclusive democracy: The crisis of the growth economy and the need for
a new liberatory project. London and New York: Cassell.
Freire, P. & Macedo, D. (1995). A dialogue: Culture, language, and race. Harvard Educational Review, 65,
377–402.
Furedi, F. (2004). Where have all intellectuals gone? Confronting 21st century philistinism. London:
Continuum.
Report of the Harvard Committee, with an introduction by James Bryant Conant (1952). General education
in a free society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Giroux, H. (2002). Neoliberalism, corporate culture, and the promise of higher education: The university as
a democratic public sphere. Harvard Educational Review, 72(4), 425–463.
Giddens, A. (1998). The third way: The renewal of social democracy. Oxford: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (2000). Runaway world: How globalization is reshaping our lives. New York: Routledge.
Good, G. (2001). Humanism betrayed: Theory, ideology, and culture in the contemporary university. Quebec
City: McGill Queens University Press.
Green, A. (1990). Education and state: The rise of education systems in England, France and the USA.
London: Macmillan.
Green, A. (1999). Education and globalization in Europe and East Asia: Convergent and divergent trends.
Unpublished paper.
Grollios, G. (1999). Ideology, pedagogy and educational policy: Logos and praxis of the European programs in education. Athens: Gutenberg (in Greek).
Halls, W. D. (1965). Society, schools and progress in France. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Hargreaves, A. (2003). Teaching in the knowledge society: Education in the age of insecurity. Maidenhead
and Philadelphia: Open University Press.
Hutchins, R. M. (1936). The higher learning in America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hutchins, R. M. (1952). The great conversation: The substance of a liberal education. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Hutchins, R. M. (1953). The conflict of education in a democratic society. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Jaeger, W. (1939). Paideia: The ideals of Greek culture, translated by Gilbert Highet. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Jordan, G., & Weedon, C. (1994). Cultural politics: Class, gender, race and the postmodern world. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Kalkavage, P. (2006). The neglected muse – Why music is an essential liberal art. AFT American Educator.
Kazamias, A. M. (2000). Crisis and reform in US education: A nation at risk, 1983 and all that. World
Yearbook of Education 2000.

--- [PDF Page 1087 / Book Page 1110] ---

1110

Kazamias

Kazamias, A. M. (1997). Comparative analysis of the international experience in post-graduate studies and
the case of Greece. In Education 2000, Post-graduate studies and research in Greek institutions of
higher learning. Athens: Kallithea (in Greek).
Kazamias, A. M. (1960). What knowledge is of most worth? An historical conception and a modern sequel.
Harvard Educational Review, 256–276.
Kazamias, A. M., & Roussakis, Y. (1998). Crisis and reform in Greek education: The modern Greek
Sisyphus. In S. Lindblad & T. Popkewitz (Eds.), National cases: Educational systems and recent
reforms. Uppsala.
Ker, I. (1999). Newman’s idea of a university – A guide for the contemporary university? In D. Smith &
A. K. Langslow (Eds.), The idea of a university. London: Jessica Kingsley.
Kerr, C. (1963). The uses of the university. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Kimball, B. A. (1986). Orators and philosophers: A history of the idea of liberal education. New York:
College Entrance Examination Board.
Kliebard, H. (1995). The struggle for the American curriculum. New York: Routledge.
Kladis, D. (1999). The university between the ‘labor society’ and the ‘knowledge/ learning society’. In The
university in the emerging society. Athens: Ellinika Grammata (in Greek).
Lofstedt, J. -I. (Ed.) (2001). Virtualization of higher education in the era of globalization: Issues and trends.
Stockholm: Institute of International Education, Stockholm University.
Lyford, J. P. (1986). An interview with Robert M. Hutchins in 1962. Reprinted in The Center Magazine.
Lyotard, J. -F. (1984). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.
Macedo, D. P. (1993). Literacy for stupidification: The pedagogy of big lies. Harvard Educational Review.
63, 183–206.
Martin, J. R. (1985). Becoming educated: A journey of alienation or integration? Journal of Education.
167(3), 71–84.
Mann, S., & Hall, N. (2001). Cyborg: Digital destiny and human possibility in the age of wearable computer. New York: Random House.
McGrew, A. (1992). A global society. In S. Hall, D. Held & A. McGrew (Eds.), Modernity and its futures.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
McLean, M. (1990). Britain and a single market Europe: Prospects for a common school curriculum.
London: Kogan Page.
McLean, M. (1995). Educational traditions compared: Content, teaching and learning in industrial countries. London: David Fulton.
Mok, Ka Ho (2000). Impact of globalization: A study of quality assurance systems of higher education in
Hong Kong and Singapore. Comparative Education Review, 44(2), 148–174.
Nussbaum, M. C. (1997). Cultivating humanity: A classical defense of reform in liberal education.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Neave, G. (1988). Education and social policy: Demise of an ethic or change of values. Oxford Review of
Education, 14(3), 273–283.
Noddings, N. (1984). Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics & Moral Education. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (1998). Education at a glance: OECD
indicators. Paris: OECD.
OECD (1995). Government in transition: Public management reforms in OECD Countries. Paris: OECD.
OECD (2002). OECD work on education. Paris: OECD.
OECD (1989). Reviews of national policies for education – Turkey. Paris: OECD.
O’ Sullivan, E. (2001). Transformative learning: Educational vision for the 21st century. London and New
York: Zed Books.
Papathanasopoulou, A. (1987). Anthropistiki paideia [Humanistic education]. Athens: D. N. Papademas.
(in Greek).
Peterson, A. D. C. (1957). Educating our rulers. London: Gerald Duckworth and Co.
Plato. Apology.
Procter, R. E. (1988/1998). Defining the humanities: How rediscovering a tradition can improve our schools
– with a curriculum for today’s students. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.

--- [PDF Page 1088 / Book Page 1111] ---

Agamemnon Contra Prometheus 1111
Readings, B. (1996/1997). The university in ruins. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.
Rosenblatt, L. M. (1995). Literature as exploration. New York: The Modern Language Association of
America.
Schein, S. (2002). Classical letters and cultural studies. In A. Regakos (Ed.), Dead letters: Classical studies
in the 21st century. Athens: Patakis (in Greek).
Scholte, J. A. (2000). Globalization: A critical introduction. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Shakespeare. Hamlet.
Shorris, E. (2000). Riches for the poor: The Clemente course in the humanities. New York and London:
W.W. Norton.
Slaughter, S. (1998). National higher education policies in a global economy. In J. Currie & J. Newson
(Eds.), Universities and globalization: Critical perspectives. Thousand Oaks, London and New Delhi.
Smith, D., & Langslow, A. K. (Eds.) (1999). The idea of a university. London: Jessica Kingsley.
Snow, C. P. (1959). The two cultures and the scientific revolution. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Snow, C. P. (1964). The two cultures: A second look. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sophocles. Antigone.
Sorkin, D. (1983). Wilhelm Von Humboldt: The theory and practice of self-formation (bildung). Journal of
the History of Ideas, 55–73.
Soros, G. (1998). The crisis of global capitalism: Open society endangered. New York: Public Affairs.
Spring, J. (1998). Education and the rise of the global economy. Mahwah and London: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Stamatis, C. M. (2005). He avevei koinonia tis gnosis [The uncertain knowledge society]. Athens: Savvalas
Publications.
Stromquist, N. P. (2002). Education in a globalized world: The connectivity of economic power, technology
and knowledge. Boulder, CO: Rowman & Littlefield.
Stromquist, N. P., & Monkman, K. (Eds.). Globalization and education: Integration and contestation across
cultures. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Talbott, J. E. (1969). The politics of educational reform in France, 1918-1940. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Taquieff, P. –A. (2002). Pangosmiopoiese kai demokratia (Globalization and democracy), Greek translation
of the French original Resisterd au “bougisme”- Democratie forte contre mondialisation techno-marchande. Athens: Eikostoyu Protou Publications.
Tombazos, S. (1999). Globalization and European Union: Introduction to the criticism of globalization and
neo-liberalism. Athens: Hellinika Grammata (in Greek).
Tozer, St., Violas, Paul C., & Senese, G. (2002). School and society: Historical and contemporary perspective. London and New York: McGraw-Hill.
Turkish Ministry of Education, Turkish Education System, http://www.meb.gov.tr/Stats/apk2002ing/
apage29-48.htm accessed June 30, 2006.
Van Dijck, J., After the ‘two cultures’: Towards a ‘(multi) cultural’ practice of science communication. Paper
given at the Conference on Public Communication of Science and Technology, in Capetown, South
Africa, December 4–7, 2002.
Varmazis, N. K. (1992). He archaia Hellinkiki glossa kai grammatia os problema tes neohellinikis
Ekpaideusis (The ancient Greek language and literature as a problem of neohellenic/modern Greek
education. Thessaloniki: Kyriakides Bros.
Vergopoulos, C. (2000). The chimera of globalization. Athens (in Greek).
Vitsaxis, V. (2002). O mythos: Semio anaphoras tes yparksiakis anazeteses (A reference point for the existential quest). Athens: Ellen Publications.
Winterer, C. (2002). The culture of classicism: Ancient Greece and Rome in American intellectual life,
1780–1910. (Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Zorlu-Durukan, S. A. (1999). Privatization and religion in Turkish education: The ‘80s and ‘90s. Unpublished
paper. University of Wisconsin-Madison.

