================================================================================
Chapter 69: Beyond Methodological ‘Isms’ in Comparative Education in an Era of Globalisation
Author(s): Roger Dale and Susan Robertson
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 1113–1127
PDF Pages: pp. 1089–1103 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1089 / Book Page 1113] ---

69
BEYOND METHODOLOGICAL ‘ISMS’
IN COMPARATIVE EDUCATION IN AN ERA
OF GLOBALISATION
Roger Dale and Susan Robertson

Introduction
[A] whole series of key concepts for the understanding of society derive their
power from appearing to be just what they always were and derive their instrumentality from taking on quite different forms. (Smith, 2006, p. 628)
Gavin Smith’s pithy insight takes us straight to the heart of the methodological – but
also the substantive – problems posed to comparative education by ‘globalisation’.
We do not need to define globalisation very precisely to recognise that it has brought
about major challenges to comparative education’s objects of study, and the terms and
concepts it uses – and this means, we will argue, that it has also brought about changes
in the meaning of comparative education itself. In this chapter we will be suggesting
that recognising the nature and extent of this problem is one of the most important
requirements of being comparative in education in an era of globalisation, for a major
consequence of globalisation, not just for comparative education but more generally,
is that while it has profound effects on the key features of the economic political and
social worlds we inhabit, we remain tied to the concepts with which we described
and understood the world prior to globalisation.
We will focus here on both the changes brought about by globalisation in the core
objects of study of comparative education, ‘national’ ‘education’ ‘systems’ and their
consequences for the area of study, both methodological and ‘political’. In terms of the
first, we will suggest that the three central elements of the field of comparative education, respectively directly related to those three core objects of study, are in danger of
becoming somewhat ossified and of thereby restricting, or even obstructing, rather
than expanding, our opportunities to come to terms with globalisation and the ways in
which institutional and everyday life has been transformed.
We will suggest that the danger can be summed up by suggesting that the ways of
approaching the central elements of comparative studies of education, national systems, state-run, of education, are in severe danger of becoming ‘isms’. We may be
confronted by, or reliant on, not just methodological nationalism, but methodological
statism and methodological educationism. In each case the ‘ism’ is used to suggest
1113
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1113–1127.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1090 / Book Page 1114] ---

1114

Dale and Robertson

an approach to the objects that takes them as unproblematic and assumes a constant
and shared meaning; they become ‘fixed, abstract and absolute’ (Fine, 2003, p. 465),
and the source of the danger lies in the nominal continuity provided by the ostensibly
‘same’ concepts, as Smith warns. The assumption/acceptance of the ‘isms’ means that
the understanding of changes brought about by globalisation may be refracted through
the lenses of unproblematic conceptions of nationalism, statism and educationism,
even as these changes themselves bring about changes in the meaning of, or the work
done by, nation states and education systems, and thereby undermine their validity. One
reflection of the depth of the embeddedness of this set of concepts is that they become
themselves a kind of benchmark against which perceived changes are measured and
represented; thus we have the ‘De-’conceptions; de-territorialisation, de-statisation,
de-concentration, decentralisation and so on (Patramanis, 2002).
It is our argument that it has taken the impact of globalisation to expose the problems of the ‘isms’ in comparative education (and indeed education studies more
widely). It is fundamentally the changes of the scale and the means of governance at
and through which ‘education’ is carried out that have exposed the shortcomings of
previous theorising. What seeing the core elements of comparative education as methodological ‘isms’ reveals is that it has rarely ever been the case that ‘the state did it
all’ in the case of education, that educational activities and governance have ever been
confined to the national scale and that ‘education’ has ever been a single straightforward, unproblematic conception.

Comparative Education and ‘National Education Systems’
Methodological Nationalism
The most widely recognised of the ‘isms’ is methodological nationalism. The nation
state has been at the core of comparative education throughout its history. It has been
the basis of comparison, what has been compared. As Daniel Chernilo puts it, “the
nation-state became the organizing principle around which the whole project of modernity cohered” (Chernilo, 2006, p. 129). We might see it as the institution that embodies
the principles of modernity and through which those principles are to be delivered.
Furthermore, the nation-state conception is further reinforced by its being embedded
within a well-established system of similar states, (where nation states are recognised
as legal entities under international law) which deepens the difficulty of both looking
beyond, and of imagining alternatives to it.
The nation state has been the core concept on which the methodological nationalism that has characterised not just comparative education, but most of social science,
has been based (Martins, 1974). In fact, we can identify four distinct elements of this
problem (for an extended critique of the conception of methodological nationalism
in comparative education see Dale, 2005). The first, and best known, is the idea that
methodological nationalism sees the nation state as the container of ‘society’, so that
comparing societies entails comparing nation states (Beck, 2002; Beck & Sznaider,
2006). The second is the close association between nation states and comparison
brought about by the ‘national’ being the level at which statistics have traditionally

--- [PDF Page 1091 / Book Page 1115] ---

Beyond Methodological ‘ISMS’ in Comparative Education 1115

been gathered; as one of us put it elsewhere, methodological nationalism operates
both about and for the nation state, to the point where the only reality we are able to
comprehensively describe statistically is a national, or at best an international, one
(Dale, 2005, p. 126). The third element of the problem arises from the tendency to
juxtapose an unreconstructed methodological nationalism to underspecified conceptions of ‘globalisation’ in a zero-sum relationship. This typically takes the form of the
global ‘affecting’ the national, or the national ‘mediating’ the global. This is not to say
that such relationships are not present, but that they are not to be taken as the norm.
The final element we wish to mention here concerns the extent of the suffusion, or
identification, of concepts of the nation state with a particular imaginary of rule. This
has become clearer through recent discussions of conceptions of ‘sovereignty’, ‘territoriality’ and ‘authority’ (cf. Ansell & Di Palma, 2004). These discussions essentially
see the particular combination of responsibilities and activities that nation states have
been assumed to be responsible for as historically contingent rather than functionally
necessary, or even optimal. Thus, though the ontology that “a region of physical space
… can be conceived of as a corporate personality”, the nature, implications and consequences of this have varied greatly, and it remains the case that “the unity of this public
authority has generally been regarded as the hallmark of the so-called Westphalian
states” (Ansell, 2004, p. 6), while “the chief characteristic of the modern system of
territorial rule is the consolidation of all parcellised and personalised authority into
one public realm” (Ruggie, 1993, p. 151). However, while “public authority has been
demarcated by discrete boundaries of national territory … so, too, has the articulation of societal interests and identities that both buttress and make demands upon
this authority” (Ansell, 2004, p. 8). The question then concerns the “implications of
a world in which the mutually reinforcing relations of territory, authority and societal
interests and identities can no longer be taken for granted” (2004, p. 9).

Methodological Statism
The assumptions of the unity of public authority and a single public realm take us
towards and what we are referring to as ‘methodological statism’. If methodological
nationalism refers to the tendency to take the nation state as the container of societies,
the related but considerably less recognised term methodological statism refers to the
tendency to assume that there is a particular form intrinsic to all states.1 That is, all
polities are ruled, organised and administered in essentially the same way, with the
same set of problems and responsibilities, and through the same set of institutions.
The assumed set of institutions that has become taken for granted as the pattern for
the rule of societies is that found in the West in the twentieth century, and in particular
the social-democratic welfare state that pervaded Western Europe in the second half
of that century (Zurn & Leibfried, 2005, p. 11). Central – and, we might argue, unique
– to this conception was that all four dimensions of the state distinguished by Zurn and
Leibfried (resources, law, legitimacy and welfare) converged in national constellations, and national institutions. What Zurn and Leibfried make clear, however,
is that “the changes over the past 40 years are not merely creases in the fabric of the
nation state, but rather an unravelling of the finely woven national constellation of

--- [PDF Page 1092 / Book Page 1116] ---

1116

Dale and Robertson

its Golden Age” (2005, p. 1). To put it another way, both the assumption of a common
set of responsibilities and means of achieving them, and the assumption that they are
necessarily rather than contingently associated with each other, can no longer be
sustained, outside a continuing methodological statism.
A further consequence of methodological statism is that the model of the state that
became taken for granted in academic discourse across most of the social sciences is
not one that was ever established or present in the greater part of what we refer to as
developing countries. That model was not only imposed on the majority of postcolonial states that were created after the Second World War, but formal acceptance of,
and attachment to, it became the main basis of membership of the ‘international community’. As has been pointed out by Ferguson and Gupta (2002), among others, that
model of the state was never an effective means of conceiving of how the majority of
developing societies were ruled. They see work on states based on two assumptions;
verticality, which “refers to the state as an institution somehow above civil society,
community and family” (1982). This top-down assumption is contrasted with encompassment, “the state, (conceptually fused with the nation) is located within an ever
widening series of circles that begins with family and local community and ends with
the system of nation-states” (ibid). This politically imposed simulacrum of a constructed form of rule has not only distorted attempts at introducing fair, efficient and
effective forms of rule in those countries, but its acceptance as a valid and accurate
account by academics as well as politicians, on the basis that the same term meant the
same thing irrespective of circumstances, has equally distorted analyses of the governance of developing countries. The depth of the penetration of the assumptions of
the ‘isms’, and their consequences, is summed up by Ruggie, writing of international
relations, but in terms applicable to all social sciences. He sees them as displaying “an
extraordinarily impoverished mind-set … that is able to visualize long term challenges
to the system of states only in terms of entities that are institutionally substitutable for
the state” (1993, p. 143).
The main conclusion to be drawn from this brief discussion, then, is that one essential basis of any response on the part of comparative education to globalisation is to
recognise that using ‘the state’ as an explanatory concept, without major qualification,
is both to accept an inaccurate picture of the world and to perpetuate a particular
outcome of political imposition. To put it briefly; one consequence of globalisation
for comparative education, and for social science more generally, is to make it clear
that the nation state should be regarded as explanandum, in need of explanation, rather
than as explanans, part of an explanation. Or, to put it another way, the component
parts of what is connoted by the nation state, need to be ‘unbundled’, and their status
and relationships examined anew in a globalised world, by comparative educationists
as by other social scientists. One effective means of summarising the points made
here about methodological nation-statism is to display the bones of the argument
diagrammatically.
Figure 1 illustrates the points made above about methodological statism by
recognising that the national state is no longer the only, or taken-for-grantedly the
most important, actor in the area of education. This means that the first thing that is to
be compared as globalisation affects education more and more is the governance of

--- [PDF Page 1093 / Book Page 1117] ---

Beyond Methodological ‘ISMS’ in Comparative Education 1117

Fig. 1. Pluri-scalar governance of education

education. By governance, we mean the combinations and coordination of activities,
actors/agents, and scales, through which ‘education’ is constructed and delivered in
national societies. The diagram seeks both to indicate, and at the same time to reduce
the complexity of, what is involved in governing education, through ‘unbundling’ the
range of activities, or functions, of educational governance. We identify four categories
of activity that collectively make up educational governance (that are for the sake
of exposition taken to be mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive): funding;
provision or delivery; ownership; and regulation. These activities may in principle be
carried out independently of each other and by a range of agents other than the state.
To utilise the figure directly, this means that all the cells can be empirically populated.
However, one crucial point to be made here is that none of the relationships framed
in this diagram should be seen as zero sum, as entailing mutually exclusive relations.
The lines between the various cells are assumed to be porous rather than taken as
border. Thus, the diagram also reflects the argument that it is neither ‘natural’ nor
essential that all these activities are carried out by the state, or by any other single

--- [PDF Page 1094 / Book Page 1118] ---

1118

Dale and Robertson

agency. Rather, we may expect different combinations of agents, actors and scales in
the governance of education, bearing in mind that at all three levels, agents, activities
and scales, there will be hybrid combinations; respective examples are public–private
partnerships, complex forms of ownership and ‘jumping’ scales from local to supranational. However, this does not mean that we are faced with choices between hybrid and
‘pure’ categories; we have, for instance, argued elsewhere, using the example of higher
education in Europe, for the existence of ‘parallel’ discourses, which exist separate
from each other at different scales, in that case, the institutional, the national and the
European (Dale, 2008).
What this means in practical terms is that we need to focus on and seek to understand the implications for education, of not just a new range of actors who are now
involved in the process, but of a new range of activities that it involves, and a new
range of scales at which it takes place – as well as, of course, studying the interrelationships of these changes in actors, activities and scales.
One example of the kind of theorising made possible by the recognition of and
escape from, methodological nationalism and statism is to conceive of ‘education’
as not necessarily and exclusively associated with the nation state, but as constituted
through the complex workings of functional and scalar divisions of the labour of educational governance (Dale, 2003), which can mean any or all of a single locus of
governance; parallel loci of governance at different scales; or hybrid forms of governance across scales, and/or activities, and/or agents. So, what is broadly meant by
governance here is the replacement of the assumption that the state always and necessarily governs education through control of all the activities of governing, with what
might be called the coordination of coordination, with the state possibly retaining the
role of coordinator, or regulator, of last resort (Dale, 1997).

Educationism
At this point we will turn to the third, and possibly most controversial, ‘ism’, ‘educationism’.
What is taken as education in comparative education, and far beyond, is as unproblematic as nationalism or statism. What is understood by education can be seen as equally
fixed, abstract and absolute as the other two ‘isms’, as also requiring explanation rather
than providing it, and as having similar consequences for analysis and understanding.
It is crucial to note that the central elements of what we refer to as ‘education’ have
themselves co-evolved in a rather similar way – indeed, alongside the evolution of the
nation state (Green, 1993) – and may be in need of a similar kind of ‘unbundling’.
‘Education’ would appear on the surface to be the most constant of the three
components we are currently examining. After all, everyone in the world has either
been to school, or is to have the opportunity to go to school – which, interestingly, is
how education is defined in the Millennium Development Goals. However, we also
know both that what is understood by education differs widely and along multiple
dimensions, and that the experience of schooling varies enormously – which, of course,
has been the grist of comparative education from its inception.
More precisely, what we are calling ‘educationism’ refers to the tendency to regard
‘education’ as a single category for purposes of analysis, with an assumed common

--- [PDF Page 1095 / Book Page 1119] ---

Beyond Methodological ‘ISMS’ in Comparative Education 1119

scope, and a set of implicitly shared knowledges, practices and assumptions. It occurs
when education is treated as abstract, fixed, absolute, ahistorical and universal, when
no distinctions are made between its use to describe purpose, process, practice and
outcomes. Particular representations of education are treated in isolation from each
other, and addressed discretely rather than as part of a wider assemblage of representations – for there is no suggestion that the different representations of education have
nothing in common with each other, or that the label is randomly attached. Far from
it, it is the recognition that there are crucial relationships between different representations of education that are being occluded or disguised by the failure to distinguish
between them that makes it so important to identify and seek to go beyond educationism. Educationism does not discriminate between uses of the term or make them
problematic, and this makes it almost impossible for ‘education’ to be the object of
comparison. This is compounded by two self-limiting parochialisms. Disciplinary
parochialism restricts the bases for the study of education to approaches that come
within the field, often, it seems, to work that contains ‘education’ in its title; this leads
to analyses that share the same assumptions about the field – with the lexical equivalence removing the need to problematise them (see Dale, 1994). Institutional parochialism
similarly refers to the tendency within all education studies to take existing education
systems, institutions and practices in isolation as self-evidently the appropriate focus for
their endeavours, and not to problematise these systems, and so on (Dale, 2005, p. 134).
Fundamentally, educationism treats education as a single, indiscriminate aggregate
of representations that are qualitatively different from each other. There are
three elements involved in addressing this problem. The first is to disaggregate, or
‘unbundle’ these different components. The second is to seek to establish the determinants and consequences of the boundaries and content of education as a separate
sector; and the third is to focus on questions around how, by whom and under what
circumstances, education is currently represented.
The first, which we have discussed previously (Dale, 2000), involves replacing the
single term education by a series of questions that any understanding of education has
to take into account. This essentially entails stipulative representations of ‘education’
with a set of variables. The basic idea behind the Education Questions is that rather than
assuming/accepting that we all mean the same thing when we are talking about education, we pose a set of precise questions that can frame discussions and provide a basis for
coherent discussion and systematic comparison. The questions are intended to provide
some common ground where the nature and bases of different conceptions of education
and its purposes, institutions and practices, might first be made clearer and eventually lay
the ground for the kind of productive dialogue that their mutual neglect and incommensurability had denied. They are also intended to make different conceptions of education
‘mutually intelligible’ through providing a set of questions to which they are all able to
respond, albeit, and expectedly, in a range of wholly different ways (Dale, 2006a).

The Education Questions
These questions are set at four levels (both to reflect the range of meanings that might
be attached to ‘education’ and to make clear the complexity of the questions, none of
which can be answered from within a single level alone).

--- [PDF Page 1096 / Book Page 1120] ---

1120

Dale and Robertson

These levels are those of educational practice; education politics; the politics of
education; and the level of outcomes. Finally, it needs to be stated that the Education
Questions still assume a national basis for ‘education’. This is because that is the level
at which empirically we still find the greater part of the activities that come under the
heading of education taking place. However, as a glance at the Level 3 questions will
confirm, this does not mean adopting a wholly, or exclusively, national focus. Nor does
it mean that the national is the only or the most important scale of analysis. Nor does it
entail any assumption of comparability between national levels; it is still important to
problematise the comparability of the categories we use within and across levels and
scales (see Table 1).

Education as a Sector2
One very useful approach to looking at the changes that have – and have not – occurred
to, and within, national education sectors has been put forward by David Levi Faur

Table 1. The Education Questions
Level
Level 1
Educational practice

Who is taught, (or learns through processes explicitly designed to foster
learning), what, how and why, when, where, by/from whom, under what
immediate circumstances and broader conditions, and with what results?
How, by whom and for what purposes is this evaluated?

Level 2
Education politics

How, in pursuit of what manifest and latent social, economic, political and
educational purposes; under what pattern of coordination of education
governance; by whom; and following what (sectoral and cultural) path
dependencies, are these things problematised decided, administered,
managed?

Level 3

What functional, scalar and sectoral divisions of labour of educational
governance are in place?

The politics of education

In what ways are the core problems of capitalism (accumulation, social
order and legitimation) reflected in the mandate, capacity and governance of
education? How and at what scales are contradictions between the solutions
addressed?
How are the boundaries of the ‘education sector’ defined and how do they
overlap with and relate to other sectors? What ‘education-related’ activities
are undertaken within other sectors?
How is the education sector related to the citizenship and gender regimes?
How, at what scale and in what sectoral configurations does education
contribute to the extra-economic embedding/stabilisation of accumulation?
What is the nature of intra- and inter-scalar and intra- and inter-sectoral
relations (contradiction, cooperation, mutual indifference?)

Level 4
Outcomes

What are the individual, private, public, collective and community outcomes
of ‘education’, at each scalar level?

--- [PDF Page 1097 / Book Page 1121] ---

Beyond Methodological ‘ISMS’ in Comparative Education 1121

(2006), through a Policy Sector Approach to comparative political analysis. He
suggests:
When we study sectors we examine them in two senses, the Generic and the
nation-specific (cf. Vogel, 1996, p. 258). The generic characteristics of the sector
are the most common features that a sector has; they exist beyond nations and
regions and are applicable in principle to countries as different, for example, as
Jamaica and Germany. The nation-specific characteristics of a sector reflect the
changes in the generic features as the result of its integration into the national
setting or context. To distinguish between generic and nation-specific characteristics of a sector is to be sensitive to the commonalities of … sectors beyond
nations but at the same time to understand that sectors are embedded in national
settings and thus acquire characteristics of their own. Indeed, it makes sense
to distinguish three different aspects of the sectors’ generic and nation-specific
characteristics: the technological, the economic and the political. (Vogel, 2006,
pp. 368–369)
Our argument is that both the generic and the nation-specific (indeed, what counts as
nation-specific) characteristics of education sectors have changed and are changing
under the pressure of the political and economic aspects on the technological aspects.
So, while this approach is extremely interesting and important in this context, for its
value to be realised it is crucial not to confine the analysis to ‘nation-specific’ characteristics, but, in the spirit of the changing governance of education, to extend it to
‘sub-national-’ and ‘supranational-’specific characteristics.
It might be argued that the two central elements of the technology of the education sector are its discourses and its practices, and that both are part of a globalised
Western modernity, rather than the product or property of any particular nation
state. The key evidence for the former is to be found in Meyer and colleagues’
analyses of the global scripts of education (Meyer et al., 1992). The most crucial, but also the most taken-for-granted feature of these discourses is that they
essentially equate education with (compulsory) schooling. We see the continuing
centrality of this association quite dramatically, for instance, in the formulation of
the Millennium Development Goal for Education, which is ‘to achieve Universal
Primary Education’; this is even more explicitly related to schooling in Target 3,
which is to ‘Ensure that by 2015 children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be
able to complete a full course of primary schooling’. Progress towards the achievement of the goal is monitored by increases in the number of children able to access
primary education. Thus the practices of education are to be found in the processes
of schooling, which – as the Education MDG again shows– themselves have taken
on an equally ‘global’ aspect, to the point where we may refer to them as a common
‘grammar of schooling’ (Tyack & Tobin, 1994; Dale, 2008). Together, then, these
discourses and practices may be seen as comprising a significant part of the technology of the education sector. In a very real sense, they define what education is;
‘education’ is identified as that which takes place through the grammar of schooling
and transmits a particular culture.

--- [PDF Page 1098 / Book Page 1122] ---

1122

Dale and Robertson

Essentially what we might see such discourses and practices explaining is the
nature and tenacity of key elements of what have been historically (over a very long
period – cf. Vanderstraeten, 2006) the generic features of education sectors – —in the
technological form of the equation of education with schooling and common curricular categories across the world – and the political form of their support and diffusion
by epistemic communities, professional experts and so on. What they do not explain
so effectively is the economic aspect (Dale, 2000). However, more fundamentally,
we see in education in an era of neo-liberal globalization, significant shifts in both
generic and nation-specific features of the education as a sector, and in the relationships between them. That is to say, education as sector is changing in ways that make
existing assumptions and forms of analysis – those that make up methodological educationism – unhelpful, even misleading. We might best elaborate this point by seeking
to identify the changing nature of the sector’s generic (or transnational) features, and
of its political, economic and technical features. The essence of the argument here is
that rather than a single set of shared features making up a fundamentally common
and undifferentiated – generic– education sector, with the ‘generic’ being ‘mediated’ into the national in various ways, what we see is a breakdown of the generic
characteristics of the education sector, and their replacement by what may be seen
conceptually as a dual – or even triple, if we take into account the development of
the sub-national level – set of features framing different ‘education’ sectors, with the
relationship between them not confined to one of mediation, but taking forms such as
hybrids and parallel operations. And further, we suggest that the basic characteristics
that set the political, economic and technological aspects of the education sector are
being framed by the work of international organisations, operating to a broadly common script (Dale, 2006b).
However, when we introduce the possibility of the sector extending beyond the
national scale, a rather different story appears. Rather than an assumption of a requisite
level of compatibility of national political and economic characteristics, we have been
assuming that the forces of globalisation will both make the relationships of the political and economic at the national level problematic, and will themselves be formed into
different but parallel sets of demands, definitions and expectations at supra- and subnational levels. And here the emphases are rather different. At sub-national levels, the
stakes concern largely political issues, of representation, voice, etc. At supranational
level, the stakes are much more economic, as is witnessed in the constant reiteration
of the importance of international economic competitiveness, and the paramount need
for education to contribute to a global knowledge economy. We see here clearly the
functional and scalar division of education governance, with issues around economic
competitiveness shifting ‘upwards’, and issues around education’s role in the distribution of opportunities within national societies remaining at the national level, or
moving ‘downwards’. The key difference here concerns the nature and status of the
generic characteristics. At national and sub-national level they continue to form
the terrain on which the political disputes about the distribution of opportunities, etc.,
are carried out. At the supranational level, however, they become themselves what is
at stake, as they are perceived to be ‘unfit for purpose’ in a global knowledge economy
(Robertson, 2005). It is for this reason that we see not just the rise of supranational

--- [PDF Page 1099 / Book Page 1123] ---

Beyond Methodological ‘ISMS’ in Comparative Education 1123

organisations in education, but their rise with a particular agenda to reform, reconstruct
or transform the grammar of education. And the way in which we might imagine this
being carried out is through the effective construction of parallel, or mutually imbricated but distinct, education sectors, and it is this attempted reconstruction of the
generic characteristics of education that underpins the functional and scalar division
of educational governance, which, in its turn, we suggest, is the key to understanding what should now be compared in education. So, we see a double movement of
the generic characteristics of education; at the national and sub-national level, they
are largely politically mediated, framed and interpreted in various, but not fundamentally challenging ways; at supranational level, there is rather a project of appropriating
them, transforming them, and attaching them to the wider political project.

Representation
What the current era of globalisation has cracked open is the hegemonic status of what
is a particular, spatially and temporally located representation of ‘national education
system’ that is fused to, and directed by state power. This is perhaps seen most clearly
in the representation of education constructed by the world polity theorists (Meyer
et al., 1992), which essentially sees it as a set of common curricular categories in nationstate controlled education systems. In the current era of globalisation, we can see major
challenges to this hegemonic status, with a range of social and political forces operating at
a number of scales (global, regional, local and national) seeking to undermine the nation
state’s claims to a monopoly over the sector (even when it is possible to show that it does
not, and in many cases never has had a monopoly on the sector). These challenges are coming from within the national state itself (e.g., Singapore – see Olds & Thrift, 2004), as well
as from global and international organisations (OECD, World Bank), firms (e.g., Microsoft,
Jarvis – see Ball, 2007) and institutions (e.g., universities – see Marginson, 2006).
The idea of ‘representation’ as a moment in wider social processes is particularly
useful in helping us see that discourses about knowledge production in society are semiotic processes which have ideational and representational moments (Cameron & Palan,
2004). Being able to ‘fix’ a particular meaning at the ideational and representational by
embedding this imaginary in social institutions enables power to reproduce itself and
thus give it force (Jessop, 2004). However, as Jessop points out, this spatio-temporal fix
is always temporary, and always challenged by the contradictions of capitalism.
There are now a number of competing imaginaries as to what education should
look like in the modern twenty-first century that we outline below by way of three
(illustrative and not exhaustive) examples. The point of providing these examples is
to also show that these imaginaries are also getting some traction at scales beyond the
‘national’ sector, and if we are to appreciate the political import of these alternative
imaginaries as challenges, we must also begin to look at them more systematically.
One particular representation of education is through the use of statistics in the form of
indicators (such as with PISA run by the OECD), benchmarks (MDGs etc.) and thresholds.
Paradoxically, in this context, the purpose is to make education systems more comparable
(though not necessarily more diverse). So, from comparing, or juxtaposing, culturally
distinct and diverse educational practices and goals, comparative education is propelled in
the direction of ranking education systems against a common set of indicators.

--- [PDF Page 1100 / Book Page 1124] ---

1124

Dale and Robertson

It is also important to note that these statistical proxies for ‘education’ are not
intended to represent collectively a means of more closely and commonly defining the
existing range of purposes, policies and practices found in national education systems,
but to create an overarching and common set of alternative purposes, policies and
practices. They are intended not only to make education systems more comparable and
commensurable, but to change and direct them in particular ways.
A second powerful form is in the use of new metaphors – for instance, ‘clusters’,
‘networks’, ‘hubs’, ‘hotspots’ – to drive and generate change (Robertson & Olds, 2007).
These new imaginaries not only open up the space for new players into the knowledge
production business, but they also operate in the parallel and hybrid spaces that are being
opened by national states (cf. Singapore, and the ‘Singapore Global Schoolhouse’ – Olds
& Thrift, 2005). These new assemblages operate outside rather than inside existing regulatory spaces; they also create institutional forms that are radically different from the
knowledge production sector that we knew as the national state education sector.
A third example is the emergence of a powerful discourse and set of institutions
that make up the for-profit education sector. There is an increasingly complex and
sophisticated set of policy and social practices in this sector, including firms that supply information for investors in the sector, an annual index of publicly listed firms all
trading in education services (Robertson, 2006a). This sector articulates with visions
for education, as a once decommodified service sector, to be brought into the tradeable
services sector regulated under World Trade Organisation rules.
A final example is the challenge to national education systems by the international
organisations, including the OECD and World Bank, to re-imagine and rescript their
role in modern twenty-first-century society (Robertson, 2005). At the heart of this criticism is the view that national education systems are products of the industrial era and
have, as a result, reached their so called ‘use by date’. New visions are currently being
offered as alternatives – such as networked schools shaped by personalised learning.
While there is considerable variation in the responses by national actors, the idea of
personalisation has seeped into the policy discourse of a number of countries.

Conclusions
In this paper we have tried to make three, connected, points. The first is that the chronic
tendency within social science as a whole to make the national the focus of all analytic
attention is more than ever problematic in an era of globalisation, while the tendency to
reify, or fetishise, the national level can be seen to extend to the form of rule – ‘statism’
– and, in the case of comparative education, to the object of study, education. The second is that this exercise demonstrates that the three terms were never actually accurate
– the state never ‘did it all’, for instance. And the third and most important point in
the chapter is that each of these is in danger of generating from the core categories of
comparative education a set of methodological ‘isms’, which have to be recognised
and overcome if we are to progress comparative education in an era of globalisation.
However, when the national is still the commonest location of educational governance, ‘the state’ is the commonest form of its governance, and ‘education’ is still the

--- [PDF Page 1101 / Book Page 1125] ---

Beyond Methodological ‘ISMS’ in Comparative Education 1125

most useful portmanteau term for the activities we focus on, ‘What is now to be compared? The point is, as we have tried to show in this chapter, that the ‘nation’ and the
‘state’ of today are not the same nation and state that they were even 10 years ago, and
nor are the relationships between them the same. Similarly, ‘education’ has always
been tacitly recognised as ‘being’ and ‘doing’ different things, but it has now taken on
some qualitatively novel elements. In our view, this makes it all the more important to
recognise the nature and the danger of national, state, and education becoming methodological ‘isms’, frozen in the assumptions of earlier eras. The danger can be seen in
Smith’s comment in the epigraph to this chapter; the concepts of national, education
systems ‘derive their power from appearing to be just what they always were’. The
implications of this are by no means confined to the methodological. As we have tried
to indicate in this chapter, they have very clear theoretical implications. Further than
that, when that power is rooted in the maintenance of the idea that nothing has changed
when everything has changed, the implications are political. As we have tried to show,
‘education’ is no longer, if it ever was, the national, or the public, issue, or the set of
curriculum categories, that has featured in most studies of comparative education, and
as long as we fail to recognise and act on that understanding, we become complicit
in concealing the changes and their consequences not only from ourselves but from
those we seek to enlighten. We see this most clearly in the way that ‘education’ is now
being represented, where we may see a clear choice for comparative education, of
becoming the (unwitting, if we do not see beyond the ‘isms’) accomplice of a redefinition of ‘education’ as framed through the medium of statistical representations, which,
because of the very fact that it is so ‘accountably’ embedded, is both more difficult to
identify and, especially to budge.
Involvement in forms of statistical representation is particularly ironic for comparative education (Theret, 2005; Novóa & Yariv-Mashal, 2003). It involves the purposive
elision of national differences in pursuit of comparability for the purpose of more efficient and effective government, effectively both making national institutional boundaries
more porous and laying the basis for both reconstructed and reshaped national education sectors, and at the same time of a new transnational education sector. In so far as
comparative education is complicit in this, it is ironic that that involvement definitively
undermines the national basis on which it has rested and has taken for granted.

Notes
1. Though the term embedded statism can be found, it is usually as a synonym for methodological
nationalism.
2. We take the idea of ‘educational system’ in this context as included in ‘education sector’.

Bibliography
Ansell, C. K. (2004). Restructuring authority and territoriality. In C. K. Ansell & G. Di Palma (Eds.),
Restructuring territoriality: Europe and the United States compared. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Ansell, C. K. & Di Palma, G. (eds) Restructuring territoriality: Europe and the United States compared.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

--- [PDF Page 1102 / Book Page 1126] ---

1126

Dale and Robertson

Ball, S. (2007). Education PLC: Understanding private sector participation in public sector education.
London and New York: Routledge.
Beck, U. (2002). The cosmopolitan society and its enemies. Theory, culture and society, 19(1–2), 17–44.
Beck, U. & Sznaider, N. (2006). Unpacking cosmopolitanism for the social sciences: a research agenda. The
British J. of Sociology, 57(1),1–23.
Cameron, A. and Palan, R. (2004). The imagined economies of globalization. London and New York: Sage.
Chernilo, D. (2006). Methodological nationalism and its critique. In G. Delanty and K. Kumar (Eds.), The
Sage Handbook of Nations and Nationalism (pp. 129–40). London: Sage.
Dale, R. (1994). Applied education politics or political sociology of education? contrasting approaches to the
study of recent education reform in England and Wales. In D. Halpin & B. Troyna (Eds.), Researching
education policy: Methodological and ethical issues. London and Washington: The Falmer Press.
Dale, R. (1997). The state and the governance of education: An analysis of the restructuring of the stateeducation relationship. In A. Halsey, H. Lauder, P. Brown & A. Stuart Wells (Eds.), Education, Culture,
Economy and Society, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dale, R. (1999). Globalization: A new world for comparative education? In J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse
and Comparative Education (pp. 87–109). Bern: Peter Lang.
Dale, R. (2000). Globalisation and education: Demonstrating a “common world education culture” or locating a “globally structured Agenda for education”? Education Theory 50(4), 427–448.
Dale, R. (2003). The Lisbon declaration, the reconceptualisation of governance and the reconfiguration of
European educational space. Paper presented to RAPPE seminar, University of London Institute of
Education, March.
Dale, R. (2005). Globalisation, knowledge and comparative education. Comparative Education, 41(2),
117–150.
Dale, R. (2006a). From comparison to translation: Extending the research imagination? Globalisation,
Societies and Education, 4(2), 179–192.
Dale, R. (2006b). Knowledge of/for educational futures: Comparing the OECD, the World Bank and the EU.
Paper presented at ECER Conference, Geneva, September.
Dale, R. (2008). Repairing the Deficits of Modernity; the emergence of parallel discourses in higher
education in Europe. In D. Epstein, R. Boden, R. Deem, F. Rizvi, and S. Wright (Eds.), World Yearbook
of Education 2008: Geographies of Knowledge, Geometries of Power: Framing the Future of Higher
Education. London: Routledge.
Ferguson, J. & Gupta, A. (2002). Spatializing states: toward an ethnography of neoliberal governmentality,
American Ethnologist, 29(4), 981–1002.
Fine, R. ( (2003) Taking the ‘ism’ out of cosmopolitanism. European Journal of Social Theory, 6(4),
451–70. 4.
Green, A. (1993). Education and state formation: the rise of education systems in England, France and the
United States. New York: St. Martins.
Jessop, B. (2004). Critical semiotic analysis and cultural political economy. Critical Discourse Analysis,
1(2), 159–74.
Levi Faur, D. (2006). Varieties of regulatory capitalism: Getting the most persistence of national variation.
Review of International Studies, 26(4).
Marginson, S. (2006). Dynamics of national and global competition in higher education. Higher Education,
52(1), 1–39.
Martins, H. (1974). Time and theory in sociology. In J. Rex (Ed.), Approaches to Sociology. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Meyer, J., Benavot, A., and Kamens, D. (1992). School Knowledge for the Masses: World Models and
National Primary Curricular Categories in the Twentieth Century. Philadelphia: Falmer Press.
Nóvoa, A., & Yariv-Mashal, T. (2003). Comparative research in education: A mode of governance or a historical journey? Comparative Education. 39(4), 423–38.
Olds, K. & Thrift, N. (2005). Cultures on the brink; reengineering the soul of capitalism – on a global scale.
In A. Ong & S. Collier (Eds.), Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics and Ethics as Anthropological
Problems, Oxford: Blackwell.
Patramanis, A. (2002). Globalisation, education restructuring and teacher unions in France and Greece:
decentralisation policies or disciplinary parochialism? A paper presented to the ESF/SCSS Exploratory

--- [PDF Page 1103 / Book Page 1127] ---

Beyond Methodological ‘ISMS’ in Comparative Education 1127
Workshop Globalization, Education Restructuring and Social Cohesion in Europe, Autonomous
University of Barcelona, 3–5 October.
Robertson, S. L. (2005). Re-imagining and rescripting the future of education: global knowledge economy
discourses and the challenge to education systems. Comparative Education, 41(2), 151–170.
Robertson, S. L. (2006a). Absences and imaginings: the production of knowledge on globalisation and
education. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 4(2), 303–318.
Robertson, S. L. (2006b). Globalisation, GATS and trading in education services. In J. Kallo & R. Rinne
(Eds.), Supranational Regimes and the National Education Policies, Turku: FERA.
Robertson, S. L. & Olds, K. (2007). ‘Hubs, networks, clusters, hotspots: new imaginaries of education’,
A paper presented to the Economic Geography Conference, Beijing, June.
Ruggie, J. G. (1993). Territoriality and beyond: Problematizing modernity in international relations.
International Organization, 47(1), 139–74.
Smith, G. (2006). When “the Logic of Capital is the Real which Lurks in the Background” Programme and
Practice in European Regional Economies. Current Anthropology, 47(4), 621–39.
Theret, B. (2005). Comparisons internationales. La place de la dimension politique. In J-C Barbier & M-L
Latablier (Eds.), Politiques Sociales: Enjeux methodologiques et epistemologiques des comparisons
internationales (pp. 71–95). Brussels: Peter Lang.
Tyack, D. & Tobin, H. (1994). The ‘grammar of schooling’: Why has it been so hard to change? American
Educational Research Journal, 31(3), 453–79.
Vanderstraeten, R. (2006). The historical triangulation of education, politics and economy. Sociology, 40(1),
125–42.
Vogel, S. (1996). Freer Markets, More Rules: Regulatory Reform in Advanced Industrial Countries. Ithaca
and London: Cornell University Press.
Zurn, M., & Leibfried, S. (2005). Reconfiguring the national constellation. European Review. 13, 1–36.

