================================================================================
Chapter 70: Education, Philosophy and the Comparative Perspective
Author(s): Terence H. McLaughlin
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 7: New Thinking
Book Pages: pp. 1129–1140
PDF Pages: pp. 1104–1115 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1104 / Book Page 1129] ---

70
EDUCATION, PHILOSOPHY AND
THE COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE
Terence H. McLaughlin†

This article argues that a philosophical approach to education needs a comparative
dimension and that a comparative approach to education needs a philosophical dimension.
An analysis of the proper relationship between a philosophical and a comparative approach
to education is developed with reference to needs, difficulties and opportunities.

Introduction
Although philosophy is, in one way or another, implicated in much of the work of comparative education, and comparative educationists themselves have not been inattentive
to philosophical considerations, the role of philosophy in comparative education has
not been brought into clear focus. One expression of this lack of focus is that relationships between the disciplines of ‘philosophy of education’ and ‘comparative education’
are relatively undeveloped: educational studies remain afflicted by ‘compartmentalization’. Regardless of the current state of relationship between formally structured
educational disciplines, however, philosophical and comparative approaches to the
study of education should be in an informed, sensitive and critical dialogue with each
other. This article attempts to analyse the proper relationship between philosophy and
a comparative approach to the study of education with reference to a range of needs,
difficulties and opportunities. The article has three sections, dealing with ‘needs’, ‘difficulties’ and ‘opportunities’, respectively.

Education, Philosophy and the Comparative
Perspective: Needs
In this section I shall articulate and defend two claims: (i) that philosophy needs a
comparative dimension (in the context of education as elsewhere); (ii) that comparative education needs a philosophical dimension. Progress in relation to both claims
requires attention to how ‘philosophy’ and ‘comparative’ in relation to education are
to be properly understood.
Simon Blackburn describes philosophy as concerned with the exploration of the
structure of our thought in its application to particular kinds of questions about
ourselves (e.g., What am I? What is consciousness? Do I have free will?), the world
1129
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1129–1140.
© 2008 Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1105 / Book Page 1130] ---

1130

McLaughlin

(e.g., Why is there something and not nothing? Does it make sense to think that the
future might influence the past?) and about ourselves and the world (e.g., How can we
be sure that the world is really like we take it to be? What is knowledge and how much
of it do we have?) (Blackburn, 1999, pp. 2–3). The particularity (and peculiarity) of
these kinds of questions consists in their non-empirical character and in their resisting
simple procedures and criteria for pursuit and resolution. Questions of this kind arise
from a form of fundamental critical self-reflection that extends to the ‘scaffolding of
our thought’ (Blackburn, 1999, pp. 3–4).
One difficulty in offering a general account of the nature of philosophy is that any
account is offered from, and is perhaps biased in favour of, a particular tradition of philosophy. Blackburn’s (1999) description of philosophy as ‘doing conceptual engineering’
(p. 2) and his dismissal of the proponents of certain schools of philosophical thought as
‘conceptual engineers who cannot draw a plan, let alone design a structure’ (Blackburn,
1999, p. 13) indicates his allegiance to a broadly analytic approach to philosophy. The
analytical approach is averse to a conception of philosophy contained in the notion of
‘a philosophy’ where ‘a philosophy’ is seen as offering ‘an account on the grand scale
of the nature of reality, the place of human beings within it, and the implications of all
this for how people should comport themselves in the world and towards one another’
(Cooper, 2003a, p. 2). The traditional African beliefs referred to in the article by Bridges,
Asgedom and Kenaw in this Special Issue is an example of a philosophy in this sense.
An aversion to a conception of philosophy of this kind is captured in Richard Peters’
early denial that philosophy (and philosophy of education) should be seen as offering
‘high level directives’ (Peters, 1966, p.15; however, cf. Elliott, 1986). Any reference to
‘philosophies of education in comparative perspective’ involves the notion of ‘philosophy’ in the ‘a philosophy’ sense. As David Cooper (2003a) observes, ‘ “Philosophy”,
as the name of a very general intellectual activity, does not have a plural, no more than
does “music” ’ (p. 2).
The reality and significance of contrasting, and partly competing, traditions in philosophy is of clear importance for the concerns of this article, and this matter will be
returned to in due course. For our present purposes, however, it is useful to illustrate
what is involved in a philosophical approach to education by reference to a particular example of such an approach drawn from the broadly analytical tradition which
has been prominent in Anglo-American philosophy of education since the 1960s and
which has been interpreted in an increasingly broad way in recent years (on the question of increasing breadth of interpretation see, e.g., White & White, 2001). From the
perspective of this tradition, a philosophical approach to education can be described as
including interrelated and overlapping tasks of the following kinds (the categorization
of tasks here draws in part upon White, 1987; Burbules & Warnick, 2004):
(1) Analysing an educationally significant term or concept, showing its multiple
uses and meanings, for the purpose of clarification. Terms and concepts apt for
clarification in this way include (e.g.) ‘creativity’, ‘citizenship’, ‘active learning’
and ‘learning how to learn’. Clarity may not be a sufficient virtue in educational
discourse, but (properly understood) it is a necessary one. ‘Analysis’ has been
described as

--- [PDF Page 1106 / Book Page 1131] ---

Education, Philosophy and the Comparative Perspective 1131

the elucidation of the meaning of any concept, idea or unit of thought that we
employ in seeking to understand ourselves and our world, by reducing it, breaking it down, into more basic concepts that constitute it and thereby showing
its relationship to a network of other concepts or discovering what the concept
denotes. (Hirst & White, 1998b, p. 2)
Analysis here should not be seen as uncovering an essential or ‘correct’ meaning of a
term or concept in a putatively value-free way but can include persuasive definition for
the purposes of particular arguments and lines of enquiry. The ‘connective’ nature of
this kind of analysis, as involving an investigation of ‘how one concept is connected –
often in complex and ragged-ended ways – in a web of other concepts with which it is
logically related’ (White & White, 2001, p. 14) is particularly worthy of note.
(2) Deploying the clarity achieved in (1) in a philosophical critical evaluation of
an educationally significant term or concept, identifying hidden assumptions,
internal contradictions or ambiguities in uses of the term and/or a disclosure of
potential or actual partisan or controversial effects which the term has in professional and popular discourses. The notion of ‘critical evaluation’ here indicates
that philosophers are interested not only in clarity but also in justification. For
example, once ‘creativity’ has been clarified, the question of the senses, if any,
in which ‘creativity’ should figure as an educational aim claims the attention of
the philosopher. Analytic philosophers should not therefore be seen merely as
‘poor relations of dictionary compilers’ (White & White, 2001, p. 16).
(3) Extending (2) into a philosophical critical evaluation of educational or educationally significant practices, policies, aims, purposes, functions, theories and
theorists, doctrines, schools of thought and ‘visions’.
(4) Developing positive arguments and proposals regarding the matters referred to in
(3) including the philosophical articulation and justification of fundamental educational aims, values and processes. It is here that the move away from a preoccupation
with ‘second order’ to substantive concerns, which has characterized analytical philosophy of education in the last 25 years or so, can be most clearly seen.
The analytical tradition in philosophy and philosophy of education has been described
as unified not by shared doctrines but by a range of characteristic methods. It is, however, difficult to pin down the ‘methodology’ of the analytical tradition of philosophy
of education as a whole with any precision, although a number of salient features can
be safely identified. This tradition, with its characteristic emphases upon matters of
meaning and justification, employs a recognizable style of argumentation, characterized by (amongst other things) the clarification and analysis of concepts, premises
and assumptions, the consideration of counter-examples, the detection and elimination
of defects of reasoning of various kinds, the drawing of important distinctions (e.g.,
between conceptual, normative and empirical questions), the use of ‘thought experiments’, a particular spirit of criticism and the structured development of argument.
The analytical approach to philosophy of education is suspicious of unduly general
statements and claims. It seeks a more fine-grained and detailed argument and debate
in which attention to questions of meaning and justification act as an antidote to undue

--- [PDF Page 1107 / Book Page 1132] ---

1132

McLaughlin

generality. The approach therefore tends to begin its work not from general statements
or theories but from specific questions and problems, seeking their illumination, where
appropriate, from the resources of broader philosophical argument. (On the analytical
tradition in philosophy of education see, e.g., Peters, 1966, Introduction, 1983; Wilson,
1979; Cooper, 1986; Elliott, 1986; Hirst, 1986, 1993, 1998; White, 1987, 1995, 2003;
Soltis, 1988; Evers, 1993; Kohli, 1995, Part 1; Haydon, 1998; Hirst & White, 1998a,
Part 1, 1998b; McLaughlin, 2000; Heyting et al., 2001; White & White, 2001; Curren,
2003; Curren et al., 2003.)
Although the respects in which education in general has philosophical needs cannot be pursued in detail here, it is clear that much educational thinking, policy and
practice is not only apt for philosophical attention but requires it. There is, of course,
no suggestion that philosophy alone can fully illuminate, let alone resolve, educational questions. Philosophical reflection in education must be conducted in a close
relationship with other disciplines of enquiry and with the insights and imperatives of
educational policy and practice (on these matters see, e.g., McLaughlin, 2000).
Although the notion of a ‘comparative’ perspective on education has yet to be
brought fully into focus, it is possible to see at this stage how a philosophical perspective on education, properly understood, requires a comparative dimension. This can be
illustrated by each of the features of the analytical approach that have been identified.
In relation to (1), the analysis of an educationally significant term or concept, what
counts as an educationally significant term or concept is (partly) related to matters of
place and time: terms and concepts have a context and a history. Philosophizing about
education cannot properly take place in a vacuum, including a societal, geopolitical
and historical vacuum. If philosophical analysis of educationally significant terms and
concepts is to be sufficiently informed and fruitful a comparative dimension is necessary, at least for any extended philosophical analysis. (On the need for a comparative
perspective in philosophizing in general see, e.g., Smart, 2000; Cooper, 2003a. On a
historical dimension to philosophical perspectives on education, see, e.g., Oksenberg
Rorty, 1998b.) With regard to (2), a philosophical critical evaluation of an educationally
significant term or concept, the kinds of criteria invoked for the justificatory judgements
being made require assessment and endorsement in the light of appropriately fundamental scrutiny, and this properly involves consideration of the kinds of alternative
criteria which a comparative perspective makes available for consideration. Similarly,
in relation to (3), a philosophical critical evaluation of educational practices, principles
and the like, a comparative dimension is an important resource in the enrichment of
the range of possibilities and justificatory arguments open to view. This applies also to
(4), the development of positive proposals in relation to the matters referred to in (3).
The need for a comparative dimension to philosophy understood in analytical terms
is inherent in the philosophical slogan ‘Not all your questions answered, but all your
answers questioned’. The proper pursuit of philosophy should lead to the problematization of the tradition within which it is conducted and in this, as in other matters, a
comparative dimension to philosophizing is important and necessary.
Having attempted to illuminate the nature of a philosophical approach to the
study of education by reference to one prominent approach, how can a comparative approach to the study of education best be understood? This is a matter that has

--- [PDF Page 1108 / Book Page 1133] ---

Education, Philosophy and the Comparative Perspective 1133

been the focus of a good deal of debate in the discipline in recent years (see, e.g.,
Crossley & Jarvis, 2000, 2001). An exploration of the notion of ‘comparison’ affords
one way of illuminating matters here in a very general way for the purposes of the
present discussion. ‘Comparison’ invites attention to: (a) what is being compared with
what (e.g., teachers, schools, teaching methods and educational systems in differing
cultural, national and regional contexts); (b) the evaluative basis of comparison (e.g.,
the norms and principles being invoked in making comparisons); (c) the reasons and
motives underlying the comparisons being made (e.g., disinterested scholarly enquiry,
a search for insights, etc., to be applied from one context to another); (d) the methods
used in making comparisons (e.g., methods based on natural science, social science,
and hermeneutic traditions). The comparative study of education stands in need of a
philosophical dimension in relation to each of these four aspects.
In relation to (a), what is being compared with what, the need for a philosophical
dimension emerges in relation to at least two matters. The first arises from the general
point that many aspects of educational thinking, policy and practice are not only apt
for philosophical attention, but require it. Since most of the subject matter for comparison in comparative education is educational in character, a philosophical dimension to
the task of comparison is needed simply as a result of the general need of education for
philosophical illumination. A philosophical dimension is clearly needed in relation to
the ambition of comparative education to develop ‘an increasingly sophisticated theoretical framework in which to describe and analyse educational phenomena’ (Phillips,
2000, p. 298). The kinds of themes that comparative educationists often address in their
theorization are rich in philosophical implication: globalization (see, e.g., Crossley &
Jarvis, 2000), post-colonialism (see, e.g., Crossley & Tikly, 2004), indigenous education (see, e.g., May & Aikman, 2003), democracy (see, e.g., Davies et al., 2002)
and citizenship (see, e.g., Ichilov, 1988), as well as regionally based focuses of attention. The second matter in relation to which a philosophical dimension emerges is the
illumination of the contexts in which the educational phenomena are located. These
contexts include many aspects (cultural, anthropological, political, religious, etc.) that
invite and require philosophical attention as part of the range of approaches and strategies needed to bring a given context into focus.
In relation to (b), the evaluative basis of comparison, the presence of the notion of
‘evaluation’ (with its implication of norms and principles) indicates a role for philosophy in matters of clarification and justification. Here, as elsewhere, the role of
philosophy is a contributory one: appropriate forms of empirical enquiry have a place
in the investigation of factual aspects of the identification of ‘like with like’. In relation
to (c), the reasons and motives underlying the comparisons being made, philosophical
considerations illuminate reasons and motives such as ‘a pragmatic science of educational borrowing’ and a ‘reading of the world’, discussed by Robert Cowen (2000). The
latter, seen as involving wide-ranging cultural, historical and political interpretation,
is ripe for philosophical illumination. With regard to (d), the methods used in comparison, Robin Alexander notes that comparativists write as much about the purposes
and processes of comparing as they do about the outcomes, needing to be cautioned
against ‘methodolatry’: a preoccupation with methods to the exclusion of actually
doing research (Alexander, 2001, p. 513). According to Ninnes and Burnett (2003),

--- [PDF Page 1109 / Book Page 1134] ---

1134

McLaughlin

comparative education has been, despite ‘pleas for coherence of focus and method’,
characterized by ‘electicism’ in that it incorporates ‘a range of theories and methods
from the social sciences and intersects a range of sub-fields including sociology of
education, educational planning, anthropology and education, economics of education
and education and development’ (p. 279).
Be this as it may, philosophical considerations arise in relation to the articulation
and defence of the research methodologies used in comparative education (see, e.g.,
Martin, 2003; Ninnes & Burnett, 2003) and some comparative educationists have
addressed these philosophical considerations directly (see, e.g., Ninnes & Burnett,
2003). Patricia Broadfoot draws attention to the ‘deep methodological divide’ between
qualitative methods and those of a more quantitative kind associated with a natural
science paradigm, which has characterized comparative education (2000, p. 360). She
calls for a more critical, theoretically informed, social science perspective in comparative education, involving a greater self-critical awareness, particularly in relation to
the value-laden nature of problems, methods and conclusions (Broadfoot, 2000). She
insists in particular that ‘[c]omparative educationists … need themselves to be willing
to engage in fundamental debates about values; about the nature “of the good life” and
about the role of education and learning in relation to this’ (Broadfoot, 2000, p. 370).
More precisely, she argues, comparative education has a responsibility to carry debate
forward beyond ‘means’ alone to ‘ends’.

Education, Philosophy and the Comparative
Perspective: Difficulties
If it is accepted that a philosophical approach to education and a comparative approach
to education need each other in the ways that have been suggested, the difficulties
involved in achieving the various forms of integrated understanding come into focus.
Interdisciplinary research in general faces a wide range of well-recognized difficulties.
A number of specific difficulties stand in the way of the achievement of the kind of
collaborative understanding to which reference has been made. Four interrelated difficulties will be considered here.
The first difficulty arises from the important point that any attempt to philosophize
about an educational context must be conducted in the light of a thorough understanding of the context itself in all its aspects, including non-philosophical aspects. This
task involves the wide-ranging and complex general difficulties in achieving an adequately broad and deep understanding of educational realities and their ‘background
conditions’ in given contexts (Grant, 2000) of which comparative educationists have
long been aware. Detailed contextually illuminative work of many different kinds is
indispensable as a background to philosophical work both inside and outside a particular context (for recent work of these kinds on some of the contexts discussed in this
Special Issue see, e.g, Green, 2000; Tomiak, 2000; Cave, 2001; Harber, 2002; Jones,
2002; Yamashita & Williams, 2002). An adequate understanding of philosophizing
about education in the context of Eastern Europe, for example, requires an understanding inter alia of the various non-philosophical factors which conditioned the

--- [PDF Page 1110 / Book Page 1135] ---

Education, Philosophy and the Comparative Perspective 1135

expression of ideas in the Soviet period and the various adjustments and compromises
on the part of thinkers which this required (see the contribution by Godoń, Jucevičienë
& Kodelja in this Special Issue).
A second difficulty relates to the aspiration to relate philosophical reflection to the
educational (and other) realities of a given context. Some forms of philosophical reflection are extremely general (as in, e.g., reflection concerned with the determination of
fundamental and general educational aims) and these kinds of reflection may not seek
a direct relationship to educational practice and policy-making. Whilst this kind of
reflection has its place, it needs to guard against the danger that it might descend into
underdetermined and untethered rhetoric, which is both educationally irrelevant and
philosophically suspect. Philosophical reflection which is related to, and grounded in,
educational realities is often more adequate both educationally and philosophically.
Little progress can be made in a philosophical discussion of citizenship education
in contemporary China, for example, without attention to the reform of the history
curriculum in the post-Mao period (on this matter see Jones, 2002). Oksenberg Rorty
(1998a) reminds us that, even though European and Anglo-American countries share
some general educational aims, ‘their distinctive political and religious histories, and
their different socio-economic conditions, set them quite distinctive moral and educational problems’ (p. 10). Since solutions to (many) educational questions cannot be
general, let alone philosophically general, philosophical reflection about these questions must be related to, grounded in and vary in the light of local considerations of
various kinds. The task of exploring the relationship between philosophical reflection
and educational realities in given contexts is, however, an extremely complex one. In
part, this is because of the complexities involved in the general relationship between
philosophy and educational policy-making and practice (on these complexities see,
e.g., McLaughlin, 2000). For example, philosophical conceptions and principles can
neither be simply read off from nor applied to educational realities. Philosophical
influence on educational policy-making and practice is often exercised through the
pedagogical phronesis (or practical judgement) of educational policy-makers, teachers
and educational leaders. The general complexities to which reference has been made
here are magnified in any attempt to explore the relationship between philosophy and
educational policy-making and practice in comparative contexts.
The third difficulty relates to the task of achieving an adequate understanding of philosophizing about education across different contexts. One general aspect of difficulty
here is practical in character, and this has been addressed in the first two difficulties
outlined above. Attention will be focused here, however, on philosophical aspects of
difficulty. A good starting point for the achievement of relevant forms of understanding is (perspicuous) description of various kinds. However, whilst a description of a
philosophical tradition or of the development of philosophizing about education in a
given context is necessary for understanding, it is not sufficient (for such descriptions
see, in addition to contributions to this Special Issue, the account of philosophy of
education in Spain offered by Jover, 2001). One prominent aspect of difficulty concerns the question of understanding across philosophical traditions. The analytical
tradition of philosophy and philosophy of education, which was given as an example
at the outset of this article, is manifestly not immune from criticism, most notably by

--- [PDF Page 1111 / Book Page 1136] ---

1136

McLaughlin

the continental traditions of philosophizing to which Paul Standish makes reference
in his contribution to this Special Issue. Detailed educational visions derived from a
philosophy in the sense indicated earlier (namely, overall and wide-ranging philosophical visions and systems) invite engagement with a particularly complex exegetical and
interpretive task calling for considerable sensitivity and judgement. (For resources for
this kind of task see, e.g., Deutsch & Bontekoe, 1997. Specifically in relation to the
traditions of thought represented in this Special Issue, see, Albertini, 1997; Deutsch
& Bontekoe, 1997, Chs. 7–15, 32–40, 43, 45; Masolo, 1997; Weiming, 1997; Cooper,
2003a, Ch. 3, 6, 9. On the relationship between indigenous peoples and Western philosophies see, e.g., Marshall, 2000.) The understanding of Confucian, Buddhist and
Islamic philosophy, for example, presents a particular challenge to Western thinkers, not least because of the intricate relationship of these traditions with a whole
way of life. One danger confronting Western thinkers is that of ‘orientalism’ inherent in the categorization of non-Western philosophies of education in the light of an
assumption that all philosophical traditions that are not defined as Western constitute
an identifiable ‘something’ simply by virtue of their being non-Western (Deutsch,
1997, p. xii). Deutsch also usefully draws attention to another danger in our imagining that the thought of another culture ‘has a clear unity and simplicity in contrast to
the multifarious character of one’s own’ (1997, p. xiii). In fact, he insists, many of
these ‘alternative traditions’ are characterized by depth, range, diversity and contention. There is no such thing, therefore, as a Chinese, Japanese or African philosophy
(or philosophy of education) per se. A related danger is that of ‘primordialism’, where
a particular group identity and its underlying philosophical articulation is seen as a
timeless or eternal ‘given’. A related problem is the definition of what can count as
‘philosophy’ (see the paper by Bridges, Asgedom and Kenaw in this issue). A further danger in seeking to understand ‘philosophies’ is that of deducing educational
implications from them in an over-simple way. This danger is illustrated by MacIntyre
(1998) in his observation that whilst it is possible to ‘fabricate a collage’ out of relevant
elements of the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas and describe it as his ‘philosophy of
education’, this would be a travesty (p. 96). In these and other matters it is useful to
approach the task of understanding ‘philosophies’ and their educational implications
by starting from the educational realities that they mandate (for such an approach see,
e.g., Halbertal & Halbertal, 1998; MacIntyre, 1998; Mottahedeh, 1998).
The fourth difficulty relates to the task of engaging in dialogue with philosophizing about education across different contexts and the related implied task of
making judgements about the validity or adequacy of the perspectives and arguments
encountered. It is important to note that differing philosophical perspectives and
traditions do not necessarily stand in a relationship of mere juxtaposition to each
other but in relationships of potential and actual disagreement and conflict. Deutsch
(1997) insists that
one’s primary concern in the exploration of other traditions ought not to be that
of simply finding more of oneself and what is familiar to one, but of learning
about other possibilities of philosophical experience that can be opened up to
one through cross-cultural encounter. (p. xiii)

--- [PDF Page 1112 / Book Page 1137] ---

Education, Philosophy and the Comparative Perspective 1137

Deutsch’s claim leads to the thought that one may be a better philosopher and
philosopher of education for having embraced a comparative perspective. The greatest
difficulty that arises for educationalists from Western liberal culture in embracing a
comparative perspective is that of being genuinely open to alternative conceptions, values and forms of argument that may conflict with Western liberal conceptions, forms
of argument and values in significant ways (see particularly the contribution of Mark
Halstead to this Special Issue). One difficulty here is the prevalence of notions such as
‘postmodernism’ that seem to call into question in different ways the evaluative project
itself (on postmodernism see, e.g., Cooper, 2003b). The notion of ‘Western liberal
conceptions and values’ is not, of course, transparent and unproblematic, although an
unanalysed general sense of the notion can be invoked for the purposes of the present
discussion (for further discussion see White, 2003). The practical and normative pervasiveness of these liberal ‘conceptions, forms of argument and values’ across the
world is manifest, especially given the presence of democracy as one of its central elements (for the pervasiveness of liberal values in the case of Japan see, e.g., Feinberg,
1993). One general phenomenon worthy of note here is that of traditional forms of
philosophizing being put under intense philosophical (as well as societal and political)
pressure by liberal and democratic influences. Tu Weiming (1997) describes how the
Western Enlightenment tradition gave rise to ‘the most devastating disputation that
the Chinese mind has ever encountered’ (p. 22). Local forms of philosophizing, with
their distinctive conceptions, values and forms of argument, face assessment from the
putatively ‘universal’ standpoint of Western liberalism (see the contributions by Penny
Enslin & Kai Horsthemke and by Bridges, Asgedom & Kenaw in this Special Issue)
and many contexts seek adaptation to Western norms (see the contributions by Godoń,
Jucevičienë & Kodelja and by Naiko Saito & Yasuo Imai). The major challenge for
Western scholars here is not only that of reinterpreting local forms of thought and
practice in the light of Western perspectives in an appropriate and defensible way (on
liberal democratic educational aims and values in comparative perspective see Bridges,
1997), but also that of being sufficiently open to the genuine insights contained in local
forms of thought. This is important not least because liberal conceptions, forms of
thought and values are not unproblematic as they stand, but require enrichment and
amendment from other sources. The inadequacies of Western liberalism with respect
to securing a basis for contra-individualistic motivation and for communal needs and
imperatives are, for example, widely felt. Openness to the genuine insights contained
in local forms of thought requires considerable resources of sensitivity and imagination which extend beyond the philosophical. It should not, of course, be assumed that
the challenges of dialogue and evaluation are confined to encounters with ‘philosophies’ such as Confucianism, Buddhism and Islam. There is plenty of scope for the
exercise of sensitivity and imagination in the encounter between the analytical and the
continental traditions in philosophy and philosophy of education (on this encounter
see, e.g., Blake et al., 1998).
The difficulties indicated here are substantial ones, not least the philosophical ones
that have been identified. Any suggestion that the significant progress in relation to the
difficulties is impossible, however, would seem to call into question the very possibility
of a comparative study of education of any ambition and significance.

--- [PDF Page 1113 / Book Page 1138] ---

1138

McLaughlin

Education, Philosophy and the Comparative
Perspective: Opportunities
What opportunities arise from an acceptance of the claim that a philosophical approach
and a comparative approach to the study of education need each other? There is much
scope here for a detailed discussion of possibilities. At the very least it would be a
good thing if philosophizing about education became more sensitive to comparative
insights and concerns and comparative education became more sensitive to insights
and concerns of a philosophical kind. However, the need for sustained and sensitive
interdisciplinary cooperation emerges clearly from the foregoing discussion. Here,
flexibility is important: for example, philosophical aspects of research should not be
seen as solely the province of ‘philosophers’ or ‘philosophers of education’.
Dialogue with the unfamiliar is perhaps a key feature of the comparative approach
to education. The suggestion here is that philosophers and comparativists in education
are unjustifiably unfamiliar with each other’s work and that dialogue between them
should both enhance their work and indicate real opportunities for collaborative pursuit of their mutual and overlapping research interests.
Acknowledgement I am grateful to Robert Cowen for his advice and assistance in relation to the
writing of this article.

References
Albertini, T. (1997). Islamic philosophy: an overview, in: E. Deutsch & R. Bontekoe (Eds.), A companion to
world philosophies pp. 93–133. Oxford: Blackwell.
Alexander, R. J. (2001). Border crossings: Towards a comparative pedagogy. Comparative Education, 37(4),
507–523.
Blackburn, S. (1999). Think. A compelling introduction to philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blake, N., Smeyers, P., Smith, R., & Standish, P. (1998). Thinking again. Education after postmodernism.
Westport, CT, Bergin & Harvey.
Bridges, D. (Ed.) (1997). Education, autonomy and democratic citizenship. Philosophy in a changing world.
London, Routledge.
Broadfoot, P. (2000). Comparative education for the 21st century: Retrospect and prospect, Comparative
Education, 36(3), 357–371.
Burbules, N. C., & Warnick, B. R. (2004). Philosophical inquiry. Available online at: www.cedu.niu.edu/epf/
foundations/CMRE_(final).htm (accessed 28 July 2004).
Cave, P. (2001). Educational reform in Japan in the 1990’s: ‘Individuality’ and other uncertainties,
Comparative Education, 37(2), 173–191.
Cooper, D. E. (1986). Introduction. In D. E. Cooper (Ed.), Education, values and mind. Essays for R. S.
Peters (pp. 1–7). London, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Cooper, D. E. (2003a). World philosophies. An historical introduction (2nd edn.). (Oxford, Blackwell
Publishing).
Cooper, D. E. (2003b). Postmodernism. In R. Curren (Ed.), A companion to the philosophy of education.
(pp. 206–217). Oxford: Blackwell.
Cowen, R. (2000). Comparing futures or comparing pasts? Comparative Education, 36(3), 333–342.
Crossley, M., & Jarvis, P. (Eds.) (2000). Special Issue. Comparative education for the twenty-first century.
Comparative Education, 36(3).
Crossley, M., & Jarvis, P. (Eds.) (2001). Special Issue. Comparative education for the twenty-first century:
an international response. Comparative Education, 37(4).

--- [PDF Page 1114 / Book Page 1139] ---

Education, Philosophy and the Comparative Perspective 1139
Crossley, M. & Tikly, L. (Eds.) (2004). Special Issue. Postcolonialism and comparative education.
Comparative Education, 40(2).
Curren, R. (Ed.) (2003). A companion to the philosophy of education. Oxford: Blackwell.
Curren, R., Robertson, E., & Hager, P. (2003). The analytical movement, in: R. Curren (Ed.) A companion
to the philosophy of education. (pp. 176–191). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Davies, L., Harber, C., & Schweisfurth, M. (Eds.) (2002). Special Issue. Democracy and authoritarianism in
education. Comparative Education, 38(3).
Deutsch, E. (1997). Preface, In E. Deutsch & R. Bontekoe (Eds.), A companion to world philosophies. (pp.
xii–xiv). Oxford: Blackwell.
Deutsch, E., & Bontekoe, R. (Eds.) (1997). A companion to world philosophies. Oxford: Blackwell.
Elliott, R. K. (1986) Richard Peters: A philosopher in the older style. In D. E. Cooper (Ed.), Education,
values and mind. Essays for R. S. Peters. (pp. 41–68). London, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Evers, C. W. (1993). Analytic and post-analytic philosophy of education: Methodological reflections,
Discourse, 13(2), 35–45.
Feinberg, W. (1993). Japan and the pursuit of a new American identity. Work and education in a multicultural
age. New York: Routledge.
Grant, N. (2000). Tasks for comparative education in the new millennium, Comparative Education, 36(3),
309–317.
Green, A. (2000). Converging paths or ships passing in the night? An ‘English’ critique of Japanese school
reform, Comparative Education, 36(4), 417–435.
Halbertal, M., & Halbertal, T. H. (1998). The Yeshiva, in: A. Oksenberg Rorty (Ed.), Philosophers on
education. New historical perspectives. (pp. 458–469). London: Routledge.
Harber, C. (2002). Education, democracy and poverty reduction in Africa, Comparative Education, 38(3),
267–276.
Haydon, G. (Ed.) (1998). 50 years of philosophy of education. Progress and prospects. Bedford Way papers.
London, University of London Institute of Education.
Heyting, F., Lenzen, D. & White, J. (Eds.) (2001). Methods in philosophy of education. London:
Routledge.
Hirst, P. H. (1986). Richard Peters’s contribution to the philosophy of education. In D. E. Cooper (Ed.),
Education, values and mind. Essays for R. S. Peters. (pp. 8–40). London, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Hirst, P. H. (1993). Education, knowledge and practices, In R. Barrow & P. White (Eds.), Beyond liberal
education. Essays in honour of Paul H. Hirst. (pp. 184–199). London, Routledge.
Hirst, P. H. (1998). Philosophy of education: The evolution of a discipline. In G. Haydon (Ed.), 50 years of
philosophy of education. Progress and prospects, Bedford Way Papers. (pp. 1–22). London, Institute of
Education, University of London.
Hirst, P. H., & White, P. (Eds.) (1998a). Philosophy of education: Major themes in the analytic tradition
(4 vols). London: Routledge.
Hirst, P. H., & White, P. (1998b). The analytic tradition and philosophy of education: an historical perspective. In P. H. Hirst & P. White (Eds.), Philosophy of education: Major themes in the analytic tradition
(vol. 1). (pp. 1–12). London: Routledge.
Ichilov, O. (Ed.) (1988). Citizenship and citizenship education in a changing world. London: Woburn
Press.
Jones, A. (2002). Politics and history curriculum reform in post-Mao China. International Journal of
Educational Research, 37, 545–566.
Jover, G. (2001). Philosophy of education in Spain at the threshold of the 21st century – origins, political
contexts and prospects. Studies in Philosophy and Education, 20(4), 361–385.
Kohli, W. (Ed.) (1995). Critical conversations in philosophy of education. London: Routledge.
MacIntyre, A. (1998). Aquinas’s critique of education: Against his own age, against ours. In A. Oksenberg
Rorty (Ed.), Philosophers on education. New historical perspectives. (pp. 95–108). London:
Routledge.
McLaughlin, T. H. (2000). Philosophy and educational policy. Possibilities, tensions and tasks. Journal of
Educational Policy, 15(4), 441–457.
Marshall, J. D. (Ed.) (2000). Special Issue. Education and cultural difference. Educational Philosophy and
Theory, 32(1).

--- [PDF Page 1115 / Book Page 1140] ---

1140

McLaughlin

Martin, T. J. (2003). Divergent ontologies with converging conclusions: A case study comparison of comparative methodologies, Comparative Education, 39(1), 105–117.
Masolo, D. A. (1997) African philosophy: An overview. In E. Deutsch & R. Bontekoe (Eds.), A companion
to world philosophies. (pp. 63–77). Oxford: Blackwell.
May, S. & Aikman, S. (Eds) (2003). Special Issue. Indigenous education: new possibilities, ongoing constraints, Comparative Education, 39(2).
Mottahedeh, R. P. (1998). Traditional Shi’ite education in Qom. In A. Oksenberg Rorty (Ed.), Philosophers
on education. New historical perspectives. (pp. 451–457). London: Routledge.
Ninnes, P., & Burnett, G. (2003). Comparative education research: Poststructuralist possibilities. Comparative
Education, 39(3), 279–297.
Oksenberg Rorty, A. (1998a). The ruling history of education. In A. Oksenberg Rorty (Ed.), Philosophers
on education. New historical perspectives. (pp. 1–13). London: Routledge.
Oksenberg Rorty, A. (Ed.) (1998b). Philosophers on education. New historical perspectives. London:
Routledge.
Peters, R. S. (1966). Ethics and education. London: Allen & Unwin.
Peters, R. S. (1983). Philosophy of education. In P. H. Hirst (Ed.), Educational theory and its foundation
disciplines. (pp. 30–61). London, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Phillips, D. (2000). Learning from elsewhere in education: Some perennial problems re-visited with reference to British interest in Germany, Comparative Education, 36(3), 297–307.
Smart, N. (2000). World philosophies. London: Routledge.
Soltis, J. F. (1988). Perspectives on philosophy of education. In W. Hare & J. P. Portelli (Eds.), Philosophy of
education. Introductory readings. (pp. 7–14). Calgary: Detselig Enterprises.
Tomiak, J. J. (2000). Polish education facing the twenty-first century: Dilemmas and difficulties. Comparative
Education, 36(2), 177–186.
Weiming, T. (1997). Chinese philosophy: A synoptic view. In E. Deutsch & R. Bontekoe (Eds.), A companion to world philosophies. (pp. 3–23). Oxford: Blackwell.
White, J. (1987). The medical condition of philosophy of education. Journal of Philosophy of Education,
21(2), 155–162.
White, J. (1995). Problems of the philosophy of education. In T. Honderich (Ed.), The Oxford companion to
philosophy. (pp. 216–219). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
White, J. (2003). Five critical stances towards liberal philosophy of education in Britain (with responses
by Wilfred Carr, Richard Smith, Paul Standish and Terence H. McLaughlin). Journal of Philosophy of
Education, 37(1), 147–184.
White, J., & White, P. (2001). An analytic perspective on education and children’s rights. In F. Heyting,
D. Lenzen & J. White (Eds.), Methods in philosophy of education. (pp. 13–29). London: Routledge.
Wilson, J. (1979). Preface to the philosophy of education. London: Routledge.
Yamashita, H., & Williams, C. (2002). A vote for consensus: Democracy and difference in Japan.
Comparative Education, 38(3), 277–289.

