================================================================================
Chapter 71: Comparison: Quo Vadis?
Author(s): Gita Steiner-Khamsi
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1141–1158
PDF Pages: pp. 1116–1131 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1116 / Book Page 1141] ---

71
COMPARISON: QUO VADIS?
Gita Steiner-Khamsi

The history of comparative education in the United States is often told in terms of
revolutionary paradigm changes that revamped disciplinary focus, methods, and
geographical reach (e.g., Altbach, 1991). Until the 1960s, comparative education in
the United States was firmly based in the discipline of history, enamoured with single-country studies, and fixated on educational systems in Europe. By the end of the
decade, the field was transformed into comparative and international education, with
a composition of researchers and practitioners who were multi-disciplinary, crossnational and international in perspective. The name of its professional association was
changed accordingly, from Comparative Education Society (CES) to Comparative and
International Education Society (CIES). According to standard accounts, disciplinary
“orthodoxy” in history gave way to a “heterodoxy” (Paulston, 1993), inclusive of different social science disciplines. Once history was abandoned as the only legitimate
disciplinary foundation for the comparative study of educational systems, methodological changes followed suit. For some, the units of comparison became smaller
moving from national educational systems to culturally bounded educative sites or
communities. For others, they became broader, as the narrow focus on cross-national
comparison in North America and Europe was suspended and academic curiosity
and professional interests were redirected towards the Third World. In this chapter, I
explore the proliferation of single-case studies that occurred at the expense of multiple
case studies and other types of studies that involve comparison. I discuss the development turn that occurred in the 1960s and reflect on the repercussions it has had on
methodological issues.

The Development Turn
There is a strongly held belief that the development turn of the 1960s was all positive.
This general assessment, held by culturally oriented comparative and international
researchers in the United States deserves scrutiny. It is accurate that the exclusive focus
on Europe was abandoned and replaced with an orientation towards developing countries. It is also true that universities in the United States embarked in great style upon
language and area studies in order to understand, but also win the hearts and minds of
people in the Third World. Thus, the development turn marked the beginning of area

1143
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1141–1158.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1117 / Book Page 1142] ---

1144

Steiner-Khamsi

studies in the social sciences, humanities and in educational research. As discussed in
more detail in other publications, the emergence of development and area studies was
inextricably linked to the Cold War (Steiner-Khamsi, 2006; Steiner-Khamsi & deJongLambert, 2006). The fact that US comparative education went global in the late 1950s
and in the 1960s, leaving the exclusive focus on Europe behind, had to do more with
the global dimension of US interventions rather than with greater sensitivities towards
people in developing countries.
Naturally, the development turn has had consequences for the selection of target
countries of research, redirecting attention from high-income countries to low-income
countries. In addition, as this chapter will demonstrate, the development turn also
had considerable methodological repercussions. The push for single-case studies was
clearly visible in the late 1950s and early 1960s when the National Defense Education
Act (1958) and the Title VI Foreign Language and Area Studies fellowships created
funding opportunities and other financial incentives to focus one’s research on one
country only. The focus on one geographic area was hardly new for comparative
researchers. Given their kinship with historians, most early comparative education
researchers have always seen themselves as area specialists, focusing on the history of
education in a particular region. However, despite their area or context specialty, they
did compare. Their analyses were embedded in contextual comparison. The situation,
however, changed with the development turn.
In retrospect, the period of greatest territorial gain in comparative education was
also the era of greatest methodological loss: with US political interventions targeting
developing countries in the 1950s and 1960s, comparative education gained terrain.
The field was no longer restricted to North America and Europe, but now encompassed any country with which the US government either entertained friendly ties
or intended to forge a bond. Typically these countries were low-income, developing
countries. At closer scrutiny, however, in the wake of paying more attention to developing countries, the project of comparison got suspended; not for its methodological
limitations (e.g., difficulty of conducting solid contextual comparison) but oftentimes
for chauvinist reasons: What is there possibly to learn from countries that are at a lower
development stage? What “bourgeois education” in the United States was to MarxistLeninist comparative education, and vice versa, education in developing countries was
to comparative education in the United States: deemed too inferior to be comparable
(see Steiner-Khamsi, 2006). With the boom of development and area specialists in the
1960s, funded by NDEA Title VI or other international fellowships, comparative and
international education in the United States shifted towards qualitative single-country
studies and lost, to some extent, its comparative dimension.1
I would like to draw on Harold H. Noah’s astute methodological observations. His
comments capture very well my own criticism of the narrow research paradigm that
emerged during the Cold War in the 1960s, and endured into the present:
Obviously, the 35 years since 1970 has seen tremendous organizational growth
[in US comparative and international education]. Now, I will not speak at all;
my lips are sealed on whether there has been qualitative improvement. There

--- [PDF Page 1118 / Book Page 1143] ---

Comparison: Quo Vadis? 1145

certainly are differences. … It is just very different in one way, but very much
the same in another way. There are still, as there were before, lots and lots of
single-country studies. And the big question always is: is that comparative education? Couldn’t these studies just as well have been published in a sociology of
education journal in that country, a political science journal in that country, or
in an educational journal in that country? Why is it comparative education? That
question still worries me. (Noah, 2006, DVD excerpt 00:15:28 – 00:16:58)

Cold-War Legacies
The development turn surfaced in the late 1950s and the early 1960s. This period
marked the formative years for comparative education societies in different parts of
the world, including in the United States. The decade coincided with the period of
greatest competition between the two superpowers. The race over arms, technology
and science was the fiercest during that time. For comparative education researchers
in the United States, Soviet education was first an object of admiration, and in the following two decades a counter-reference for all that US education was not supposed to
be, or never wished to become. At the founding meeting of the Comparative Education
Society at New York University in 1956, the comparison between education in the
United States and education in the Soviet Union was placed at centre stage.2 Soviet
education became a primary point of reference after the launch of Sputnik in 1957,
a position reinforced once Yuri Gagarin became the first man in space in 1961. The
Soviet downfall coincided with reports in the 1970s and 1980s in which dissidents
spoke up against political repression and wrote about the widespread “economy of
shortage” in socialist countries.
The influence of the Cold War has endured into the present and is evident in
several contemporary features of US comparative and international education: first,
the dominance of development and area studies in US comparative and international
education, and second, the preoccupation of US comparative education with contrastive analyses of educational systems, conceived as diametrically opposed to the US
system. In the United States, Sovietology was soon replaced by Japanology, followed
by, after more than a decade of relative inertia, Islamology. Research on educational
practices in the Soviet Union, Japan, or the Arab world – all regions that were seen at
one time or another as economic or political threats to the United States – attracted
great public attention and government funding. Finally, it is noticeable that US comparative education researchers rarely compare US education with education in other parts
of the world. The only country that seems to serve as a “reference society” (Schriewer
et al., 1998) for educational reform in the United States is Great Britain, and even this
is limited to market-oriented educational reforms. It seems there is no cross-national
“policy attraction” for US analysts unless the reforms happen to emanate from Great
Britain. This is in stark contrast to comparative education research in other countries
that typically is enamoured with observing, documenting and publishing on reforms in
countries that are perceived as comparable in context.

--- [PDF Page 1119 / Book Page 1144] ---

1146

Steiner-Khamsi

Language and Area Studies
In the United States, Congress passed the National Defense Education Act (NDEA)
in 1958 to improve the quality of education (especially in math, sciences and foreign
language instruction), and increase access to postsecondary and higher education by
means of student loans and scholarships. A total of 10 areas (“titles”) were listed as
eligible for federal funding. In higher education these new areas were Title II (student
loans), Title IV (national defense fellowships), and language and areas studies development (Title VI). These funding priorities were initiated in 1958 and are, at a much
lower level of funding, available to this date.3
A review of the NDEA budget for 1963 illustrates the preoccupation with socialist countries. The top-ranking foreign languages in the early 1960s were Chinese and
Russian. More precisely, 16% of the budget for Modern Foreign Language Graduate
Fellowships was spent for Chinese and 13% for Russian, followed by Arabic (11%),
Japanese (10%), Spanish (10%) and other languages (Office of Education, 1963,
Figure 20). The US–Soviet cultural exchange agreement of 1958 made it possible to
take a peek behind the Iron Curtain in the form of organized study visits or tours. The
interest in Soviet and East European languages and studies dropped drastically in
the 1970s when government funding for foreign language and area studies dwindled. The
number of doctorates earned in Soviet and East European Studies at American universities, for example, was at a peak in the decade 1970–1979 (3,598 doctorates), but then
dropped by 60% in the period 1980–1987 (Atkinson, 1988).
Although the rhetoric for establishing NDEA was clearly embedded in the
language of the Cold War, a great number of foreign language and area studies
– regardless of whether they were in socialist countries or not – benefited from the
infusion of government funds. In 1958, the US Commissioner of Education designated 83 languages as critically needed, and identified six of them for first priority
in development: Arabic, Chinese, Hindi-Urdu, Japanese, Portuguese, and Russian
(Spanish was added in 1996, after the announcement of the US-Latin American
Alliance for Progress). By the end of 1962, four years after the implementation
of NDEA, 56 of the 83 “critical languages” received federal support and 53 centres for area and language studies in higher education were established (Office of
Education, 1963).
A brief comparison of US educational reform strategies used during the Cold War
and during the ongoing War on Terror is appropriate here. Since 2006, there has been
talk of establishing a new NDEA as an educational offensive to win the War on Terror.
Education was, like today, directly tied to national and global security, and federal
expenditures for education more than doubled in the 4 years after the NDEA of 1958
was implemented (Senate of the United States, 2006, p. 2). Even though the funds were
administered by the Department of Education, the language used to pass the Act in
Congress was soaked in the language of the military provoking anxieties that the country
would lose the race in science, technology and arms. The magnitude of NDEA becomes
immediately apparent if we compare the educational measures of the late 1950s with
those of today that the US government has initiated to combat the War on Terror. Such a
comparison is not far-fetched, since many political commentators compare September

--- [PDF Page 1120 / Book Page 1145] ---

Comparison: Quo Vadis? 1147

11 (2001) to the launch of the Sputnik (October 1957). Both events were hyped as a
shock to the nation and triggered a host of government interventions. In education, the
parallel is striking, and reflected in the 2005 National Security Language Initiative,4
established by President George W. Bush, and the plan of democratic senators, backed
by the Association of American Universities (2006), to pass the so-called New NDEA
of 2006. However, if the Federal Government were to allocate the same amount for education in the interest of “national security” as it did with NDEA in 1958, it would cost
$400–500 million, that is, roughly 10 times more than it is spending nowadays for Title
VI and Homeland Security fellowships (Brainard, 2005). In both eras – the Cold War
and War on Terror – public expenditures for winning the “war” were massive. During
the Cold War, however, the allocation of funds to the education sector was considerably
higher – in fact, 10 times higher – than today.
Returning to the decade of development in the 1960s, the boost in federal support
for higher education generated very attractive incentives to establish area studies as
well as development studies in education and the social sciences. In fact, most graduate programmes in international and comparative education, educational development
studies, or international education policy studies at US universities were established
during the decade of development. Even though the decade ended in the late 1960s, it
entirely transformed the field of US comparative and international education in that
it moved the field away from comparative historiography and directed attention to
(de-contextualized) cross-national comparison on one hand, and highly contextualized
but non-comparative single-country studies on the other.

Contrastive Analyses
Andreas Kazamias criticizes the “social scientific metamorphosis of comparative
education” (2001, p. 440) of the 1960s for having transformed comparative education into an ahistorical, and to some extent atheoretical field of inquiry. I would like
to add to Kazamias’s observation that the early period of social scientific comparison in the 1960s witnessed, in the form of Sovietology and then later Japanology,
the most shallow and de-contextualized mode of comparison: contrastive analyses.
Methodologically, contrastive analyses need to be regarded as a specific type of
comparison. They emphasize differences over commonalities. The typology of comparative case study analyses helps situate contrastive analyses within comparative
methodology.
Table 1 presents the distinction made in comparative case study analyses between
systems and outcomes (Berg-Schlosser, 2002, p. 2430; see also Przeworski & Teune,
1970). I use “system” and “case” interchangeably, because methodologically a case is
a bounded system with its own “causal web” (Tilly, 1997, p. 49) that connects the large
Table 1.

Comparative case study analyses

Most similar outcomes
Most different outcomes

Most similar systems/cases
msS-msO
msS-mdO

Most different systems/cases
mdS-msO
mdS-mdO

--- [PDF Page 1121 / Book Page 1146] ---

1148

Steiner-Khamsi

number of variables in the case/system. The following table is especially useful for
sampling decisions as it helps to make the selection of cases transparent.
In contrastive analyses, the researchers select cases/systems that they perceive to be
“most different” from each other with regard to political system, educational system,
or other system criteria (mdS), and expects to find different outcomes (mdO). The
fourth quadrant in Table 1 represents the contrastive research design (mdS-mdO), in
which the most different systems are examined with the expectation to find most different outcomes.
During the Cold War, the field of Sovietology satisfied populist demands for understanding why the US nation fell behind in the space and arms race. As a corollary, it
made it acceptable in educational research to engage in contrastive analyses, that is,
in comparison that is primarily directed towards identifying difference. As a result the
two systems were dichotomized, and each was situated at the end of a spectrum. Soviet
education was depicted as a system that relied on political indoctrination, whereas
the US system supposedly fostered critical thinking in students. The list of binary
constructions is long. Suffice it only to mention one more false dichotomy: the Soviet
educational system supposedly emphasized access to education at the expense of quality
of education. The dismissal of all that is perceived as typically socialist, such as, for
example, universal and free access to education, has had disastrous effects on current
reforms in the post-socialist region (see Steiner-Khamsi & Stolpe, 2006). The field of
Sovietology was dropped, as some commentators notice (e.g., Foster, 1998), virtually
overnight and replaced with Japanology. The new methodology was later on adopted
for the research field Japanology producing a multitude of contrastive studies on US
and Japanese education.
As with its older cousin Sovietology (see Noah, 2006), Japanology was populist
in that it spread, at breathtaking speed, many broad generalizations and exaggerated
statements about education. Furthermore – as William Cummings (1989), with reference to an expression coined by Joseph Tobin, has pointed out – American researchers
tended to use a “yes, but” approach. The approach acknowledges the successes in the
other educational system but at the same time “argues that these successes come at
too high a price, a price Americans are unwilling to pay” (Cummings, 1989, p. 296).
The exaggerated statements or myths about Japanese education included: inverted
socialization paradigm (indulgence in early childhood, discipline in adolescence and
early adulthood), education for the nation and the state, kyoiku mama (educationoriented mother), rote learning in schools, competition and suicide, elitist higher
education, and social inequality. The US attraction for the Japanese educational system evaporated as quickly as it emerged due to the economic crisis in Asia. Within a
short period of time, the “cautiously acknowledged strengths of Japanese education”
(Cummings, 1989, p. 298) disappeared from American accounts. The Japanese educational system fell from grace and American observers started to make extensive
use of studies that documented cram schools, student suicide and teacher burnout
in Japan. Critics also emerged within the Japanese contexts. In Japan, the crisis talk
surfaced at the turn of the new millennium and was used to justify the need for fundamental reform, such as the far-reaching curriculum reform that was implemented
in 2002 (Tsuneyoshi, 2004).

--- [PDF Page 1122 / Book Page 1147] ---

Comparison: Quo Vadis? 1149

Cross-National Policy Apathy
William Cummings is not alone in observing US disinterest in educational reforms of
other countries:
The American interest in foreign educational systems has never been great, and
as America has prospered to a position of international pre-eminence it appears
that this interest has steadily declined: after all, what could the world teach
America? (Cummings, 1989, p. 294)
Cummings published his observation in 1989, at the dawn of a new era in which the other
empire, the Soviet Union and its socialist allies, was dissolved. Even more than before,
the global posture of US policy analysts is noticeable. The isolationist status of US comparative education research or “self-referentiality” (Luhmann, 1990; Schriewer, 1990; see
also Steiner-Khamsi, 2004) as the primary mode with which policy decisions are made
in US educational reform, is a relatively recent phenomenon. Historically, the period
of greatest US interest in educational systems of other countries (in particular Europe),
was the second half of the nineteenth century and early twentieth century. Having this
particular period of US comparative education in mind, Harold Noah and Max Eckstein
(1969. p. 3) identified the period of educational borrowing, “when the desire to learn
useful lessons from foreign practices was the major motivation” as the second stage in
the development of comparative education.5 In a similar vein, Gail P. Kelly refers to the
period in the history of comparative education, when “gentlemen traveled extensively
and wrote about differences between nations” (Kelly, 1992, p. 14).
David Phillips coined the term “cross-national policy attraction” (Phillips, 2004;
Ertl, 2006) to capture, from a historical perspective, the British interest in German
educational provision over a considerable period of time. This interpretive framework
is useful to understand the sustained interest of policy analysts of one educational
system in the educational provisions, reform strategies, and other institutional features of another. In the case of US policy analysts, however, the inverse applies: an
apathy towards experiences from elsewhere. It seems that there are no lessons to be
learned from other educational systems and experiences elsewhere are not viewed as
instructive for domestic policy development. Exceptions such as UK – United States
cross-national policy attraction do exist, but there are, for sure, no contours of any
pronounced policy pilgrimage by US policy analysts. In other contexts, cross-national
policy attraction is the rule and not the exception. For example, the first few years after
the release of the PISA results, numerous policy analysts from different corners of the
world flocked to Finland to explore the reasons for the exceptional achievement of
Finnish students in language literacy.

The Challenge of Contextualized Comparison
Contextualized comparison, or the move away from contrastive analyses, was only
rediscovered in comparative education with the general cultural turn in the social
sciences in the 1980s. Social anthropological and historical research, by the 1980s

--- [PDF Page 1123 / Book Page 1148] ---

1150

Steiner-Khamsi

grown closer together and paradigmatically regarded as siblings rather than cousins, positively influenced the methods discussion in the social sciences, educational research,
and comparative education research. Not only did they render the exclusive focus on
national education systems problematic by including other units of analyses (classrooms, schools, communities, regions, the world), but they also demanded a more
hermeneutic approach to the study of educational systems that, by implication, pays
greater attention to cultural and historical context. As a corollary, single-country studies or case studies offered themselves as a methodological tool in which all units of
analyses, from the classroom to the globe, were interwoven and in which causal connections between the various units or layers of analyses could be made.
I would like to argue that the cultural turn in comparative education has dominated
the field at the expense of other quantitative and mixed-methods comparative studies. Today, qualitative case studies or single-country studies are the most frequently
used genre of methodological inquiry in US comparative and international education. To reiterate Harold Noah’s point, mentioned earlier (Noah, 2006): “Why is this
comparative education?” In principle, singe-country studies could very well be comparative. At closer scrutiny, however, the majority of single-country studies published
in comparative and international education journals are not comparative. This applies
especially to those case studies that refrain from any of the three conceivable types of
comparison: comparison over time (historical analysis), across space (cross-cultural
or cross-dimensional analysis), or across socially agreed standards (e.g., OECD/IEDtype of studies). Arguably, cross-national comparison is but one of several methods
of comparison. A more frequently used method in comparative education was, until
the 1960s, comparative historiography, when education in a “foreign country” was
analyzed and compared over a long period of time. Demands for more cross-dimensional analyses have been made (Bray & Thomas, 1995), but rarely implemented in
research. I regard case study research as a very powerful tool for policy analysis under
two conditions: the researcher must clearly define the case (what does the case stand
for?) and the researcher needs to convincingly construct causal stories within the case
(Tilly, 1997, p. 5) by investigating how the various actors, agendas, policy levels, and
educational practices relate to each other. As a corollary, a case study must be regarded
as a thick description based on a small sample size (small N), but many variables
(Ragin, 1997).
For example, in the case study on educational import in Mongolia (SteinerKhamsi & Stolpe, 2006), we had to come to grips with the ‘fuzziness’ of case studies
(Bassey, 2001, p. 6; see also Hammersly, 2001; Pratt, 2003). The uncertainty of predictions relates to the contextual information in which a case study must be nested.
Even though we have, every now and then, included observations made in other
contexts, the bulk of our findings were deeply rooted in the Mongolian context of
educational reform. The fuzziness of case studies is both a methodological weakness and strength. What accounts for the fuzziness is the complexity of an issue
(many variables) that unfolds when attention is paid to the different actors, agendas,
units of analysis, and practices within a context. In the Mongolian case study, for
example, we consistently used three units of analysis, corresponding to three distinct
policy levels (policy talk, action, implementation); the lists of actors, agendas, and

--- [PDF Page 1124 / Book Page 1149] ---

Comparison: Quo Vadis? 1151

practices varied for each chapter in the book (Steiner-Khamsi & Stolpe, 2006), and
would be too long to reiterate here.
Solid comparative studies or “contextual comparison” typically draw from information, which are specific to the case(s), as well as from comparison with other cases.
The problem I observe, however, is that many studies either do one or the other. That
is, they either focus on one case – and are highly contextual within that case – but lack
a broader frame of reference or perspective, oftentimes because the researcher (over-)
emphasizes contextual differences and, thus, refuses to compare. Or, they are very
exact with describing, for a number of cases, changes over time but miss out on important details for each case. These methodological differences are not merely nuances for
they produce different theories, depending on which method of inquiry and perspective is utilized. For example, in the fascinating intellectual debate on whether there
is an international convergence towards a single (international) model of schooling,
methodological considerations are instrumental for determining whether the scholars believe or disbelieve in an international convergence of schooling that supposedly
results from globalization.
Globalization is commonly viewed as an act of de-territorialization (Appadurai,
1990). By implication, globalization studies investigate the transnational flow of money,
communication, beliefs, or, as is the case with comparative educational research, the
travel of educational reforms from one cultural context to another. As students of globalization, we are able to draw on an established tradition in comparative education
with investigating policy borrowing and lending (Noah & Eckstein, 1969; Holmes,
1981) from one context to another, and by implication, with examining transnational
or global phenomena. In this key research area of comparative education, the cultural
turn in the social sciences that, more specifically, corresponds to the development turn
in comparative education, has had vast repercussions for the study of transnational
policy borrowing/lending or globalization in education. What we are witnessing today
is a bifurcation of comparative borrowing/lending research with one branch featuring cross-national comparison, and the other emphasizing culture or local contexts.
Within this binary space, one group of scholars – associated with neo-institutionalist
sociology – investigates long-term changes to identify a convergence of national educational systems, beliefs, and practices over time (Meyer & Ramirez, 2000; Ramirez,
2003; Baker & LeTendre, 2005; Kamens & Benavot, 2006). Diametrically opposed is
a group of researchers, representing a specific orientation within cultural anthropology, that produces single-country studies to emphasize that global or “external” forces
are heavily reinterpreted and adapted locally, and therefore only have a limited impact
on local structures, beliefs, and practices (Anderson-Levitt, 2003).
Although the disagreements between the two camps – neo-institutionalist sociologists and anti-neo-institutionalist cultural anthropologists – have ignited a lively debate
on strengths and shortcomings of each interpretive framework, we lack a discussion
on methodological constraints and disciplinary blind spots. The single-case studies
presented in Anderson-Levitt’s book criticize neo-institutionalism or world culture
theory from an anthropological perspective. In her edited volume (Anderson-Levitt,
2003), each of the nine case studies reflects on how exogenous influences in education (global forces) have been interpreted in a particular community (local encounter).

--- [PDF Page 1125 / Book Page 1150] ---

1152

Steiner-Khamsi

As announced in the title of the book, the case study authors investigate “local meanings” to visions and pressures of “global schooling,” and find a multiplicity of (local)
meanings. Their criticism builds on this finding, and serves them as an argument to
denounce the homogenizing effects of globalization that world culture theory has
asserted. The contributors illustrate that, although choice, student-centred learning,
outcomes-based education, marketization of schools, etc., went global, they neither
replaced already existing models nor do did they mean the same in various cultural
contexts. For example, choice with regard to the language of instruction, propelled by
US missionaries in Tanzania (Stambach, 2003) is, for a variety of reasons, a different
“thing” altogether than the choice in math instructional methods that factions of the
PTA association in California were combating (Rosen, 2003). Such variations matter
a great deal to the contributors of the edited volume for these differences reveal that
individuals in a particular community have a shared understanding of what global
reform models mean in their own cultural context. They criticize their antagonists,
the scholars of world culture theory or neo-institutionalist sociology, for taking global
schooling models at face value without scratching at the surface, and examining how
they play out differently at the community level. To phrase it more bluntly, world culture
theorists seem to have mistaken “brand name piracy” such as choice, outcomes-based
education, student-centred learning, etc., hijacked from one corner of the world and
catapulted to another, as heralds of an international convergence of education.
In contrast, neo-institutionalism or world culture theory acknowledges local “variations” (Ramirez, 2003, p. 247) of the global model of schooling, but regards them
either merely as manifestations of “loose coupling” between official and enacted policy, or views them as part of a world culture that promotes difference and diversity.
It simply is not interesting to comparative sociologists to analyze how and why exactly
the same school reform – let’s say “choice” – is interpreted and implemented differently in various cultural contexts. There is little to gain for them in the way of making
better sense of trends at system level. The fact that policy-makers in different parts of
the world justify choice, vouchers, privatization of education, and a host of other neoliberal reforms in terms of “progress” and “justice” only reconfirms their theory on the
international convergence in education.
Anthropological research has much to offer for understanding how globalization
plays out in communities. They have the methodological tools to understand what
“globalization” means to groups and communities: why “it” is appropriated or rejected,
and how “it” is adapted and modified to their cultural contexts. By analyzing the local
encounters with global forces, we learn more about cultural contexts than we do about
“globalization” per se. In contrast, defining the global or “the-out-there” (AndersonLevitt, 2003, p. 17), is not the strength of this kind of anthropological research. In
fact, in a few case studies presented in Anderson-Levitt’s edited volume (2003), the
external forces or globalization (“out-there”) was actually “in-here.” These are a few
constructions that I noticed in the volume: The authors either assumed that the global is manifested in neo-liberal reforms (choice, economic efficiency programs),
personified in specific groups viewed as outsiders (Russian immigrants in Israel, US
missionaries in Tanzania), or, if all other methods of distilling the global from the
local failed, simply used a quasi-subtractive method (the residual from what already

--- [PDF Page 1126 / Book Page 1151] ---

Comparison: Quo Vadis? 1153

existed locally, was established as the global) and thus run the risk of having given
attention to anything new. However, not everything that is “out there in the larger
world” (Anderson-Levitt, 2003, p. 55) qualifies as global. Precisely because the global
is frequently “in here,” several anthropologists have pointed out that concepts of spatial
determinism or “the local,” are of limited value (e.g., Camaroff & Camaroff, 2001),
and at the same time acknowledged the disjunctures of various transnational developments (Appadurai, 1990). This other group of anthropologists forces us to explicitly
address the blurring lines between global and local, between external and internal, and
to render the overlap of these two spaces to an object of study.
The endeavour to investigate the impact of globalization on education is more ambitious than it appears. The greatest challenge is to avoid falling into the trap of first
establishing national boundaries, only to demonstrate afterwards, that these boundaries have indeed been transcended. Reforms do not have a home base, a territory,
or a nationality, and therefore do not “belong” to a particular educational system.
Individuals conceive reforms and, depending on where they are geographically and
institutionally situated and how well they are globally networked, succeed in having
their ideas disseminated worldwide. Important for comparative research is therefore
the question as to why policy-makers and analysts refer to globalization, that is, generate reform pressure by pointing at educational reforms in other countries.

Comparativists Who Understand
By way of concluding my methodological observations, I highlight a few of the challenges of comparison that I mentioned earlier. The development turn of the late 1950s
and early 1960s reinforced a tendency that already existed in comparative educational
research: a great attention to context (culture, history, language) and a reluctance to
compare unless a strong case could be made for comparability of contexts. As Noah
mentions (Noah, 2006), the majority of articles in the journal of the US Comparative
and International Education Society (Comparative Education Review) are single-country
studies. Authors who do compare risk being criticized for being culture-insensitive or
for engaging in de-contextualized comparison.
Given the caution towards comparison, the question of comparability has taken on
monumental significance. Of course, nothing is comparable per se (Tilly, 1998; Ragin,
1997). Unless the researcher identifies a commonality, or more accurately constructs a
specific dimension against which two or more cases/contexts can be compared, comparison is ruled out. Establishing a tertium comparationis, that is, generating, justifying
and applying a construct against which two or more educational systems are compared,
has become one of the major preoccupations of comparative researchers. The tertium
comparationis changed over time. From a historical perspective, “civilization”, “modernization”, “development” and “democracy”, only to list the major constructs utilized
in North American comparative education research, has each served as an interpretive
framework or as tertium comparationis for justifying comparison across contexts or
cases, or – in early comparative education research – across national educational systems. The early comparativists, such as Sadler and Kandel, used civilization theory to

--- [PDF Page 1127 / Book Page 1152] ---

1154

Steiner-Khamsi

construct comparability. Groups, people and nations that were perceived to be at the
same stage of “civilization” were deemed comparable (Steiner-Khamsi, 2002; Welch,
2000). Since the newly formed nation states of the nineteenth century were supposedly
at the same (high) stage of civilization, the transatlantic transfer of educational models
was justifiable. Similarly, US and British researchers at the turn of the last century
believed that African Americans, Native Americans, and Africans (and later all colonized people in the British colonial empire) were regarded to be at the same (low) stage
of civilization. Since these groups were perceived to be comparable, transfer of educational models from one continent (North America) to another (Africa) was viewed,
methodologically and morally, as permissible. A good case in point is the transfer of
“adapted education” from Hampton and Tuskegee (schools in the segregated South
of the United States) to Achimota (colonial Ghana) in the 1920s (Steiner-Khamsi &
Quist, 2000).
There is a need to write a historiography of comparison that accounts for changing
notions of comparability. With the proliferation of indicator research in the 1980s and
1990s, development was framed in quantitatively measurable terms (HDI, GDP, GNP,
etc.). Arguably, the quantification of development makes the justification for comparison too easy for comfort. Coefficients tend to conceal, perhaps more than theoretical
concepts, the assumptions of a stage model which ranges from 0 (“not developed”) to 1
(“developed”). At the same time, we need to acknowledge positively that the vast number
of development indicators is evidence that definitions of development have become
diversified. Even though each and every international organization advances its own
stage model with regard to dimensions that matter to them (e.g., economic dimensions
for development banks, children and women’s rights for UNICEF, absence of corruption
for Transparency International, etc.), we lack a critical reflection of how data banks on
development and other indicators, established at each and every international organization, actively contribute to the construction of “development” or “under-development”.
As mentioned earlier, we have behind us more than two decades of growing skepticism about the place and purpose of cross-national and cross-contextual comparison
(Steiner-Khamsi, Torney-Purta & Schwille, 2002). Attacks against large-scale country
comparisons are not singular incidents. Furthermore, they are not carried out by cultural anthropologists only. Nor are these attacks exclusively directed to sociologists,
as the debates around world culture theory seem to suggest. However, these attacks
neglect the existence of researchers in comparative studies that simultaneously contextualize and compare. For example, Charles Tilly emphasizes, not only in his widely
read historical analyses of nation states (or “national states” as he labels them) and
citizenship, but also in his methodological contributions to comparative sociology and
history, the need to simultaneously examine intra-national and transnational interactions. He reminds researchers in comparative studies to explore the “causal stories”
that are embedded in each case or context and that rest on “different chains of causeeffect relations” (Tilly, 1997b, p. 50). To name one concrete example, his comparison
of several European “revolutionary situations” in the early 1990s, and his discussion
of the different political “outcomes” in these Central and Eastern European countries,
is one of his methodological masterpieces integrating cross-national comparison and
contextual analysis. For the research field of comparative policy studies in education,

--- [PDF Page 1128 / Book Page 1153] ---

Comparison: Quo Vadis? 1155

Tilly’s methodological approach helps us to understand why, in a given context, one
policy solution is selected over another and how external factors influence and are
woven into local politics.
In comparative education research, the group of scholars advancing contextual comparison has been quite productive. This group is very visible in one of the traditional
research areas of comparative education: cross-national policy borrowing and lending. Embedded in a theoretical framework of system theory (Luhmann, 1990), Jürgen
Schriewer and his colleagues propose to study the local context in order to understand
the “socio-logic” (Schriewer & Martinez, 2004, p. 33) of externalization. According
to this theory, references to other educational systems serve as leverage to carry out
reforms that otherwise would be contested. Schriewer and Martinez also find it indicative of the “socio-logic” of a system that only specific educational systems are used as
external sources of authorities. Which systems are used as “reference societies” and
which are not tells us something about the interrelations of actors within various worldsystems. I found the concept of externalization useful for comparative policy studies
as it enables us to understand how “global forces” are sometimes locally induced with
the purpose of generating reform on domestic developments (Steiner-Khamsi, 2004).
I found that it is precisely at a moment of heightened policy contestation that references to other educational systems, to “international standards in education” broadly
defined, or to globalization are made. I concluded that cross-national policy borrowing,
discursive or factual, has a certification effect on domestic policy talk. Teasing out the
interrelation between the local and global requires a bifocal focus that enables us to
investigate – in meticulous detail and across various policy levels – the local context, and
to simultaneously compare the particular case with other cases that had either a similar
or a different policy outcome. Comparativist after comparativist, from Michael Sadler to
Brian Holmes to Robert Cowen, warned against analyzing education out of context and
using comparison in ways that blindly advances cross-national policy borrowing. Robert
Cowen (2000) revisits Sadler’s hundred-year-old question: “What can we learn from the
study of foreign systems?” Cowen illustrates that, in practice, the comparative study of
educational systems has fuelled a “cargo-cult”, that is, a wholesale export and import
of educational models across national boundaries. Cowen is among a growing group of
researchers in comparative studies that insist on the need for more contextualized comparison. This group of researchers attempts to seriously challenge the contention that
those who compare do not understand, and those who understand do not compare.

Notes
1. It is important to keep in mind that the shift of comparative education towards single-country studies
did not necessarily occur in other countries and continents. In fact, the comparative education section
of the European Educational Research Association (EERA) excluded all abstracts and presentations
that lacked an explicit comparative dimension and delegated them to other sections of EERA. There
was a lively debate at the European Conference for Educational Research in Geneva (September 2006)
whether presentations dealing with one case only qualify for the comparative education section.
2. Study of Soviet education was the only area specific topic at the 1956 meeting. All other topics dealt
with theories, methods, or concepts of comparative education (see Campisano, 1988, p. 35; Brickman,
1966). George Z. Bereday was asked to compare education in the United States with Soviet education

--- [PDF Page 1129 / Book Page 1154] ---

1156

Steiner-Khamsi

(Bereday, 1957). The other three topics, scheduled by the co-organizers William Brickman and Gerald
Read, were: (1) the theoretical foundations of comparative education; (2) the current importance of
the subject as an area of study and research; and (3) an examination of definitions, aims, and values of
comparative education and the concept and general principles of comparison. The participants discussed
the practical applications of comparative education in the second half of the programme.
3. In 2005, 60 universities were eligible to administer Foreign Language and Area Studies (Title VI) fellowships. The budget for 2005 fiscal year was $28.2 million and 926 year-long fellowships and 635
summer fellowships were funded. The Title VI international education programs remained the largest
source of federal funding in which education is explicitly tied with national and global security. It is
followed by the Homeland Security fellowship (created in 2003) which disbursed $15 million and the
National Security Education Program with a budget of $8 million in 2005 (Glenn, 2005).
4. In 2002, the US army reported the “serious shortfalls of translators and interpreters in 5 of its 6 critical
languages” (Senate of the United States, 2006, p. 3): Arabic, Korean, Mandarin Chinese, Persian-Farsi
and Russian. The National Security Language Initiative is supposed to remedy the situation by producing 2,000 “advanced speakers of critical languages” by 2009 that could be employed by the US army,
intelligence and government offices (Liebowitz, 2006, p. B29).
5. Noah and Eckstein (1969) identify the following five stages in the development of comparative education: (1) travellers’ tales, (2) educational borrowing, (3) international educational cooperation, (4) studies
on society and schooling, including national character studies, and (5) social science foundation of comparative education. Noah and Eckstein have been criticized for their assertion that the early philosophical
and historical emphases of comparative education have been replaced with one devoted to the social
sciences, and especially for their enthusiastic endorsement of quantitative research methods in comparative education. Their historical account of the five stages is in line with what other scholars have
noted. Perhaps, their enthusiasm about the great potential of quantitative research could have been more
guarded, but – despite assertions to the contrary (Masemann, 2006; see also Steiner-Khamsi 2006, note
12) certainly there is no doubt that history and philosophy were the foundation of early comparative education research, and any other educational research for that matter, in the United States and in Europe.

References
Altbach, P. G. (1991). Trends in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 35(3), 491–507.
Anderson-Levitt, K. (ed.) (2003). Local meanings, global schooling. Anthropology and world culture theory. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Appadurai, A. (1990). Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy. In M. Featherstone (Ed.),
Global culture (pp. 295–310). London: Sage.
Atkinson, D. (1988). Soviet and East European studies in the United States. Slavic Review, 47(3),
397–413.
Baker, D. P., & LeTendre, G. K. (2005). National differences, global similarities. World culture and the
future of schooling. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Bassey, M. (2001). A solution to the problem of generalization in educational research: Fuzzy predictions.
Oxford Review of Education, 27(1), 5–22.
Bereday, G. Z. F. (1957). American and Soviet scientific potential. Social Problems, 4(3), 208–219.
Berg-Schlosser, D. (2002). Comparative studies: method and design. International encyclopedia of the
social and behavioural sciences, no. 4 (pp. 2427–2433). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Brainard, J. (2005). Defense Department hopes to revive Sputnik-era science-education program. Chronicle
of Higher Education, 51(36), A18.
Bray, M., & Thomas, R. M. (1995). Levels of comparison in educational studies: Different insights from different literatures and the value of multilevel analyses. Harvard Educational Review, 65(3), 472–490.
Brickman, W. W. (1966). Ten years of the Comparative Education Society. Comparative Education Review,
10(1), 4–15.
Camaroff, J., & Camaroff, J. L. (2001). Millennial capitalism: First thoughts on a second coming. In
J. Camaroff & J. L. Camaroff (Eds.), Millennial capitalism and the culture of neoliberalism (pp. 1–56).
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

--- [PDF Page 1130 / Book Page 1155] ---

Comparison: Quo Vadis? 1157
Campisano, C. J. (1988). The Comparative Education Review: Thirty years of scholarship. Ed.D. dissertation. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University.
Cowen, R. (2000). Comparing futures or comparing pasts? Comparative Education, 36(3), 333–342.
Cummings, W. K. (1989). The American perception of Japanese education. Comparative Education, 25(3),
293–302.
Ertl, H. (2006). Cross-national attraction in education. Accounts from England and Germany. Oxford:
Symposium.
Foster, P. (1998). Foreword. In H. J. Noah & M. A. Eckstein. Doing comparative education: Three decades
of collaboration (pp. 1–8). Hong Kong: CERC Studies in Comparative Education.
Glenn, D. (2005). Cloak and classroom. Many social scientists say a new government program will turn
fieldwork abroad into spying. Can secrecy coexist with academic openness? Chronicle of Higher
Education, 51(29), A14.
Hammersley, M. (2001). On Michael Bassey’s concept of the fuzzy generalization. Oxford Review of
Education, 27(2), 219–225.
Holmes, B. (1981). Comparative education: Some considerations of method. London: Allen & Unwin.
Kamens, D. H., & Benavot, A. (2006). World models of secondary education, 1960–2000. In A. Benavot &
C. Braslavsky (Eds.), School knowledge in comparative and historical perspective. Changing curricula
in primary and secondary education (pp. 135–154). Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research
Centre, University of Hong & Springer.
Kazamias, A. (2001). Re-inventing the Historical in Comparative Education: reflections on a protean episteme by a contemporary player. Comparative Education, 37(4), 439–449.
Kelly, G. P. (1992). Debates and trends in comparative education. In R. F. Arnove, P. G. Altbach & G. P.
Kelly (Eds.), Emergent Issues in Education: Comparative Perspectives. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Liebowitz, R. D. (2006). What America must do to achieve competence. Chronicle of Higher Education,
52(29), B29.
Luhmann, N. (1990). Essays on self-reference. New York: Columbia University Press.
Masemann, V. (2006). Afterword. Current Issues in Comparative Education, 8(2), 104–111.
Meyer, J. W., & Ramirez, F. O. (2000). The world institutionalization of education. In J. Schriewer (Ed.),
Discourse formation in comparative education (pp. 111–132). Frankfurt/M: Lang.
Noah, H. J. (2006). Video-recorded interview. In G. Steiner-Khamsi & E. M. Johnson, producers,
Comparatively speaking: The first 50 years of the Comparative and International Education Society.
New York: Teachers College, Columbia University and CIES.
Noah, H. J., & Eckstein, M. A. (1969). Towards a science of comparative education. New York:
Macmillan.
Office of Education (1963). Report on the National Defense Education Act. Fiscal year 1963. Washington,
D.C.: US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education.
Paulston, R. G. (1993). Mapping discourse in comparative education. Compare, 23(2), 101–114.
Phillips, D. (2004). Toward a theory of policy attraction in education. In G. Steiner-Khamsi (Ed.), The global
politics of educational borrowing and lending (pp. 54–67). New York: Teachers College Press.
Pratt, N. (2003). On Martyn Hammersley’s critique of Bassey’s concept of the fuzzy generalization. Oxford
Review of Education, 29(1), 27–32.
Przeworski, A., & Teune, H. (1970). The logic of comparative social inquiry. New York: Wiley.
Ragin, C. C. (1997). Turning the tables: How case-oriented research challenges variable-oriented research.
Comparative Social Research, 16, 27–42.
Ramirez, F. P. (2003). The global model and national legacies. In K. Anderson-Levitt (Ed.), Local
meanings, global schooling. Anthropology and world culture theory (pp. 239–254). New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Rosen, L. (2003). The politics of identity and the marketization of U.S. schools: How local meanings
mediate global struggles. In K. Anderson-Levitt (Ed.), Local meanings, global schooling. Anthropology
and world culture theory (pp. 161–182). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Schriewer, J. (1990). The method of comparison and the need for externalization: Methodological criteria
and sociological concepts. In J. Schriewer (Ed.), in cooperation with B. Holmes, Theories and methods
in comparative education (pp. 25–83). Frankfurt/M, Germany: Lang.

--- [PDF Page 1131 / Book Page 1156] ---

1158

Steiner-Khamsi

Schriewer, J., & Martinez, C. (2004). Constructions of internationality in education. In G. Steiner-Khamsi
(Ed.), The global politics of educational borrowing and lending (pp. 29–53). New York: Teachers
College Press.
Schriewer, J., Henze, J., Wichmann, J., Knost, P., Barucha, S., & Taubert, J. (1998). Konstruktion von
Internationaliltät: Referenzhorizonte pädagogischen wissens im wandel gesellschaftlicher systeme
(Spanien, Sowjetunion/Russland, China). [The construction of internationality: Reference horizons
of educational knowledge and social change]. In H. Kaelble & J. Schriewer (Eds.), Gesellschaften
im Vergleich. Forschungen aus Sozial- und Geschichtswissenschaften (pp. 151–258). Frankfurt/
M: Lang.
Senate of the United States (2006). New National Defense Education Act of 2006. Session of the Senate of
the United States, 13 June 2006. Accessed 2 July 2006: http://www.govtrack.us/congress.
Stambach, A. (2003). World-cultural and anthropological interpretations of “choice programming” in
Tanzania. In K. Anderson-Levitt (Ed.), Local meanings, global schooling. Anthropology and world culture theory (pp. 141–160). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2002). Re-framing educational borrowing as a policy strategy. In M. Caruso & H.-E.
Tenorth (Eds.), Internationalisierung – Internationalisation (pp. 57–89). Frankfurt/M: Lang.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2004). Conclusion. Blazing a trail for policy theory and practice. In G. Steiner-Khamsi
(Ed.), The global politics of educational borrowing and lending (pp. 201–220). New York: Teachers
College Press.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2006). The development turn in comparative education. European Education, 38(3),
19–47.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. & deJong-Lambert, W. (2006). The international race over the patronage of the South:
Comparative and international education in Eastern Europe and the United States. Current Issues in
Comparative Education, 8(2), 84–94.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. & Quist, H. O. (2000). The politics of educational borrowing: Reopening the case of
Achimota in British Ghana. Comparative Education Review, 44(3), 272–299.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. & Stolpe, I. (2006). Educational import. Local encounter with global forces in Mongolia.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Steiner-Khamsi, G., Torney-Purta, J., & Schwille, J. (2002). Introduction. Issues and insights in crossnational analysis of qualitative studies. In Steiner-Khamsi, G., Torney-Purta, J. & Schwille, J. (Eds.),
New paradigms and recurring paradoxes in education for citizenship: An international comparison
(pp. 1–36). Oxford: Elsevier.
Tilly, C. (1997). Means and ends of comparison in macrosociology. Comparative Social Research, 16,
43–53.
Tilly, C. (1998). Micro, macro, and megrim. In J. Schlumbohm (Ed.), Mikrogeschichte – Makrogeschichte:
komplementär oder inkommensurabel? (pp. 34–51). Göttingen: Wallstein.
Tsuneyoshi, R. (2004). The new Japanese educational reforms and the achievement “crisis” debate.
Educational Policy, 18(2), 364–394.
Welch, A. (2000). New times, hard times: Re-reading comparative education in an age of discontent. In
J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse formation in comparative education (pp. 189–225). Frankfurt/M: Lang.

