================================================================================
Chapter 72: Digital Technology and Education: Context, Pedagogy and Social Relations
Author(s): Andrew Brown
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1159–1172
PDF Pages: pp. 1132–1145 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1132 / Book Page 1159] ---

72
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY AND EDUCATION:
CONTEXT, PEDAGOGY AND SOCIAL RELATIONS
Andrew Brown

Introduction
Digital technology, and particularly information and communications technology, is
frequently, but rather obliquely, referred to in contemporary academic comparative
education. Most commonly the capacity to enable rapid international communication
and networking is invoked as a facilitating factor in the process of globalization, or
more generally as a key component in the formation of contemporary societies, be
they identified as postmodern, late-modern, post-industrial, knowledge-centred or
some variant of these. Very rarely, however, is sustained attention given to the characteristics and uses of these technologies themselves. This is a pity, since lack of critical
scrutiny can lead us to accept some questionable assumptions about what digital technologies do and can do in relation to education and society.
It is all too easy to get drawn towards utopian visions which, for instance, view
virtual worlds as new frontiers in which material constraints and physical oppression
can be cast aside in the creation of new digital democracies, throwing open access
and opportunity to disenfranchised and marginalized groups. Likewise, the virtual
dystopian complement of this, the potentially unbounded and unregulated moral and
cultural corruption of society, is equally easy to envision and elaborate. A comparative perspective, which by definition grounds and contextualizes activity, on the uses
of digital technology would caution and protect against the collapse into any single
unitary perspective. Comparison as an activity demands difference, diversity and, at
its best, dialogue, and as an academic activity requires explanation, understanding and
theoretical development. With respect to digital technologies, however, such academic
comparative scrutiny is largely absent.
This lack of specific attention to digital technology constitutes a further lost opportunity in the development of comparative education. Cowen (2006) argues that:
the academic field of study called comparative education must always deal with
the intellectual problems produced by the concept of context (the local, social
embeddedness of educational phenomena) and transfer (the movement of educational ideas, policies and practices from one place to another, normally across
a national boundary); and their relation. (Cowen, p. 561)

1159
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1159–1172.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1133 / Book Page 1160] ---

1160

Brown

The academic study of digital technology and education presents copious opportunities
to explore the pedagogic, social and cultural dynamics of embedded educational and
cultural practices, and offers an ever-expanding constellation of examples of the transfer of technologies and practices from one context to another. Above all else, it offers
rich opportunities for the exploration of the effects of re-contextualization, both as these
technologies and associated practices move from one context to another and as the
technologies themselves act as a conduit for the transfer of knowledge and the bringing
together of individuals and groups, and their pedagogic, cultural and social practices.
In the light of this, rather than address the local and global impact of digital technology
in general terms, in this chapter I will address a number of dimensions, and specific
instances, of the educational use of digital technologies in a range of contexts.
In planning and compiling the World Yearbook of Education 2004 (Brown & Davis,
2004), which addressed the theme of digital technology, communities and education,
Niki Davis and I focused on the uses of digital technologies by individuals and groups
in a variety of contexts, both in their own learning and in the creation of learning
communities and networks. As in this chapter, we worked with a broad conception
of digital technology, taking this to include both technologies for the production and
manipulation of digital artifacts, such as digital video and audio, and digital communication technologies and media, such as the internet and mobile telephony, signifying
a convergence of digital production and distribution. We also set out to explore the use
of digital technologies in a wide range of contexts, for instance in individual and collective activities, formal and informal educational settings, and economically rich and
poor communities. The resulting collection was correspondingly diverse in the perspectives adopted and the substantive focus of the papers, ranging from consideration
of the impact of digital technology on pedagogic modes and school curricula through
the technological augmentation of everyday cultural practices and economic activities
of children and adults to the extension of the locality, networks and community from
geographic into virtual space.
In this chapter I will take up some of the key themes explored and consider these
in the light of recent developments in practice. In particular, I want to explore the
relationship between the practice and its context in relation to the production and
reproduction of social relations in and through education, a distinctly sociological concern but not incompatible with Cowen’s framing of academic comparative education.
Engaging with digital technologies and their uses challenges our conceptions of what
constitutes a context (by, for instance, the facilitation of virtual communities) and,
though their capacity to act as a conduit within and between contexts, foregrounds the
need to understand the processes and effects of transfer.

Learning Technologies
Alexander’s (2001) international comparison of primary education in five countries
illustrates the complexity of the relationship between the practices of formal education
and the historical and contemporary political, social, cultural and economic conditions
of the societies in question. The organization of pedagogic spaces, modes of regulation,

--- [PDF Page 1134 / Book Page 1161] ---

Digital Technology and Education: Context, Pedagogy and Social Relations 1161

the content of the curriculum, student expectations, the construction of identities, the
recognition of achievement and so forth are interrelated, are shaped by a complex
of factors from the systemic to the individual level and vary across contexts. Digital
technologies present a number of challenges to these practices, but clearly, given the
manner in which practice is shaped in different contexts, these challenges take different forms and have diverse consequences.
As Kress (2004) has argued, the manner in which information is presented on the
screens of computers and portable digital devices, for instance, challenges existing
notions of literacy. As multi-modal forms of presentation and representation become
increasingly common, a demand grows for the facility to produce and interpret not
only linear written text, but also audio, digital still images, animation, video and so on.
The bringing together of these forms of representation into complex non-linear hypertexts further extends what we might consider to be basic communicative competence
in the digital age:
The media of the new screens provide, simultaneously, means for the production of text and for its dissemination. Given the facts of social diversity, the
disappearance, or attenuation, or absence of central power, and above all the
displacement of the state by the market as the telling source of power, there is
now no longer a canonical mode of representation. Rather, the characteristics
of the audience (now in any case no longer seen as citizens but as consumers),
their needs, wishes and their real or attributed desires move into the foreground.
Representational mode becomes a matter of design: does this group prefer image
or writing? Moving image or still? What ensemble of modes will serve best my
rhetorical needs vis-a-vis this audience? (Kress, 2004, p. 38)
The potential impact of digital technologies on schooling is itself multi-dimensional. The
incorporation of competences relating to the use of digital technology into the curriculum of the school clearly transforms the content of the curriculum, but more than this,
argues Kress, the productive potential of the creation of multi-modal texts demands the
radical revision of underlying models of learning from the reproduction of meaning to
the individual and collective production of meaning, from a curriculum based on transmission to a curriculum based on design. Furthermore, as Jewitt (2003) has observed,
the move away from the acquisition of ‘competences’ to the fostering of creativity and
innovation, with the consequent reshaping of the curriculum and of pedagogy, creates a
need for transformation of the practices of assessment within the school:
The multimodal reshaping of the construction of curriculum entities and the
practices of reading brought forth by the multimodal context of learning, in particular computer mediated learning, have important consequences for literacy
and assessment. There is a need to move beyond language in order to understand
the complexity of learning and literacy in the multimodal environment of the
classroom. Further, in order to assess what it is that is learnt assessment needs
to re-focus in order to attend to the full range of modes involved in learning.
(Jewitt, 2003, p. 100)

--- [PDF Page 1135 / Book Page 1162] ---

1162

Brown

In this way the use of digital technology both within and beyond the school has the
potential to provoke transformation in the curriculum, in pedagogy and in assessment
by virtue of the increasing importance given to multi-modal communication, and in
particular production, in contemporary schooling. Digital technologies can also be
incorporated into the school as pedagogic resources, and used in teaching and learning
across the curriculum (for instance, in the development of virtual and managed learning environments, the use of digital visual and audio production, the use of the internet
to access information and facilitate collaboration). Whilst much of the literature on
digital technology and education presents these transformations as necessities (a thinly
veiled form of technological determinism), there is marked variation at the level of
practice. This is unsurprising because, from studies such as Alexander’s, we already
understand that the practices of schooling are diverse and are the product of a complex
of influences. Digital technology and its associated practices and potentials, inside and
outside formal education, are made sense of, and incorporated into and transformed
by, systems of schooling in the context of this diversity and complexity.
Studies of the use of digital technology in specific contexts present a predictably
varied picture of the realization of this potential in practice. As part of Module 1 of
the Second Information Technology in Education Study (SITES M1), a survey of the
use of ICT in primary and secondary schools in 26 countries was carried out (Pelgrum
& Anderson, 1999). This revealed substantial variation in the extent to which new
technology was used in schools, and highlighted differences in access to new technology and variation in teacher knowledge as key factors in this. Module 2 of the study
(SITES M2) followed this up by collecting reports on innovative pedagogical practices
(locally defined and identified by national expert panels) from each of the participating
countries (Kozma, 2003). In her analysis of the resulting 130 case studies, Law states
that there is some evidence of a shift towards “more collaborative, student-directed,
enquiry-based and productive modes of learning” (Law, 2004, p. 151). This statement
is made, however, on the basis of examples of what could be considered by the expert
panels to be best practice and thus not necessarily representative of practice more generally. Grouping these cases into six activity types (ranging from innovative scientific
investigation and project work, through media production and online courses, to more
conventional task-based learning and expository teaching), Law then explores the role
played by the teacher and the pedagogic strategies they use.
The picture that emerges is that whilst there is evidence of substantial innovative
practice using new technology, in terms of the kinds of activities set, the role of the
teacher and the kinds of pedagogic strategies they use are somewhat more conventional. Law observes that whilst innovative practice is almost equally represented in
the case studies from the five regions covered by the study (the Americas, Eastern
Europe, Western Europe, Southern Africa and Asia), the distribution of innovative
pedagogy varies markedly. From this she suggests that whilst the dissemination and
transfer of activity types between regions is relatively well established, the transformation of pedagogic practices or teacher roles is somewhat less common and more
difficult in practice. These, it could be suggested, are less prone to change as they
are tied to both the professional identities of teachers and local pedagogic cultures.
The range of what is pedagogically possible in one region, or country, or school, for

--- [PDF Page 1136 / Book Page 1163] ---

Digital Technology and Education: Context, Pedagogy and Social Relations 1163

instance, in making the transition from predominantly didactic forms of pedagogy to
more facilitative approaches, can be very different from another. The next phase of the
SITES study (Plomp, Pelgrum & Law, 2007) includes exploration of the factors within
and beyond school that might act to shape pedagogical practice and the use of digital
technology in the classroom, and the contextual factors amongst these that might dispose teachers and schools to innovative practice.
In wide-ranging and large-scale multinational studies such as SITES, it is difficult to explore the relationship between digital technology, pedagogic practice and the
impact on student attainment in any meaningful way (given the diversity of forms of
schooling). Some sense of this relationship can be gathered from more detailed and
nuanced studies in specific, more limited contexts. Take, for instance, the evaluation
of the use of interactive whiteboards in London schools, carried out by Moss and colleagues (2007). Substantial investment has been made in the provision of interactive
whiteboards in schools in economically wealthy countries. These enable teachers to
develop teaching materials that incorporate multi-modal resources (including image,
sound and movement) and to use these interactively with classes of students. Moss and
colleagues set out to ascertain the impact of large-scale investment in this particular
pedagogic technology across London, focusing particularly on the process of learning and teaching, student and teacher motivation, student behaviour and attendance,
and standards of student attainment in core curriculum subjects. In this study, once
again, the manner in which the technology is used in teaching is highly variable, with
the most innovative practice being most evident in the practice of those leading in the
introduction of the technology.
In assessing the potential of this technology to transform pedagogy, the researchers
observe that this depends on what the teachers think it is for. They find that teacher
thinking about interactive whiteboards revolves around the potential for greater pace of
delivery, increased multi-modality of teaching resources and a more interactive form of
class teaching. However, the extent to which pedagogic change can be fostered depends
on how deeply the technology is integrated into the pedagogic approach adopted and
how the facilities offered by the technology relate to established forms of pedagogy in
the classroom and the character of the particular subject area being taught. Put simply,
speed of delivery, or the use of a variety of forms of representation, may or may not
be beneficial in the learning and teaching of particular aspects of particular subjects.
The potential of the technology thus relates to the existing pedagogic practices and
to the pedagogic cultures and curricular content of the area being learnt and taught.
Whatever the perceived potential and observed practice, the research was unable to
find evidence of any relationship between student attainment in the core curriculum
subjects and increased use of interactive whiteboards in the year of the study.
The point here is that, again, the form of realization of this digital technology in
practice relates to the context in which it is embedded. As the technology moves from
place to place, its meaning changes. The technology itself is both re-contextualized and
re-contextualizing. Kress and colleagues see digital technology as transforming modes
of representation and communication and, through this, demanding a transformation
in our models of learning and practices of education. In the practice of formal, and
informal, education these technologies and their usage are radically contextualized,

--- [PDF Page 1137 / Book Page 1164] ---

1164

Brown

and, as international studies such as the SITES studies and more localized studies,
such as Moss and colleagues, demonstrate, factors such as the pedagogic culture of a
context (at any level from a system to a specific classroom), the skills and understandings of teachers and the expectations of the students act to shape what is possible and
lead to a diversity of practices, which conform and diverge in varying degrees from
any imagined ideal. There is more to be understood, though, than the dynamics of the
contingency of practice. These practices have social consequences and potentials, and
to explore these I want to shift attention from one side of the pedagogic relation to the
other and to look at the engagement of learners (though a neat distinction between
teachers and learners can sometimes be difficult to sustain over time), with a particular
interest in the strategies by which differentiation is achieved. I will also shift attention
from the physically defined settings of schools and classrooms to virtual pedagogic,
and other, settings.

Pedagogic Spaces
Changing modes of communication and representation do not necessarily attenuate
the tendency of education to produce and reproduce social and cultural differences
in the distribution of attainment and life chances. Gino’s (2006) study of visual communication in an economically deprived urban neighbourhood in Israel, for instance,
has explored the manner in which children from three culturally diverse groups living
in close proximity draw on their distinct cultural histories in making and interpreting
images. These children inhabit the same physical neighbourhood, but in their everyday
lives have limited opportunities for interaction with children from the other communities. Visual communication, and in particular the making of images to represent
aspects of their experience of living in the neighbourhood, can be seen as offering
an opportunity to share experiences and perspectives and the creation of a common
space and mode of communication that bypasses linguistic differences. However, the
cultural differences between the groups give rise, despite working together to construct
and share their work, to very different kinds of image, not only at the level of visual
conventions, but also in terms of what can be represented.
The move to the visual here could be seen as reinforcing rather than attenuating
cultural difference. This raises interesting questions with respect to the potential of
computer-mediated multi-modal representation, both in relation to learning to make
sense of a diversity of forms of text (where and how might this take place?) and the
potential of intercultural communication (to what extent do online communities, with
ready-at-hand shared communicative practices and understandings, reinforce divisions constructed and played out in neighbourhoods such as these). Here we have three
communities in a tightly bounded physical space with shared common resources and
experiences, but whose networks of identification are defined elsewhere and stretch
beyond this setting. Online communication offers different possibilities, by virtue, for
instance, of its dominant visual conventions, to each group, and both provides the
potential to evade, for better or for worse, interaction with other groups prominent in
their physical neighbourhood, and to reinforce existing social, cultural and, ultimately,
economic differences.

--- [PDF Page 1138 / Book Page 1165] ---

Digital Technology and Education: Context, Pedagogy and Social Relations 1165

A study of three secondary schools serving distinctly different communities in
post-apartheid South Africa by Dowling and Brown (in press) explores the relationship between the characteristics of a community (including the culture and practices
of students and parents, and the positioning of schooling and teachers in relation to
this community and its aspirations) and pedagogic practices and relations within the
schools (including the layout of classrooms, the use of texts, the modes of interaction
between students and teachers, and the teaching and learning strategies of teachers
and students). How school students position themselves in relation to their immediate
locality and community, and how they envisage their future trajectories in relation to
these communities clearly has an impact on their orientations to virtual communities
and networks.
The school students at a predominantly white school located in a wealthy suburb, for
instance, saw themselves as part of a global network and held aspirations that extended
across this network (which was consistent with the aspirations and identifications of
the school). In contrast students at a predominantly black African township school
identified more strongly with their immediate community, but those that sought to
leave this community (including teachers who aspired to pursue other careers) saw
individual effort, within a supportive community, in formal education as the means to
achieve this (Dowling & Brown, in press). Whilst this study does not concern digital
technology directly, it does demonstrate the complex relationship between community
and pedagogic practice in a way that might lead us to think carefully about assuming
that virtual spaces are socially and culturally neutral, and to consider how they might
act as contexts for the production and reproduction of social inequalities as do physical
pedagogic spaces and practices.
Doherty (2006) provides an illustration and analysis of the complexity of projecting pedagogic practices and attendant assumptions, from one culture to one or more
others, by way of an online distance education programme. This study focuses on
an MBA unit offered internationally by an Australian university. In designing this
online course, care was taken to respect the cultural identities of the participants, and
to treat the diversity of experiences and perspectives of the participants as a pedagogic
resource, for instance, in setting up small group discussions around the workplace narratives of the members of these, deliberately formed, culturally diverse groups. This in
itself presents a paradox that is difficult to manage. Individual members of the groups
become privileged informants on, and thus heavily identified with, sets of culturally
marked localized practices. This representation of self through the abstraction and
re-description (for an international audience) of workplace experience clearly bears
the danger of defining individuals and groups in relation to the dominant culture or
cultures of the programme. It can also lie in tension with the aspirations of participants
who have made a positive commitment to enrol on an ‘international’ programme as
a means of extending or supplementing their cultural identities and gaining access to
what they might see as being a potentially valuable international or global discourse.
Other ‘troubles’ identified by Doherty more predictably revolve around sometimes
systemic assumptions of cultural homogeneity, like the ethnocentric default naming
conventions in the virtual learning environment, the presumption of knowledge of textual conventions in assessed coursework and the effects of time/space displacement on

--- [PDF Page 1139 / Book Page 1166] ---

1166

Brown

provision of feedback to participants. Though Doherty’s analysis – and related work on
international programmes, such as Singh and Doherty (2004) – goes further than this,
the main point to be made here is that online courses in virtual settings are as much
party to the play of pedagogic, social and cultural identities as any localized, located
and demarcated face-to-face educational programme. Indeed, they may provide particularly fruitful contexts for the further development of the ‘sociology of pedagogy’
(Singh & Luke in Bernstein, 1996, p. xiii).
Collis (2006), in a collection of papers exploring “the patterns and dynamics of the
network society in its policy dimension” (Castells & Cardoso, 2006, p. xix), considers the transformation of education in corporate, professional and higher education
settings in the light of the shift to a knowledge economy. She focuses particularly
on the potential of e-learning to support productivity in a situation where, citing a
New Zealand Ministry of Economic Development statement on the skills needed to
sustain contemporary knowledge economies, ‘know-why and know-who matters more
than know-what’ (Collis, 2006, p. 216). Though this clearly echoes a long-standing
aspiration of broadly progressive forms of education, Collis observes that much of the
practice in e-learning, in which digital technology is used in the management and delivery of education and training, particularly in corporate settings, works in a contrary
direction by delivering de-contextualized fragments of knowledge through depersonalized managed learning environments. Collis presents a number of counter-examples
in which digital technology, in particular the use of Internet-based resources, online
interaction and digital repositories, has and could be used to foster corporate crossdisciplinary knowledge building and sharing, the development of physically remote but
mutually supportive professional communities of practice and modes of assessment in
higher education that foster reflection, sharing and cumulative knowledge building.
It is notable, however, that once again whilst digital technologies are presented
as key drivers of the development of the knowledge economy, the conditions for the
appropriate and productive use of digital technology in education are far from in place.
The productive use of electronic portfolios in higher education, for instance, is seen
as requiring greater institutional investment, flexibility of accreditation bodies, reform
of the practices of lecturers and transformation of the expectations of students. As
Selwyn (2007) has observed, the gap between the aspirations of advocates of educational technology, like Collis, and the current limited, rigid and constrained usage
of digital technology evident in higher education is not easily breeched. The use of
digital technology in higher education is, Selwyn argues, shaped by a range of forces
at various levels within the system, from governmental concern with global economic
competitiveness, through the ‘new managerial’ concerns of university administration
and the commercial interests of the software, hardware and system providers to the
experience, interests and concerns of university students. The development of productive engagement with digital technology in formal higher education from this
perspective thus requires macro and micro political engagement if the aspirations of
educational technologists are to be realized.
Whilst schools and higher education institutions struggle to incorporate creative and
flexible uses of digital technology and establish programmes in which the collaborative co-production of knowledge is ostensibly prioritized over transmission, there are

--- [PDF Page 1140 / Book Page 1167] ---

Digital Technology and Education: Context, Pedagogy and Social Relations 1167

communities of physically dispersed agents, collectively and productively engaged in
the co-construction of knowledge, collaborative activity and the sharing of information and strategies thriving, to varying degrees, on the Internet. Most notable are the
flourishing informal communities based around shared interests, such as fans of a particular television programme or computer game, or those with an interest in particular
technological, cultural or political activities, or shared identities and practices. These
communities do not, however, escape the play of cultural and social capital that marks
similar endeavours in the ‘space of places’.
In a study of Internet fan sites, Whiteman (2006) explores the manner in which
authority is established and maintained in online interaction. Far from being open to
the free play of positions, perspectives, voices and identities, these sites, though highly
productive in the exchange of ideas and information and in the production of commentary on their specialized, and related, areas of interest are highly regulated in and
through the contributions made by participants. The strategies deployed by participants
act to establish a range of possible legitimate identities and positions mark out who
can say what in which settings. The strategies can be viewed as pedagogic in that they
act to induct participants into particular modes of engagement and interaction in addition to producing and reproducing knowledge about their chosen area of interest. In
conducting the research, Whiteman deploys a broadly comparative strategy in that she
looks at two distinctly different sites (though how they might be distinguished beyond
surface description is as much a product of the analysis as a starting point). One site,
City of Angels (COA), is dedicated to the US television series Angel and the other site,
Silent Hill Heaven (SHH), concerns the Silent Hill series of videogames.
By analysing postings in a sample of the discussion lists, Whiteman explores how
authority and status are established in these fan communities, and the manner in which
affinity to particular objects is achieved and regulated. She identifies continuities and
discontinuities between the two sites, and is able to explore the different strategies that
are deployed by participants in the establishment of an online identity, in claiming
authority, in building and regulating a community, and so on. In each case a balance
between openness and regulation is achieved in what are ostensibly completely open
contexts. Each, however, has its own distinct culture and exhibits the deployment of
range of pedagogic strategies through which participants are inducted into appropriate behaviour, and are included, positioned and excluded (Whiteman, 2006). Though
not formally constructed as such, these are pedagogic spaces and within these spaces
social difference, relations and structures are produced and reproduced.

Digital Divisions
Access to digital technology is clearly not uniform within or between contexts. For
those who see digital technologies as a key contemporary educational resource,
the differential access to these technologies is a central concern in addressing what
is commonly seen as the ‘digital divide’, with relative wealth or poverty of access
clearly discernible between rich and poor communities, regions and countries. Whilst
access to these technologies is clearly an important issue, this chapter has attempted

--- [PDF Page 1141 / Book Page 1168] ---

1168

Brown

to establish that it is not the only issue in understanding, and addressing, social and
cultural inequity in, and beyond, education. The struggle to ensure more equitable
access to digital technology has to be accompanied by endeavouring to understand
how, through different modes of engagement with and through these technologies,
inequalities are (re)produced. Not to do so invokes the danger of the fetishizing of
technology, and the pursuit of access as a social project in and of itself.
This is evident in the One Laptop per Child (OLPC) project, initiated by Nicholas
Negroponte and other faculty of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media Lab.
The aim here is to develop a low-cost laptop computer that can be widely distributed
to children in both the ‘developed’ and ‘developing’ worlds (see http://laptop.org). The
laptop and its software have been developed, it is claimed, to exemplify a ‘constructionist’ approach to learning and thus facilitate ‘learning learning’. Though it is claimed that
this is an education not a technology project, the development of the laptop, rather than
the principles of its use, have been to the fore. This project has not been universally well
received. The Government of India, for instance, turned down the offer to participate
on the basis that it would divert funds away from more established needs (The Hindu,
Tuesday 25th July, 2006). Others have argued that, with even small amounts of money
able to make a distinct difference to life chances in desperately poor parts of the world,
through, for instance the provision of fresh water and vital medication, this effort is misplaced. Aside from this, the project itself has run into a number of problems relating to
the production of the technology to specification and budget and relating to assumptions
made about the conditions in which people live, difficulties in meeting the costs of running the machines and the provision and maintenance of basic infrastructure.
The very assumption that the provision of a laptop (or, in this case, a simplified
device that bears only limited similarity to a commercial laptop) and selected software
(though not, in this case, established business and educational software) will make a
substantial contribution to the educational and life prospects of the school students in
this vast array of social, economic and cultural circumstances, is itself open to serious
question. Even in classrooms in the USA, doubt has been cast by researchers of the
value added by giving one-to-one access to laptops. For example, Dunleavy, Dexter
and Heinecke (2007), in a study of two middle schools, found that a one-to-one ratio
of laptops to students in the classrooms studied did not automatically add value, and
suggested that the high cost and the management challenges presented to teachers by
the provision of laptops creates a demand for thorough professional development to
ensure that teachers are able to create and manage appropriate learning environments.
This does not necessarily mean giving up on digital technology in all but the most
economically privileged circumstances (and thus opening the divide further). An
alternative strategy is to select and deploy digital technologies in a way that is more
carefully attuned to the specific context and circumstances of their use. In the light of
the studies cited so far in this chapter, a focus on teacher development would seem
to be particularly valuable. Leach and Moon (2002) explore the ways in which digital technologies can be deployed in the education of teachers in wider attempts to
reform schooling and to meet national and international objectives, such as universal
primary education. They present a number of examples from contexts ranging from
poor rural communities in sub-Saharan Africa attempting to rebuild education in the

--- [PDF Page 1142 / Book Page 1169] ---

Digital Technology and Education: Context, Pedagogy and Social Relations 1169

face of war and disease to urban schools in rich Western countries attempting to provide for increasingly linguistically, culturally and economically diverse populations.
In all cases, the creation and maintenance of a sufficiently large teaching force with
appropriate knowledge and professional skills are seen as key challenges, which digital technologies and new approaches to teacher education can help to meet.
The strength of the approach proposed and of the examples given is the contextual
sensitivity and appropriateness of the interventions. In many cases conventional forms
of teacher education are themselves not feasible, given the scale of the enterprise and
the levels of resources available. In these settings, the use of communications technologies to facilitate teacher learning and networking can enlarge the possibilities for
teacher development far beyond the conventional investment in buildings and other
physical facilities that concentrate resources in one area thus creating distance between
professional development activities and the context of their eventual realization.
The Digital Education Enhancement Project (DEEP) is one such research and
development project which focuses on the use of digital technologies in fostering the
development of the pedagogic knowledge and practice of teachers, and exploring the
impact of technology enhanced strategies on the motivation and achievement of school
students, in 12 schools in the city of Cairo in Egypt and 12 schools in towns and rural
areas of the Eastern Cape Province in South Africa. As part of this, Leach and Moon
(2004) explored the use of handheld computers by teachers in this project, finding
that these small, portable, flexible and easy to use devices became easily integrated
into teachers’ daily workflow and had a substantial impact on teacher professionalism,
organization and planning, collaboration and shared learning, the development of new
classroom practices and the self-esteem of teachers. Studies such as this give some
indication of the potential of new technologies in teacher education and development.
It should be clear, though, that the outcomes are not a function of the technology but
of its interaction with contextual factors in the setting within which the technologies
and their related practices are embedded. This means not only that care has to be taken
in assuming that these technologies/practice can be transferred elsewhere to similar
effect, but that the perceived effectiveness of the intervention itself is likely to be transitory as, for instance, the technology takes on new social and cultural meanings over
time, and as other conditions change.

Conclusion
Digital technologies are viewed as enabling rapid communication across distances.
They enable the production and distribution of information and digital artifacts, in
the form of text, graphics, sound and video. As these artifacts move from one place to
another, whilst their form might remain stable (or might not), their meaning, potentially, transforms as they shift from one system of signification to another, and as they
are read and reread by different agents bringing different meanings and understandings
to their interpretation. This is nothing new, and indeed is the stuff of that strand of academic comparative education which attempts to understand the relationship between
systems and practices through addressing, for instance, the borrowings, transfers and
translations between one system and another. So practices associated with child-centred

--- [PDF Page 1143 / Book Page 1170] ---

1170

Brown

education in England, such as the public display of individual children’s work as a way
of celebrating individual achievement and encouraging collective endeavour, come to
mean something very different when transferred to the classrooms of rural Indonesia.
This re-contextualization constitutes a transformation as practices are plucked from
one network of meaning, or culture, and replaced in another.
Viewed in this way, these practices cannot be understood as having a given essential
meaning, but rather can only be understood in relation to the context of their realization. The movement of digital artifacts from one context to another can also be
understood in the same way. The spaces through and in which they travel are, however,
virtual as well as geographical (and the ‘and’ here is of central importance). It is not
just the digital texts and artefacts, though, which meet this fate; it is also the digital
technologies themselves.
The emphasis in this chapter has been on understanding digital technologies and
their educational usage, both formal and informal, in relation to the contexts in which
they are embedded. These contexts can themselves be embedded in other contexts.
Individual schools, for instance, are embedded in particular groupings (defined, for
example, by the ages of the school students, modes of funding, geo-political location
and so on) within particular systems of education (defined, for example, in terms of
nation or region or trans-national network of interlinked or associated institutions and
so on). Each higher level of organization acts to provide a reservoir of meaning potential for its constituent parts, which in turn, through the realization of this higher level
as a repertoire of instances, enables us to describe, understand and explain its characteristics. Classrooms thus have to be understood in relation to the systems in which
they operate, and in turn act to constitute the system as instances of it. This relationship
operates at any level from individual action to trans-global systems.
The formal and informal pedagogic spaces that have been considered in this chapter
are clearly not socially neutral. Just like any material setting or community, virtual
settings and communities are marked by the play of social and cultural capital, and
through this patterns of social relations are produced and reproduced. Whilst the shift
from reproduction of knowledge and artifacts to production and dissemination that is
facilitated by digital technology can be seen as potentially subverting formal educational institutions, in practice existing patterns of social and cultural relations and their
associated practices act against this. The perceived need, for instance, to train teachers
and students to use specialized technologies in particular ways is one example. This
inverts the notion of transformation of education by new technologies by reading these
technologies as requiring new competences, of teachers and students, which must be
acquired before they can be used effectively in pedagogic settings. This creates potential deficits and patterns of distribution of competence, and thus inclusion and exclusion
and success and failure in the use of technology in particular sanctioned ways.
Increasingly, the technologies themselves are already part of the everyday experiences of students and teachers. These technologies are not, however, equally part of
the everyday lives of all students (and so the degree of resonance between the culture,
practices and common competences of, for instance, the home and the school will
vary), nor are the material and symbolic resources (such as teacher knowledge and
expertise) to be able to incorporate them into the curriculum equally available to all

--- [PDF Page 1144 / Book Page 1171] ---

Digital Technology and Education: Context, Pedagogy and Social Relations 1171

schools. Even if they were, the relationship between the cultures of the children and the
cultures of the school would be different. The framing of the ‘digital divide’ as being
predominantly about access to appropriate hardware and software fails to address this.
The OECD study carried out in 23 countries by Venezky and Davis (2002) noted that
schools were clearly aware of the potential inequalities that the use of digital technologies in schooling might cause, but the strategies to overcome this that they cite relate
only to helping low-income families to gain access to these technologies. The report
notes that few schools had data to enable them to monitor differences relating to gender, income or achievement.
None of these are determining relationships, but involve potential and meaning,
and thus, of course, entail facilitation and constraint. Much of the discussion of the
relationship between education and digital technology within and between contexts
confuses potential with practice and possibility with necessity. Consideration of
digital technology from a comparative perspective, which acknowledges the social
embeddedness of the phenomena with which it engages and seeks to understand what
happens as entities move or are manifest in different contexts, can help us to avoid, or
at least mitigate, these confusions and conflations. The disembedding, or rather re-contextualizing, potential of digital technologies also presents a challenge to comparative
education in questioning the utility of the boundaries constructed around contexts (for
instance, around national systems) and, indeed, constitutes a challenge to the very
notion of a boundary as elements from one context are projected into (and read and
reread) in others. Methodologically and conceptually, engagement with the uses of
digital technology in formal and informal educational settings provides an opportunity for the enlargement and further development of the productivity of a comparative
approach, both academic and applied.

References
Alexander, R. (2001). Culture and pedagogy: International comparisons in primary education. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Brown, A. J., & Davis, N. (Eds.) (2004). Digital technology, communities and education (World Yearbook of
Education 2004). London: Routledge Falmer.
Castells, M., & Cardoso, G. (2006). The network society: From knowledge to policy. Washington, D.C.:
Johns Hopkins Center for Transatlantic Relations.
Collis, B. (2006). E-learning and the transformation of education for a knowledge economy. In M. Castells
& G. Cardosa (Eds.), The network society: From knowledge to policy (pp. 215–224). Washington, D.C.:
Johns Hopkins Center for Transatlantic Relations.
Cowen, R. (2006). Acting comparatively upon the educational world: Puzzles and possibilities. Oxford
Review of Education, 32(5), 561–573.
Doherty, C. (2006). Pedagogic identities on offer in a case of online internationalised education. AARE 2005
International Education Research Conference, UWS Parramatta.
Dowling, P. C., & Brown, A. J (in press). Pedagogy and community in three South African schools: An iterative description. In P. C. Dowling (Ed.), Sociology as method: Departures from the forensics of culture,
text and knowledge. Rotterdam: Sense.
Dunleavy, M., Dexter, S., &. Heinecke, W.F. (2007). What added value does a 1:1 student to laptop ratio
bring to technology-supported teaching and learning? Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23(5),
440–452.

--- [PDF Page 1145 / Book Page 1172] ---

1172

Brown

Gino, J. (2005). Visual meaning making: Children’s texts for an intercultural Israeli neighbourhood.
Unpublished Ph.D. London: Institute of Education University of London.
Kozma, R. (2003) (Ed.). Technology, innovation, and educational change: A global perspective. Eugene,
OR: International Society for Technology in Education.
Kress, G. (2004). Learning: A semiotic view in the context of digital technologies. In A. J. Brown &
N. Davis (Eds.), Digital technology, communities and education (World Yearbook of Education 2004),
(pp. 15–39). London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Jewitt, C. (2003). Re-thinking assessment: Multi-modality, literacy and computer-mediated learning.
Assessment in Education, 10(1), 83–102.
Law, N. (2004). Teachers and teaching innovations in a connected world. In A. J. Brown & N. Davis (Eds.),
Digital technology, communities and education (World Yearbook of Education 2004) (pp. 145–163).
London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Leach, J., & Moon, B. (2004). 4D technologies: Can ICT make a real difference in achieving the goal of
Universal Primary Education? Pan-Commonwealth Forum on Open Learning. Dunedin, New Zealand.
Leach, J. & Moon, B. (2002). Globalisation, digital societies and school reform: Realising the potential
of new technologies to enhance the knowledge, understanding and dignity of teachers. 2nd European
Conference on Information Technologies in Education and Citizenship: A Critical Insight. Barcelona.
Moss, G., Jewitt, C., Levaciç, R., Armstrong, V., Cardini, A., & Castle, F. (2007). The interactive whiteboards,
pedagogy and pupil performance evaluation: An evaluation of the Schools Whiteboard Expansion
(SWE) Project. DfES Research Report 816. London: DfES.
Pelgrum, H., & Anderson, R. (Eds.) (1999). ICT and the emerging paradigm for life long learning.
Amsterdam: IEA.
Plomp, T., Pelgrum, W. J., & Law, N. (2007). SITES2006–International comparative survey of pedagogical
practices and ICT in education. Education and Information Technologies, 12(2), 83–92.
Selwyn, N. (2007). The use of computer technology in university teaching and learning: A critical perspective. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23(2), 83–94.
Singh, P., & Doherty C. (2004). Global cultural flows and pedagogic dilemmas: Teaching in the global university ‘Contact Zone’. TESOL Quarterly, 38(1), 9–42.
Singh, P., & Luke, A. (1996). Foreword. In B. Bernstein (Ed.), Pedagogy, symbolic control and identity:
Theory, research, critique. London: Taylor & Francis.
Venezky, R. L., & Davis, C. (2002). Quo vademus? The transformation of schooling in a networked world.
Paris: OECD/CERI.
Whiteman, N. (2007). The establishment, maintenance and destabilisation of fandom: A study of two online
communities and an exploration of issues pertaining to internet research. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
London: Institute of Education University of London.

