================================================================================
Chapter 73: Rethinking Context in Comparative Education
Author(s): Michael Crossley
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1173–1187
PDF Pages: pp. 1146–1160 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1146 / Book Page 1173] ---

73
RETHINKING CONTEXT IN COMPARATIVE
EDUCATION
Michael Crossley

Concern with context penetrates to the heart of comparative education. It is reflected in
much of the early writing within the field, and it remains central to many contemporary
intellectual positionings, discourses and developments. Contextual issues are also central
to many of the most passionate theoretical and methodological debates that are to be found
in the research literature – past and present. Thus questions of context reveal much about
the history of comparative education, at the same time as they inspire and shape some of
the most challenging research and scholarship at the cutting edge of the field today.
This chapter explores the nature and implications of such debates, and of the contextual themes that play a strategic role in shaping the future of some of the most
innovative approaches to comparative and international education worldwide. This is
done with reference to developments that have made a significant contribution to the
evolution of research in comparative education, and to my own related work within this
multi-disciplinary field.

Historical Reflections and Paradigmatic Tensions
Tensions between positivistic forms of comparative research in education seeking
generalisable laws and predictions, and more hermeneutic/interpretive perspectives
developed to generate insights and improved understanding, can be traced back to
the intellectual foundations of comparative education as a specialist field of enquiry.
While details of this history can be readily found elsewhere (Brickman, 1960, 1966;
Wilson, 1994; Crossley & Watson, 2003), the implications of related paradigmatic
debates for contemporary innovation and creativity in both theory and methodology
repay careful reconsideration.
The seminal influence of Marc-Antoine Jullien’s “plan” for comparative education
in the Parisien intellectual climate of 1817, for example, established the positivistic foundations of the field with efforts “to deduce true principles and determined
routes so that education would be transformed into an almost positivist science”
(cited in Fraser, 1964, p. 20). For many Western writers Jullien is seen as the founding “father” of systematic research in what was, then, a new field. Jullien’s influence
is alive and well today where it is reflected in the efforts of international agencies,
such as UNESCO and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
1173
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1173–1187.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1147 / Book Page 1174] ---

1174

Crossley

(OECD), to produce annual collections of international education statistics to facilitate
global comparisons. It is also visible in the work of bodies such as the International
Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA) that has pioneered
cross-national achievement tests and the construction of international league tables
(Postlethwaite, 1999) – and in the OECDs own influential Programme for International
Student Assessment (PISA) surveys (OECD, 2004).
While there is much that can be learned from the current enthusiasm for cross-cultural
achievement studies, attention also needs to be given to their limitations and to the dangers of their misuse – be it unintended or not. Finland, for example, has consistently done
well in cross-national league tables, while South Africa has experienced disappointing
results. The visibility of such rankings can inform and inspire qualitative improvements,
but it can also prove to be damaging and unhelpful, as argued by Reddy (2005) in the
South African context – and, perhaps more surprisingly, as Simola (2005) points out for
Finland. What unites these two very different cases is attention to the limitations of largescale comparative surveys in taking adequate account of the influence of contextual and
cultural differences. Reddy (2005,p. 76) for example, argues that the potential benefits of
cross-national achievement studies will only be realised in South Africa if:
participating countries contribute more towards the shaping of such studies to
meet their own needs. The power relations inherent in cross-national research
also deserve greater recognition, and mechanisms need to be set in place to
help diminish these differentials. Information derived from multi-country studies
needs more careful analyses if it is to be relevant to specific local contexts … and
it is also important for the culture of the international organisations that promote
and coordinate such work to change so that they can better accommodate the
implications of different experiences and contexts.
Secondly, as Simola (2005) demonstrates, distinctive pedagogic assumptions and values
are embedded deep within cross-national achievement tests, and, somewhat ironically,
these often prioritise formalistic forms of teaching and learning that many educational
decision-makers and stakeholders claim to be challenging for being inappropriate for the
demands of the twenty-first century. Issues of context thus loom large if we are to better
understand the dilemmas that are associated with cross-national achievement testing, the
use of league tables and the dangers of their “backwash” effect (see also Dore, 1976 and
Little, 1997) upon pedagogic and professional cultures in education worldwide.
Returning to the historical and epistemological foundations of such debates, it can
be seen how concern for context also underpins one of the central questions faced by
comparativists in many fields and disciplines – that is, how can we best learn from
experience elsewhere? It was such questions that inspired challenges to Jullien’s
positivistic foundations for the field, and to nineteenth-century preoccupations with
the international transfer or “borrowing” of educational policy and practice (Phillips
& Ochs, 2004; Phillips & Schweisfurth, 2006). Michael Sadler’s widely acknowledged influence upon the emerging field of comparative education at the outset of the
twentieth century clearly reflected a challenge to such positivistic assumptions, and
represented a socio-political re-positioning that both recognised the dangers of the

--- [PDF Page 1148 / Book Page 1175] ---

Rethinking Context In Comparative Education 1175

uncritical international transfer of policies and practices, and highlighted the significance of context and culture in the development of education systems (Sadler, 1900;
Higginson, 1979; Sislian, 2003). In subsequent years leading comparativists such as
Isaac Kandel (1933), Nicholas Hans (1964), Vernon Mallison (1975) and Edmund
King (1979a) developed and applied their own distinctive approaches to comparative
research, consistent with the spirit of Sadler’s influence and the interpretive-hermeneutic paradigm. By the 1960s, however, a resurgence of “scientific” approaches to
research in the social sciences was evident in the Western literature. This favoured
quantifiable data that offered the prospect of law-like generalisations and the possibility of more robust educational planning and social engineering. Positivistic aspirations
were thus refashioned in the form of post-war contributions seeking to advance the
“science” of comparative education. Noah and Eckstein (1969) are well known for
pursuing such work in the United States, while in the United Kingdom, Holmes (1965,
1981) sought to advance the scientific model by promoting what he called the “problem approach” to social science and comparative education.
Interpretive and hermeneutic traditions, nevertheless, remained influential with many
comparativists, championed by writers such as Grant (1977), King (1989) and Kazamias
(2001). By the 1970s renewed rigour and enthusiasm were also stimulated by advances in
the “new sociology of education”, critical theory and qualitative approaches to research
in the social sciences. Stenhouse’s (1979) Presidential Address for the then UK Branch of
the Comparative Education Society in Europe (CESE) characteristically advocated greater
attention to case study informed by detailed qualitative fieldwork (see also Crossley &
Vulliamy, 1984/2006). At the time, this was seen to challenge current practice and preoccupations with policy, by opening up new units for analysis at the micro level, and
focusing the attention of researchers more firmly upon observed practice and the lived
experience of research subjects. For many observers this was seen to exemplify:
the change which has taken place since the 1960s in all aspects of social study
(including the study of education). “Phenomenological” or “locally significant”
dimensions of the educational scene are now given more attention in terms which
the prime participants would use. (King, 1979b, p. 1)
My own work contributed to such developments by arguing for greater attention to be
paid to local professional contexts in developing countries, as a way of challenging the
uncritical international transfer of curriculum reform strategies (Crossley, 1984). New
“voices” were thus increasingly being heard and, in combination with the influence of
critical theory, the politics of different discourses was increasingly recognised at all
levels of the research process. Masemann’s work on critical ethnography (1982) illustrates this well, and her CIES Presidential Address on “Ways of Knowing” (Masemann,
1990) drew direct attention to the significance of contextual issues in epistemological
debates concerned with the nature, characteristics and quality of comparative education. More could be said, but while it is not the intention to rehearse the details of
this history here, it is useful to observe how what came to be called the “paradigm
wars” inspired further methodological advances that both reflected and contributed
to major theoretical developments across the social sciences. A related overview of

--- [PDF Page 1149 / Book Page 1176] ---

1176

Crossley

such historical trends and their influence on comparative education is also provided
elsewhere (see Crossley et al., 2007). More pertinently for the present analysis, these
are all developments that in large part wrestled (and still do) with the place of context
in both theoretically and empirically orientated research and scholarship. It is to the
nature and significance of more recent intellectual developments, to the centrality of
context in such processes, and to their implications for the future of comparative and
international research in education that we now turn.

Reflections and Reworkings: Rethinking the Place
of Context in Comparative Research in Education
While tensions between positivistic and interpretive forms of comparative education
continue to influence the research landscape to the present day, the impact of critical theory, postmodern perspectives and other related epistemological and theoretical
positionings has been profound. Recent decades have experienced dramatic paradigmatic challenges and innovative “re-imaginings” for comparative education, as growth
in the research profile of the field has been spurred on by the intensification and impact
of globalisation worldwide (Crossley & Watson, 2003; Dale & Robertson, 2005).
This history may seem to be familiar territory for some readers, but by taking a
different view of events, the main thrust of this chapter is to argue that it is contextual
factors and increased awareness of their significance in both educational research and
educational change, that underpin many of the most significant developments of current times. This, in turn, points to the very real potential of comparative research in
education to contribute to increased understanding of such issues, by drawing upon the
field’s wealth of directly relevant experience. This can now be illustrated by revisiting
and reflecting upon selected paradigmatic shifts, and future possibilities, in greater
detail from this explicitly contextual perspective.
Perhaps, most obviously, it can be seen how qualitative researchers such as Stenhouse
and Masemann played a significant role in shifting the focus of comparativist’s attention away from a concentration upon both the nation-state context and the analysis of
policy at the macro level. Contributions to Crossley and Vulliamy’s (1997) volume
illustrate this well with reference to studies of education and international development that employ ethnographic, case study and other research strategies that access
the micro-level contexts of schools and communities throughout the South. While
such studies, and influential European research by Broodfoot, Osborn and colleagues
(1993, 2000, 2003), often combined local level context sensitivity with broader social
and political analyses, Bray and Thomas (1995) made a further contribution by highlighting the importance of multi-level analysis through the construction of a helpful
three dimensional theoretical model. In this model:
The authors observed that much research remained at a single level, thereby
neglecting recognition of the ways in which patterns at the lower levels in education
systems are shaped by patterns at higher levels and vice versa. (Bray, Adamson,
& Mason, 2007, p. 8)

--- [PDF Page 1150 / Book Page 1177] ---

Rethinking Context In Comparative Education 1177

Again, however, Bray and Thomas were advocating the juxtaposition and comparison
of different levels of context.
In a related series of developments, efforts to better understand local perspectives
and the voices and needs of practitioners helped to inspire the application of action
research and practitioner researcher strategies in comparative investigations – so reducing the extent of the gap between the researcher and the researched. Stuart, Morojele
and Lefoka’s (1997) study of classroom practice in Lesotho demonstrates the potential
of such forms of action research, and Choksi and Dyer’s (1997) reflections on their
collaborative research in India draw attention to the benefits to be gained from contextsensitivity generated through North–South collaboration. Influenced by writers such as
Freire (1971, 1982), Chambers (1994) and Kemmis (1997) the potential contribution
of participatory and practitioner approaches to comparative and international research
has become increasingly recognised by the academy as well as by governments,
development agencies and funding bodies. This has further stimulated the generation
of a variety of innovative models that include Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA)
(Chambers, 1994; 1995) and participatory action research (Selner, 1997). Paticipatory
approaches to research have thus become increasingly acknowledged for what they
can contribute to educational development and community empowerment in context.
Similarly, much of the rationale for the application of postcolonial perspectives
(Hickling-Hudson, 1998; Hickling-Hudson, Mathews & Woods, 2003) draws upon:
an interpretive approach blending history and epistemology in specified locations [that] is useful in showing how interwoven is the postcolonial present with
the colonial past. (Hickling-Hudson, 1998, p. 328)
Here concern is given to understanding the world from the perspective of the South,
the formerly colonised, the marginalised, from their own distinctive vantage points
– and informed by their own political and contextual sensitivities. Not surprisingly,
critical theory often informs such comparative research (Burns & Welch, 1992; Apple,
1993; Rizvi, 2004), inspired by a commitment to ensure that research plays a part in
challenging unequal power relations and in influencing the nature and direction of
change (Foucault, 1972; Habermas, 1978; Apple, 2001). A special issue of the journal
Comparative Education (Crossley & Tikly, 2004) explores such postcolonial possibilities for comparative and international research in education, reflecting upon this in the
light of a related critique of postmodern influences upon educational research.
Where both postcolonialism and postmodernism have much in common is in
their critique of globally orientated meta-theory and the assumptions of enlightenment science, along with their celebration of diversity, difference and context. To cite
Gadamer “all knowledge reflects the socio-historical contexts of its production” (cited
in Hammersley, 1995, p. 14). By drawing attention to the political and intellectual contexts of knowledge production and legitimation, researchers thus began to focus upon
the deconstruction of dominant world views and to explore the relationship between
politics, knowledge and power. According to Cowen (1996a, b) such advances came
late to the field of comparative education though there is now much work within the
contemporary literature to suggest that these influences are increasingly significant – if

--- [PDF Page 1151 / Book Page 1178] ---

1178

Crossley

somewhat indirect and marginalised from policy-making arenas. This need not be so,
however, as demonstrated by the edited collection by Ninnes and Mehta (2004) titled
Re-Imagining Comparative Education: Post foundational Ideas and Applications for
Critical Times; and work in progress, by Larsen and Mehta (forthcoming), exploring
the impact on education of the insecurities that have been generated in North America
by the events of September 2001. For present purposes, however, it is the contextual
sensitivities that engage with the philosophical foundations of post-modernist, postcolonial and post-structuralist thinking that are seen to have much to offer comparativists,
and it is selected research initiatives that capture elements of such potential that are the
focus of the next sections.

Changing Research Contexts, Emergent Trends
and New Possibilities
Despite the many and varied paradigmatic advances of recent decades the global
research context is currently one in which positivistic conceptions of the social sciences
are once again prioritised in many quarters. In the UK and United States, for example,
neo-liberal ideologies, combined with the interests of the state and managerialist
principles have had a powerful impact upon the nature and focus of research environments and processes (St.Clair & Belzer, 2007). Sustained critiques of social and
educational research have argued that too much work lacks a coherent body of theory,
is neither authoritative nor cumulative enough, and is often unhelpful for policy and
practice (Hargreaves, 1996; Kennedy, 1997; Hillage, 1998; Tooley & Darby, 1998). In
responding to this, policy-makers, research funders and other powerful stakeholders
have engaged with what Furlong (2004) refers to as the “big science” approach to
research-based evidence. This many see as silencing other approaches, most notably those qualitative strategies that have contributed most to the study of practice
in context. Vulliamy (2004) challenges the global impact of such trends with direct
reference to their implications for comparative education in his 2003 Presidential Address
for the British Association for International and Comparative Education (BAICE). In
doing so he points out how comparative researchers must now contend with:
growing international interest in systematic review methodology and its associated privileging of quantitative research strategies, such as randomised controlled
trials, in evidence-based policy. (Vulliamy, 2004, p. 261)
This is the intellectual and professional context in which many in the educational
research community – including comparativists – must now work. It is in the light
of this that possible ways forward are now considered, arguing along with Furlong
(2004,p. 343), that:
we need to defend a rich and diverse range of approaches to research, promoting
debate about quality within different sub-communities and encouraging open
discussion across epistemological and methodological boundaries.

--- [PDF Page 1152 / Book Page 1179] ---

Rethinking Context In Comparative Education 1179

Indeed, it is also argued that this is even more important in the arenas of cross-cultural,
international and comparative research – where differences in world views add significantly to the complexities, and ethical, political and contextual implications (Hayhoe
& Pan, 2001). In exploring possible ways forward the chapter now draws upon examples of innovative comparative research, along with aspects of my own work, that it
is suggested hold potential for future trajectories in context-sensitive comparative and
international research in education.
In looking to the future, reference is initially made to two related arguments that
help to draw a number of contextual themes together. Firstly, this revisits my own
concerns to “reconceptualise” comparative and international research in education
in ways that more effectively acknowledge the potential and limitations of different
approaches to, and modes of, comparative education (Crossley, 1999). Secondly, this
argument is developed along with efforts to encourage an increased “bridging of cultures and traditions” (Crossley, 2000; Crossley & Watson, 2003) within the field and
between, for example, paradigmatic and disciplinary positions, theoretical and applied
studies, policy and practice, micro, macro and other levels of analysis, the humanities
and the social sciences, studies of the past and the present and research in the North
and the South. It is argued that such efforts could do much to help to address many of
the challenges raised about the impact, authority and accessibility of educational and
social research that are noted above – and that this is possible even in contexts experiencing the difficulties and dilemmas generated by problematic changes in the broader
research environment.
Moreover, while this bridging process may encourage a blurring of boundaries
between constituencies, paradigms and personnel, this should not be seen as equating in any way to an intellectual or professional compromise or bland search for
consensus. Rather, as argued elsewhere (Crossley & Watson, 2003), it prioritises
and values the ongoing creativity and originality that the juxtaposition of different world views may generate – and, most pertinently here, improved awareness of
the implications of cultural and contextual differences. This “bridging” thesis therefore celebrates and values difference – and the potential of different comparative
educations – and applies comparative perspectives and processes to generate new
creativity. Bakhtin’s understanding of such processes is helpful in this respect when
he suggests that:
A meaning only reveals its depths once it has encountered and come into contact
with another, foreign meaning. … We raise new questions for a foreign culture,
ones that it did not raise itself; we see answers to our questions in it; and the
foreign culture responds to us by revealing to us its new aspects and new semantic depths … such a dialogic encounter of two cultures does not result in merging
or mixing. Each retains its own unity and open totality, but they are mutually
enriched. (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 7)
In the light of this conceptual and theoretical positioning, much can be gained from
examples of ways in which recent comparative studies have been developed around
international collaborations between Northern and Southern research teams, while

--- [PDF Page 1153 / Book Page 1180] ---

1180

Crossley

linking theoretical scholarship with studies designed to inform policy and practice in
context. Three such research projects stemming from my own work over the last decade were carried out in collaboration with colleagues at the Universities of Bristol and
Bath, and personnel working within universities, colleges and ministries of education
in Belize, Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania.
The first study (1994–1999) was designed to document the nature and quality of
teaching and learning in Belizean primary schools – and to help evaluate the impact,
in practice, of the DFID funded Belize Primary Education Development Project
(BPEDP) (Crossley & Bennett, 1997). The second two-phase study consisted of the
formative and summative evaluation of the implementation of the Primary School
Management Project (PRISM), designed to train head teachers in leadership skills
in Kenya (1996–2000). This was combined with a reflective and historically situated
analysis (2001–2005) of the theoretical foundations of the project and its associated
research and evaluation strategies (Crossley et al., 2005). The third study (2000–2002)
examined the implications of globalisation for education and training policies in
Rwanda and Tanzania (Tikly et al., 2003).
For present purposes these initiatives can be seen to build cumulatively upon
each other. While each had a different substantive focus, all were funded by the UK
Department for International Development (DFID) and all prioritised improved stakeholder partnerships and process goals designed to contribute to the strengthening of
research and evaluation capacity within the South. From the outset, this was seen to
include ways of improving the context-sensitivity, and cross-cultural research skills
and experience of all involved – including the Northern partners.
The substantive findings of each specific study can be read elsewhere, but it can be
seen how they collectively demonstrate different dimensions of the bridging thesis in
practice. It is therefore the process goals and associated research strategies that are
most illuminating for present purposes. In all three cases the research was carried out
by international teams of researchers – emphasising long-term collaboration between
organisations and personnel in both the North and the South. This had the advantage
of combining insiders familiar with the cultural contexts involved, with outsiders who
can bring fresh and challenging perspectives – a strategy much commended in the
international literature (Spindler & Spindler, 1982). In the Belizean and Kenyan studies emphasis was also placed on involving practitioners in forms of participatory or
action research and evaluation. This is consistent with Delanty’s (1997) proposal for
social research to be conceptualised as ‘discursive practice’, whereby problems are
democratically identified, defined and examined. In a related vein, Chambers, an advocate of participatory research in development work, calls for the researcher’s role to be
transformed in similar ways so that:
[f]rom planning, issuing orders, transferring technology and supervising, they shift
to convening, facilitating, searching for what people need and supporting. From
being teachers they become facilitators of learning. (Chambers, 1994, p. 34)
In these three studies bridges were thus built between the North and the South, between
researchers, policy-makers and practitioners, and between insiders and outsiders. In

--- [PDF Page 1154 / Book Page 1181] ---

Rethinking Context In Comparative Education 1181

addition, all three studies were multidisciplinary in nature, provided research training that
bridged paradigmatic boundaries, incorporated macro and micro levels of analysis and
located contemporary policy critique within a thoroughly researched historical framework. Finally, each of these studies usefully illustrates the possibilities and dilemmas that
are encountered when efforts are made to investigate development issues with increased
sensitivity to what Arnove and Torres (2003) call the “dialectic of the global and the local”.
In this respect we can see how these initiatives, designed partly to help strengthen local
research and evaluation capacity, are firmly grounded in perspectives that are at the heart
of disciplined and context sensitive comparative and international research.
Today the influence and potential of such collaborative approaches to research
are being explored further in the form of a new DFID funded Research Programme
Consortium (RPC) led by Leon Tikly, Angeline Barrett and colleagues (www.edqual.
org/.). This focuses upon studies designed to help improve the quality of education in
low income countries, and the mode of operation continues to foreground long-term,
international partnerships and research capacity strengthening (Crossley, 2006).
A second area where an increased focus upon context holds considerable potential
for future comparative research relates to the work of a parallel DIFD-funded RPC
focused upon access to education (www.create-rpc.org), and to the earlier discussion of cross-national achievement studies and associated league tables. In a recent
BAICE Presidential Address, Lewin (forthcoming) draws upon the initial work of the
Sussex-led RPC on “Access to Education for All” and demonstrates how improved
understanding of such issues can be gained from innovative uses of statistical data sets
in ways that draw attention to, rather than mask, local variations and contextual differences. To quote Lewin’s (forthcoming) concluding remarks:
[A]s the EFA processes have unfolded, at least in the poorest countries and those
most dependent on external assistance, convergence in diagnosis and prescription has overshadowed more and more divergence in context and patterns of
exclusion. If this persists it is at least arguable that progress will be hampered by
homogenised goals and targets applied without much contextual grounding or
dynamic relationship to changing circumstances.
Indeed, by paying close attention to context, this statistically oriented research helps to
indicate how quantitative and qualitative research can make complementary contributions that have important potential for policy critique and development, and for the
advancement of theory – in this case relating to school access and retention, and to the
pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals.
Similarly, the critique of cross-national achievement tests, the use of league tables
(of all types and in all sectors of society), and target setting, deserves increased attention
from the comparative social sciences – ideally incorporating mixed method (Osborn,
2004) collaborations between quantitative researchers and qualitative personnel
attuned to contextual implications. Goldstein (2004, p. 13), for example, draws upon a
distinguished career in statistical methods but engages with comparative critique and
context sensitivities in a most challenging way when he argues that organisations such
as UNESCO should challenge their:

--- [PDF Page 1155 / Book Page 1182] ---

1182

Crossley

current orientation … which appears to derive from official philosophies of target setting and centrally determined “benchmarks” which have prevailed within
certain parts of the Anglophone world since at least the mid 1980s. Nevertheless,
from the perspective of those countries identified as likely to fail to meet current
targets, a locally contextualised perspective would seem to offer more potential for
improvement. It is, after all, just those countries that are in most need of help.
In reflecting upon the significance and impact of the IEA studies, Goldstein (1996,
p. 126) holds similar sentiments, calling for more careful and insightful studies of test
procedures, conclusions and implications and noting that:
when educational systems have different aims and curricula, interpretations of
student performance need to be related to such different contexts.
A third and final group of examples of innovative context-sensitive research can be
drawn from recent advances in the application of narrative research to comparative
studies. Trahar’s (2006) edited volume is one of the first books to explicitly address
such combinations, and the individual chapters make a valuable contribution to the
methodological debate, at the same time as they point to future possibilities. As Hayhoe
(2006, p. 9) argues in her Foreword to this volume … through narrative research:
people in different contexts share their thoughts and experiences about educational changes brought about through globalisation, and contribute to the
reconceptualisation of comparative research and notions of internationalisation
in ways that reflect their distinctive geopolitical locations.
Narrative approaches can thus build most effectively upon other qualitative traditions
that have already played a part in advancing interpretive and hermeutic research, but
it can also help to bridge such work with theoretical perspectives such as postcolonialism (Fox, 2006), and arts-based investigations in which story, poetry and other
forms of representation are used to understand context (see Holmes & Crossley, 2004).
Bainton (2007), for example, has recently completed doctoral research that developed
a “critical narrative” approach to explore the impact of Western education on indigenous knowledge in the Indian Himalayan region of Ladakh. In this highly innovative
study the researcher prioritised post-structural and narrative approaches, combined
with Buddhist philosophy, in order to interrogate the livelihood practices and educational experiences of rural communities in Ladakh. Here, his own experience living
and interacting with local farmers, sculptors, poets, priests and families, was the wellspring for policy critique and theoretical insights where:
[t]he productive tensions between the different aspects of the critical narrative
approach allows for a tentative comparative analysis of possible counter hegemonic
knowledge production. In this regard, Buddhist philosophy, as a form of “indigenous theory” is seen to offer new forms of critique while at the same time giving
a hopeful reading of the possibility of human agency. (Bainton, 2007, p. i)

--- [PDF Page 1156 / Book Page 1183] ---

Rethinking Context In Comparative Education 1183

In such research, the analysis of uncritical international transfer is central, and context
is both the focus and the methodology – context is the heart of the study itself.

Conclusions
Rethinking the place of context in comparative education, it is suggested, has much
to offer all engaged in both educational research and educational development.
Indeed, as Schriewer (2006a) has shown a “culturalist” approach can be identified
within comparative studies across the social sciences and has long “been geared
towards examining phenomena not in disjointed isolation but in terms of their
historical affiliation to, and dependence on, more encompassing societal and cultural contextual conditions” (Schriewer, 2006b, p. 1). Implications of the present
analysis, in turn, hold potential for future research trajectories in many fields and
disciplines across the social sciences. The year 2002, for example, saw the American
Sociological Association launch a new journal simply titled Contexts, designed to
take “sociological research out of its ivory tower and into a real world perspective”
(ASA, Contexts Brochure). In the realm of psychology, innovative and challenging advances by Rogoff (1990), Wertsch (1995) and Elliott and Grigorenko (2007)
reflect many comparative principles, by demonstrating how sociocultural theory
understands individual, personal growth as shaped by the cultural and social contexts in which it occurs. Similarly, in exploring future directions for global economic
development, the BBC Reith Lectures delivered by Jeffrey Sachs in 2007, also locate
increased contextual sensitivity at the heart of future international policy deliberations designed to reduce poverty, tackle climate change and prevent war (Sachs,
2007). Returning to the field of comparative education, Stromquist prioritises similar concerns for international equality and equity with implications for improved
linkages between stakeholders and constituencies. She argues that the influence of
comparative and international education:
is determined not only by its intellectual value but also by the proximity of its
practitioners to the circles of power. Those wielding influence are not academics
but rather the staff members of international organisations and their transnational
counterparts who subscribe to dominant, market-oriented development models
that are not substantiated by empirical research. (Stromquist, 2005, p. 107)
The future for comparative and international research across the social sciences will
therefore be exciting, challenging and increasingly engaged with the nature, role and
impact of context.
In this chapter new ways of exploring the significance and implications of context have
been explored, in the light of its long acknowledged place in research and scholarship
in this multi-disciplinary field. It is argued that further revisiting and rethinking of
such implications could make a significant contribution to the future of comparative
and international research in education. Vulliamy (2004), nevertheless, returns to the
paradigmatic issues discussed at the outset of this chapter and warns that:

--- [PDF Page 1157 / Book Page 1184] ---

1184

Crossley

A concern for sensitivity to cultural context has been a key part of the field of
comparative education in England – all the way from its pioneers … to current
exponents … Such a concern for cultural context also pervades sociological traditions underpinning the development of qualitative research … The challenge
for future comparative and international researchers in education is to harness
the symbiosis of these two traditions to resist the increasing hegemony of a positivist global discourse of educational research and policy-making. This global
discourse threatens to undermine the findings and analyses of comparative education research by either completely disregarding cultural context or relegating
culture merely to existing as an extraneous variable to be statistically analysed.
It is hoped that the critical reflections presented here help others to challenge the
uncritical international transfer of educational and social research paradigms and policies, that they contribute in some way to future directions for comparative education,
and that they help to demonstrate the extent to which “context matters” more than is
often realised, not only by policy-makers, but also by many researchers working in
education and across the social sciences.

References
Apple, M. (1993). Official knowledge: Democratic education in a conservative age. London: Routledge.
Apple, M. (2001). Comparing neo-liberal projects and inequality in education. Comparative Education,
37(4), 409–423.
Arnove, R. F. & Torres, C. A. (Eds.) (2003). Comparative education: The dialectic of the global and the
local (2nd edn.). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Bainton, D. (2007). Suffering development. Indigenous knowledge and Western education in Ladakh.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. University of Bristol, Graduate School of Education.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Response to a question from Novy Mir editorial staff. In C. Emerson & M. Holquist
(Eds.), Speech genres and other late essays. Translated by V. W. McGee). Austin, TX: University of
Texas Press.
Bray, M., Adamson, B., & Mason, M. (Eds.) (2007). Comparative education research: Approaches and
methods, Hong Kong Comparative Education Research Centre, University of Hong Kong: Springer.
Bray, M. & Thomas, R. M. (1995). Levels of comparison in educational studies: Different insights from different literatures and the value of multi-level analyses. Harvard Educational Review, 65(4), 472–490.
Brickman, W. W. (1960). A historical introduction to comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, 3(3), 1–24.
Brickman, W. W. (1966). The prehistory of comparative education to the end of the eighteenth century.
Comparative Education Review, 10(1), 30–47.
Broadfoot, P., Osborn, M., Gilly, M., & Bûcher, A. (1993). Perceptions of teaching. Primary school teachers
in England and France. London: Cassell.
Broadfoot, P., Osborn, M., Planel, C., & Sharpe, K. (2000). Promoting quality in learning. Does England
have the answer? London: Cassell.
Burns, R., & Welch, A. R. (Eds) (1992). Contemporary perspectives in comparative education. New York:
Garland.
Chambers, R. (1994). Participatory rural appraisal (PRA): Challenges, potentials and paradigm. World
Development, 22(9), 1437–1454.
Chambers, R. (1995). Paradigm shifts and the practice of participatory research and development. In
N. Nelson & S. Wright (Eds.), Power and participatory development: Theory and practice. London:
Intermediate Technology Publications.

--- [PDF Page 1158 / Book Page 1185] ---

Rethinking Context In Comparative Education 1185
Choksi, A., & Dyer, C. (1997). North-South collaboration in educational research: reflections on Indian
experience. In M. Crossley & G. Vulliamy (Eds.), Qualitative educational research in developing countries. New York: Garland.
Cowen, R. (1996a). Last past the post: comparative education, modernity and perhaps post-modernity.
Comparative Education, 32(2), 151–170.
Cowen, R. (Ed.) (1996b). Comparative education and post-modernity. Special Number of Comparative
Education, 32(2).
Crossley, M. (1984). Strategies for curriculum change and the question of international transfer. Journal of
Curriculum Studies, 16(1), 75–88.
Crossley, M. (1999). Reconceptualising comparative and international education. Compare, 29(3), 249–267.
Crossley, M. (2000). Bridging cultures and traditions in the reconceptualisation of comparative and international education, Comparative Education, 36(3) 319–332.
Crossley, M. (2006). Capacity strengthening and evaluation within international research collaboration.
A consultation paper for the DFID funded Implementing Quality Education in Low Income Countries,
Research Programme Consortium, University of Bristol: Research Centre for International and
Comparative Studies (5 January).
Crossley, M. (2006). Bridging cultures and traditions. Perspectives from comparative and international
research in education. Bristol: University of Bristol, Graduate School of Education (public lecture).
Crossley, M., & Bennett, A. (1997). Planning for case-study evaluation in Belize, Central America. In
M. Crossley & G. Vulliamy (Eds.), Qualitative educational research in developing countries. New York:
Garland.
Crossley, M., Broadfoot, P., & Schweisfurth, M. (Eds.) (2007). Changing educational contexts, issues and
identities: 40 years of comparative education. London & New York: Routledge.
Crossley, M, Herriot, A, Waudo, J, Mwirotsi, M, Holmes, K., & Juma, M. (2005). Research and evaluation
for educational development. Learning from the PRISM experience in Kenya. Oxford: Symposium.
Crossley, M., & Tikly, L. (Eds.) (2004). Postcolonialism and comparative education. Special issue of
Comparative Education, 40(2).
Crossley, M., & Vulliamy, G. (1984). Case-study research methods and comparative education, Comparative
Education 20(2), 193–207; republished in A. Sica (Ed.), Comparative methods in the social sciences,
vol III. London & Thousand Oaks: Sage (2006).
Crossley, M., & Vulliamy, G. (Eds.) (1997). Qualitative educational research in developing countries.
New York: Garland.
Crossley, M., & Watson, K. (2003). Comparative and international research in education. Globalisation,
context and difference. London & New York: Routledge Falmer.
Dale, R., & Robertson, S. L. (Eds) (2005). Globalisation and education in knowledge economies and knowledge societies. Special Issue of Comparative Education, 41(2).
Delanty, G. (1997). Social science: Beyond constructivism and realism. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Dore, R. (1976). The Diploma disease. London: Allen & Unwin.
Elliott, J., & Grigorenko, E. (Eds.) (2007). Western psychological and educational theory and practice in
diverse contexts. Special Issue of Comparative Education, 43(1).
Epstein, E. H. (1994). Comparative and international education: Overview and historical development. In
T. Husen & T. N. Postlethwaite (Eds.), The international encyclopaedia of education (2nd edn.). Oxford:
Pergamon.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge and the discourse on language. New York: Tavistock
Publications.
Fox, C. (2006). Stories within stories: Dissolving the boundaries in narrative research and analysis. In
S. Trahar (Ed.), Narrative research on learning. Comparative and International Perspectives. Oxford:
Symposium.
Fraser, S. E. (1964). Jullien’s plan for comparative education 1816–1817. New York: Bureau of Publications,
Teachers’ College, Columbia University.
Freire, P. (1971). Pedagogy of the oppressed. London: Penguin.
Freire, P. (1982). Creating alternative research methods: learning to do it by doing it. In B. Hall, A. Gillette
& R. Tandon (Eds.), Creating knowledge: A monopoly? Participatory research in development.
New Delhi: Society for Participatory Research in Asia.

--- [PDF Page 1159 / Book Page 1186] ---

1186

Crossley

Furlong, J. (2004). BERA at 30. Have we come of age? British Educational Research Journal, 30(3),
343–358.
Goldstein, H. (1996). Introduction, in Special Issue of Assessment in Education on The IEA Studies, 3(2),
125–128.
Goldstein, H. (2004). Education for All: The globalisation of learning targets. Comparative Education,
40(1), 7–14.
Grant, N. (1977). Educational policy and cultural pluralism: A task for comparative education. Comparative
Education 13(2), 139–150.
Habermas, J. (1978). Knowledge and human interests. London: Heinemann.
Hammersley, M. (1995). The politics of social research. London: Routledge.
Hans, N. (1964). Comparative education. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hargreaves, D. (1996). Teaching as a research based profession: Possibilities and prospects. The Teacher
Training Agency Annual Lecture, 1996. London: TTA.
Hayhoe, R. (2006). Foreword. In S. Trahar (Ed.), Narrative research on learning. Comparative and
International Perspectives. Oxford: Symposium.
Hayhoe, R., & Pan, J. (Eds.) (2001). Knowledge across cultures: A contribution to dialogue among civilisation. Hong Kong: University of Hong Kong Comparative Education Research Centre.
Hickling-Hudson, A. (1998). When Marxist post-modern theories won’t work: The potential of post-colonial theory for educational analysis. Discourse, 19(3), 327–339.
Hickling-Hudson, A., Mathews, J. & Woods, A. (Eds.) (2003). Disrupting preconceptions: Postcolonialism
and Education. Flaxton: Post Press.
Higginson, J. K. (Ed) (1979). Selections from Michael Sadler: Studies in world citizenship. Liverpool: Dejall
& Meyorre.
Hillage, J. (1998). Excellence in research on schools. Research report no. 74. London: Department for
Education & Employment.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Holmes, B. (1981). Comparative Education: Some Considerations of Method. London: Allen & Unwin.
Holmes, K., & Crossley, M. (2004). Whose knowledge, whose values? The contribution of local knowledge
to education policy processes: a case study of research development initiatives in the small state of
St Lucia. Compare, 34(1), 197–214.
Kandel, I. L. (1933). Studies in comparative education. Boston, MA: Houghton & Mifflin.
Kazamias, A. M. (2001). Re-inventing the historical in comparative education: Reflections on a protean
episteme by a contemporary player. Comparative Education, 37(4), 439–449.
Kazamias, A. M., & Massialas, B. G. (1965). Tradition and change in education: A comparative study.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kemmis, S. (1997) “Action research” in J. Keeves (Ed) Educational Research Methodology and
Measurement: an international handbook. Oxford: Pergamon.
Kennedy, M. K. (1997). The connection between research and practice. Educational Researcher, 26(8), 4–12.
King, E. J. (1979a). Other schools and ours (5th edn.). London: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
King, E. J. (1979b). Notes and comments. Comparative Education, 1(4), 1 1–4,
King, E. J. (1989). Comparative investigation of education: an evolutionary process. Prospects, 19(3), 369–379.
Larsen, M., & Mehta, S. (Eds.) (forthcoming). Insecurity, desire and comparative education: North
American perspectives. Special Issue of Comparative Education.
Lauwerys, J. (1959). The philosophical approach to comparative education. International Review of
Education, 5(3), 281–298.
Lewin, K. (forthcoming). Diversity in convergence: Access to Education for All, Compare.
Little, A. W. (Ed.) (1997). The diploma disease twenty years on. Special Issue of Assessment in Education, 4(1).
Mallison, V. (1975). An introduction to the study of comparative education (4th edn.). London: Heinemann.
Masemann, V. L. (1982). Critical ethnography in the study of comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, 26(1), 1–15.
Masemann, V. L. (1990). Ways of knowing. Comparative Education Review, 34(3), 463–473.
Ninnes, P., & Mehta, S. (Eds.) (2004). Re-imagining Comparative Education: postfoundational ideas and
applications for critical times. New York: Routledge.
Noah, H. J., & Eckstein, M. A. (1969). Toward a science of comparative education. New York: Macmillan.

--- [PDF Page 1160 / Book Page 1187] ---

Rethinking Context In Comparative Education 1187
OECD (2004). Learning for tomorrow’s world: First results from PISA 2003. Available online at: http://
www.pisa.oecd.org/
Osborn, M. (2004). New methodologies for comparative research? Establishing “constants” and “contexts”
in educational experience. Oxford Review of Education, 30(2), 265–285.
Osborn, M., Broadfoot, P., McNess, E., Planel, C., Ravn, B., & Triggs, P. (2003). A world of difference?
Comparing learners across Europe, Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (Eds.) (2004) Educational policy borrowing: Historical perspectives. Oxford:
Symposium.
Phillips, D., & Schweisfurth, M. (2006). Comparative and international education: An introduction to theory, method and practice. London: Continuum.
Postlethwaite, T. N. (1999). International studies of educational achievement: Methodological issues. Hong
Kong: University of Hong Kong Comparative Education Research Centre.
Reddy, V. (2005). Cross-national and achievement studies: Learning from South Africa’s participation in the
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). Compare, 35(1), 63–77.
Rizvi, F. (2004). Debating globalisation and education after September 11. Comparative Education, 40(2),
157–171.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking. Cognitive development in social contexts. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
St Clair, R., & Belzer, A. (2007). In the market for ideas: How reforms in the political economy of educational research in the US and UK promote market managerialism. Comparative Education. 33(4),
471–488.
Sachs, J. (2007). A new politics for a new age, 2007 Reith Lecture for the BBC (http:www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/
reith2007/lectures5.shtml).
Schriewer, J. (2006a). Comparative methodologies in the social sciences – Cross-disciplinary inspirations.
Special Issue of Comparative Education, 42(3).
Schriewer, J. (Ed.) (2006b). Comparative social science: characteristic problems and changing problem
solutions. Comparative Education, 42(3), 299–336.
Sadler, M. (1900). How far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of foreign systems
of education? In J. H. Higginson (Ed.) (1979), Selections from Michael Sadler. Liverpool: Dejall &
Meyorre.
Selner, D. (1997). Participatory action research and social change. New York: Cornell University.
Simola, H. (2005). The Finnish miracle of PISA: historical and sociological remarks on teaching and teacher
education, Comparative Education, 41, 4: 455–470.
Sislian, J. (Ed.) (2003). Representative Sadleriana. New York: Nova Science Publisher.
Spindler, G. D., & Spindler, L. (1982). Roger Harker and Schonhausen: From the familiar to the strange and
back again. In G. D Spinder (Ed.), Doing the ethnography of schooling: Educational anthropology in
action. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Stenhouse, L. (1979). Case-study and comparative education. Particularity and generalization. Comparative
Education, 15(1), 5–11.
Stromquist, N. (2005). Comparative and international education: a journey toward equality and equity.
Harvard Educational Review, 75(1), 89–111.
Stuart, J., Morojele, M., & Lefoka, P. (1997). Improving our practice. In M. Crossley & G. Vulliamy (Eds.),
Qualitative educational research in developing countries. New York: Garland.
Tikly, L., Lowe, J., Crossley, M., Dachi, H., Garrett, R. M., & Mukabaranga, B. (2003). Globalisation and
skills for development in Rwanda and Tanzania. London: DFID.
Tooley, J., & Darby, D. (1998). Educational research. A critique. London: Office for Standards in Education.
Trahar, S. (Ed.) (2006). Narrative research on learning: Comparative and international perspectives (Bristol
Papers in Education, Comparative and International Studies). Oxford: Symposium.
Vulliamy, G. (2004). The impact of globalisation on qualitative research in comparative and international
education. Compare, 34(3), 261–284.
Wertsch, J. (1995). Socio-cultural studies of the mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, D. N. (1994). Comparative and international education: Fraternal or Siamese twins? A preliminary
genealogy of our twin fields. Comparative Education Review, 38(4), 449–486.

