================================================================================
Chapter 74: Big Stories, Small Stories: Beyond Disputatious Theory Towards ‘Multilogue’
Author(s): Sonia Mehta
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1189–1208
PDF Pages: pp. 1161–1180 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1161 / Book Page 1189] ---

74
BIG STORIES, SMALL STORIES: BEYOND
DISPUTATIOUS THEORY TOWARDS
‘MULTILOGUE’
Sonia Mehta

Dedicated to Rolland G. Paulston
That there was a time when a war could be waged between ‘relativists’, who claim
that language refers only to itself, and ‘realists’, who claim that language may
occasionally correspond to a true state of affairs, will appear to our descendants
as strange as the idea of a fight over sacred relics.
Latour, B. (1999)

By Way of Introduction: A Small Story
As an ‘international’ student of comparative education, I entered the field of comparative international education, bringing with me a very different academic tradition and
cultural history. I saw the field as a durbar (or ‘King’s court’, in Hindi) of theories,
presided over by an organizational structure that positioned it within a certain range of
disciplinary academic frameworks. This disciplinary lexicon was further disciplined
by professorial choice of syllabi. This was a powerful court, and its arguments were
familiar, if distant. I made haste to learn its language. I paid attention to the glittering
promises of the largest stories: the upliftment of all humankind, and the promise of
progress. I wore these as mantels in my own grand design of scholarship. Inevitably, I
was disenchanted: there appeared no way to articulate the different and separate (and to
me, precious) sets of stories I carried around with me like a secret. There was a reason
I had come into the field with my own small stories, thinking they meant something
in a larger canvas, and I was not alone: other students came with other small stories. I
found my stories becoming more obscure, as language failed them and socio-educational practice left them on a distant margin. There was no advocacy for them in the
durbar of comparative education studies, more out of neglect and insularity rather than
specific malignancy. My stories, and those of some of my fellow students, were simply
unimportant, less immediate or translated and changed as they slowly became grafted
onto more powerful research options in more powerful and pervasive educational discourses. Mine was only one small story, and this problem was only a nebulous one
in the larger scheme of educational problems, but it led me to consider this curious
placing of stories in an educational and social, and intimately human context. I have
1189
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1189–1208.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1162 / Book Page 1190] ---

1190

Mehta

two dear friends to thank for their wisdom in helping me escape this effacement of self,
and the compression of teeming human variety into stifling binary logic. Peter Ninnes
and Rolland Paulston, with their separate approaches to scholarship and their immense
humanity, compassion and vision showed me a fluid and malleable landscape of understanding and another possible reality for myself and for what I do through education.

Disputatious Times in a Disputatious Field
This essay-in-understanding is situated in the context of comparative education studies in Anglo-America. I begin by tracing some of the scholarship done in the field
that begins to open the way for new and different ways of doing comparative education research, while at the same time marking the upheaval this has caused within
its scholarship. Comparative education has been struggling with its own stories. The
field of comparative education has been seen as diverse and eclectic (Laska, 1973;
Paulston, 1994), the selected expression of knowledge in a field of immense possibilities
(Schriewer, 2000). Modernism has been long seen to dominate the field, but the field is
also seen to be moving towards ideologies that are other than modern (Paulston, 1999;
Rust, 1991; Kelly, 1992; Welch & Masemann, 1997; Cowen, 1996, 2000). There have
been various interrogations of what is excluded from the histories of comparative education and its origin stories, and concern for excluded narratives (Cowen, 1996, 2000;
Ninnes, 2002). Cowen, revisiting a comparative education preoccupation with identity
and ‘early ideologies’, suggests a reflexive and critical look at the literature, and in so
doing, points out an implied critical value of all “small stories”:
(If) a good comparative education would combine an understanding of the intersection of the forces of history, social structures and individual biography, then
it is crucial to absorb the theme of personal identities into our literature. …[A]ny
reading of the contemporary world in terms of the scale of diasporas and migration suggests that comparative education is now too separated from a literature
about ‘the other’ which it helped to pioneer. (Cowen, 2000, p. 336)
Masemann, in 1990, wrote “It is quite likely that the spread of linear fragmentary
forms of education as we now know them will be slowed or halted”, “in a world that
can value diversity” (Masemann, 1990, p. 473). She also advocated “looking beyond
what might be an adaptive form of response … where the ‘sacred knowledge’ is being
generated by academics and researchers” (1990, p. 469). Masemann, Cowen and
others, in my reading, are among those advocating alternative ways of thinking about
education in a diverse world, and are implying that there is a need for non-linear, connective forms of education which can address the world of diversity we now engage
with. The influx, however small, of postcolonial and postmodern ideas, largely due to
the search for more relevant and inclusive ways of thinking about comparative education studies, signalled a shift or turn in orthodox comparative education origin stories.
I suggest that this was a shift/break in the sense that it disrupted the prevailing story of
what comparative education is or could be, but also a turn, or a move, away from the

--- [PDF Page 1163 / Book Page 1191] ---

Big Stories, Small Stories 1191

largely modernistic premises of the field in Anglo-American Comparative Education.
This ‘turn’, (Paulston, 2004) ), has been met with vigorous condemnation by those in
the field who would prefer the familiarity and predictability of a vision of the world as
seen by the founding fathers of comparative education and education in general. The
latest in this heated debate is the essay by Epstein and Carroll, “Abusing Ancestors:
Historical Functionalism and the Postmodern Deviation in Comparative Education”
Comparative Education Review No. 49 (2005). Three years before that (2002), Ninnes
delivered his paper, “Origin Stories and the Discursive Constitution of Comparative
Education” at Stanford University, USA. In 2005, Paulston drew his final maps, specifically referring to this collision of scholarship and knowledge cultures. These maps
will be explained later in this essay.
Ninnes, through his work, interrogated the origin stories of comparative education
and traced (and also displaced) the dominant discourse of comparative education by
using Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) by looking at texts and publications that are
being used to tell the story of comparative education (Ninnes, 2002). In 1994, Paulston
brought to the attention of the comparative education community, and to education
theory at large, a map of the diverse perspectives present in the field. In doing so, he also
introduced a particular way of looking at theory and research, one which was inclusive
rather than exclusive of the various knowledge communities in comparative education.
Rolland thus succeeded in marking important engagements the field has with multiplicity and difference. Representations of knowledge continue to change and grow in
comparative education studies, as Paulston’s mappings of the field show (2004).
These remain disputatious times. Old orthodoxies are being contested just as local
skirmishes accelerate into disciplinary wars; even if the old battles between the ‘scientific’
and the ‘non-scientific’ did not continue to divide scholarship. Beyond that, critiques of
the ‘birth’ of the social sciences pointed out that the Enlighteners, for all their elegance
and beauty of reason and humanitarian ideology, shaped a society hostile to social differences, and non-western cultures (as also non-scientific knowledge cultures), and had
the unfortunate social effect of promoting harsh intolerance towards human diversity,
and of carving social differences into individuals and groups (Seidman, 2004) This is
not to say that social differences have not been asserted into individuals and groups far
before the Enlightenment had anything to do with it, for reasons of religious or social
categories, separating sect, caste, male, female and so on. In education discourse, however, as perhaps in other sites of identity building, we are still fighting over sacred relics,
our small or big stories. There will always be the shrillness of acrimonious debating
over the validity and ethics of one theory against the other as long as some ways of
knowing are seen to be more valid or more valuable than others.
In this field, we have long been engaged in various non-harmonious ways of telling
educational and sociological stories – a debate which has become recently tense and
embattled, with the inclusion of the ‘post’ enlightenment theories, (postmodern, poststructural, postcolonial among others) the advocacy or condemnation of which have
led those in the field to align their positions along both sides of an dichotomous theoretical divide. I suggest that this is an artificial divide: being opposed to the ‘universal
stories’ of modern sociology does not imply an opposition to empirical science or to
the idea that human studies may make a better world. It does imply however, that the

--- [PDF Page 1164 / Book Page 1192] ---

1192

Mehta

privileging of scientific truth over all others is seen to limit epistemological choice and
a full understanding of human diversity. Discarding dichotomous divisions also suggests that an understanding of the human condition in society would be more enhanced
by not discarding the promise of explanatory accounts of social realities, but replacing
their rationales of ‘truth’ and social ‘progress’ with rationales of social justice and
critical moral reflexivity, replacing their comparisons of models and functions with
genealogy and narrative. Academic communities continue, however, to be invested
in opposing theoretical stances linked with power, prestige, institutional sanction,
personal ego or other reasons, maintaining the divisiveness of differing knowledge
cultures. The theoretical divide is particularly harmful to students and studentship in
the field of comparative education studies, but it could also have the larger effect of
circumscribing research which has direct implications on individuals and institutions
that plan and implement policy decisions based on education research, and specifically comparative education research. Binary logic and territorialism in academia also
serves to decimate our own simple (and complex) humanity.
This essay-in-understanding seeks to take a view broader than the contentious one,
to find the landscape that empowers and privileges learning, rather than territory, so that
those engaged in the business of shaping ontological choice may first be engaged in the
practice of unlearning, (a term coined by Heredero, 1989, in the context of social awareness) learning and relearning, in other words, “reflexivity’, a term used to refer to the
practice of understanding a text through its own constructedness, or the understanding of
the researcher through the constructedness of her own stories. To do this, I use Rolland
Paulston’s last research and maps to identify and navigate “Big” and “Small” stories
towards a comparative methodology that is inclusive of the process of how these stories
are constructed and how they become big or small, and as Paulston shows through his
maps, how narratives “see” and place each other in an interrelated web of connection.
Using mapping methods and interpretations of CDA, my essay continues the discussion
of how to do the ‘multiple’ (to map multiple knowledge perspectives) as both metaand mini-narratives, specifically combining a modality of CDA and postmodern social
cartography into pedagogy for comparative education studies. For those suffering postenlightenment language fatigue, let me say that this is (simply) an exercise in enabling
more choice in language and register, through which to describe our various worlds and
views. Our interconnected and contentious, globalised milieu of academics, academic
activity and institutions makes it possible to look upon the various wars of ideas and
disenchantments, and ask, what is it that serves the purpose of a learning and teaching
community at the end of contestation and disagreement?

Big and Small Stories
McCarthy and Dimitriadis problematise the organisation of knowledge in schooling
itself following the industrial age: “Against the tide of … currents of change, however,
mainstream educational thinkers … have tended to draw a bright line of distinction
between the established school curriculum and the teeming world of multiplicity that
flourishes in the everyday lives of youth beyond the school” (2001, p. 2), pointing out

--- [PDF Page 1165 / Book Page 1193] ---

Big Stories, Small Stories 1193

one of the problems of excluding some stories from bodies of knowledge intending to
teach and instruct. If seen through a genealogical lens, when binaries are adhered to,
two separate bodies of knowledge are conceptualised, one in which there are dissenting
opinions and theories, which may be excluded or rejected from other bodies of knowledge, and another which includes local beliefs and heterogeneous ontologies, which are
unfixed and transgressive. At this impasse comes into play the deployment of authority
and investiture, constructing the discourse of legitimate/academic/official knowledge,
deemed ‘knowledge’ and excluding as ‘not knowledge’ the alternative body of knowledge, in its genealogical sense, choosing one knowledge culture above the many.
Mini-narratives (small stories, local, experiential, subjective and disruptive/transgressive/interrogative of meta-narratives) and meta-narratives (big stories, global,
theoretical, objective and exclusive of small stories) then become discourses exclusive
of each other. This bifurcation has particular effects on the wider process of research
and understanding. Firstly, there is the erasure of voices as stories struggle to become
part of a dominating discourse and the loss, or translated versions of those stories as
they become part of the visible discourse (of research, of ‘thick’ or metaphoric sociological description, of policy and so on). Secondly, there is what I call the invisible
problem (invisible since erasures have occurred), of denying the most plural view to
the student of educational issues, a significant problem for a field that bases its identity
in the cross-cultural and multi-disciplinary. The problem of erasures occurs between
languages and identities, between experience and struggle. We are then faced with
the problem of making problems; how questions are framed and logic laid out when
knowledge orientations are effectively kept out. We are also faced with problems of
inclusion, and what to include what not to; what is counted as knowledge, what then
becomes ‘legitimate’ in the discourse.

Big and Small Narratives
Big stories, or meta-narratives, are overarching theoretical ideologies, or universal stories. Mini-narratives, or small stories, are specificities, subjective anti-theories that
are ubiquitous (everyone has their own small story). Any narrative when ‘grafted’
(Sommers, 1999) on to a binary code which sets up a system of rules of exclusion and
engagement (e.g., of social naturalism or religious values) may become a meta-narrative. The binary code then transmogrifies the narrative into a more potent force of
authority and power, giving it ‘naturalised’ or ‘god-like’ sustainability in the face of
evidence to the contrary. Which also means that there is an opposition built into this
binary division, making its alternative an undesirable thing, contrary to the ‘natural’
or ‘truthful’ set of rules the meta-narrative is grafted upon. For example, the metanarrative of the Enlightenment is so ‘naturalised’ as a state of social being that it is
monolithic enough to spawn any number of theories addressing the ‘natural’ need for
society to better itself, supporting the truth claim that this is a universal aspiration.
My point here is not to demonise the desire behind meta-narratives, or to demonise
any narrative for that matter. What I mean to do here is to highlight that part of the
process in the formation of meta-narratives that becomes internalised, entrenched and

--- [PDF Page 1166 / Book Page 1194] ---

1194

Mehta

taken for ‘truth’ myths about the state of society, or individuals in it. Sommers, in
her essay tracing the building of a meta-narrative suggests that narratives, when they
become meta-narratives, cannot be easily destabilised. Based as they are on a binary
logic, they have two important effects: they create and maintain boundaries of inclusion and exclusion, becoming epistemological “gatekeepers” (1999, p. 145), where the
more ‘valid’ knowledge cultures become those based on this foundational knowledge
schema or binary logic, and the less ‘valid’ are deemed those based on contingent
logic. Thus, knowledge cultures are set up to be opposing and mutually exclusive.
I suggest that small stories more often than not interrogate meta-narratives, are
plural and local, sometimes referred to as subversive discourse when they appear in
opposition to the meta-narrative. Mini (small) narratives question the authority of a
meta-narrative and are usually the site of uncovering the limitations of theory. Andreas
Musolff (2006) calls small stories “source concepts” and has analysed the organisation of source concepts into mini-narratives in the construction of social debates.
Mini-narratives are those useful vehicles used in sociological studies for the benefit
of a researcher who goes on to construct the pattern of these ‘incipient stories’, or
‘experiential narratives’ according to Conle (1992, pp. 165–190) against a conceptual
framework, or, in other words, a big story of choice. However, small stories are what
their proponents say they are, and are to be unknown until they are brought into a
public domain. In this durbar, turning to Paulston’s map of knowledge cultures within
big and small stories provides a welcome disruption: All stories are mapped as texts,
‘telling’ a particular kind of story which then has certain effects and implications.
More importantly, the map provides a way for texts to talk to each other, and for stories
to find connection. As a student faced with competing claims of truth and power, it is
invaluable to be able to see this landscape as one system of interaction, which may then
be remapped to alter the dynamic presented there. In the end it is about the need for a
choice of an alternative language, access to the alternative and the ability to craft one’s
own register within the languages of both meta- and mini-narratives.
Paulston did his final map for the 2004 CIES Annual conference. It was a conference at which he could not be present because of his failing health, but it provided a
rich, generative signpost for possible futures for the people in comparative education
studies. The next section is devoted to the map he drew by hand (reproduced here
electronically), followed by my reading of the map and its possibilities for crafting a
different pedagogy for comparative education studies.
Rolland asked, “How are we to practice our comparative art in this time of heterogeneity and tumultuous change?” To date, several options have been presented. One is
to hold fast to the eternal truths of our founding fathers. Another is to embrace and
privilege the cultural differences of Others. And there are also those who would avoid
the issue altogether, using a strong dose of scientific rigour – and, perhaps, cultural
blinders. In contrast, I would like to argue for the re-inscription of all “big stories”
into a space, or field, of little stories. This ontological and epistemological turn from
a binary logic of exclusion offers the possibility of a more diverse and interactive
cartographic representation of our field. Thus, the perspectives constructing knowledge debates may be mapped into webs of difference that are open to other actors and
other possible stories. This is not to argue for a neutral position or a neutral language

--- [PDF Page 1167 / Book Page 1195] ---

Big Stories, Small Stories 1195

in which to compare difference. All theoretical choices offer a view of the world in
their own terms, and all can be critiqued from the position of another theory. We can,
of course, insist on the absolute validity and orthodoxy of our view and attempt to
exclude other accounts as deviant. Or we can embrace Clifford Geertz’s great ‘refusal’
to impose a single reductive story on the wonderful varieties of human understanding.
At the end of a long scholarly road, I opt to join those who willingly attempt what may
seem to be an impossible task, ‘to acknowledge the partiality of one’s story (indeed, of
all stories) and still tell it with authority and conviction’ (J. W. Scott, 1991, pp. 42–43).
while mapping it into the debate field of comparative education. In this way, we begin
to visualise how our field may be seen – constructed as a representation, a picture of
our complex multidimensional reality” (Paulston, 2004).
Paulston’s map (reproduced in the following pages) shows the ontological divide
that separates spaces where it is possible for small stories to emerge while also illustrating the conditions for such possibilities.
Paulston’s map describes and maps five discourse genres through their core values,
ontology, epistemology and disciplinary focus. The discourse genres chosen here are
idiographic, nomothetic, ethnographic, agnostic and cartographic: explained fully in
the table of genre attributes following the map (Table 1). It might be useful for readers to imagine ‘text’ as narrative – written or spoken, with its specific beginning, its
present events (a middle) and its ends, denouements or conclusions that fix the narrative or its world view with a particular knowledge culture.
Although the map shows opposite knowledge constructs, these need not necessarily be opposing unless the value systems of narrators (mappers) are constructed to be
opposing. I would suggest that the circular nature of the map of knowledge cultures
shows also what is left out of one’s own narrative when it appears alongside another’s.
Thus the map begins a dialogue or a ‘multilogue’ (engaging communication on multiple levels), towards an unlearning and relearning as one re-maps and interrogates
the map itself, and one engages with other narratives, because the ‘other’ is now in
relational discourse with ‘me’. It is hoped that the map and its coordinates will provoke its own debate. For the purposes of this essay, it has led me to reconfigure my
own theoretical positions and to rethink my own knowledge culture. A commentary
on possible pedagogical modalities for the field of comparative education ends this
essay-in-understanding.
An original of the map reproduced here is to be found with the University of
Pittsburgh’s Occasional Papers series (USA) (Figure 1).

Doing the Multiple: How Postmodern Social Cartography
and Critical Discourse Analysis Work Together
The question remains of how to operationalise multiplicity and subjectivity. I suggest a modality called multilogue, which constitutes a number of pedagogical themes.
At the level of text, Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) focuses on social, historical
and political contexts of discourses. This school of thought looks at the relationships
between discourses, the effects of discourse on human subjectivity, and how power and

--- [PDF Page 1168 / Book Page 1196] ---

Causal explanations
(Nomothetic genre):

Cultural
interpretations
(Ethnographic
genre):

2

3

Materialist
Documentation
Representation
Consensus
Analogy
Order
Linearity
Lawful relations
Analytical
Foundational truth
Universality
Verification
Certainty
Empathy
Authenticity
Mediation
Holism
Insight
Actor identity
Human agency
Metaphysical
Propositional
Logic
Exclusive
Detached
Lawful reality
Situated
Subjective
Hermeneutical
Relative
Reflexive
Experiential
Reality

Realist
Computational
Objective
Positive
Foundational
reality

Ethnographic
Thick descriptionn
Interpreting
Symbolism
Qualitative
Decoding
Constructing
meaning

Systemic modeling
Analyses
Quantitative
Correlational

Numeration
Case study
Typology
Calculating
Categorical

Core values (axiology) Preferred reality, way Favoured way
of being (ontology)
of knowing
(epistemology)

Cultural anthropology
Ethnology
Art history
Folklore
Humanities

Social sciences
Sociology and
economics
Statistics
Policy sciences

Social and historical
studies
Educational planning
and evaluation

Disciplinary locus

Narratives
Myths
Icons, arteifacts
Codes
Images
Rituals

Theories
Models
Functions
Systems
“Social facts”

Data, categories
Cases, types
Plans, time
Nomenclature
Facts

Compares

How the five inquiry perspectives and discourse genres mapped in Figure 1 may be seen to construct a diverse comparative education

DISCOURSE GENRES
1 Conceptual
descriptions
(Ideographic genre):

Table 1.

Durkheim (1895)
Anderson (1961)
Archer (1982)
Khoi (1986)
Meyer (2003)
Schriewer (2003)
Cassirer (1957)
Geertz (1993)
Rockwell (1996)
Hoffman (1999)
Masemann (1999)
Epstein, I. (2003)

Jullien (1817)
Comté (1876)
Kandel (1961)
Bereday (1964)
World Bank (1995)
Bray (2000)

Illustrative texts
comprising genre
“minicanons”

1196
Mehta

--- [PDF Page 1169 / Book Page 1197] ---

Perspectivist mappings Multiplicity
(Cartographic genre): Pluralism
Heterotopia
Space
Visual
Nomadic
Surface

5

Difference
Contradiction
Struggle
Alterity
Textuality
Irony
Uncertainty

Contested Readings
(Agonistic genre):

4

Paradoxical
Becoming
Subjective
Aletheistic
Critical
Hybrid
Contested
Reality
Rizomatic
Interconnected
Perspectivist
Inclusive
Fluid
Relational reality

Revealing
contradictions
Aporias
Unmasking and
deconstructing
Rhetoric
Agonistics
Paralogics
Patterning
spatial links and
webbings
Cartographics
Juxtaposition
Cognitive mapping
Comparative studies
Cultural geography
Cybernetics
Intellectual history

Semiotics
Poetics
Cultural studies
Feminist studies
Postcolonial studies
Philosophy
Rhetoric
World views
Ways of seeing
Patterns
Epistemes
Performances
Networks, spatial
relations

The invisible & the
visible
Omissions
Tropes, genres
Discourse
Narratives
Multivocality

Gore (1993)
Bain (1995)
Cowen (2000)
Ninnes & Mehta
(2000)
Hickling-Hudson
(2003)
Seidman (2004)
Foucault (1986)
O’Dowd (1999)
Rust (2000)
Shroff-Mehta (2002)
Ahmed (2003)
Gorostiaga &
Paulston (2004)

Big Stories, Small Stories 1197

--- [PDF Page 1170 / Book Page 1198] ---

1198

Mehta

Figure 1. An Alexandrian-style map comparing knowledge spaces and inquiry genres in comparative
education discourse
Source: Paulston (2004)
See Appendix A for Mini-Canons constructing each genre

knowledge circulate through these effects (Foucault, 1980). In Luke’s writing (1999),
according to Foucault and Derrida, language and discourse are “not transparent or
neutral means for describing or analyzing the social world. … (Foucault) refers more
generally to reiterated key words and statements that recur in local texts of all kinds.
Such statements appear intertextually across texts and comprise familiar patterns of
disciplinary and paradigmatic knowledge and practice” (Luke, 1999, p. 163). Derrida
questions whether authoritative interpretations are at all possible, being that all texts
are polysemous (the dynamic play of difference where multiple, unpredictable and
idiosyncratic meanings can be made by multiple readers in multiple social contexts).

--- [PDF Page 1171 / Book Page 1199] ---

Big Stories, Small Stories 1199

Thus ‘text’, in social cartography becomes ‘narrative’. Multiple users of the map can
re-map, re-tell their texts in relationship to the other narratives on the map.
CDA therefore begins from certain assumptions of “systematic asymmetries of
power and resources between speakers and listeners, readers and writers (that) can
be linked to their unequal access to linguistic and social resources” (Luke, 1999, p.
167). Fairclough and Wodak (1997) further elaborate on the task of CDA as being both
deconstructive and constructive. According to Fairclough and Wodak, the deconstructive moment of CDA disrupts the power dynamic of textual and verbal events and
problematises the themes of these events. In its constructive task, CDA allows for
a vast resource for students to critically analyse social relations by distributing the
resources of discourse in an equitable process.
According to a review of CDA literature done by Peter Ninnes (Ninnes, 2002),
Critical Discourse Analysis assumes discourses, through language, to be forms of
social practice and that they are dialectically constituted within social situations that
are also constituted by them in a mutual process. Ninnes shows us how discourses have
material effects that can shape, reproduce, disrupt and reshape relations of inequality
and is therefore a form of social action. In the treatment of textual material (written
word), CDA makes use of some degree of systemic functional linguistic methods.
Employing lexical and grammatical features of texts, as argued by Halliday and Hasan
(1989), have three functions:
At the level of ‘field’: texts represent and portray the social and natural world
At the level of ‘tenor’: texts construct and effect social relations
At the level of ‘mode’: texts develop identifiable conventions in particular media
‘Field’ also represents texts as the written and spoken word as particular selective
views of the world, or ‘subject positions. ‘Tenor’ may be seen as ‘reading positions’
that the text set out as social relations. Texts, by their ‘mode’ of establishing reading
positions can position readers, situating them in identifiable relationships of power and
agency vis-à-vis the text.
In CDA, typically, subject positions (of texts) have analysed cultural assumptions
in the textual macro-structure, focusing on selective traditions of values, ideologies,
‘voices’ and representations. Such techniques allow the text to be analysed to demonstrate how they structure and stipulate social relations between human subjects and
“how they build differential relations of power and agency between readers and writers, between students and textbooks” (Luke, 1999, p. 170). Through this perspective,
discourses may also be seen as discursively reconstituted by the very discourses that
may have been deployed to limit and divide them. Thus, because of the repeated action
made by students and teachers upon the texts of the discourse, these discourses are
ultimately in the hands of those who are acting upon them. The topic of analysis, such
as value and beliefs systems about education, or poverty alleviation, is what people say
or think it (the topic) is (Game & Metcalf, 1996).
CDA studies the interpretive grid, as it were, of what is said, in text and speech,
what is not said and what cannot be said. This method focuses on the specific condition under which ‘reality’, ‘truth’ and ‘knowledge’ claims are made and sustained, and
the conditions under which particular discourses and imbedded discourses are seen as

--- [PDF Page 1172 / Book Page 1200] ---

1200

Mehta

more dominant than others. In a sense, CDA becomes a key process in the creation of
a map made by multiple users, as the critical step towards working out the coordinates
of the map.
Foucault described how some discourses and not others become prominent in
particular contexts, the conditions of this prominence and the maintenance of it
and the relationships of power between their mutual functioning, and their transformation whether independent, reciprocally or co-relatively (Foucault, 1972).
CDA allows one to interrogate discourses by questioning how various spoken,
written and symbolic texts constitute and define knowledge, learner, educator,
academic and institutional identities within the relationships of power and socialhistorical conditions through which these discourses are manifest. CDA are not
only concerned with the contents of documents, but also with the process of their
development and outcomes.
The challenge of mapping multiplicity would be engaged when there is more
than one mapper working on creating a map of knowledge constructs. As Paulston
(1996, p. xvii) points out, mapping recognises and patterns difference: “[A] spatial
turn in comparative studies would focus less on formal theory and competing truth
claims and more on how contingent knowledge may be seen as embodied, locally
constructed, and re-presented as oppositional yet complementary positionings in
shifting fields.” Paulston gives us a general outline of the process of mapping in
six stages:
1. Choosing “the issues and debates” to be mapped
2. Choosing the “range of texts that construct these debates”
3. Conducting a “close reading and macro-analysis” of these texts (or narratives)
4. Identifying the “range of positions in the intertextual mix”
5. “Sharing”: Paulston recommends identifying textual communities that share
ways of seeing and communicating reality and their locations in the mapping.
One might also find differences.
6. “Re-mapping”: The last, and I feel, most significant point in the mapping
process, regarding pedagogy, is Paulston’s recommendation to test the map with
individuals or knowledge communities involved, and then to re-map as desired
and or share conflicting interpretations of the map.
The mapping process requires a choice of coordinates along which to map the various stories told by the text. This can be negotiated through differences or similarities,
which also have divergences within them, leading to re-mapping. CDA may come into
the mapping process at anytime and with any narrative, the analysis of which would
alter its place on the map.

Multilogue
The concept of multilogue (my coinage) questions the idea that pedagogy of difference
can be crafted exclusively from the classroom. In the end, the space of most fluidity
may be found in spaces other than the traditional (such as classrooms), perhaps in

--- [PDF Page 1173 / Book Page 1201] ---

Big Stories, Small Stories 1201

cyber-space versions of a combination of CDA, which uses language to deconstruct
discourse, and postmodern mapping methods, which mobilises the positioning and
situatedness of the actors who choose to be within the discourse, and other processesoriented tools of critique and representation. The concept of multilogue extends the
pedagogical sites of meaning construction from the classroom, to any environment
through which common and/or different space is represented. It takes the concepts
of dialogue and multiplies them so that there may be the creation of an internal and
external map, as well as the ability to share and discuss the differences that these
maps manifest. The communal space that represents mapping discourse as a group,
presents, I argue, the means by which to change ontological and epistemological coordinates, introduce new ones. Thus, the actors of the discourse are to be engaged in the
construction of a deeply meaningful way of creating ‘knowledge’, or perhaps even
‘problem-solving’, in a fashion that allows for personal expression as well as collective
interaction with others in the discourse.
Rolland Paulston had made it his life’s work to construct and reconstruct knowledge perspectives in order to be and become more and more reflexive and inclusive.
Going beyond the contentious debates of modern against postmodern, orthodoxies
against heterodoxies, he looked upon the future of international scholarship in terms
of its heterogeneity: networks and synergetics. This is the manifestation of a belief
in multiple realities, with space for both big and small stories, multidimensional,
complex, mutable and embodied, where intertextual relationships take over what
meta-narratives left out. Thus we move from shared and isolationist histories, the big
stories of national systems and social movements, and the interruptions of small dissentions and other stories, or mini-narratives to a process of synergy and continually
changing discourse.
Multilogue works under the following conceptual framework:
Concern for Otherness and Othering, as constructive and destructive concepts
Recognition of the simultaneous existence of multiple voices
● Acute and self-conscious bias towards enabling tentative and silenced voices
● Recognition of the existence of liminality, hybridity, transitions/transitologies and
of motion in all narratives and knowledge cultures
● Recognition that deconstruction and reconstruction, situatedness and fluidity are
empowering and desired in a learning process
● Recognition of the existence and effects of power
● Recognising the limits of each story: that all knowledge is partial and is built
through the interaction between reader and texts as well between multiple
communications
● Recognising that everything is dangerous, and that being able to engage reflexively
at all levels keeps us generating connective forces rather than static, silencing forces
●
●

Combining CDA and postmodern social cartography gives us a way of operationalising
a sort of ‘multilogue’. According to the 1920s literary theory of Mikhail Bakhtin, all
utterance is dialogic in that it anticipates the response of the addressee and is accented
towards another. That is to say, we are defined by our own perceived relationship to
others through speech. Bakhtin wrote about the intrinsic connectedness of temporal

--- [PDF Page 1174 / Book Page 1202] ---

1202

Mehta

and spatial relationships in cognitive and meaning-making situations. However, it
was Foucault and Lefebvre (1974) who privileged space over time, signalling
the end of ‘despatialised’ history. Rebecca Martusewicz’s Seeking Passage: Post
Structuralism, Pedagogy, Ethics describes Serras’ idea of ‘noise’ (often dismissed
as so many small stories): “Serras writes about the ‘beautiful noise’ or the ‘excess
empirical’ of every text and every claim to knowledge, in the spaces of meaning
that escape the capture of representation” (2001, p. 13). If inquiry were to be
so pedagogically configured as to include that noisy third through a process of
multilogue, such as is possible with the mapping process, then there is a space
and perhaps many spaces open to the knowledge within the ‘excess empirical’. In
effect, it may open the discourse of other potential meanings and forms, the creative process of applying all the plural parts of the individual learner, eclipsed or
suppressed desire and understanding of the human condition, into the public and
private sites of knowledge creation.

Beyond the Postmodern: In Conclusion
Postmodern themes in pedagogy are useful because they change the entire paradigm
by which to approach knowledges, while they also destroy the system of paradigmatic boundary-making. Stronach and McLure (1997) show quite effectively how
a re-reading of educational research, or perhaps an undoing of it, break not only
the practise of boundary-making and maintaining, but also unearth ‘new’ insights
into old research. In that sense, postmodern pedagogies, are both micro and macro:
micro in that they are concerned with the minute details of research relationships and
macro because they are concerned with effects and actions and influences outside and
beyond these details.
Perhaps the strength of comparative education studies lies in the ability (or possibility) to allow diversity in the field to actually inform the field. It is after all, one
thing to present differences in theories and concepts, quite another to operationalise
them in the research of the field. Presenting theories may mean that they are presented as far-away, static spaces to use or not depending on the context defined. My
argument has been for a way of presenting a multiplicity of views that allows for a
process as well as for the ‘interference’ of personal agency (whether teacher, learner
or Other), and that also allows for the possibility of movement, of relationship, of
perhaps, connective tissue. Multilogue, as CDA and postmodern social cartography
addresses the unexamined effects of power within an experiential knowledge paradigm (when mapping takes place as an investigation into desire), allowing all actors
to place themselves self-consciously within a discourse. Multilogue, ultimately,
breaks the barrier and the power relationship between instructor and instructed,
engaging both in the learning process. Only a collective can produce a working
model of multilogue, and this suggests a next phase in traditional ways of doing
research. In a sense, it begins with a readjustment of values, as an invisible pedagogy, a process begun before the manifestation (mapping) of stories and the shared
learning (re-mapping) is done.

--- [PDF Page 1175 / Book Page 1203] ---

Big Stories, Small Stories 1203

Through Rolland Paulston’s work, and the extensive interpretations of CDA done
by Peter Ninnes and others, it has become possible to look through and then beyond
both the harsh exclusions of meta-narratives and the sharp subjectivities of mininarratives towards processes that illustrate possible connectedness (rather than the
static divide) of these knowledge cultures or choices, as well as their dependence
on each other. For a student trying to tell a story or a set of stories through a space
competing for validity of various kinds, working through text and through visual,
spatial media could provide an escape and a personal affirmation in the face of the
monolithic censure of academic legitimation. The backlash from those who felt we
have to contain and discipline the field into a more secure, predictable community
surely understand that there is really no going back, because the past was never static
and because the content, people and places of comparative education are variegated.
The studentship of comparative education is globally engaged, whether contentiously
or seamlessly. Indeed the identities of most are plural, culturally, ethnically and even
perhaps ethically.
It is a fearsome thing, to think of the unimaginable stories that await representation; mapping the unimaginable is an uncomfortable, unpredictable thing. I want to
echo Rolland Paulston and Peter Ninnes, and offer the challenge of allowing the selfconscious and biased process of mutilogue to become the choice of method, rather
than choice of theoretical consolidation to become a method. Theory thus becomes
vehicle, towards the unpredictable outcomes of research. Simply put, we need to
start at some point, which will necessarily and admittedly be limited and myopic, but
intensely subjective and intimate, hence invaluable. Then we continue, in Paulston’s
conceptualisation, to think in terms of a circular and netted map, rendering the
‘starting point’ of research only vestigial in its linearity, focusing, not on endings
(although there will be conclusions) but on continuation and learning through debate
and discourse. In the end, it will be the students of comparative studies that push
boundaries in any meaningful ways, but only if there is the freedom to embrace the
impossible, the subversive and the unthought-of, and the alternative, whatever that
may be. At a pedestrian level, it would mean the incorporation of reflexivity into
every teaching event, asking of all research, “What is the alternative? Where, and
who is the Invisible”, as Susan Star does (1991) in her essay on the ‘Sociology of the
Invisible’, being able to name known alternatives and then to allow other alternatives
to name themselves. This is not to imply, in any way that ‘post’ anything is the new
and glittering direction in which we should all aspire to go. That reinforces only that
we should not remain in the grip of one or the other orthodoxy. However, it would
take real courage of academic spirit to have the landscape of context (the multiple
present), of history (the multiple past) and of abstraction (multiple possible futures)
in the service of learning above service to agenda or ego. It is a messy direction, but
I feel, infinitely generative. Advocates of obedience to sacred texts may do so
because of the predictability of method and inquiry. If predictability means ‘being
safe’, then by all means let us be safe. Should we then not also be safe to be different
and differing, and should we not also have a safe space in which to engage these
differences? Comparative education, as any field of cross-cultural investigation
deserves at least that.

--- [PDF Page 1176 / Book Page 1204] ---

1204

Mehta

Appendix A: How Diverse Knowledge Perspectives May Be
Seen to Shape a Postfoundational Comparative Education
(© Rolland G. Paulston)
A Proposed Mini-Canon for Knowledge Perspective No. 1
Conceptual Description
Bereday, G. Z. F. (1964). Comparative method in education. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Bray, M., & Gui, Q. (2000). Comparative education in greater China: Contexts, characteristics, contrasts and
contributions. Comparative Education, 37(4), 451–473.
Chabbot, C., & Elliot, E. J. (Eds.) (2003). Understanding others, educating ourselves: Getting more from
international comparative studies in education. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.
Chang, K. M. (1996). Quality of basic education in China. A case study of Zhejiang province. Paris:
International Institute for Educational Planning.
Comte, A. (1876 [1830–42]). The course of positive philosophy. In 3 vols. London: George Bell and Sons.
Fraser, S. (1964). Jullien’s plan for comparative education, 1816–1817. New York: Teachers College Press.
Halls, W. D. (1990). Comparative education: Contemporary issues and trends. London: Jessica Kingsley, in
association with UNESCO, Part I.
Hans, N. (1958). Comparative education. A study of educational factors and traditions. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
Hayhoe, R. (1999). China’s universities 1895–1995: A century of cultural conflicts. Hong Kong: The
Comparative Education Research Center, the University of Hong Kong.
Husén, T. (Ed.) (1967). International study of achievement in mathematics. New York: John Wiley.
Kandel, I. (1961). Comparative education and underdeveloped countries: A new dimension. Comparative
Education Review, 4(3), 130–135.
Noah, H. J., & Eckstein, M. A. (1969). Toward a science of comparative education. New York: Macmillan.
Sadler, M. E. (1964). How far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of foreign systems of
education? Comparative Education Review, 7(2), 307–314.
Watson, K. (1999). Comparative education research: The need for reconceptualizing action and fresh
insights. Compare, 29(3), 233–248.
Wilson, D. N. (1994). Comparative and international education: Fraternal or Siamese twins? A preliminary
geneology of the field. Comparative Education Review, 38(4), 449–486.
World Bank (1995). Priorities and strategies for education. A World Bank Sector Review. Washington, D.C.:
The World Bank.

A Proposed Mini-Canon for Knowledge Perspective No. 2 Causal Explanation
Anderson, C. A. (1961). Methodology of comparative education. International Review of Education 7, 1–23.
Archer, M. S. (1982). Theorizing about the expansion of educational systems. In The sociology of educational expansion (pp. 3–64). Beverly Hills: Sage.
Beck, U., Giddens, A., & Lash, S. (1994). Reflexive modernization. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bernstein, B. (1975). Class, codes and control: Theoretical studies towards a sociology of language.
New York: Schocken Books.
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. C. (1977). Reproduction in education, culture and society. London: Sage.
Carnoy, M., & Samoff, J. (1989). Education and social transition in the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Clayton, T. (1998). Beyond mystification: Reconnecting the world-system theory for comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 42(4), 479–490.
Collins, R. (1975). Conflict sociology: Towards an explanatory science. New York: Academic Press.
Diebolt, C. (2003). Towards a theory of systemic regulation? The case of France and Germany in the 19th
and 20th centuries. In J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse formation in comparative education (pp. 55–85).
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

--- [PDF Page 1177 / Book Page 1205] ---

Big Stories, Small Stories 1205
Durkheim, E. (1895). Les regles de la methode sociologique. Paris: Presse Universitaires de France.
Epstein, E. H. & Carroll, K. T. (2005). Abusing ancestors: Historical functionalism and the postmodern
deviation in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 50(1).
Habermas, J. (1984–1987). The theory of communicative action. 2 vols. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Khoi, L. T. (1986). Towards a general theory of education. Comparative Education Review, 30(1), 12–39.
Meyer, J. W. et al. (2003). The world institutionalization of education. In J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse
formation in comparative education (pp. 111–132). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Parsons, T. (1966). Societies: Evolutionary and comparative perspectives. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Schriewer, J. (2003). Comparative education methodology in transition. Towards a science of complexity?
In J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse formation in comparative education (pp. 3–52). Frankfurt am Main:
Peter Lang.

A Proposed Mini-Canon for Knowledge Perspective No. 3
Cultural Interpretation
Abu-Lughod, L. (1990). Can there be a feminist ethnography? Women and Performance. 5(1), 7–27.
Aikman, S. (1995). Territory, indigenous education and cultural maintenance. The case of the Arakembut of
southeast Peru. Prospects. 25(4), 665–681.
Antweiler, C. (1996). Local knowledge and local knowing: An anthropological analysis of contested cultural
products in the context of development. Knowledge and Learning Center, Africa region web site, The
World Bank. www.worldbank.org
Calasso, R. (2001). The Forty-nine steps. Translated by J. Sheply. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Bloch, A. (2003). Red ties and residential scholars: Indigenous Siberians in a post-Soviet State. Philadelphia,
PA: The University of Pennsylvania Press.
Cassirer, E. (1957). The philosophy of symbolic forms: The phenomenology of knowledge. London: Yale
University Press.
Chernela, J. M. (2001). Piercing distinctions: Making and remaking the social contract in the North-West
Amazon. In L. Rival & N. Whitehead (Eds.), Beyond the visible and the material (pp. 177–196).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Clifford, J., & Marcus, G. E. (Eds.) (1986). Writing culture: The practices and polarities of ethnography.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Epstein, I. (2003). Juvenile delinquency and reformatory education in China: A retrospective. In E. R.
Beauchamp (Ed.), Comparative education reader (pp. 163–182). New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Geertz, C. (1993). Local knowledge: Further essays in interpretive anthropology. London: Harper Collins.
Hoffman, D. (1999). Culture and comparative education: Towards decentering and recentering the discourse.
Comparative Education Review, 43(4), 464–88.
Krogh, G. V., Kazuo I., & Nonaka I. (2000). Enabling knowledge creation: How to unlock the mysteries of
tacit knowledge and release the power of innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johannsen, A. M. (1992). Applied anthropology and postmodern ethnography. Human Organization, 51(1),
71–81.
Latour, B. (1998). A few steps toward the anthropology of the iconoclastic gesture. Science in Context,
10(1), 62–83.
Masemann, V. L. (1999). Culture and education. In R. F. Arnove & C. A.Torres (Eds.), Comparative education: The dialectic of the global and the local (pp. 115–133). Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield.
McCarthy, E. D. (1996). Knowledge and culture: The new sociology of knowledge. London and New York:
Routledge.
Rockwell, E. (1996). Keys to appropriation: Rural schooling in Mexico. In B. A Levinson (Ed.), The
cultural production of the educated person: Ethnographies of schooling and practice Albany, NY:
SUNY Press.
Tikly, L. (1999). Postcolonialism and comparative education. International Review of Education, 45,
603–621.

--- [PDF Page 1178 / Book Page 1206] ---

1206

Mehta

A Proposed Mini-Canon for Knowledge Perspective No. 4 Contested Readings
Bain, W. (1995). The loss of innocence: Lyotard, Foucault and the challenge of postmodern education. In
M. Peters (Ed.), Education and the postmodern condition (pp. 1–20). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
Ball, S. J. (1994). Education reforms: A critical and post-structural approach. Buckingham: Open University
Press.
Bonnett, M. (1998). Education in a destitute time: A Heideggarian approach to the problem of education
in the age of modern technology. In P. Hirst & P. White. (Eds.), Journal of Philosophy of Education,
17(1), 201–216.
Brock-Utne, B. (2000). Whose education for all? The recolonizing of the African mind. New York: Falmer Press.
Cowen, R. (2000). Fine tuning educational earthquakes. In D. Coulby & R. Cowen (Ed.), Education in times
of transition: World yearbook of education London: Kogan Page.
Gore, J. (1993). The struggle for pedagogies: Critical and feminist discourses as regimes of truth. New York:
Routledge, Chapman and Hall.
Gur-Ze’ev, I. (2002). Martin Heidegger, transcendence and the possibility of counter-education. In M. Peters
(Ed.), Heidegger, education and modernity (pp. 65–80). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Heidegger, M. (1976). The age of the world view. In W. Spanos (Ed.), translated by M. Grene, Martin
Heidegger and the question of literature: Towards a postmodern literary hermeneutics (pp. 126–149).
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Hicking-Hudson, A. & Ahlquist, R. (2003). Contesting the curriculum in the schooling of indigenous
children in Australia and the United States: From Eurocentrism to culturally powerful pedagogies.
Comparative Education Review, 47(1), 64–89.
Long, N., & Long A. (Eds.) (1992). Battlefields of knowledge: The interlocking of theory and practice in
social research and development. New York: Routledge.
Ninnes, P. (2004). Fear and desire in twentieth century comparative education discourse. Paper presented at
the 48th CIES International Annual Meeting, Salt Lake City, March.
Ninnes, P., & Mehta, S. (2000). Postpositivist theorizing and research challenges and opportunities in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 44(2), 205–22.
Paulston, R. G. (2000). Comparative education as Heterotopia? J. Bouzakis. In Historical-Comparative
Perpectives: Festschrift for Andreas M. Kazamias (pp. 153–178). Athens: Gutenburg.
Ross, H. et al. (1992). On shifting ground: The post-paradigmatic identity of U.S. comparative education,
1979–1988. Compare, 22(2), 113–132.
Seidman, S. (2004). Contested knowledge: Social theory today. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
St. Pierre, E. A. & Pillow, W. S. (Eds.) (2000). Working the ruins: Feminist poststructural theory and
methods in education. New York: Routledge.
Stronach, I., & MacLure, M. (1997). Educational research undone: The postmodern embrace. Buckingham:
Open University Press.

A Proposed Mini-Canon for Knowledge Perspective No. 5
Perspectivist Mappings
Ahmed, Z. N. (2003). Mapping rural women’s perspectives on nonformal education experiences. In E. R.
Beauchamp (Ed.), Comparative Education Reader (pp. 45–76). New York: Routledge Falmer.
Antonia, R. J. (1998). Mapping the postmodern social theory. In A. Sica (Ed.), The philosophical debates.
Boston, MA: Blackwell.
Eckstein, M. A. (1986). The comparative mind. In P. G. Altbach & Kelly, G. P. (Ed.), New Approaches to
Comparative Education. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Erkilla, K. (2001). Mapping the entrepreneurial education debates in the United States, the United Kingdom
and Finland. New York: Garland.
Fauconnier, G. (1997). Mapping in thought and language. Cambridge University Press.
Gorostiaga, J., & Paulston, R. G. (2004). Mapping diverse perspectives on school decentralization. In
P. Ninnes & S. Mehta (Eds.), Re-imagining comparative education: Postfoundational ideas and applications for critical times, New York: Routledge Falmer.
Foucault, M. (1986). Of other spaces. Diacritics, 16(1), 22–28.

--- [PDF Page 1179 / Book Page 1207] ---

Big Stories, Small Stories 1207
Friedman, S. S. (1998). Mappings: Feminism and the cultural geographies of encounter. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Huff, A. S. (2000). Ways of mapping strategic thought. In R. G. Paulston (Ed.), Social cartography: Mapping
ways of seeing social and educational change New York: Garland.
Mehta, S. (2002). Mapping excluded knowledge into comparative education discourse: Some implications
for pedagogies of difference. Doctoral Dissertation: University at Buffalo, SUNY, 254 p.
Nicholson-Goodman, J. V. (2000). A Ludic approach to mapping environmental education discourse.
In R. G. Paulston (Ed.), Social cartography: Mapping ways of seeing social and educational change
(pp. 307–326). New York: Garland.
O’Dowd, M. (1999). Mapping knowledge perspectives in the construction of Swedish educational research.
Paper presented at the 43rd CIES annual meeting, Toronto, Canada, April.
Pickles, J. (1999). Social and cultural cartographies and the spatial turn in social theory. Journal of Historical
Geography, 25(1), 93–98.
Rust, V. D. (2000). From modern to postmodern ways of seeing social and educational change. In R. G. Paulston
(Ed.), Social cartography: Mapping ways of seeing social and educational change, New York: Garland.
Shroff-Mehta, P. (2002). Mapping local knowledges in Indian rural development. Doctoral Dissertation:
University at Buffalo, SUNY, 277 p.
Stromquist, N. (2000). Mapping gendered space in Third World educational interventions. In R. G. Paulston
(Ed.), Social cartography: Mapping ways of seeing social and educational change (pp. 223–248).
New York: Garland.

References
Bakhtin, M. M. (Ed) (1994). The Bakhtin reader, Edited by Pam Morris. London: Arnold.
Conle, C. (1992). Language, experience and negotiation. Curriculum Inquiry, 22(2), 165–190.
Cowen, R. (1996). Last past the post: Comparative education, modernity and perhaps post-modernity.
Comparative Education, 32(2), 151–70.
Cowen, R. (2000). Comparing futures or comparing pasts? Comparative Education, 36(3), 333–42.
Dimitriadis, G. & McCarthy, C. (2001). Reading and teaching the postcolonial: From Baldwin to Basquiat
and Beyond. New York: Teacher’s College Press.
Epstein, E. H. & Carroll, K. T. (2005). Abusing ancestors: Historical functionalism and the postmodern
deviation in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 50(1).
Fairclough, N. & Wodak, R. (1997). Critical discourse analysis. In T. A. van Dijk (Ed.), Discourse as social
interaction (pp. 258–84). London: Sage.
Foucault, M. (1980). Power and knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings 1972–1977 Edited by
C. Gordon. Pantheon: New York.
Foucault, M. (1986). Of other spaces. Translated by J. Miskowiec. Diacritics, 16(1), 22–27.
Game, A., & Metcalfe, A. (1996). Passionate sociology. London: Sage.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1989). Context and text: Aspects of language in a social-semiotic perspective.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heredero, J. M. (1989). Education for social development: Social awareness, organisation and technical
innovation. New Delhi: Manohar.
Kelly, G. P. (1992). Debates and trends in comparative education. In R. Arnove, P. Altbach & G. Kelly (Eds.),
Emergent issues in education: Comparative perspectives (pp. 13–24). Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press.
Laska, J. (1973). The future of comparative education: Three basic questions. Comparative Education
Review, 17(3), 295–298.
Latour, B. (1999). Pandora’s hope: Essays on the reality of science studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Lefbevre, H. (1974/1991). The production of space. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Luke, A. (1999). Critical discourse analysis. In J. P Lakomski & Keeves, G. (Eds.), Issues in educational
research. New York: Pergamon.
Martusewicz, R. (2001). Seeking passage: Poststructuralism, pedagogy, ethics. New York: Teacher’s College Press.

--- [PDF Page 1180 / Book Page 1208] ---

1208

Mehta

Masemann, V. (1990). Ways of knowing: Implications for comparative education. Comparative Education
Review 32(4), 465–73.
Musolff, A. (2006). Metaphor scenarios in public discourse. Metaphor and Symbol, 21(1) 165–190.
Ninnes, P. (2002). Origin stories and the discursive constitution of comparative education. Paper presented
at Stanford University, USA, 2002.
Paulston, R. (1994). Comparative and international education: Paradigms and theories. In T. Husen (Ed.),
The international encyclopedia of education (pp. 923–33). Oxford.
Paulston, R. (1999). Mapping comparative education after postmodernity. Comparative Education Review,
38(2), 438–463.
Paulston, R. (1996). Social cartography: Mapping ways of seeing social and educational change. New York:
Garland.
Paulston, R. (March 2004). Opening up the canon? How freedom to map the multiple in knowledge debates
enhances comparison for disputatious time. Paper presented at the 48th CIES annual meeting, Salt Lake
City, Utah.
Rust, V. (1991). Postmodernism and its comparative education implications. Comparative Education Review,
35(4), 610–626.
Star, S. (1991). The sociology of the invisible: The primacy of work in the writings of Anselm Strauss.
In D. R. Maines (Ed.), Social organisation and social process: Essays in honour of Anselm Strauss.
New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Schriewer, J. (2000). Discourse formation in comparative education, Komparatistische bibliothek; bd 10.
Comparative education studies series: Vol. 10. New York: Peter Lang.
Scott, J. W. (1991). Women’s history. In P. Burke (Ed.), New perspectives on historical writing (pp. 42–43).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Seidman, S. (2004). Contested knowledge: Social theory today. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Sommers, M. (1999). The privatisation of citizenship: How to unthink a knowledge culture”. In V. Bonnell,
L. Hunt & R. Biernacki (Eds.), Beyond the cultural turn: New directions in the study of society and
culture University of California Press.
Stronach I. & McClure, M. (1997). Educational research undone: The postmodern embrace. Buckingham:
Open University Press.
Welch A., & Masemann, V. (1997). Editorial introduction (special issue on tradition, modernity and postmodernism in comparative education). International Review of Education. 43(5–6), 393–399.

