================================================================================
Chapter 75: Comparative Education in Two Asian Contexts: A Juxtaposition and Some Questions
Author(s): Chengxu Wang, Jianhong Dong, and Masako Shibata
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1209–1223
PDF Pages: pp. 1181–1195 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1181 / Book Page 1209] ---

75
COMPARATIVE EDUCATION IN TWO ASIAN
CONTEXTS: A JUXTAPOSITION AND SOME
QUESTIONS
Wang C., Dong, J. and Shibata, M

Introduction
The history of ‘comparative education in China and in Japan is fascinatingly different.
Both countries, of course, share many aspects of cultural history, major belief systems, and some aspects of governmental tradition (including the tradition of Confucian
assumptions about social and political harmony). Yet the individual (but overlapping)
histories of the two countries are powerfully different and have taken them in dramatically different directions at various points in the late nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.
It is possible to provide a juxtaposed account of these developments, but writing the
histories is, paradoxically, a job for the future: it will require a great deal of subsequent
work to define and to dispute these ‘histories’ in a serious and comparative way.
A great deal of work has already been done on the various ‘comparative educations’ of Europe, or Europe and North America. Certainly with individual accounts
of comparative education being assembled for a range of countries, and for professional, Societies the basic sorts of information that permit thought are beginning to
be assembled.
But we are nowhere near yet in terms of grasping the comparative sociologies and
geographies of ‘comparative education’: How do the shape and style of comparative education change over time, affected by the politics and sociology of specific
contexts?

We Are Not Sure
Therefore, it is suggested that these ‘histories’ of comparative education in China and
Japan – which are here merely juxtaposed – are an indication of some of the work which
needs doing in the future. The ‘histories’ of comparative education in East Asia need
defining and rescuing. These brief sketches are a first step, a hint about unresolved issues,
a sketch of the ways in which knowledge – comparative education – is related to social
context. As authors, therefore, we have chosen to keep our sketches separate.

1209
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1209–1223.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1182 / Book Page 1210] ---

1210

Wang, Dong, and Shibata

China: The Evolution of Chinese Comparative Education
[Wang C., Dong, J.]
Most accounts of comparative education stress the English-speaking tradition, but
there is also a major tradition of comparative education in East Asia.
A number of Chinese scholars in comparative education say that the Chinese comparative education has experienced similar development stages as in the Western
countries (Li, 1983; Cheng, 1985; Wu & Yang, 1999). Since 1949, Chinese comparative education has been heavily influenced by political, social and cultural changes in
the country and has gone along a bumpy road.

The Stage of Prehistory
In ancient China, there was discussion about education from a comparative perspective, and at a later stage, articles or reports on foreign education by travellers spread. It
is hard to say that at this stage there was any comparative study in education. During
the period of the Spring and Autumn (770–476 BC), the historical records show that
both Confucius and Mencius once made comparisons about politics, cultures as well as
education of the Xia, Shang and Zhou Dynasties (Wang, 1999). By the seventh century
of Tang Dynasty, Huang Zunxiang’s ‘Records on Japan’ and Xuan Zang’s (602–664)
‘Records on West Regions’ presented broad pictures on education in both Japan and
India (Li, 1983; Wu & Yang, 1999; Wang, 1999). The exchanges of cultures and education with neighbouring countries such as Korea, Japan and India can be traced back to
the Han Dynasty (202 BC).
The detailed introduction of foreign education to China started in the late sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, mainly by Western missionaries in written form (Li, 1983;
Wu & Yang, 1999). The education systems, teaching methods, together with history
of Western education, became increasingly popular in China, which resulted in a great
and long debate nationwide in the nineteenth century.

The Stage of Description and Borrowing
China has a long tradition of culture and civilization of five thousand years. In the past
dynasties, the cultural superiority complex in the Chinese academic field resulted in
neglecting the study of foreign cultures including education. Only during the Opium
War of 1840, when foreign industrial and military forces opened the door of China to
the outside world, there began the self-questioning of Chinese intellectuals on outward
looking ways for China in all fields. In this regard, education played an important role.
In the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century, nationwide debate on
how and what to learn and borrow from foreign experiences including education
began among intellectual circles, as well as all walks of life, and practices copied
from foreign education systems were experimented in education. The debate on
‘Chinese Essence, Western function (Zhong Ti Xi Yong)’ which built the notion that
‘[t]he Oriental worships Dao (the spiritual civilization) and the Western worships

--- [PDF Page 1183 / Book Page 1211] ---

Comparative Education in Two Asian Contexts 1211

techniques (the material civilization)’ reached its peak during the May 4 Movement, a
new cultural movement. The Movement to some extent was anti-tradition, namely, antiConfucianism. The refusal of anything foreign was taken as one of the major obstacles
impeding China’s progress towards modernization. In response to this, the strategy of
Western Democracy and Science was put forward. During this period, comparative
education gradually earned its reputation within the more general field of educational
studies (Cheng, 1985; Wu & Yang, 1999).
A number of articles, translated books and even teaching materials on foreign education with a descriptive and introductory nature were published and adopted. The first
publication on comparative education in a real sense was found as early as 1901 (late
Qin Dynasty) in a journal entitled ‘World Education’. In the same year, a four-volume
teaching compendium introducing education in Germany, France, United States, Britain
and Japan developed by the Hubei Provincial Education Department was adopted. One
additional publication was the ‘Status-quo of World Education’ edited by Lu Feikui in
1911 (Li, 1983; Cheng, 1985). The three publications sparked a start in comparative
studies in the field. In the following years, more than 40 books on comparative education
either edited or translated by Chinese scholars were published. Luo and Wei translated
the work of Kandel on Comparative Education (Cheng, 1985; Wu & Yang, 1999). The
publication introduced the methodology of comparative education to China, which was
widely adopted by Chinese scholars in the field of comparative education.
All the publications on comparative education at this stage were mainly focused on
the introduction of Western education together with the research findings of Western
comparative education.

The Stage of Professional Study
The term ‘comparative’ was first found in a book entitled ‘Education in Germany, France,
Britain and US from a Comparative Perspective’ edited by Yu Ji in 1917 (Li, 1983). It
was written mainly on the basis of similar work by a Japanese Scholar and hardly had
any extra work by the author himself. The real start of comparative education research
was after the May 4 Movement in 1919 with the introduction of Russian education and
lectures of a number of American educators such as Dewey, Monroe, Michael, etc., who
were rather influential in the field of education as well (Wang, Zhu & Gu, 1985).
This period of comparative study can be represented by four books which are the
most important and influential works in the field of comparative education written by
Zuang (1929), Zhong (1935), Chang (1936–1937) and Luo (1939) (Cheng, 1985; Wu
& Yang, 1999). They were based on the comparative analysis of education or school
systems in a wide range of countries with a detailed analysis on education at different
types and levels in Germany, France, Britain and the United States.
Zuang’s publication of “Comparative Analysis of Education in a Variety of
Countries” resulted in a required course in comparative education being established in
China Normal University and departments of education of universities (Li, 1983).
The works written by Chinese scholars at this stage can be streamlined into three
categories: first, a thematic introduction of different types of education in a number of

--- [PDF Page 1184 / Book Page 1212] ---

1212

Wang, Dong, and Shibata

countries in a juxtaposed manner; second, a full picture of education depicted country
by country; and third, an integrated description of the first and the second above (Wu &
Yang, 1999). The methodologies, that is, the historical approach, adopted in the studies
were mainly copied from colleagues in Western countries.

Changes and Development in Comparative
Education After 1949
Unlike the Western tradition of comparative education (to my understanding, the
development stages of comparative education in Western countries are more or less
linked to the works published by the eminent scholars in the field), after 1949, the
founding of new China, the development of the Chinese comparative education are
closely linked to the political, social and cultural changes in the country. This can be
roughly categorized into four stages represented by zips and turns.
The first stage was from 1949 to 1957, which was a period of nationalization and
reorganization. This stage witnessed a process of taking over the system of education
and the ‘old regime’ institutions of the republic – and formulating a highly centralized
control over education. The education system and aspects such as organization and
structure, education theories and practices, and even teaching curricula and textbooks
were solely patterned on the Soviet model. Chinese comparative education was no
exception. Since there was no ‘comparative education’ in the Soviet Union, comparative education in China was abolished both as an independent discipline and teaching
subject (Li, 1983; Cheng, 1985). The education researchers and studies focused only
on the Soviet system. In the 1950s, a large number of Soviet works on education, that
is, history of education, pedagogies, educational psychology, etc., were translated and
published in China (Wu & Yang, 1999).
The late 1950s till the first half of the 1960s showed a stage of a ‘great leap forward’
in Chinese comparative education. In line with the ‘great leap forward’ movement in
the economic field and the adoption of a positive foreign policy, the exchanges with
other countries in the world were increased rapidly in all areas including education. In
the meantime, the friendly relationship with the Soviet Union was abruptly broken in
the early 1960s. As a result, radical changes occurred in all spheres of society including education. At this critical moment, China had to turn its eyes on other parts of the
world. Comparative education in China followed along the same line. Five research
institutes on foreign education study were established in universities, that is, Peking
University, Qinhua University and Beijing Normal University, from 1961 to 1964,
focusing on education in Western Europe and North America, Soviet Union, Japan and
Korea (Wu & Yang, 1999; Wang, 1999). The main assignments of these research institutes in the mid-1960s were first to learn and study, and second to collect information
and materials. The only in-house publication was a journal named “Trends of Foreign
Education” edited by the research institute of Beijing Normal University (Li, 1983;
Wu & Yang, 1999).
In line with the state ideology, Marxism, Leninism and Maoism were taken as the
guiding principles of comparative education. The theories and methodologies adopted

--- [PDF Page 1185 / Book Page 1213] ---

Comparative Education in Two Asian Contexts 1213

in the comparative field were historical materialism and dialectics advocated by Marx,
Lenin and Mao. Other schools of theories and methods in comparative education of
Western origin were largely rejected and even criticized.
The ‘Great Cultural Revolution’ (1966–1976) saw another stage of stagnation in
the field of comparative education. Anything foreign was abandoned and criticized as
rubbish and anti-revolutionary. Chinese comparative education was again the victim.
All research establishments on foreign education study were dismissed and a number
of eminent scholars in the field persecuted (Li, 1983). Though there were piecemeal
studies on foreign education in the early 1970s, they were solely for the purpose of
political needs (Li, 1983; Cheng, 1985; Wu & Yang, 1999).
1977–1985 experienced a phase of rehabilitation and recovery of political, economic and social order along the lines of the pre-Cultural Revolution period, in which
education was also in the process of recovery. Hence, China switched its national
focus on the nation’s economy with the adoption of the open-door policy in political and socio-economic affairs. From 1979 onwards, the issue of change and reform
of educational structure was put on the national agenda; a decision on the reform of
the educational structure (May 1985) was adopted. This change was represented by a
nationwide system reform of education, which covers almost all spheres of education.
Chinese comparative education also experienced a period of recovery and impressive
development.
The Ministry of Education organized a seminar on the recovery of Chinese comparative education in 1977, with participation by the scholars from the previous four
comparative research institutes (Li, 1983). The four research institutes were not only
re-established but also expanded in both institution and research area terms. In addition, new research institutes or units were built, such as the comparative education
research unit in the National Institute of Educational Research (1979) and a foreign
education research section in the department of education headed by Professor Wang
Chengxu of Hangzhou University (1979).
The last two decades have witnessed an unprecedented stage of development in
Chinese comparative education, which is represented by the establishment of the
guiding principles of comparative studies in the field. The shift of national focus on
economic construction resulted in adjusting the national objectives in education and its
research orientations. In terms of comparative education, Deng Xiaoping’s ‘education
should be oriented to the modernization, world and the future’ is taken as directive ideology for building the discipline together with the theories, view points and approaches
of Marxism and Leninism. In addition, comparative researches and studies were on
the laws and successful practices of global education to serve for the construction of
socialist modernization with Chinese characteristics (Zhang & Wang, 1979). Along
with this line, the different theories and methods from abroad have been introduced to
the field and widely adopted by the scholars of comparative education in consideration
of the national context.
The foci and topics of concern are changing with the political, socio-economic and
cultural contexts in the country. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, keeping in mind
that the dual objectives of comparative education were to ‘centre on the excellence
of education’ and to ‘promote educational development and reform’ in China in

--- [PDF Page 1186 / Book Page 1214] ---

1214

Wang, Dong, and Shibata

conformity with the national development plans, the starting focus of comparative
study was mainly on education systems of six developed countries, namely, United
States, Soviet Union, Britain, France, West Germany and Japan, ranging from preschool education to higher education including secondary technical and vocational
education, teacher education and education administration (Li, 1983; Wang, Zhu, &
Gu, 1985; Gu, 2005). In the meantime, the research focus was also on second-hand
materials about foreign education so that information and data which might be helpful
to the reform and adjustment of the education structure of the country were processed
and analysed to serve practical needs.
Following the increasing advocacy of national open-door policy, the international
exchanges in terms of personnel and documentation were greatly encouraged and accelerated. The professionals in the field of comparative education had wide opportunities to
study and research in countries of their interests with the first-hand materials and their
own experiences. Diversification was the main feature at the 1990s stage. The foci and
topics of comparative education were widely expanded and getting more specific. In
addition to studying on theories and practices of education structure reforms of other
countries, there were themes like cultural tradition and education modernization, education and market economy, education and social progress, etc. The diversification was also
in terms of theories and approaches adopted in the field of comparative research. A large
number of books on comparative education mainly from Western countries were translated and published in China. In the meantime, the adoption of our own philosophies and
methods in the comparative study was encouraged. The study became analytical rather
than descriptive. Chinese comparative education ‘entered a stage of thematic studies’. In
other words, comparative education research has shifted “from macro research such as
system studies to a micro one, that is, curricula, teaching modes and methods, etc. They
are all closely related to the education reform and development in China” (Gu, 2005).
The diversification is evident in the publications of comparative education as well.
A number of research findings and publications came into being with a wide range of
topics. Since the 1980s, the publications in the field can be sorted into four categories:
(1) teaching materials for higher education institutions, the most important of which
were ‘comparative education’ edited by Professors Wang, Zhu and Gu, which was the
first teaching material after 1949, with the first edition published in 1982 and the second
1985, and the other entitled ‘comparative pedagogics’ developed and edited by Wu and
Yang in 1989 and revised in 1999; (2) comprehensive and thematic research works,
that is, a three-volume short history of comparative studies of Chinese and foreign
education edited by Zhang and Wang published in 1979, a pioneering work in Chinese
comparative education which intends to place the comparative analysis of the history of
both Chinese and foreign education in a broad frame of historical and cultural context
of the world and is expected to provide both theoretical and practical bases for the education reform in China; (3) selections and translated articles; and (4) series, the most
influential two sets were ‘series of foreign education’ with more than 30 volumes in the
late 1970s and 1980s and ‘comparative education series’ with 9 volumes with a wide
extent of topics like Gu and Xue’s ‘introduction of comparative education: education and
national development’, Wang’s ‘history of comparative education’, Wu’s ‘comparative
teaching theories’, Hao and Li’s “comparative study on education legislations in differ-

--- [PDF Page 1187 / Book Page 1215] ---

Comparative Education in Two Asian Contexts 1215

ent countries’, etc., in the 1990s (Li, 1983; Wu & Yang, 1999). Since the early 1990s,
China has entered its second round of reform and opening and speeded up its process
of integrating into the international community led by the United States. An increased
number of scholars were involved in collaborative projects with international agencies
and education institutions of other countries. The areas of comparative education studies have been greatly broadened and kept abreast with the international field, that is, the
cultural perspective of study, international and indigenous education, etc. The current
comparative education in China is developed along two lines, one is on academic or
professional studies with in-depth analysis, and the other is based on practical needs.
The former is more focused on the theoretical and scientific researches and has a limited impact on policy-making and practices and the latter is centred on evidence-based
studies and has a stronger impact on the current practices in education.
‘Policy-makers in an increasing number of countries are becoming aware of
developments in education and training necessary to meet the challenges posed by
globalization. Comparative and international education studies are able to provide the
information needed by these policy-makers to assist them in their quest for educational
practices and innovations necessary to meet the challenges’ (Wilson, 2003). It is
evident in China. The comparative practice is becoming an indispensable part of
decision-making processes in education in China. The National Centre for Education
Development Research and other departments for international exchange and cooperation in the Ministry of Education are the main components to undertake the mission of
comparative studies and information provision. There are a number of special issues,
bulletins or references on comparative analysis and descriptive introduction of strategies, policies and practices in all areas of education of both developed and developing
countries circulated mainly in the ministry.
During the period of recovery, the academic societies in the field of comparative
education emerged. The Research Society of Foreign Education (later changed to the
China Comparative Education Society (CCES) ) was founded in 1979 and admitted
into the World Council in 1984. The Journal of the Society, ‘Foreign Education’1 was
created in 1980. The first National Conference of the Society was held in 1978 with
50 participants and the latest 13th National Conference in 2005 with 260 participants
(including scholars from Hongkong, Taiwan and postgraduate students in comparative
education). The membership has been raised from 130 in 1981 to more than 500 in
1989 (Beijing Normal University, www.compe.cn).
In the 1980s, comparative education as either compulsory or elected course was introduced to the bachelor programmes at normal universities or the departments of education
of comprehensive universities. Started from 1979, comparative education as an independent discipline was introduced to both Master and Ph.D. programmes (Wu & Yang,
1999). For instance, Hangzhou University introduced comparative education for graduate students by Professor Wang Chengxu in 1980. At a later stage, a Masters’ course
was offered in 1982 and Ph.D. in 1984 in the same university (now named Zhejiang
University). Nowadays, Ph.D. degree in comparative education is awarded in 7 universities and Masters’ degree courses are offered in 30 universities (Wang, 2006; Gu, 2006).
The main bimonthly academic journals and periodicals are: Comparative Education
Research of Beijing Normal University (also known as The Journal of the Society),

--- [PDF Page 1188 / Book Page 1216] ---

1216

Wang, Dong, and Shibata

Prospect for Global Education of East China Normal University, Foreign Education
Review of North East China Normal University and Primary and Secondary Education
Abroad of Shanghai Normal University. In addition, the translation and publication of
Chinese version of Prospects of UNESCO International Bureau of Education (IBE) started
in 1980. More and more reports and documents prepared by the international organizations such as UNESCO, UNICEF, UNDP and World Bank have been translated into the
Chinese language and added to the publications of comparative education in China.

JAPAN: Introduction
[Masako Shibata]
This part of the chapter tries to trace the history of comparative education in Japan.
Comparitive study emerged and began operating not necessarily in the university
in the case of Japan and elsewhere. The ideas and operation of comparitive study have
been outlined essentially within the processes of the construction, destruction and
reconstruction of the modern state and society. On this analytical ground, I understand
that comparative education as a field of study is a modern project. This article on
Japan, therefore, starts with my understanding of the development of Japan as a modern state before looking at how the study has been shaped as an academic field in the
university. The processes of Japan’s steep learning curve in inspecting and absorbing
foreign models demonstrated a slow genesis of the history of comparative education in
the country. That is to say, this field of study has been shaped within the generative and
regenerative processes of a modern Japan, its society and its education.
To attest this, a number of modern aspects of comparative education will be discussed with special reference to Japan. They are: firstly, the concept of the state and its
power as the major theme of the study; secondly, the unchallenged, linear notions of
progress; and thirdly, the aspirations of science.

The Onset of Japan’s Steep Learning Curve in Learning
from the Others
In nineteenth-century Europe and America, education was regarded as an important
social institution for the development of the country. The French, the English and the
Americans, for example, recognized that finding ‘better’ education and absorbing it
were a key and a most effective strategy for improving their own education. During
this period, their educational bureaucrats spared time and labour to inspect foreign
education. So did the Japanese. They had sought better education in more advanced
societies outside the country to make it rich, powerful and enlightened.
Japan’s steep learning curve in studying foreign countries had started before the
country became a State in the Meiji era (1868–1912). Feudal fiefs in the Tokugawa
shogunate (1603–1867), despite the Shogunal tradition of isolation policy, invested
in, or turned a blind eye to, the travelling of their young samurais abroad. Some of
the fiefs, like Satsuma and Choshu (Satcho, in short) whose samurais later played the

--- [PDF Page 1189 / Book Page 1217] ---

Comparative Education in Two Asian Contexts 1217

central role in the Meiji Restoration, had appealed to the shogunate to recognize the
need of absorbing knowledge in Europe and the United States. In this respect, those
fiefs were foresighted in arguing that this would ultimately meet the ‘national’ interest.
As a result, 60 samurais, of which 37 were from Satcho, went to Western countries,
mainly to England (34), the United States (30), France (5) and Holland (2) (Ishizuki,
1972, p. 104). In the process of the construction of the modern Japanese State, those
who opened their eyes to foreign countries – exclusively Europe and America, but
not Asia – assumed leadership of State affairs in the coming era. The passenger list
shows the names of chief personnel in the Meiji regime, such as the Ministers of
Education and professors of Tokyo Imperial University. Eventually the Shogun himself dispatched 80 men to France (27), Holland (18), England (15), Russia (6), the
United States (3) and other countries (Ishizuki, 1972, p. 104).
In deconstructing the semi-feudal Tokugawa ancient regime and constructing a
modern Japan, advanced technology was not only what Meiji leaders felt was wanting in the country. What drew their attention was the ‘progressiveness’ of Western
societies, which, for them, implied civil societies where a sense of individualism and
social equality are based. Often in the West, the term modern is associated with the
advancement of technology and the construction of democratic and equal society
(Bendix, 1967). In this regard, Meiji leaders were clear-sighted that becoming modern
and being recognized as such by the Westerners was imperative for the Japanese State
to claim its legitimacy and to enforce its political independence against them. Arinori
Mori, a former samurai student in England and America, and arguably the most influential Minister of Education (1885–1889) in Meiji Japan, was a great admirer of those
civil societies and their social values. Like some other national leaders in Japan, he
was profoundly inspired by Christian faith as well. What those samurai students saw
in Western societies greatly influenced the blueprint of Meiji educational policy. In the
government’s inspection voyage to the West, the top envoy noted in 1871 that:
Nothing is more important than schools for improving social conditions and
uprooting social evils. [A sound national foundation] depends on education, on
education alone. … Our people are no different from the Americans or Europeans
of today; it is all a matter of education or lack of education. (Kume, 2002, p. xiii)
Meiji leaders were also far-sighted in maintaining that ‘things outside the schools
would matter and govern things inside the schools’. Since this stage, the government
and educators in Japan, to different extents and from difference approaches, had tried
to reflect the social values of Western societies upon the educational ideas and system
of the country. Especially from the late nineteenth century until the middle of the twentieth century, drastic changes took place in education through the absorption of ideas
and systems which were, strictly speaking, foreign to the country. For the Japanese
government and educators, a major purpose of studying foreign countries was to build
a country of an acceptable approximation to the modern State, industrial technology
and civil society in American or European terms. The kernel of the State legitimacy
and the national pride was winning the recognition of Western countries as a country
with those qualities.

--- [PDF Page 1190 / Book Page 1218] ---

1218

Wang, Dong, and Shibata

In line with this idea, Tokyo Imperial University started as a remarkably international institution in the country with 24 Western professors (43% of the total). The
government directed that higher education had to be given through foreign tongues,
and a good command of Western languages was an elite factor in Japanese higher education (DoE, 1876, p. 26; DoE, 1893, p. 112). Studying in the West became central to
career development in the Japanese academe. Professors and students in other Imperial
Universities too received governmental funding for their study abroad. Through these
institutional windows to the West, the national academic elite were equipped with
‘advanced knowledge’.
Since then, the theme of counter-balancing attraction to the West and exclusive pride
in ‘self ’ has been recurrent in the politics and education of the country. In the Meiji
period, Japan’s learning curve had made drastic strides along with the growth of the
economy, the military and a sense of national pride. Eventually, those foreign professors were replaced by Japanese returnees from the West, and the Japanese language
became exclusively dominant in instruction in the university. Since then, for the most
part the Japanese academe has remained practically monolingual. In the so-called
‘catch-up’ processes, there could be seen a sense of superiority to Asian countries.
Prominent educators advocated that a modern Japan should detach itself from its ‘old
Asian ill-fated friends’ such as China and Korea (Fujita, 1995, p. 33). To the Western
audience, the government proudly introduced Japan’s achievement in the Philadelphia
International Exhibition in 1876: ‘Learning is … to be equally the inheritance of
nobles and gentry, farmers and artisans’, and ‘Males and females are admitted without
distinction’ (DoE, 1876, pp. 20–22, 125). It was important for the Japanese to show a
credible face of modern Japan in the mirror of Western civilization.
On the whole, education had operated mainly as political, social and cultural benchmark of the national development until it became ‘science’. Therefore, within the
context of the construction of a modern Japan, her steep learning curve continued for
the ultimate sake of the national defence. The dominant theme of ‘progress’ continued
to be sought within education outside the country. Europe and America had long been
the teachers of Japan until its economy superseded theirs in the 1980s. Even after, or
because of, Japan’s defeat by the United States in the Second World War, this political
and academic inclination remained powerful.

The Linearity of Social Development
and the Notion of Science
The demise of the nationalist Emperor State reinforced the Westward direction of the
Japanese academe. There was also a growing aspiration for the reconstruction of democratic societies in the post-Second World War world. Both Japanese and American
educators undertook the drastic reform for the democratization of Japanese education
by recognizing a democratic Japan as crucial not only for Japan itself but also for the
Asia-Pacific region.
Apart from the education reform as such, the US occupation has left influence on the
development and direction of the post-war Japanese academe. During the occupation,

--- [PDF Page 1191 / Book Page 1219] ---

Comparative Education in Two Asian Contexts 1219

prominent Japanese educators supported the US authority in rewriting the educational
ideas of pre-war Japan. This cooperation offered by the Japanese was enormously useful for the US authority and, to the surprise of the United States itself, far-reaching
(Shibata, 2005). Tokiomi Kaigo, for example, worked with the Americans for screening and rewriting school textbooks. Mantarou Kido too played a leading role in the
Japanese Education Reform Committee, which, according to a US official’s memory,
‘more than any other agency, including the Occupation itself, had brought about the
achievements in Japanese education’ (Trainor, 1983, p. 119). Many of those Japanese
who created the basis of Japan’s new education had exerted professional authority in
the post-war Japanese academe.
Masunori Hiratsuka was a student who had cultivated his intellectual capacity
with young Professor Kaigo in Tokyo Imperial University from the pre-war period.
Hiratsuka eventually became the leading founder of the Japan Comparative Education
Society (JCES, initially called the Comparative Education Society in Japan). Born in
a clergyman’s family, he was inspired by Pestalozzian pedagogy. He often claimed
strong Christian influence on his commitment to education. Hiratsuka’s devotion to
comparative education was also largely based on his earlier missionary schooling
(Hiratsuka, 1975). His undergraduate work at Tokyo became a book, Kyuyaku-seisho
no kyoiku-shiso (The Educational Philosophy of the Old Testament). And another
one of his works, Nihon Kirisuto-shugi-kyoiku bunka-shi (The Cultural History of
Christian Education in Japan), drew the attention of the US occupation authorities,
and was translated by them into English. As a professor of Kyushu University and
later the director of the National Institute for Educational Research, Hiratsuka operated these two institutions as the pioneer and centre of comparative education in
Japan. His achievements have been commemorated by the JCES in the Hiratsuka
Award from 1990.
Coinciding with the foundation of the Comparative Education Society in North
America in 1956, more studies of foreign education began to take place than before in
Japan as well. The chair of Comparative Education was first established at Kyushu in
1952. Hiroshima, Kyoto and Tokyo followed suit. The JCES started with 94 members
in 1965 (827 in 2005). In 1975, the Society first published its own journal, Nihon
Hikaku-kyoiku-gakkai Kiyou (renamed Hikaku-kyoiku-gaku Kenkyu in 1990), under
the editorial board headed by Tetsuya Kobayashi at Kyoto.
Despite the steady growth of the Society, this field of study did not win a proper
academic recognition in the Japanese academe. Comparative educationists put up with
a marginal reputation as ‘experts’ on other countries. In general, the study of comparative education was thought to offer a merely descriptive summary of foreign educational
affairs or to be used as an excuse for scholars’ travelling abroad (Ikeda, 1975). Indeed,
a lengthy work of a 10-volume series written by those who shared interest in foreign
education, Sekai no kyoiku (Education in the World) showed largely the description, and
not analysis, of educational policies and systems abroad (Kido et al., 1958). Scholars in
comparative education were aware of the reputation, the practices of this kind, and the
problems they had to deal with. The JCES put as its prime aim at the first conference in
Hiroshima: “How to introduce comparative education into university education”. Since
then, the Society has striven to make the field of study as an academically authorized

--- [PDF Page 1192 / Book Page 1220] ---

1220

Wang, Dong, and Shibata

subject of university study. The Society thought that it would not be possible to deal with
the ‘low level’ of work in comparative education, without having established its own
‘methodology’ (Ikeda, 1975). In this period, it was accepted in Japan and elsewhere that
educational research joined ‘science’. Kido stated that the purpose of the research is to
‘know the facts’ (Kido, 1958). However, such popular debates on science and methodology themselves did not make an innovative development in Japan. There, the studies
concentrated on the introduction of the theories and methodologies of Hans, Kandel,
Bereday, King, Holmes and others (Ando, 1965; Ikeda, 1969). By doing this, despite the
growing attention to this study field in the post-war world, comparative education as an
academic field in Japan had not surpassed the infantile stage (Suzuki, 1958).
Nonetheless, within comparative education circles around the world, the JCES
as an organization had grown solidly and became a founding member of the World
Council of Comparative Education Societies (WCCES) in 1970. In 1980, the Society
by itself managed to organize the 4th WCCES Congress in Tokyo. The main theme of
the Congress was ‘Tradition and Innovation in Education’. In reference to this main
theme, ‘Moral Education’ was also put up as a sub-theme. In post-war Japan, educators
have hardly been able to discuss these issues, such as ‘tradition’ and ‘moral education’,
without failing to recall pre-war ‘wrong’ education and its denial by the United States
after 1945. As Japan’s new education started by denouncing pre-war education which
had long been controlled by the Emperor State, the power of the State remained as the
dominant theme in practically all fields of educational study in the post-war period. For
the Japanese in general, these issues are reminiscent of pre-war ethnocentric nationalism, and, for some people, are a potential for its resurgence. The themes of the Tokyo
Congress reflected the Japanese preoccupation with this discussion. It was especially
strong before the end of the Cold War, but has never been forgotten.
There was also a legacy of the war and the occupation in the development of comparative education in Japan. By the 1980s, Japanese industries have grown in capitalist
ways, well enough to alarm the United States itself who had pushed Japan in this
line after the war. While the American leaders were feeling their ‘Nation at Risk’,
Japan had achieved a major position in the economy in the world, in particular in the
Pacific Rim. It was broadly assumed that the pattern of education and human resource
application in Japan was a strong basis for its ‘miraculous’ success in developing the
industries and the national economy (Asian Development Bank, 1991). Structuralfunctionalists also suggested that economic growth would be contingent on the stock
of human capital, and the quality of human capital would depend on that of education.
In the 1980s, Japanese education had attracted a great deal of attention from around
the world (King, 1986). Along with other ‘centres’ of comparative education, Tokyo
earned the privilege of being a World Congress organizer after London (JCES, 2004).
At the same time, the 1980s was also a period when Japan was expected to make
larger contributions to the international community than before. The Ad-hoc Education
Reform Council (1984–1987), summoned by the Nakasone Cabinet (1983–1987),
called for the internationalization of the school and the university in Japan. Based
on the governmental plan of ‘100,000 Foreign Students’ in the Japanese campuses,
they accepted an increasing number of overseas students. Accordingly, ‘international
education’ became popular, and courses with name of this kind or alike were rapidly

--- [PDF Page 1193 / Book Page 1221] ---

Comparative Education in Two Asian Contexts 1221

installed in the university curricula. As of 1993, 168 courses on comparative international
education were offered in 62 universities and 3 research institutions throughout the
country (Umakoshi, 1996).
Given the Japanese position in politics, economy and education in the world, the
Japanese eyes were beginning to shift, not literally but culturally, from the West to the
East. With the growth of Japan’s monetary contribution to international institutions, a
larger number of positions than before became available for the Japanese to take up.
In this context, along with the government, educators also regarded offering Japanese
experience as a model as important and useful, in particular, to developing countries.
Although themes and panels on Western education were still dominant in the JCES
conferences, there could be seen a burgeoning of those on Asia from the late 1970s
(JCES, 2004). From this period, this eastward tendency has remained in comparative
education in Japan. It is characteristic that all the books which deserved the Hiratsuka
Award (the 1st in 1990 until the 15th in 2004) were on Asia, except for one volume on
Germany and the other one on Australia.
Overall, then this interpretation of Japanese education owes many insights to the
intellectual tradition of comparative education developed in Europe. Firstly, the Japanese
learnt that it was important for the State to take the lead in educating the people to establish its own model. This way would lead the country to its political and social stability,
its economic prosperity and its security. They also learnt that it was important and very
useful to inspect other models. This way would enable the government and educators
to know what would be ‘better’ or what would be more ‘advanced’ education. And data
and their systematic presentation would help the proving of this view.
Indeed, comparative education is a modern project (Cowen, 1996). The Japanese have
pursued the aspiration of the ideas of ‘liberalism’, ‘democracy’, ‘civil society’, ‘science’
and ‘development’. Although the belief of the Japanese in these values has elevated their
steep learning curve, the chasing of these ideas and the belief as an academic act appeared
to be linear and not complex enough. A strong focus on data collection, concentration
on descriptions and the simple aspirations of positivism, what can be called the practices of ‘an error in episteme’ (Cowen, 1999; Cowen, 2002), have long been addressed
as problems in Japan too. Nonetheless, they seem to have not been seriously grappled
with. In dealing with demands for new ‘knowledge’, this field of study in Japan is seen
as incapable of overcoming its anachronism (JCES, 2004). It is still a modern project.
Perhaps it has missed an old theme, education as cultural practices. For sure, adherence
to the linear notions of social development and knowledge will not be helpful to come to
grips with the changing pattern of formal education in a globalising world.

Conclusion
What is interesting (among other things in these juxtaposed accounts) is the way in
which there is a mix of comparative education as action and comparative education as
a way of thinking. Of course these motifs can be found almost anywhere (as for example in the United States or in France) but the dramatic histories of modernization and
re-modernization in China and Japan make the motif there very complex.

--- [PDF Page 1194 / Book Page 1222] ---

1222

Wang, Dong, and Shibata

What is also quite fascinating is the way in which the politics of war and revolution affect what is seen as ‘comparative education’. These potential histories are
different from the changes marked by shifts in schools of thought, of disputes about
method, and struggles over the decline and fall of departments or journals which are
so much part of the literature about ‘comparative education’ in northern Europe and
northern America.
Thirdly, on the basis of these accounts (juxtaposed above), a fascinating motif for
future research is the question: what happens when the link between comparative education and the State is visible and strong? How does the State as a comparative actor
begin to affect comparative education as a way of thinking (and vice versa)? Maybe
there is no vice versa.
Thus, there is a final and permanently relevant question to be raised also, which in
one way, subordinates all of the themes above. For future work, one of the most important single questions to ask is: Through which lenses or (in a different vocabulary)
through which categories of description, may an interpretation of comparative education in East Asia be built?

Notes
1. 1990, the journal ‘Foreign Education Trends’ of Beijing Normal University was replaced as the journal
of the Society and later changed its title to ‘Comparative Education Research’ in 1992.

References
Ando, Takao (1965). Hikaku-kyoiku-gaku genron – mondai no teiki to kenkyu. Tokyo: Iwasaki Shoten.
Asian Development Bank (1991). Education and development in Asia and the Pacific. Manila: Asian
Development Bank.
Beijing Normal University, Memorabilia of China Comparative Education Society, http://www.compe.cn
Bendix, R. (1967). Tradition and modernity reconsidered. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 9(3),
292–346.
Cheng, Youxin (Ed.) (1985). Comparative pedagogics, Beijing cultural College Unpublished teaching
materials.
Cowen, R. (1996). Last past the post: Comparative education, modernity and perhaps post-modernity.
Comparative Education, 32(2), 151–170.
Cowen, R. (1999). Late modernity and the rules of chaos: An initial note on transitologies and rims. In
R. Alexander, P. Broadfoot & D. Phillips (Eds.), Learning from comparing: New directions in comparative
educational research (pp. 73–88). Oxford: Symposium.
Cowen, R. (2002). Moments of time: A comparative note. History of Education, 31(5), 413–424.
Cummings, W. K. (1995). The Asian human resource approach in global perspective. Oxford Review of
Education, 21(1), 67–81.
David N. W. (2003). The future of comparative and international education in a globalised world, comparative education: Continuing traditions, new challenges, and new paradigms.
Department of Education, Japan (DoE) (1876). Outline history of Japanese Education: prepared for the
Philadelphia international exhibition, 1876. New York: D. Appleton and Company.
Department of Education, Japan (DoE) (1893). Outlines of the modern education in Japan. Tokyo: The
Department of Education.
Fujita, Tomoji (1995). Fukuzawa Yukichi no Tenno-kan. In G. S. Kenkyukai (Ed.), Chishikijin no Tenno-kan
(pp. 31–52). Tokyo: San’itsu Shobo.

--- [PDF Page 1195 / Book Page 1223] ---

Comparative Education in Two Asian Contexts 1223
Gu Mingyuan (2005). On several issues related to the construction of the comparative education
discipline.
Gu Mingyuan (2006). Opening speech in the 13th national conference on comparative education, Shanghai
Branch.
Hiratsuka, Masunori (1975). Hikaku-kyoiku-gaku eno michi – zuisou-teki kaiko no joshou. Nihon Hikakukyoiku-gakkai Kiyou, (1), 1–6.
Ikeda, Susumu (1969). Hikaku-kyoiku-gaku kenkyu. Kyoto: Fukumura Shuppan.
Ikeda, Susumu (1975). Hikaku-kyoiku-gaku kara sogo-kyoiku-gaku he – Hikaku-kyoiku-gaku heno hitotsu
no jogen. Nihon Hikaku-kyoiku-gakkai Kiyou, (1), 7–9.
Ishizuki, Minoru (1972). Kindai Nihon no kaigai-ryugaku-shi. Kyoto: Minerva Shobo.
Japan Comparative Education Society (JCES) (2004). Nihon Hikaku-kyoiku Gakkai 40-nen no ayumi.
Tokyo: Toshindo.
Kido, Mantarou (1958). Hikaku-kyoiku-gaku no houhou-ron. In M. Suzuki (Ed.), Hikaku-kyoiku (pp. 255–269).
Tokyo: Kokudosha, 255–269.
Kido, Mantarou, Shuhei Ishiyama, Tokiomi Kaigo, Masaaki Kousaka, Sumie Kobayashi, Shidou Sumeragi,
Minoru Harada, Masunori Hiratsuka, & Seiya Munakata (Eds.) (1958). Sekai no kyoiku. 10 vols. Tokyo:
Kyoritsu Shuppan.
King, Edmund J. (Ed.) (1986). Comparative Education (Special Issue: Education in Japan), 22(1), 73–82.
Kume, Kunitake (2002). The Iwakura Embassy, 1871–73: A true account of the Ambassador Extraordinary
& plenipotentiary’s journey of observation through the United States of America and Europe. Vol. 1: The
United States of America. Chiba: The Japan Documents.
Li Qilong (1983). Development course of Chinese comparative education, Foreign Education Reference
(vol. 1).
Shibata, Masako (2005). Educational borrowing in Japan in the Meiji and Post-War Eras. In D. Phillips &
K. Ochs (Eds.), Educational borrowing: Historical perspectives (pp. 147–168). Oxford: Symposium.
Shugo, Hiroshi, Seiichi Miyahara, & Seiya Munakata (Eds.) (1950). America kyoiku shisetudan hokokusho
yokai. Tokyo: Kokumin Tosho Kankokai.
Suzuki, Motohide (1958). Hikaku-kyoiku. Tokyo: Kokudosha.
Trainor, J. C. (1983). Educational reform in occupied Japan: Trainor’s memoir. Tokyo: Meiji University
Press.
Umakoshi, Toru (1996). Hikaku-kokusai kyoiku-gaku-kenkyu no genzai. In M. Ishizuki (Ed.), Hikakukokusai kyoiku (pp. 42–59). Tokyo: Toshindo.
Wang Chengxu (2006). Written speech in the 13th National conference on comparative education, Shanghai
Branch.
Wang Chengxu, Zhu Bo & Gu Mingyuan (1985). Comparative education. Beijing: People’s Education
Press.
Wang Yingjie (Ed.) (1999). Comparative education: A general outline on comparative education for the
self-taught examination program. Guangzhou: Guangdong Higher Education Press.
Wu Wenkan & Yang Qinyi (Eds.) (1999). Comparative pedagogics: Teaching materials for students in
humanities at higher education institutions (Rev.). Beijing: People’s Education Press.
Xue Liyin (1993). Study on contemporary methodologies on comparative education. Beijing Normal
University Press.
Zhang & Wang (Eds.) (1979). Short history of comparative studies of Chinese and foreign education.
Shandong Education Press.

