================================================================================
Chapter 76: National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis and Comparative Education
Author(s): Eleftherios Klerides
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1225–1247
PDF Pages: pp. 1196–1218 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1196 / Book Page 1225] ---

76
NATIONAL CULTURAL IDENTITIES, DISCOURSE
ANALYSIS AND COMPARATIVE EDUCATION
Eleftherios Klerides

Introduction
The notions of nationhood and cultural identity have long been fundamental motifs
in Comparative Education (CE) (Mason, 2006; Ninnes & Burnett, 2004; Tikly, 1999).
In the literature that the field has produced since at least the turn of the twentieth
century, they appear either as underlying assumptions or as objects of study. They are
an important part of the working professional and intellectual capital of comparative
educators, to the point that they are said to be amongst the “unit ideas” of the field
(Cowen, 2002a; Cowen, 2002b).
In recent times, Cowen (2002b, 1996) has called for a rethinking of how to treat
these unit ideas within CE. The necessity to renegotiate them is part of a wider call
for re-imagining the field in the new millennium (Ninnes & Mehta, 2004; Kazamias,
2001; Crossley, 2000; Broadfoot, 2000; Watson, 1999). Such a call is believed to be
mandated by a changed or changing world, in the words of Kazamias (2001, p. 439),
“the new cosmos of late modernity” and notably, by what is seen as a pressing need to
incorporate into comparative educational research the complex new views of identity,
culture and nation that have emerged or are emerging not least through post-structuralism,
postmodernism and post-colonialism (Ninnes & Mehta, 2004; Ninnes & Burnett, 2004;
Cowen, 2002b; Tikly, 1999).
Even if the world has changed or is changing, it does not necessarily mean that
older perspectives on these unit ideas should be automatically dismissed. Their renegotiation does not imply developing an ahistorical thinking. Rather, the practice of
their redefinition should be viewed “as one of consolidation and maturity that builds
cumulatively, confidently and critically upon past achievements” (Crossley, 2000,
p. 329). Hence, historical interpretations of these concepts in the field should be
reviewed to assess which ideas can be kept, which should be readapted and which
should be discarded.
This chapter seeks to contribute towards the re-conceptualisation of these unit ideas
in CE through a critical engagement with both the traditions of the field and the new
views of nationhood and national identities. It starts with an analysis of the historical
literature of the field, seeking to sketch how these concepts were construed and what
implications did their understanding carry for the study of education across settings.

1225
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1225–1247.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1197 / Book Page 1226] ---

1226

Klerides

This is followed by an outline of the emergence of new perspectives on identity and
nation in other fields of study such as Cultural Studies, Sociology and Sociolinguistics.
It is argued that these new perspectives make urgent a rethinking of how CE appreciates these notions and that a new agenda for comparative educational research arises
out of their re-articulation. It is then suggested that discourse analysis is a helpful
approach in putting into practice the new research priorities and in reaching new complexities in understanding identity formation in school practices. The main argument
being forward here is that discourse analysis can be a theoretical and methodological
bridge in the study of identity and nationhood across cultural settings. The chapter finishes with a call for looking beyond economic aspects of education and globalisation
into a cultural and historical motif of analysis reinvented, however, along the lines of
the new emancipatory views on nationhood and cultural identity.

Nationhood and Cultural Identity in the Comparative
Education Canon
The notions of identity, nation and culture, and their study in different settings have
always been a central theme in a particular strand of CE. For example in the work of
Kandel (1933), Mallinson (1975) and Schneider (1966), there was the idea of “national
character”. Hans (1958) also stressed through his “factors” (notably race, religion, language and political philosophies), an extended concept of national culture and identity.
A cultural framing also characterised the Sadlerian dictum that “the things outside the
schools matter even more than the things inside the schools” (Sadler, 1964, p. 310).
Underpinning this early historical literature of the field was a certain cluster of
claims about the nature of nationhood and national identity. These were often perceived as natural and objective entities, existing “in the very nature of things”, to use
Gellner’s terms (1983, p. 48). This assumption is reflected in the literature as a tendency to write and talk about these concepts in terms of an organicist and naturalist
wording. One example of this tendency comes from Hans. He distinguished between
“immature” and “mature” nations, and drew an analogy between national communities and human beings as follows: “The growth of nations can be compared with the
growth of an individual” (Hans, 1958, p. 11). The parallelism between a national group
and a human being is also manifested in the work of Kandel who also ascribed to each
and every nation characteristics and qualities that are similar to a person. Nationality,
he writes, “is for a people what personality is for the individual, the expression of its
life and culture” (Kandel, 1933, p. xxiv).
There was also a tendency in this literature, notably in the work of Mallinson
(1975), to make nationality equivalent with such terms as “national consciousness”
and “national feelings”. This terminology reveals the way in which he and other
comparativists thought about identities – they were inner and innate essences. This
thinking is particularly dominant in their views on the notion of “national character”.
Mallinson, for instance, defined it as a “fixed mental constitution”, a determinant of
a nation’s behaviour rather than a form of national behaviour. He also ascribes its origins “to the existence of a number of relatively permanent attitudes – to these prime

--- [PDF Page 1198 / Book Page 1227] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1227

values – common to a nation” (1975, p. 14). In his writings on the concept, Kandel,
recognising the danger of generalisations, defined it as a strong possibility towards
collective behaviour in specific ways. As he put it, “certain groups are likely to act in
ways different from other groups according to their history, traditions, environment,
ideals, and intellectual outlook” (1933, p. 23). Even so, he could not also escape
essentialised generalisations such as “the Englishman dislikes to think or formulate
plans of action” and “the Englishman, more than any other national, believes that an
ounce of practice is worth a pound of theory” (1933, p. 25).
The above statements also highlight a specific reading of cosmos. In the eyes of
these comparative educators, the world was inevitably and fatally organised into a
league of unique and independent nations, each with its own distinct identity, culture
and destiny in the world. The work of Mallinson is also indicative of this reading. He
wrote that each and every nation was “master of its own fate, owing no obedience to
any power above or outside it, and free to determine itself as it best thought fit” (1975,
p. 265). In the literature studied, however, there was no consensus on what constituted
a nation or a national identity. On the contrary, comparative educators often defined
them on the basis of a range of combinations drawing upon ethnic and civic criteria.
Nationhood were said to be determined by ethno-cultural elements such as a common
language, a common religion, collective historical experience, a shared set of traditions and customs or a common descent; or, by such political-territorial features as a
common territory, a body of civic values and aspirations common to all citizens or a
patria of common institutions and laws.
The essentials of cultural identities and nationhood were further understood as
being there from birth, unified and continuous, changeless throughout all the changes,
eternal. To cite Mallinson again, national character was described as “the totality of
dispositions to thought, feeling and behaviour peculiar to and widespread in a certain
people, and manifested with greater or less continuity in a succession of generations”
(1975, p. 14). The illustrations from his work can be multiplied – the identity of a
society “is the total way of life of that society” and “comprehends all that is inherited”;
“is an expression of continuity, an awareness of an extension of people in time, in
numbers and in space”; and “is based on long continued uniformity of customs and
manners” (Mallinson, 1975, pp. 7, 263–264).
To sum up here, the notions under discussions were seen in this early comparative
literature as essential, homogenised, fixed and everlasting entities. Their specific conception is a manifestation of the colonisation of CE by the so-called primordialist and
perennialist paradigm on the study of nationhood and nationalism (Özkirimli, 2000;
Smith, 1999). In turn, this reading of national identity and nation produced and legitimised: (a) certain views on the nature of education and its purposes; (b) how national
systems of education and educational knowledge were shaped; and thus (c) a certain
kind of comparative education with particular research emphases and priorities.
Since the nation and identity were viewed as essential units, they were in turn seen
as existing independently from school practices; and if they existed before these practices, a national system of education was nothing more than their mere reflection. The
following statement taken from Kandel is illustrative of this point: “each national system of education is characteristic of the nation which has created it and expresses

--- [PDF Page 1199 / Book Page 1228] ---

1228

Klerides

something peculiar to the group which constitutes that nation” (1933, p. xxiv). Hans
echoed Kandel by stressing that education systems “are the outward expression of
national character and as such represent the nation in distinction from other nations”
(1958, p. 9).
Thus, the main purpose of national education was to protect, preserve and hand on
the so-called cultural inheritance of a nation, and by means of this heritage, to foster
a sense of national belongingness among citizens and to assure the cultural continuity
of the nation. An example of this line of thought comes from Mallinson. “It is through
the education of the immature that each society strives to protect and perpetuate its traditions and its aspirations” (1975, p. 8). Kandel likewise spoke of education in terms
of “the transmission of the cultural inheritance which has been regarded as necessary
for the preservation of society” (1933, p. 365). In this view, education was an institution where the nation’s children were assimilated into national culture and learned
how to be nationally. This form of national socialisation was based on the assumption
that children were already ethnic subjects, but the fuller realisation of that was to be
achieved through national education.
Since they were construed as given entities, national mentalities, traditions and their
historical trajectory tended to be dealt with in CE as “the things outside the school”
(Sadler, 1964, p. 310), “the intangible, impalpable, spiritual and cultural forces”
(Kandel, 1933, p. xix) or the “factors” (Hans, 1958) that affect the shaping of education.
Formulated differently, the forces and factors’ school of thought approached cultural
context and the history of cultural context in which education was embedded in terms
of a causal narrative (Cowen, 2002a; Kazamias, 1961): they were the ‘determinants’
and ‘causes’ of certain forms of national educational systems and knowledges.
Hence, as a mode of research and an approach to knowledge, CE under the impact
of nationalist claims of primordialism and perennialism was envisaged as a multidisciplinary episteme devoted to the study of education within its wider cultural and
historical context (Kazamias, 1961, 2001; Cowen, 1996, 2002a). This point is perhaps
best illustrated in the work of Mallinson. He defined comparative research and study in
education as “a systematic examination of other cultures and other systems of education deriving from those cultures in order to discover the resemblances and differences,
the causes behind resemblances and differences, and why variant solutions have been
attempted (and with what result) to problems that are often common to all” (1975,
p. 10). This epistemic strand of the field tried to specify the cultural contexts that are
always relevant in shaping all educational systems and all educational knowledge. It
was, however, on the margin of mainstream CE, which was mainly preoccupied with
the modernisation and development of educational systems within a broader functionalist and positivist approach (Kazamias, 2001; Cowen, 1996).
In the mid-1970s and early 1980s, there was a shift in the field (Kazamias, 2001;
Tikly, 1999; Cowen, 1996). It concerned itself with colonialism, neo-colonialism
and cultural imperialism, examining educational patterns in former colonies from a
dependency theory perspective. Within this paradigm (Carnoy, 1974; Altbach & Kelly,
1978; Watson, 1982), comparative research in education focused on, amongst other
things, the specification of the forms and contents of cultural identities created by
school practices across colonial settings (Cowen, 1996), but being concerned mainly

--- [PDF Page 1200 / Book Page 1229] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1229

with economic facets of underdevelopment “did not lend itself easily to an analysis
of issues of race, culture, language and identity” (Tikly, 1999, p. 609). Nevertheless,
what was common in all work produced during this period was the sociological view of
education as a mechanism for cultural reproduction. The most explicit manifestation
of this tendency in CE is the volume of Brock and Tulasiewicz (1985), in which the
concept of “cultural identity” was used to explain the role of education in reproducing
cultural norms. In the introduction of this volume, the editors write about this notion:
“The cultural identity of the group is kept up by constant reference to the reservoir of
its culture” and “is born of a common heritage” (pp. 3–4).
Though forms of identity within education became now units of comparative analysis, the notions of identity and nation, as the last statement above highlights, were still
perceived as essential and fixed entities (Ninnes & Burnett, 2004; Tikly, 1999). As a
result, this new body of comparative literature took the modernist categories ‘coloniser’ and ‘colonised’ for granted – and reproduced and perpetuated them. It treated
the relationship between these categories unproblematically and necessarily as one
of omnipotence, neglecting to examine the effects of colonialism on the identities of
colonising nations. It also gave little attention to heteroglossia, antinomies and tension
regarding identity formation within both the colonial and the metropolitan settings;
to cultural resistance by colonised peoples to imperialist cultural plans and cultural
hybridity as a result of these struggles; and, to fragmentation of colonial experience
along gender, class, ethnic and other lines. That is, it failed to examine exactly all
the issues which are now considered to characterise notions of national identity and
nationhood.

New Perspectives on Nation and Identity
In the second half of the twentieth century, a number of influential works (Kedourie,
1960; Gellner, 1964; 1983; Anderson, 1983; Hobsbawm & Ranger, 1983) appeared
in the fields of political science, history and sociology, signalling a shift in the study
of nationalism: “from a primordialist, essentialist notion of the nation to the currently
dominant view of the nation as constructed or invented” (Eley & Suny, 1996, p. 6).
Some scholars (Smith, 2001; 1999) speak of this shift in terms of the emergence of a
new paradigm of explaining the nature and origins of nations – the so-called modernist paradigm, which apart from the thesis of the social constructedness of nationhood,
advocates their modernity. Others (Hall, 1992) see this shift as the beginnings of the
emancipatory process of deconstructing national cultures and identities.
More recently, during the 1990s, a new set of approaches (Bhabha, 1990; Hall, 1992;
1996b; Billig, 1995; Woodward, 1997; Wodak et al., 1999) appeared. These postmodern
and post-colonial accounts do not represent a distinct explanatory category of the nation
but they employ a constructionist mode of thinking to back and operationalise the modernist arguments (Smith, 1999). For Eley and Suny (1997), these recent methodological
approaches and techniques have moved the study of nationhood and nationality into
“the realm of discourse and the generation of meaning” (p. 6). Specifically, they attempt
to explain how nations and identities are socially constructed in two senses: (a) what

--- [PDF Page 1201 / Book Page 1230] ---

1230

Klerides

particular means and devices are employed to construct them and (b) what elements
constitute the meta-narrative of the nation. It is the task of the following paragraphs to
provide an account of these most recent developments in the study of nationalism.
The point of departure of the discussion is Anderson’s thesis of nations as “imagined political communities”. For him, each and every nation is necessarily imagined
because it stretches beyond immediate experience – it embraces far more people than
those with which nationals are personally acquainted and far more places that they
have visited. As an abstraction, the nation is imagined as finite, bounded, autonomous
and horizontally uniform:
The nation is imagined as limited because even the largest of them, encompassing
perhaps a billion living human beings, has finite, if elastic, boundaries, beyond
which lie other nations. … It is imagined as sovereign because … nations dream
of being free, and, if under God, directly so. … Finally it is imagined as a community, because, regardless of the actual inequality and exploitation that may
prevail in each, the nation is always conceived as a deep, horizontal comradeship
(Anderson, 1983, p. 7).
Similarly, national identity can be conceived as a mental construct - one that creates a
sense of solidarity among a group of people by promoting the notion of being part of
and sharing a common image; a construct that stresses the bound-ness of this image,
providing an imaginary unity against other peoples that exist beyond its frontiers and
from whom the group is felt to be autonomous; and, a construct that is conceived as
unity, concealing actual divisions and heterogeneity within the national boundaries.
The re-reading of nations and identities as imagined is not a denial of their reality and material effects. Rather, it is a recognition of the fact that they are contingent
upon human practices, being constructed in and out of interaction between human
beings and their world. Hence, nations and nationalities, in Anderson’s words, “are
to be distinguished not by their falsity/genuineness, but by the style in which they are
imagined” (p. 6).
Like Anderson, Hall also points out that identity is imagined as a form of solidarity.
He goes on to suggest that this is achieved through “a discursive device which represents difference as unity or identity” (Hall, 1992, p. 297). Thus, however different the
members of a nation may be in terms of class, gender, region, ethnicity, age or race,
this device-identity depicts them all as sharing the same features and belonging to the
same national family. This means that the unity, which every national identity treats as
fundamental, is not a natural but rather an imaginative structure of solidarity accomplished through the exercise of certain forms of symbolic power.
Although diversity within the nation is often repressed and backgrounded in
national identities, international differences tend to be foregrounded and emphasised
(Woodward, 1997; Bauman, 1997; Hall, 1996a; Hall, 1996b; Billig, 1995). Hence, any
identity is about imagining the national Self as much as imagining the national Others.
As Hall (1996b) puts it, “there is no identity that is without the dialogic relationship
to the Other. The Other is not outside, but also inside the Self, the identity” (p. 345).
From a post-structuralist perspective, the presence of otherness in national imaginings

--- [PDF Page 1202 / Book Page 1231] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1231

is critical in constructing national sameness: “[I]t is only through the relation to the
Other, the relation to what it is not, to precisely what it lacks, to what has been called
its constitutive outside that the ‘positive’ meaning of any term – and thus its ‘identity’
– can be constructed” (Hall, 1996a, pp. 4–5).
If nations and national identities are an imaginary complex of ideas containing at
least the defining elements of unity and difference then the image is real to the extent
that citizens are convinced of it, believe in it and identify with it emotionally. The issue
here is how the imagined community reaches the minds of those who are convinced of
it – it is conveyed and constituted in representation. Indeed, according to Hall (1992),
nations are not only political formations but also systems of cultural representations.
It is via these systems that a people represent, interpret and produce knowledge about
themselves:
[N]ational identities are not things we are born with, but are formed and transformed within and in relation to representation. We only know what it is to be
‘English’ because the way ‘Englishness’ has come to be represented, as a set
of meanings, by English national culture. It follows that a nation is not only a
political entity but something which produces meanings – a system of cultural
representation. People are not only legal citizens of a nation; they participate in
the idea of the nation as represented in its national culture. A nation is a symbolic community and it is this which accounts for its power to generate a sense
of identity. (Hall, 1992, p. 292)
Bhabha (1990) points out that a mode of representation which has been used to produce and circulate the image of the nation is narration. “Nations, like narratives,” he
writes, “lose their origins in the myths of time and only fully realise their horizons
in the mind’s eye. Such an image of the nation – or narration – might seem impossibly romantic and excessively metaphorical, but it is from those traditions of political
thought and literary language that the nation emerges as a powerful historical idea” (p. 1).
In a more recent account, Benwell and Stokoe (2006) emphasise the same point by
writing that “the practice of narration involves the ‘doing’ of identity” (p. 138). This
perspective is often related to the notion of “narrative identity” seen as the identity
of a character – the national Self – in a story (Wodak et al., 1999; Martin, 1995). The
quintessence of such an identity is that the nation draws its identity from the story’s
plot rather than being described in it.
In all scholarly accounts highlighting narratives as sites of identity work, there is
also an emphasis on the multiplicity of identities. In the words of Özkirimli (2000),
“different members of the nation promote different, often conflicting, constructions of
nationhood” (p. 228). Hence, “there is no single narrative of the nation” (Özkirimli,
2005, p. 169). Yet, the idea of multiple identities does not simply refer to the articulation of different narratives by different social groups. It also refers to the construction
of diverse narratives according to the sort of social communicative occasion that they
are told and to the historic and institutional location of their narrator(s). The view of
identities as situational entities is best captured in Wodak and her colleagues’ formulation
that there is “no such thing as one national identity. We believe rather that different

--- [PDF Page 1203 / Book Page 1232] ---

1232

Klerides

identities are discursively constructed according to audience, setting, topic and
substantive content” (1999, p. 4). The various versions of national identity in a given
society are in relationships of appropriateness and in relationships of complementarity,
translation, opposition and exclusion.
Several implications for theorising identity and nation can be highlighted in relation to this plurality thesis. First, their construction may be seen as a contested process
and these concepts themselves as terrains of contestation (Özkirimli, 2005; Smith,
1999). Second, they are marked by fragmentation, contradictions and hybridity. They
are made up out of partial and diverse narrative fragments, of the Self and the Others,
that frequently pull in different directions. Thus, for Martin (1995) “the Self is a mixed
body” (p. 17); for Hall (1996a) cultural identities are “fragmented and fractured”
(p. 4); for Calhoun (1997) nations are “heterogeneous objects of analysis” (p. 21);
and for Bauman (1997) every group identity is “a palimpsest identity” (p. 53). Third,
identities are ambivalent entities and there are various kinds of ambivalence. Bhabha
(1990) advocates that they oscillate between tradition and modernisation. According
to Hall (1990, 1992), they are ambiguously placed between past and future, belonging
to the future as much as to the past. Billig (1995) speaks of the tension between the
particularistic and universalistic claims of nation. In his various works, Smith (2003,
1991) finally suggests that they fluctuate between reality and fiction, culture and politics, inclusion and exclusion.
Identities, moreover, change shape not only in space across social fields, institutions and occasions, but also over time: “national identification and what it is believed
to imply, can change and shift in time, even in the course of quite short period”
(Hobsbawm, 1992: 11). Similarly, Bauman (2004) sees identity “as an as-yet-unfulfilled, unfinished task”, a concept that “was destined to remain not just perpetually
unaccomplished but forever precarious” (pp. 20–21). Hall (1996a) also speaks of identity as a formation in a state of constant flux and identity construction as “a process
never completed – always ‘in process’. It is not determined in the sense that it can
always be ‘won’ or ‘lost’, sustained or abandoned” (p. 2). Hall further stresses the
point that changes in the shape and form of an identity are always associated with “its
determinate conditions of existence”, including material and symbolic resources.
If national identity is now seen as the product of narrative representation, the issue
is what is “the cluster of ideas and understandings that came to surround the signifier
‘nation’ in modern times” (Suny, 2001, p. 870). It is suggested that a narratively constructed identity contains four main elements.
The notion of a common national space is the first pillar. “A nation is more than an
imagined community of people, for a place – a homeland – also has to be imagined”
(Billig, 1995, p. 74). The geo-body of the nation is articulated in a range of ways (Smith,
2003, 1986) – as a sacred homeland, a unified entity which starts and stops at demarcated borders beyond which lie other national territories. It is imagined as a historic and
ancestral land, a land that spiritually and organically belongs to its people and a people
to its land. It is also imagined as a unique, peculiar, beautiful and self-sufficient land,
separating what is ‘ours’ from ‘theirs’.
Secondly, there is a collective national time in the narrative representation of
national identities. “If nations exist in space,” Smith suggests, “they are equally

--- [PDF Page 1204 / Book Page 1233] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1233

anchored in time” (2003, p. 166). The national time is often segregated into three subelements – a shared past, present and future. It is represented as stretching back into
the mists of obscure generations of ancestors and forward into the equally unknowable
generations of descendants (Calhoun, 1997; Miller, 1995; Smith, 1986). Of these three
facets of time, Hobsbawm (1996) privileges the past in the making of nationhood.
“What makes the nation is the past; what justifies one nation against others is the past
and historians are the people who produce it” (p. 255). In any national historicity, there
are a number of recurrent themes – the people’s uniqueness, the superiority of their
culture and character, their racial and cultural purity, their longevity, the importance of
their autonomy and the negative effects of heteronomy (Berger et al., 1999).
A third aspect of identity is the idea of a shared national culture. “Modern man (sic)
is not loyal to a monarch or a land or a faith, whatever he (sic) may say, but to a culture”, writes Gellner (1983, p. 35). Similarly, for Martin, the making of any collective
identity implies “a selection of pre-existing cultural traits which will be transformed
into emblems of identity” (1995, p. 13). National identity is represented to be the sum
of the great artefacts of a “high culture’, as presented in the classic works of literature,
painting, music and philosophy and beyond that, to everyday practices which make up
the lives of ordinary people – to the widely distributed forms of popular music, art,
design and literature, or the mass activities of leisure-time and entertainment (Hall,
1997; Smith, 1991; Gellner, 1983).
The final aspect of the narration of identity is a common national habitus. “National
identity has its own distinctive habitus which Bourdieu defines as a complex of common but diverse notions or schemata of perception, of related emotional dispositions
and attitudes, as well as of behavioural dispositions and conventions” (Wodak, 2006,
p. 106). Here, instead of the traditional term ‘national character’, the notion of national
habitus is preferred on the grounds that it indicates not ‘something’ inherent and eternal, but a set of beliefs or opinions, emotions, attitudes, and behavioural norms that can
change from one period to another and that are internalised or individually acquired in
the course of socialisation. Hence, a national habitus goes beyond stereotypical images
about ‘us’ and ‘them’ to include features such as the willingness to take sides with the
nation one has a sense of belonging or the readiness to protect it when one feels it is
threatened (Wodak et al., 1999).
Thus, to have a national identity, following Billig (1995), is to possess certain banal,
prosaic, routinely familiar ways of writing and talking about nationhood – about the
national space, the national time, the national culture and the national habitus. However,
“rather than being reflected in discourse, identity is actively, ongoingly, dynamically
constituted in discourse” (Benwell & Stokoe, 2006, p. 4). Equally, for Wodak et al.
(1999), “national identities, as special forms of social identities, are produced and
reproduced, as well as transformed and dismantled, discursively” (pp. 3–4), and for
Özkirimli (2005), “nationalism is in this sense a form of discourse, a way of seeing
and interpreting the world” (p. 2). This discursive approach to nationalist phenomena
is based on structuralist and post-structuralist linguistic philosophy. This theory sees
language not as a neutral medium merely reflecting reality, but rather as a means of
creating experience, identities and systems of knowledge about the world (Benwell &
Stokoe, 2006; Jørgensen & Phillips, 2002; Fairclough, 1992).

--- [PDF Page 1205 / Book Page 1234] ---

1234

Klerides

This recent reading of identities as inscriptions in discourse has been criticised on
the grounds that it tells little about agency, specifically how subjects interact with
discourse and how they may resist, modify, negotiate or reject narratives about the
national Self (Benwell & Stokoe, 2006). In an attempt to hit a middle ground, Hall
(1996a) employs the term ‘identification’, defining this concept as
the meeting point, the point of suture, between on the one hand the discourses
and practices which attempt to ‘interpellate’, speak to us or hail us into place as
the social subjects of particular discourses, and on the other hand, the processes
which produce subjectivities, which construct us as subjects which can be
‘spoken’. Identities are thus points of temporary attachment to the subject
positions which discursive practices construct for us. (pp. 5–6)
National identity can be similarly conceived as a positional concept. It is a position
of identification, the attachment of the subject to what may be called the nationalist subject position. This is constituted by nationalist discourse, either, according to
Hall (1992), the discourse of national culture, or, according to Calhoun (1997), the
discourse of nationalism. Both discourses have the ‘nation’ or the ‘people’ as their
object of signification. Members of a nation identify with this position to which they
are summoned and seek to engage or invite others in discourse. “National cultures”, as
Hall (1992) points out, “construct identities by producing meanings about ‘the nation’
with which we can identify” (p. 293). This premise – the joining of authors and readers
in structures of nationalist meaning and conventions – represents a consensus in the
literature.

Implications for Comparative Education: A New
Research Agenda?
In light of deconstructive views, treating nationhood and cultural identity within CE
as essential, unified, eternal and fixed is problematic. Rather, the emergence of these
new theoretical accounts makes urgent a rethinking of how the field appreciates the
concepts of identities and nations. Their re-negotiation and re-conceptualisation builds
on the traditions of the field and is explored here in relation to the nature and function
of education, as well as to the way in which educational knowledge is constituted. It is
then suggested that a range of new research issues for CE to engage with arises from
this re-reading. The intention here is to identify some potential areas for research and
to open debate rather than to imply closure.
Since national identities and nationhood are now seen as products of language
and discourse, their treatment as existing independently from schooling processes is
problematic. From the standpoint of the new theories, signifying practices within education (for instance, the production and distribution of curricula and textbooks, and
their consumption in school and classroom), as in other social domains, are not mere
reflections of the distinctive character, history and culture of a nation. Rather, they
should be viewed as sites of their discursive construction. Any educational practice of

--- [PDF Page 1206 / Book Page 1235] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1235

signification be it a civics lesson, the reading of a poem, a geography book or a history map, provided that it has either explicitly or implicitly the ‘nation’ or ‘people’ as
its privileged object of attention, can be seen as an instantiation of national identity
articulation. In any such instance, the production of the nation’s image is a historically
and socially contingent praxis depending on a number of factors: the topic and the
audience to which an instance of identity construction is related, the general features
(including purposes) of the pedagogic setting and the education system in which this
instance takes places and more generally, the wider society and the historical trajectory
of that society in which identity formation is embedded.
Therefore, the role of national education is not so much to protect, preserve and pass
on the nation’s cultural inheritance. Instead, the purpose of education, from the point
of view of postmodern, post-structural and post-colonial accounts of identities and
nationhood, is to participate in the construction and transmission of this heritage to the
masses – for example, of the belief in national unification, in the differentiation of the
Self from Others and in the singularity of the people, of the idea of national continuity
over time and in space, and more generally, of certain types of national subjectivities.
Some scholars working for instance in the field of history education have recently
begun to address these functions of education (Lowe, 1999; Frangoudaki & Dragona,
1997; Green, 1997), and others to particularly study them from a comparative perspective (Foster & Crawford, 2006; Vickers & Jones, 2005). In spite of these positive
developments, there is still a lot to be done, especially in developing the theoretical
dimension of this work.
Moreover, the centrality of a culturally contextualised and historical approach to
the study of educational matters across national settings – that is, the Sadlerian views
that ‘the things outside the schools’ shape and regulate ‘the things inside the schools’,
and that education is ‘the outcome of battles long ago’ – should still be relevant today
for the field. For example, in light of the new views on nationhood and cultural identity, it is expected that constructs of national identity in education are linked to, and
influenced by, the articulation of nationhood in other social fields (the political, media,
academic), both synchronically and diachronically. The value of contextualisation in
the investigation of educational practices and the relevance of cultural specificities in
shaping educational forms and knowledge have been also reiterated recently by some
scholars working in CE (Mason, 2006; Crossley, 2000; Broadfoot, 2000; Alexander,
2000). Others, the most vocal of them being Kazamias (2001), Watson (1999) and
Sweeting (1999), have extended the notion of cultural context calling for the reinvention of the historical in CE.
However, from the position of new conceptions of identity and nationhood, the link
between ‘the things outside the schools’ and ‘the things inside the schools’ needs to be
reread in terms of a dialectic: ‘the things inside’ are constituted by ‘the things outside’
but at the same time, they are constitutive of them. Therefore, if CE is to take account
of the new complexities of identity formation, any educational instance of identity
constitution should be now construed as “the insertion of history (society) into a text
and of this text into history” (Kristeva, 1986, p. 39). By the insertion of history into a
text, it is meant that identity absorbs and is built out of available conventions from a
society and its history, being in this way involved in the enactment of continuity with

--- [PDF Page 1207 / Book Page 1236] ---

1236

Klerides

the past and reproduction. By the insertion of this text into history, it is meant that
identity reworks the available meanings of that society, and in so doing, it helps to
make history by contributing to processes of change in the image of the national Self.
Moreover, and following again new theories of identity construction, the relation
of education with cultural context and the history of cultural context, ought not to be
thought of and examined on the basis of determinism – ‘the intangible, impalpable,
spiritual and cultural forces and factors’ as ‘determinants’ of educational forms and
knowledge. Instead, this motif of the historical comparative literature should be
re-conceptualised on the basis of the idea of possibility – ‘the intangible, impalpable,
spiritual and cultural forces and factors’ as the conditions for articulating certain
nationalist narratives and at the same time, delimiting the possibility for other ways of
representing and constructing knowledge about the Self. This point will be revisited
and further explained later in this chapter.
From a critical engagement with both traditions of the field and new perspectives
on identities and nationhood, a number of new priorities for research can be now
sketched.
It is necessary for CE to start interrogating notions of nationhood and cultural
identity across national settings. The starting point of this process should be an interpretation of these notions as products of discourse and language, being materialised
in curricula, policy texts, textbooks or classroom practices. A whole range of new
research themes emerges from this insight. Of particular relevance are for instance
the study of how nationalities are constructed as primordial units, of how nations and
cultures are presented as homogeneous, of how continuity and singularity are enunciated, of how distinctions between the Self and the Others are constituted, of how
identities are presented as eternal and natural entities. The implication for CE here is
to engage in investigations of the ways in which these nationalist ideas (unity, timelessness, uniqueness, difference, and so on) are constructed in different places. Such
an approach, one that focuses on how rather than what, is not a usual practice in CE,
and in other educational fields. In the literature, national identities and nationhood are
often studied via methods of content analysis which neglect the role of language in
constituting content (Oteiza, 2003).
Another area of study is to deepen understanding of now nationalist subject positions are constructed in schooling across cultural settings. This type of analysis can be
carried out by identifying and describing issues such as: what kind of knowledge about
the national past and culture the nation’s children are given; what types of opinions,
emotions and attitudes about and towards the Self and the Others are made available
to them; what representations of the nation’s geo-body they are provided with; and,
what sense of destiny in the present and future is cultivated in them. It is through identification with particular nationalist readings of time, culture, habitus and space that
children ‘become’ certain kinds of national subjects.
If CE is to start examining the making of national subjectivities, then attention also
needs to be given in the study of the ways in which pupils are summoned to identify with
narratives of nationhood and whether some space is created for them to negotiate, resist,
modify or reject national mythologies. This mode of analysis can be extended to cover the
ways in which teachers or writers of curricular material themselves are positioned in

--- [PDF Page 1208 / Book Page 1237] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1237

relation to discourses about the Self. A crucial implication for comparative research
here is to trace and explain possible variations across cultural settings regarding pupils’
interpellation and writers’ positioning towards nationalist discourses.
Moreover, the ‘style’, to employ Anderson’s (1983) term, in which nations and identities are imagined in different places needs not be examined as coherent and consistent.
Rather, it ought to start from the view that it is marked by fragmentation, ambivalence,
heterogeneity, contradictions and pluralism, implying that the search for the nature and
origins of these features can be the basis of comparison. This implication, as was said
earlier, derives from the postmodern and post-colonial axiom that the imagery of the
nation is fractured, fluid and hybrid, a point of struggle and contestation, of ambiguity,
dilemmas and paradoxes.
The inherent historicity of every national identity, that images of nation are subject to
change or perpetuation, implies a need to look at how nationhood is challenged, transformed, sustained or defended across cultural settings. The recent works of Vickers
and Jones (2005) on national identity and nationhood in East Asia and Schissler and
Soysal (2005) in Europe provide two examples of the application of such an approach
comparatively. However, although the contributors in these volumes analyse changing
politics concerning nation, they frequently neglect the persistence of older entrenched
national myths; and more importantly, the hybridisation of identification deriving from
co-articulations of new and older national images. The complex juxtaposition of new
and old and the creation of novel hybrids should also be taken into account.
A final area of comparative research addressed here stems from the view that national
identity is contingent upon the ideological, political, sociocultural and historical context in which it is embedded and is constitutive of this context in creative or normative
ways. Such a view implies a necessity to explore both the role that education is given
to shape and transmit certain perceptions of nationhood, and the conditions for the
(re)production of certain styles of identities. The examination of the conditionality
should seek to capture and illustrate both the uniqueness and the interdependency of
cultures. Some of the complex linkages between educational constructs of identity
and the broader conditions which they are related to can be revealed by discourse
analysis.

Discourse as a Theoretical and Methodological Bridge
This section seeks to show how discourse analysis can be fruitfully used to help CE
to operationalise some of the new priorities for comparative study that arise from a
rereading of both the traditions of the field and the notions of nationhood and national
identity. As a research method and a theoretical approach to knowledge, discourse
analysis provides a set of concepts and techniques that are valuable in studying nations
and nationalities in a systematic way in different places. It is argued here that the
notion of ‘discourse’ itself can be a theoretical and methodological bridge across cultural settings. Its analytical power lies in that it can capture what is common in different
places – that is, the discursive (re)construction of nationhood and national identity –
and at the same time, does not gloss over history, culture and difference – “the themes

--- [PDF Page 1209 / Book Page 1238] ---

1238

Klerides

that make comparative education intellectually interesting” (Cowen, 2002a, p. 419). It
also lies in that it builds bridges not only across cultures but also between disciplines,
micro and macro levels of analysis, theoretical and empirical study – the themes of “a
neo-comparative education” (Broadfoot, 2000; Kazamias, 2001; Crossley, 2000; Bray
& Thomas, 1995).

Identifying and Describing Discursive Identities
The ‘styles’ in which national identities are imagined in a range of educational texts
(curricula, textbooks, policy documents, teachers’ talk or pupils’ writings) across cultural settings can be identified and described through three interconnected levels of
analysis: the level of propositional contents, the level of discursive strategies, and the
level of linguistic realisation. This tripartite framework of analysing nationalist discourse derives from a view of discourse as a group of statements about a specific topic
whose organisation is regular and systematic (Mills, 2004; Hall, 2001; Fairclough,
1992; Foucault, 1972).
First, there is the level of topics and propositions. The purpose of discursive
analysis here is to reveal the thematic choices of, and the messages encoded in,
nationalist discourse. Its contents are organised in terms of the four categories
of narrative identity presented and defined earlier – the category of ‘time’, of
‘space’, of ‘culture’, and, of ‘habitus’.
● The second level of analysis is the level of strategies. Following the Austrian
strand of Critical Discourse Analysis (Wodak, 2006; Reisigl & Wodak, 2001;
Wodak et al., 1999), a strategy is defined as the particular, conscious or unconscious plan adopted by writers or speakers to achieve the aims of constituting and
conveying primarily national unity and difference in relation to the categories of
time, space, habitus and culture. Yet, identity, as was said earlier, is also about the
construction of a range of other nationalist notions – the ideas of national continuity, uniqueness, superiority, autonomy, positive ‘self’-presentation and negative
‘other’-presentation, and so forth.
● All these strategies are of a constructive nature – that is, they attempt to enact
a certain kind of identity by promoting sameness, difference, continuity, and so
forth. There are also strategies of perpetuation (that aim to maintain, defend and
reproduce a national identity) and transformation strategies (changing a particular
identity and its pillars into another one). All these strategies types stem from a
view of discourse as having simultaneously the following functions – constructive, transformational and perpetuating (Wodak, 2006; Wodak et al., 1999).
● There is another cluster of strategies – those of involvement or detachment, and
those of intensification or mitigation (Reisigl & Wodak, 2001). The former set
refers to how writers or speakers express their involvement in or detachment from
a represented nationalist discourse and position their point of view in the discursive flux. The latter set is applied to qualify or modify the epistemic status
of a nationalist proposition and to express its commitment to truth. Both sets of
strategies are related to the way hearers or readers are summoned to identify with
nationalist discourse.
●

--- [PDF Page 1210 / Book Page 1239] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1239
●

Third, there is the analysis of the linguistic means and devices which are involved
in the expression of contents and strategies. The two layers – contents and strategies on the one hand, and language on the other – “are connected via the process
of ‘realisation’: lexico-grammar ‘realises’ semantics, the linguistic ‘realises’ the
social” (Benwell & Stokoe, 2006, p. 108). This process, in other words, is based
on the idea that content and language forms are inseparable (Fairclough, 2003). A
central dimension of the linguistic realisation of nationalist discourse is what may
be called the lexicon of nationality. And, as Billig (1995) points out, “the crucial
words of banal nationalism are often the smallest: ‘we’, ‘this’ and ‘here’, which
are the words of linguistic ‘deixis’ ” (p. 94). This means that a given nationalist discourse is expected to construct narratives of national time, national space, national
habitus and national culture, as well as of continuity, difference, singularity, autonomy, in specific ways realised linguistically through specific vocabulary choices.

This tripartite framework of identifying and describing identities, based on the analysis of nationalist contents, strategies and language forms, is illustrated with examples
from my own research on national identity and school historiography in Cyprus and
England.
The following extract is taken from a Greek Cypriot textbook. It encodes particular
readings of the past and present of the Greek community of Cyprus, as well as of
its habitus, destiny, land and culture. These readings are linked to three strategies –
the strategy of stressing continuity, difference and unity – and both contents and strategies are constituted and conveyed via certain linguistic devices:
Many peoples (or groups) made their way through Cyprus or conquer it:
Phoenicians, Assyrians, Egyptians, Persians, Ptolemies, Romans, Arabs,
Crusaders, Franks, Venetians, Turks and English. However, the inhabitants safeguarded the Greek character which had been formed since the Mycenaeans had
settled on the island, at the end of the Later Bronze period; this is evident in the
language as much as in the tradition.
The projection of the continuity of ‘the Greek character’ of the population, culturally
defined by Greek language and tradition, is prominent here. Two linguistic devices are
used to realise the strategy of continuation. First, there is the tense system which gives
expression to the comparative loci of difference and similarity. These two loci construct the view of the distant past as the origins of the Greek character of the people,
and of the present as the epoch where this character is still evident. Second, there is the
conjunction ‘however’ employed to realise the contrastive locus of comparison. This
suggests the reading that the people ‘safeguarded’ (a verb carrying connotations of
preservation) their character, despite repeated contact with and attempts by ethnically
and religiously different peoples to suppress, change or destroy it.
In this excerpt, there is also strategic emphasis on difference and sameness, which
is linguistically manifested in group-constituting labels (such as ‘Turks’, ‘Franks’) and
the epithet ‘Greek’ (it evokes a Greek unified people). Through these two strategies,
both the constitution of the Self and the Others, and their differentiation, are created

--- [PDF Page 1211 / Book Page 1240] ---

1240

Klerides

by insinuating a symbolic frontier between a Greek world of subjugation, defiance,
resistance and struggles, and a non-Greek world of power, conquests, oppression and
threats. This division highlights the destiny of the Self in a world of nations – to preserve their Greek character by defending it against Others who tried to change or
destroy it. This, in turn, is related to the implied message of Cyprus as a Greek land,
both at the present time and throughout history, as well as a specific perspective on the
nature and habitus of the Self – ‘we’ are a Greek cultural community of shared language and tradition, and of stubborn loyalty to them, including the readiness to fight
against powerful peoples for their maintenance.
The categories of ‘discourse content’ are also valuable in sketching the different
style in which identities are imagined across cultures, diachronically and synchronically. This is illustrated with the ‘past’. In English histories, two main aspects of the
representation of the national past are what I have termed in my analysis ‘the narrative
strand of constitutional growth’ and ‘the narrative strand of imperial expansionism’. In
contrast, Greek Cypriot histories, as was mentioned above, promoted the past as one
of the preservation of Greek culture on the island. The making of the past along Greek
lines has dominated school historiography in Greek Cypriot schooling since the first
decades of the twentieth century. Following the territorial division of Cyprus in 1974,
a new narrative was added to existing patterns. This is ‘the strand of heteronomy and
autonomy’ that tells the story of a Cypriot people struggling for physical survival and
freedom against great powers.
The content categories can be also important in revealing the motifs of fragmentation, ambivalence, dilemmas and hybridity that characterise the constitution of
identity. In English stories, for example, the narrative of constitutional growth promotes a democratic nation, the English first and then the British (after the creation of
the United Kingdom), who, with the passing of time have broadened their liberties. In
the expansionist narrative, the Self is also articulated in an ambivalent way: there is,
on the one hand, the image of a powerful and progressive English nation who had managed to bring their weak and backward Celtic neighbours under English power, and
on the other, the image of a civilised and superior British nation who were engaged in
a mission to spread civilisation to uncivilised and inferior peoples. Similarly, the cooccurrence of the narrative of Greek cultural preservation and the narrative of Cypriot
heteronomy and autonomy in Greek Cypriot histories after 1974 further exemplifies
the heterogeneous, fragmented, ambivalent and dilemmatic nature of identity. Each of
these two strands promotes a different position of national identification: a Greek position, the narrative of Greek cultural preservation, through which the Self is construed
as a Greek people that is an inseparable part of the Hellenic community; and a Cypriot
position, the narrative of autonomy and heteronomy, through which the Self is seen
as a Cypriot people that is independent and different from the broader community of
Hellenism.
Ambivalence and heterogeneity can be also studied through the discursive motif of
‘linguistic realisation’. This is illustrated with an excerpt from an English textbook of
1966, which is also indicative of the persistence of the nineteenth-century Whig construction of the English past as a triumphant and uninterrupted march towards political
democracy:

--- [PDF Page 1212 / Book Page 1241] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1241

Just as a child grows up to maturity, learning by experience and teaching, so a
country must develop its own institutions and ideas, growing through its history
into a responsible nation. Some of the lessons are hard, some of the experiences
are shattering, like the Civil War in the reign of Charles I, but all play their part.
We in Britain have developed gradually towards a country where the law protects
our liberties and Parliament represents the majority of our wishes.
In this passage, it is uncertain whether the terms ‘country’ and ‘nation’, the deictic
‘we’ and the possessive pronoun ‘our’ denote the English or the British people. This
is the effect of the fact that the text blends together elements from English identity
discourse – the Whig historicity manifested, for example, in the episode of the Civil
War – and elements from the British identity discourse – the British parliament as the
representative of the nation’s will and the British law as the guardian of national liberties. Similarly, the term ‘Britain’ appears ambivalent whether it refers to Britain or
England, highlighting the so-called enigma of national identity in England – British or
English? (Kumar, 2003). This example also indicates that the aim of discourse analysis to ‘read between the lines’ can only be reached with a combination of detailed
linguistic analysis of texts and the explanatory insights from other social disciplines
(Fairclough, 2003; Reisigl & Wodak, 2001).
The notion of ‘linguistic realisation’ is also useful in tracing the different formation
of identity according to audience and generally, the idea of multiple identities in educational practices of signification. This notion embeds the view that even if a certain
proposition or strategy is the same in two distinct instances of identity formation, its
realisation in language may differ. One example is the different linguistic realisation
of the idea of the preservation of Greek culture and identity over time in elementary
and secondary education textbooks. Greek Cypriot stories for elementary school often
convey this idea through simple language, for example, by verbs and adverbs denoting
continuity and the tense system: “The Cypriots continued to feel love for Greece. This
love has never stopped.” The same message is often expressed in secondary textbooks
through abstract noun phrases – “the continuation of Hellenism under extremely bad
conditions” – or negation: “But, despite all the sufferings the Arabic raids caused to the
Greek Cypriots, they had no effect on their Greek character.”
Apart from content categories, the analytic category of ‘discourse strategy’ is also a
useful tool in uncovering identity shifts. To mention one example, English histories, in
light of decolonisation and post-colonial literature, sought to reconstruct the reading
of the British imperial past via a strategy of transformation. Consider this extract taken
from a textbook section entitled “Changing interpretations”:
For more than fifty years twentieth-century historians agreed with the nineteenthcentury view that the British Empire brought the benefits of European civilisation
to native peoples. …
By the 1970s most countries of the Empire had become independent of Britain,
some after bitter wars. British historians no longer looked at the Empire purely
from the British or European point of view. A. J. P. Taylor pointed out that British
rule did not necessarily benefit the people of the Empire.

--- [PDF Page 1213 / Book Page 1242] ---

1242

Klerides

By means of temporal references, this extract adopts the locus of difference to project
two understandings of the relation between empire and native peoples. The first is the
nineteenth-century reading (still evident in most parts of the twentieth century) that
empire brought the benefits of civilisation to them. The second is the view of the 1970s
and onwards that empire did not necessarily benefit them. What links these two historical interpretations is change – from the old certainty that empire was favourable to the
colonised peoples into a new view that empire was not necessarily beneficial to them.
The strategies of detachment/involvement and of mitigation/intensification are also
of important value especially in examining comparatively the way in which writers or
speakers position themselves in relation to represented discourses on nationhood and
the way in which hearers or readers are summoned to identify with them. This is also
illustrated with examples from my own analysis of school historiographies in Cyprus
and England, notably in relation to how stereotypic expressions appeared in textbooks.
Consider two extracts:
1. The Irish live like beasts, are more uncivil, more uncleanly, more barbarous in
their customs than in any part of the world (in source 4E: an Englishman reporting in Elizabeth I’s reign, taken from an English textbook).
2. Processions, honour and dignity, personal liberty, were all effortlessly violated
by the Venetians (found in the main narrative of a Greek Cypriot textbook).
In the English textbook, the utilisation of direct reporting with source to give expression to the negative stereotype of the Irish as uncivilised indicates a mood on behalf of
the textbook writer to explicitly detach himself from it and to implicitly challenge it in
terms of universal truth. At the same time, this detachment strategy mitigates the illocutionary force of the stereotype and its persuasive impact on readers, telling them that
this is just an opinion and thus, generating space for them to negotiate it. The Greek
Cypriot textbook, in contrast, does not allow much space for the readers to negotiate
the stereotype of the Venetians as an autocratic people. It is conveyed as a universal
truth (via the simple past) and its illocutionary force is further intensified through the
adverb ‘effortlessly’. These features also highlight the writer’s strategic involvement in
the making, naturalisation, legitimacy and perpetuation of this stereotype.

Conditions for Discursive Identity Construction: Contexts of Possibility
Discourse analysis can be also valuable in the comparative study of the conditions
within which certain identities are constructed – through the idea of ‘context of possibility’. “Discourse”, Fairclough & Wodak (1997) point out, “is not produced without
context and cannot be understood without taking the context into consideration” (p. 276).
Blommaert (2005) further elaborates that the notion of context is to be construed “as
conditions for discourse production” (p. 66). This position echoes Foucault (1972)
who defined this notion as the rules of formation of discourse. For him, context operates as a regime of possibilities, permitting, and at the same time, constraining what
can be thought, said and written, in this case, about the national Self. The context, then,
does not determine the articulation of an national identity, but rather “what enables
it to appear, to juxtapose itself with other objects, to situate itself in relation to them,

--- [PDF Page 1214 / Book Page 1243] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1243

to define its difference, its reducibility, and even perhaps its heterogeneity; in short to
be placed in a field of exteriority” (Foucault, 1972, p. 45).
The reading of context as conditions of possibility regarding the representation and
construction of nationhood differs from older approaches in CE to the study of cultural
and historical context in two ways. First, it acknowledges the possible existence of a
finite variety of positions of national identification based on and derived from different interpretations of and interactions with the context of possibility, by members of a
national community. Older approaches, viewing nations and cultures as essential entities, did not accommodate diversity of nationalist imagination. Second, trying to trace
conditions of possibility underlying the making of a discourse on nationhood is an
activity much less fixed, certain or transparent than the older deterministic arguments.
Though it also implies that a range of ‘forces and factors’ are linked with its construction, the notion of context of possibility recognises that the researcher probably fails to
grasp all of them, primarily the most ‘insignificant’ but perhaps the most crucial, leaving thus room for conditions yet to be identified. In other words, this concept is more
locally sensitive, more inclined to capture the vast complexity of the emergence of a
nationalist discourse, and points to the limitations of analysis and interpretation.
Yet, the line between ‘contexts of possibility’ and ‘causes’ or ‘determinants’ is
very thin and fuzzy. Larsen (2004), using a similar distinction in her work, notes that
ways bringing together these two notions without resorting to determinism must be
developed. A fruitful way, perhaps, to resolve this problem would be to look for these
contexts in texts themselves rather than arbitrarily decide about them on the grounds
of available theories and literature. This suggestion derives from the view that any discourse is defined by its relations with others and by the material conditionality which
it is related to (Reisigl & Wodak, 2001; Fairclough, 1992; Foucault, 1972).
One example of how such an interdiscursive approach can reveal the conditions that
made the production of a nationalist discourse possible is the shift in the representation
of colonial rule in English school stories. As said above, histories of the post-imperial
period seek to transform the view that imperial rule brought the benefits of civilisation to colonial peoples into a view that empire did not necessarily benefit them. This
means that it was decolonisation and the emergence of new post-colonial histories
(upon which textbooks draw) that made it possible for this shift in the making of the
national past to take place. An additional condition for national identity reconstruction
was the existence of practices of new history in school historiography – notably the
belief that history is just a reading of the past which is never definitive but shifts in
light of new historical evidence.
A second example also comes from English history textbooks. School stories of the
earlier parts of the twentieth century often represented Magna Carta as “the foundation
of our liberties” or as the act that “rescued our ancestors from much of the oppressive tyranny of the feudal system”. In both utterances, the possessive pronoun ‘our’
conveys the view of Magna Carta as beneficial to all the English. In contrast, Magna
Carta tended to be represented in textbooks of the later parts of the twentieth century
as an act which was favourable only to some people: “It was granted to all freemen of
the realm (not villeins).” Again, this shift was made possible to occur with the emergence of new history as a paradigm of history teaching and writing as well as of new

--- [PDF Page 1215 / Book Page 1244] ---

1244

Klerides

academic historiographies in the post-war period, promoting the reading of this act as
the foundation of the rights of the higher social ranks of England – not of common
people. Thus, new history, new constitutional and post-colonial academic historiographies, as well as decolonisation and the collapse of the British Empire were part of the
contexts of possibility for identity constitution in post-imperial English textbooks.
It derives from the discussion above that instances of national identity construction
also necessarily position themselves in relation to non-discursive aspects of context.
Perhaps this point can be made clearer with an example from a Greek Cypriot textbook.
It illustrates exactly how material conditions shape the construction of a particular
image of the national present and the destiny of the national Self:
Four years have passed since the coup and the Turkish invasion. The 40% of our
land is under Turkish occupation. Four thousands our dead and two thousand the
missing persons. Some 200 thousand Greeks have been forced to abandon their
houses and belongings and they live as refugees under miserable conditions.
Those who stayed behind are being humiliated and are suffering at the hands of
the conqueror and with numerous blackmails are also being enforced to abandon
the land of their fathers.
Under specific material conditions – the Greek and Turkish military offensives, the
territorial division of the island, violent displacement of populations, death and abject
social and economic circumstances – the common present is constructed in negative
terms, as one of ordeal, occupation, mourning, expulsion and oppression, implicitly
conveying an image of the Self as a victimised people.
The conceptualisation of ‘contexts of possibility’ along both discursive and material
lines, is indicative that the approach offered here does not align itself with postmodernist reification of discourses as autonomous collusive actors which steer speakers
and writers, hearers and readers. Nor does it subscribe to the post-structuralist dogma
that there is ‘nothing outside the text’. Rather, it tries to hit a middle ground: discursive
practices produce, reproduce, transform and dismantle material aspects of the world
just as elements of material reality shape what can be thought, spoken and written
(Fairclough & Wodak, 1997).

Conclusion
The emergence of complex new perspectives on nationhood and cultural identity in
other fields of study does not merely imply a necessity for a radical rethinking of
how CE treats these unit ideas. Perhaps more importantly, it also highlights for comparative educators that they need to broaden their research agenda and particularly
to look beyond economic globalisation concerns into non-economic issues including
identity, ethnicity, culture, nation, race and gender. This is a call that has been repeatedly stressed in recent times in literature (Kazamias, 2001; Watson, 1999; Tikly, 1999;
Cowen, 1996). Here, I would like to extend this call by arguing that it is important to
start the study of these non-economic concepts from their understanding as discourses
and as products of discourse, and to examine the complex dialectic linkages of their

--- [PDF Page 1216 / Book Page 1245] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1245

articulation in educational sites with the wider cultural and historical contexts of possibility in which they are embedded. This chapter illustrated, I hope, that discourse
analysis can help CE to carry out these research priorities, and thus, to recaptures its
concern with two of its older, but largely marginal, traditions – the study of culture and
the history of culture.

References
Alexander, R. (2000). Culture and pedagogy: International comparisons in primary education. London:
Blackwell.
Altbach, P., & Kelly, G. (Eds.) (1978). Education and colonialism. New York and London: Longmans.
Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism. London
and New York: Verso.
Bauman, Z. (1997). The making and unmaking of strangers. In P. Werbner & T. Modood (Eds.), Debating cultural hybridity: Multi-cultural identities and the politics of anti-racism. London and New Jersey: Zed.
Bauman, Z. (2004). Identity. Cambridge: Polity.
Benwell, B., & Stokoe, E. (2006). Discourse and identity. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Berger, S., Donovan, M., & Passmore, K. (1999). Apologias for the nation-state in Western Europe since
1800. In S. Berger, M. Donovan & K. Passmore (Eds.), Writing national histories: Western Europe since
1800. London and New York: Routledge.
Bhabha, H. K. (1990). Narrating the nation. In H. K. Bhabha (Ed.), Nation and narration. London:
Routledge.
Billig, M. (1995). Banal nationalism. London: Sage.
Blommaert, J. (2005). Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bray, M., & Thomas, R. M. (1995). Levels of comparison in educational studies: different insights from different literatures and the value of multi-level analysis. Harvard Educational Review, 65(4), 472–489.
Broadfoot, P. (2000). Comparative education for the 21st century: retrospect and prospect. Comparative
Education, 36(3), 357–371.
Brock, C., & Tulasiewicz, W. (1985). (Eds.). Cultural identity and educational policy. London: Croom Helm.
Calhoun, C. (1997). Nationalism. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Carnoy, M. (1974). Education as cultural imperialism. New York: David McKay.
Cowen, R. (1996). Last past the post: Comparative education, modernity and perhaps post-modernity.
Comparative Education, 32(2), 151–170.
Cowen, R. (2002a). Moments of time: A comparative note. History of Education, 31(5), 413–424.
Cowen, R. (2002b). Sketches of a future: Renegotiating the unit ideas of comparative education. In
M. Caruso & H. E. Tenorth (Eds.), Internationalisation: Comparing educational systems and semantics.
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Crossley, M. (2000). Bridging cultures and traditions in the reconceptualisation of comparative and international education. Comparative Education, 36(3), 319–332.
Eley, G., & Suny, R. G. (1996). Introduction: from the moment of social history to the work of cultural
representation. In G. Eley & R. G. Suny (Eds.), Becoming national: A reader. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Fairclough, N., & Wodak, R. (1997). Critical discourse analysis. In T. van Dijk (Ed.), Discourse as social
interaction: A multidisciplinary introduction. London: Sage.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge: Polity.
Fairclough, N. (2003). Analysing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. London and New York:
Routledge.
Foster, S., & Crawford, K. (Eds.) (2006). What shall we tell the children? International perspectives on
school history textbooks. Connecticut: Information Age Publishing.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge. London: Tavistock.
Frangoudaki, A., & Dragona, T. (Eds.) (1997). ‘Ti einai h patridha mas? Ethnocentrismos stin ekpaideusi.
Athens: Aleksandria (in Greek).

--- [PDF Page 1217 / Book Page 1246] ---

1246

Klerides

Gellner, E. (1964). Thought and change. London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson.
Gellner, E. (1983). Nations and nationalism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Green, A. (1997). Education, globalisation and the nation state. London: Macmillan.
Hall, S. (1992). The question of cultural identity. In S. Hall, D. Held & T. McGrew (Eds.), Modernity and
its future. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hall, S. (1996a). Introduction: Who needs ‘identity’?. In S. Hall & P. Du Gay (Eds.), Questions of cultural
identity. London: Sage.
Hall, S. (1996b). Ethnicity: Identity and difference. In G. Eley & R. G. Suny (Eds.), Becoming national: A
reader. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hall, S. (1997). Introduction. In S. Hall (Ed.), Representation: Cultural representations and signifying practices. London: Sage in association with The Open University.
Hall, S. (2001). Foucault: Power, knowledge and discourse. In M. Wetherell, S. Taylor & S. J. Yates (Eds.),
Discourse theory and practice: A reader. London: Sage.
Hans, N. (1958). Comparative education: The study of educational factors and traditions (3rd edn.). London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hobsbawm, E. J., & Ranger, T. (Eds.) (1983). The invention of tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hobsbawm, E. J. (1992). Nations and nationalism since 1780: Programme, myths, reality. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hobsbawm, E. J. (1996). Ethnicity and nationalism in Europe today. In G. Balakrishnan (Ed.), Mapping the
nation. London: Verso.
Jørgensen, M., & Phillips, L. (2002). Discourse analysis as theory and method. London and Thousand Oaks
and New Delhi: Sage.
Kandel, I. L. (1933). Comparative education. Connecticut: Greenwood.
Kazamias, A. M. (1961). Some old and new approaches to methodology in comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 5(2), 90–96.
Kazamias, A. M. (2001). Re-inventing the historical in comparative education: Reflections on a protean
episteme by a contemporary player. Comparative Education, 37(4), 439–449.
Kedourie, E. (1960). Nationalism. London: Hutchinson.
Kristeva, J. (1986). Word, dialogue and novel. In T. Moi (Ed.), The Kristeva reader. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Kumar, K. (2003). The making of English national identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Larsen, M. (2004). A comparative study of the socio-historical construction of the teacher in mid-Victorian
England and Upper Canada. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Institute of Education, University of London.
Lowe, R. (Ed.) (1999). Education and national identity. History of Education, 28(3).
Mallinson, V. (1975). An introduction to the study of comparative education (4th edn.). London:
Heinemann.
Martin, D. C. (1995). The choices of identity. Social Identities. 1(1), 5–20.
Mason, M. (2006). Comparing cultures. In M. Bray, B. Adamson & M. Mason (Eds.), Comparative education research: approaches and methods. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Miller, D. (1995). On nationality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mills, S. (2004). Discourse. London and New York: Routledge.
Ninnes, P., & Burnett, G. (2004). Postcolonial theory in and for comparative education. In P. Ninnes
& S. Mehta (Eds.), Re-imagining comparative education: Postfoundational ideas and applications for
critical times. New York and London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Ninnes, P., & Mehta, S. (2004). A meander through the maze: Comparative education and postfoundational
studies. In P. Ninnes & S. Mehta (Eds.), Re-imagining comparative education: Postfoundational ideas
and applications for critical times. New York and London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Oteiza, T. (2003). How contemporary history is presented in Chilean middle school textbooks. Discourse
and Society, 14(5), 639–660.
Özkirimli, U. (2000). Theories of nationalism: A critical introduction. Basingstoke and New York:
Palgrave.
Özkirimli, U. (2005). Contemporary debates on nationalism: A critical engagement. Basingstoke and New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.

--- [PDF Page 1218 / Book Page 1247] ---

National Cultural Identities, Discourse Analysis 1247
Reisigl, M., & Wodak, R. (2001). Discourse and discrimination: Rhetorics of racism and anti-Semitism.
London and New York: Routledge.
Sadler, M. (1964). How far can we learn anything of practical value from the study of foreign systems of
education? Comparative Education Review, 7(3), 307–314.
Schissler, H., & Soysal, Y. (Eds.) (2005). The nation, Europe and the world: Textbooks and curricula in
transition. Oxford: Berghahn.
Schneider, F. (1966). Towards substantive research in comparative education. Comparative Education
Review, 10(1), 18–20.
Smith, A. D. (1986). The ethnic origins of nations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Smith, A. D. (1991). National identity. Reno: University of Nevada Press.
Smith, A. D. (1999). Myths and memories of the nation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, A. D. (2001). Nationalism: Theory, ideology, history. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Smith, A. D. (2003). Chosen peoples. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Suny, R. G. (2001). Constructing Primordialism: Old histories for new nations. The Journal of Modern
History, 73, 862–896.
Sweeting, A. (1999). Doing comparative historical education research: Problems and issues from and about
Hong Kong. Compare. 29(3), 269–285.
Tikly, L. (1999). Postcolonialism and comparative education. International Review of Education, 45(5/6),
603–621.
Vickers, E., & Jones, A. (Eds.) (2005). History education and national identity in East Asia. New York and
London: Routledge.
Watson, K. (Ed.) (1982). Education in the third world. London: Croom Helm.
Watson, K. (1999). Comparative educational research: The need for reconceptualisation and fresh insights.
Compare. 29(3), 233–245.
Wodak, R. (2006). Discourse-analytic and socio-linguistic approaches to the study of nation(alism). In
G. Delanty & K. Kumar (Eds.), The Sage handbook of nations and nationalism. London: Sage.
Wodak, R., De Cillia, R., Reisigl, M., & Liebhart, K. (1999). The discursive construction of national identity.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Woodward, K. (Ed.) (1997). Identity and difference. London: Sage in association with the Open University.

