================================================================================
Chapter 77: Time for a Scientific Revolution? From Comparative Education to Comparative Learnology
Author(s): Patricia Broadfoot
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1249–1266
PDF Pages: pp. 1219–1236 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1219 / Book Page 1249] ---

77
TIME FOR A SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION? FROM
COMPARATIVE EDUCATION TO COMPARATIVE
LEARNOLOGY
Patricia Broadfoot

A New Dawn for Comparative Education?
The scale and reach of this handbook is welcome testimony to the current buoyancy of
the field of comparative education – testimony to its intellectual energy, its theoretical
reach and its considerable diversity. In recent years, comparative education has moved
out of the doldrums it found itself in during the late twentieth century, acquiring both
a new clarity of purpose and significantly increased external recognition of its value as
an approach. There are a number of reasons for this.
One of the most important has been the willingness of comparative educationists
to grasp the opportunities provided by the advent of postmodernist perspectives; to
progress from the on-going debates between positivist and humanist perspectives
which dominated a previous era in order to embrace the rich intellectual potential of
the emerging sociological emphasis on culture and lived experience. Comparative
educationists have not shied away from the challenges presented by a more fractured
way of looking at the world; nor have they failed to respond to the implications of
the seismic changes taking place in the world. Indeed, a great deal of the recent
interest in characterizing the field of comparative education has centred on these
very issues – as shown, for example, in the twin millennium issues of the journal
Comparative Education (Crossley & Jarvis, 2000, 2001).
Thus, in place of the previously more typical focus on education systems and
policies, national contexts and international surveys, we are increasingly seeing bold
attempts to reconfigure the epistemology of the field; to apply hitherto untapped
theoretical perspectives; to conceive new units of analysis and to widen the range of
building blocks that form its focus such as micro comparative studies of classroom
life. In short, as this Handbook convincingly demonstrates, the field of comparative
education finds itself in ferment, a bubbling cauldron of new ideas and perspectives
that has welled up in response to the significant intellectual challenges of an increasingly globalized world.
But, happy as we should be at this state of affairs, there remain aspects of comparative education that are significantly less buoyant at the present time. Chief among these
is the issue of methodology – the rigour of the research process itself. I do not refer
to the kind of arcane debates about epistemologies which have long characterized the
1249
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1249–1266.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1220 / Book Page 1250] ---

1250

Broadfoot

field. Rather I refer to the apparently simpler, but yet fundamental, questions concerning how data are collected; how they are analyzed and reported; how they are stored
and how they may be made accessible to other researchers and future generations. As
Crossley and Broadfoot (1992) have argued, this is an area that has received relatively
little attention in the comparative education literature. Yet it is fundamental to the quality of the research that is ultimately produced.
New times present new research challenges. If, as suggested above, there is now a
growing recognition among scholars in the field that we need a re-conceptualization
of the fundamental building blocks of comparative education, (see, e.g., Alexander
et al., 1999), so too, I would argue, it is time for a fresh look at how adequate are the
traditional tools of the trade for addressing the new research questions now emerging.
It is perhaps not too whimsical to suggest that comparative education is in the process
of moving out of a protracted adolescence into young adulthood. Like all adolescents,
it has had to meet the challenge of separating from its parent disciplines as part of
a process of exploring its own, potentially unique contribution; to endure a time in
which it was not sure of its identity, in which it experimented with a variety of different perspectives and approaches; in which it lacked the self-confidence of a mature
field. Hence there have been protracted discussions in the literature about ‘the state of
the art’ (see, e.g., Bray, 2003; Watson, 2001) and occasional turf wars between rival
orthodoxies.
But, with the advent of explicit recognition of the implications of globalization,
Governments are now becoming increasingly hungry for comparative insights. There
is, in consequence, an unprecedented opportunity for a significant upscaling of the
perceived importance of comparative studies of all kinds. This in turn requires the
development of the field’s capacity to deliver research that it is adequate in its scope
and sophistication to bear the weight of this interest. As always, coming of age brings
with it increased responsibilities. Comparative education, like other comparative fields,
must be able to deliver research findings that have a broad, international salience; in
which the rigour of the process of conceptualization, research management, data-gathering and analysis is both robust enough to withstand politically motivated attacks and
yet sufficiently fresh and original that it is able to provide the independent validation
or challenge to the status quo that is its raison d’être.
So what might be the features of such a sea change in the scale and sophistication
of comparative education research? In this chapter I argue the need for two fundamental re-orientations that seem to me to be particularly pressing. The first of these
re-orientations is, I suggest, a change in the focus, the epistemological foundation
of what we currently term ‘comparative education’ and the concepts that frame the
research questions being asked. The second re-orientation I want to argue for concerns
the methodologies which comparative researchers currently employ. Thus in the first
part of what follows, I seek to illustrate the need for a radical re-examination of the
basic precepts of the field. In the second part of the chapter, I explore some of the
exciting new methodological challenges for comparative education that are likely to
present themselves in the years ahead if it is to meet the criteria of an ‘adult’ scientific
discipline in the twenty-first century. Together these two sections provide the basis for
a concluding section which describes a future in which comparative education has

--- [PDF Page 1221 / Book Page 1251] ---

Time for a Scientific Revolution? 1251

indeed come of age: an approach to comparative studies that combines the best of an
illustrious tradition with a refreshed theoretical orientation and enhanced empirical
rigour. These new developments in the field, it is suggested, will in turn underpin the
possibility of conducting comparative studies which are both on an unprecedented
scale and also have an international impact on conventional thinking about educational
delivery.

From Comparative Education to Comparative ‘Learnology’?
Previously, I have criticized the world of education for being slow to challenge the
accepted ‘delivery’ model of conventional schooling (as well as now, increasingly,
higher education) (Broadfoot, 2001). I have drawn attention to the irony that whilst
a surgeon transported from an operating theatre in say 1900 to one in the twentyfirst century would find themselves hard put to understand the function of almost all
the equipment it contained, a school teacher from that time would feel immediately
at home in the conventional paraphernalia of a contemporary classroom. Although
slightly unfair, this comparison does underline how little the accepted wisdom concerning educational delivery has so far been challenged. Education is still broadly
conceived as the transmission of a given body of knowledge from either a teacher or
a book or some combination of the two, knowledge which is ‘studied’ by the student
and hopefully ‘learned’ sufficiently well to be reproduced in some kind of examination process. If all goes well, the student passes the test set and everyone is happy. If
it does not go well, failure is generally explained as either a lack of application on
the student’s part (‘must try harder’) or as a reflection of some innate weakness on
the part of the latter (‘less-able student’). This model of learning, accords ill with
what we know from the growing body of ‘learning science’ (Claxton, 1999) even in
the Western world in which it mainly developed. It accords even less well with the
traditions and learning approaches of other cultures (see, e.g., Watkins & Biggs,
1996; Hufton et al., 2003).
Given the hitherto largely unchallenged nature of this paradigm, either by educationists or by policy-makers, it is unsurprising that virtually all educational research,
including comparative education, focuses in one way or another on aspects of this
‘delivery’. Whether it is the formation of education policy, educational administration
and management, the training of teachers, questions of school organization, curriculum development, assessment procedures or any of the other topics that form the focus
for educational research, such studies are almost always conceived within the status
quo in that they concern how to improve on solutions to current problems of organization and delivery – how we can provide education more efficiently, more equitably,
or more effectively. Rare indeed are the occasions when either the theoretical or the
empirical magnifying glass is set up to examine rather different assumptions and questions concerning education and learning.
Thus, although pressure has been building up within the field of comparative education to recognize the significance of the cultural flesh on the skeleton of laws and
policies, systems and resources which formally define educational provision, this trend

--- [PDF Page 1222 / Book Page 1252] ---

1252

Broadfoot

has yet to challenge the established parameters of the field. It has yet to challenge the
discourse that defines educational issues in terms of a delivery model of education
in which countless thousands of children and young people throughout the world are
more or less successfully processed through centrally determined curriculum packages
and taught to compete with each other in the business of regurgitating their knowledge
in specific ways. Most contemporary developments within the field of comparative education must thus be regarded as still essentially debates within the existing
paradigm. There is a need, I would argue, for the application of more postmodern
conceptual tools, to create a ‘neo-comparative’ education (Broadfoot, 1977, 2001) that
recognizes the very considerable research evidence that now exists concerning the
shortcomings of conventional models of education. The critical lens provided by comparative educational research can arguably play a key role in the search for concepts
and approaches that will be more fruitful for the twenty-first century. For whereas the
‘delivery’ model of education may have served well enough for less rapidly changing
times, it is becoming increasingly clear that it is ill-equipped to respond to a world
of pervasive information technology, rapidly changing employment markets and the
absence of a common canon of values and behavioural norms.
So far, one of the most defining characteristics of the twenty-first century is the
erosion of the boundaries between formal education and other activities in life. The
worlds of work and home, leisure and study are becoming increasingly integrated.
This means that the modernist conception of education as a defined and organized
form of activity conducted in a specialist institution and conceived as a preparation
for adult life thus becomes increasingly anachronistic. Indeed, it could be said that
in an increasingly postmodern world, the continued use of modernist paradigms of
educational organization and of teaching and testing, are a powerful reactionary force
helping to sustain the status quo. If the ‘normal science’ (Kuhn,1962) of education is
to be challenged, then research must provide the seed bed of the necessary ‘scientific
revolution’, or ‘paradigm shift’.
Such a paradigm shift, I suggest, needs to move learning itself centre stage as the
focus of study. Questions such as how individuals can best be helped to engage successfully with the myriad different forms of learning opportunity that technological
development has made available pose novel challenges for educational research. For
comparative education in particular, the broader and more amorphous territory of learning, challenges its more traditional focus on education systems and the problems of
provision. If learning per se, rather than provision for its acquisition or the evaluation of
its outcomes, becomes accepted as the new centre of gravity for the discipline, so it might
be reasonable to reflect this development in a change of nomenclature. ‘Comparative
education’ as a descriptor might be replaced by ‘comparative learnology’ as a new
name for research that seeks better to understand the business of learning by using the
systematic comparison of contexts and cultures. The use of the descriptor ‘comparative
learnology’, whilst not perhaps defensible in the face of a sustained exegesis, would
nevertheless provide a strong signal that the centre of attention for such studies is the
process of learning itself and the forces that shape individuals’ engagement with it.
This is particularly important because, as suggested above, despite the enormous
volume of research on teaching and learning that has been undertaken over the years,

--- [PDF Page 1223 / Book Page 1253] ---

Time for a Scientific Revolution? 1253

there is still a considerable gap in our understanding of how to improve learning outcomes in the many different contexts in which learning takes place. Where there is
a preoccupation with ‘what works’ – as is increasingly the case among governments
anxious to ‘raise standards’, there is a corresponding tendency to ignore the inevitable
complexity of the learning process and a consequent failure to take into account some
of the complex social forces that impact upon it. Among these are the following as
identified by James and Brown:
The influence that the environment (characteristics of learners or the learning
context) has on the success of a particular approach in promoting learning
● The difficulty of clearly conceptualizing some aspects of learning that are seen as
highly desirable (e.g., attitudes, dispositions, values, identities) but do not have a
common interpretation in the way that straightforward practical or cognitive skills do
● The difficulty of assessment in cases where a clear conceptualization of the learning is yet to be established
● Problems at a theoretical level that arise from a lack of engagement of many of the
theories of learning with those of teaching or instruction (i.e., a lack of pedagogy)
● The need to provide evidence of learning in a form that will convince the community beyond academic researchers’ (James & Brown, 2005, p. 9)
●

As James and Brown argue, how individuals learn in different settings and cultures and
how this process can best be facilitated, are questions to which the answer is neither
simple nor unambiguous. Indeed, so complex are the factors involved that, in the best
traditions of social science, as Kazamias has argued (Bouzakis, 2000), illumination
is as likely to come from the humanistic tradition using, for example, a historical
approach, case studies and other forms of qualitative data, than from the more systematic, controlled studies of the positivist tradition. Alexander’s comparative study of
learning in five countries provides a good illustration of this approach building on the
foundations laid by earlier studies such as those of Osborn and colleagues (2003).
Added to the challenge of seeking to understand the interaction between learning
processes, and the impact of particular contexts, is the fact that learning itself takes
many different forms. Various efforts have been made to define the main elements
such as those of Gardner (1993). Recently, the advent of new neurological research
techniques has served further to stimulate such efforts with an unprecedented interest in the brain itself as part of the attempt to understand the process of learning (see,
e.g., Perkins, 1995). This application of neuroscience underpins the developing field
of ‘learning science’ as a major field of research endeavour to complement more traditional educational perspectives.
Even a relatively high-level categorization of different kinds of learning such as that
provided by James and Brown (2005, p. 9) powerfully illustrates the importance of
such perspectives where learning is the central focus of enquiry:
Attainments including subject knowledge or work competencies
Understanding – of ideas, concepts and processes
● Cognitive and creative learning involving performance or ‘new’ knowledge
● Using – involving the application of practical or technological skills
●
●

--- [PDF Page 1224 / Book Page 1254] ---

1254

Broadfoot

Higher-order learning including metacognition
Dispositions – attitudes, perceptions, motivation
● Membership, inclusion self-worth – the shaping of learner identity
●
●

The particular contribution that comparative studies can make to our understanding of
these complexities is the effort to understand the complex interaction between different kinds of learning and different cultural and institutional settings such as attempts
to explain and evaluate the significance of the various kinds of learning that individual
cultures prioritize. Moreover, a particular strength of a comparative approach to learning science as embodied in a ‘comparative learnology’ would be a respect for the
cultural integrity of key concepts. Such a research approach would make no initial
assumptions about how the purpose and processes of learning were being defined in
the setting being studied.
Whilst the differences between cultures in this respect are unlikely to be as significant in today’s, post-colonial, globalized world as they once might have been, there
remains plenty of evidence in the pages of both anthropological journals and those
dedicated to comparative education that processes of learning and their goals continue to vary widely around the world. Moreover, as priorities for learning change in
response to social and economic change, there is likely to be increasing fracturing of
traditional educational models and tools.
Educational testing provides a powerful example of the potential difference between
modernist and postmodernist educational perspectives. The quotation below describes
a more humanistic, individualized perspective on this most positivist of educational
technologies:
[I]f being a learner is about becoming a member of a community and engaging
in norms of social practice and tool use, or if one accepts ‘knowledge creation’
as an important learning outcome in a knowledge society then the perceived
need for valid and reliable assessment instruments … might disappear. … If the
learning outcomes in which we are interested are dynamic, shifting and sometimes original and unique, we need a new methodology of assessment, perhaps
drawing more on ethnographies and peer-review approaches in social science,
appreciation and connoisseurship in the arts and advocacy, testimony and judgment in law. (James & Brown, 2005, p. 19)
Such an approach to evaluation is in stark contrast with the kind of modernist approach
embodied in most contemporary forms of assessment and testing which are predicated on
an objectivist stance. The series of international surveys of educational attainment of recent
years provide one of the most powerful examples of this tradition using as they do, sophisticated quantitative methodologies for comparative purposes. Reviewing the key role of
OECD in such studies, McGaw (2004) provides the following description of the search by
a consortium of 30 member countries for education ‘indicators’ that will permit:
The systematic examination and assessment of the performance of a state by
other states, with the ultimate goal of helping the reviewed State improve its

--- [PDF Page 1225 / Book Page 1255] ---

Time for a Scientific Revolution? 1255

policy-making, adopt best practices, and comply with established standards and
principles. (Pagani, 2002, p. 1)
This project is based on a model of education that assumes that ‘one size fits all’. It
is arguably flawed both in not taking into account significant contextual differences
between the nations involved and in not questioning the accepted structures and delivery of formal education as it has evolved in the last century or so.
Yet, although many comparativists have deplored the technical inadequacies of such
international surveys of achievement over the years (see, e.g., Goldstein, 2004; Brown,
1999) there has been little attempt so far to challenge them in the terms set out above,
namely, that such surveys of achievement represent the increasingly global imposition
of a unidimensional model of education that reinforces and celebrates only a small
part of the rich tapestry of actual and potential learning. The more countries strive
to compare themselves on such common yardsticks, the more it becomes unlikely
that comparisons of other kinds of learning outcome will be pursued, which are less
amenable to formal assessment, even though they may be more important,.
I rehearse these arguments in order to highlight the urgent need for comparative
educationists to recognize that as the field is becoming increasingly influential in policy terms, so the responsibility of comparative education to be self-critical in terms of
its focus and methodology also grows correspondingly. It would be a sad irony indeed
if the contemporary dynamism of the field proved, in the end, to be a reactionary
force rather than fulfilling its unique potential to provoke a fundamental questioning
of accepted perspectives within education.
If the digital revolution and the dawning of the information age means that formal education provision is becoming a relatively small part of the range of learning
opportunities available to individuals, comparative studies of that learning need to
embrace both the widest possible range of theoretical perspectives and the full canon
of available methodologies from complex statistical analyses based on huge quantitative data-bases at one extreme through to intensive ethnographic studies on the other.
A comparative focus on the process of learning itself offers a far more ambitious
intellectual project with the potential for research that embraces a scale and range
of contributory disciplines hitherto almost unimaginable to address, for example, the
much neglected ‘affective domain’ – the part played by the perceptions and feelings of
the individual learner. Thus, comparative studies could draw on insights derived from
anthropology to neuroscience, political science to systems engineering and the arts, to
gain a much more profound understanding of the constants and contexts of learning.
The initial contribution of adopting a ‘comparative learnology’ perspective would
be to problematize the discourse of comparative education since the existing apparatus
of educational assumptions and terminology arguably encourages collective conceptual blinkers. Even the most familiar terms – ‘comparative’, ‘international’, ‘system’
and ‘policy’ – embody a range of taken-for-granted assumptions about the appropriate
focus and subject matter for such studies. As such, these terms, as a form of discourse,
are themselves a source of power and control (Foucault, 1977).
The skeptical reader may justly feel that this bandying of new jargon is neither
necessary nor helpful. It is certainly the case that for a century or more, comparative

--- [PDF Page 1226 / Book Page 1256] ---

1256

Broadfoot

education has provided a wide range of valuable insights into aspects of educational
provision and practice – the deliberate management of learning – and that it is these
insights that form the foundation for the current ascendancy of the field. But despite
these successes, I suggest that if comparative education remains in this paradigm in
the future, it will find itself in a self-referencing and self-reinforcing vicious circle
in which research fails to challenge in any fundamental way the conventional ways
of conceiving learning and hence, educational problems and issues. Having failed to
rise to the challenge of change, comparative ‘education’ will in turn find the validity
and reliability of the research process subject to progressive erosion and with it, the
capacity of the field to make an impact.
A comparative study of learning, by contrast, what I refer to here as ‘comparative
‘learnology’, offers an exciting range of new research avenues. Such a ‘neocomparative education’ would still retain an important place for the existing project of
comparing the educational process in different cultures. However, it is likely to involve
a more interdisciplinary even ‘meta-disciplinary’, approach in which a range of social
disciplines such as sociology, politics, economics, geography, cultural studies, anthropology and history combine on occasions with the physical sciences and medicine, to
illuminate the complex and interrelated realities that impinge on learning. Examples
in this respect might include the interaction between diet and learning outcomes in
different cultures, or the impact of pollution on brain functioning in different national
settings. In both these cases, whilst there may be significant differences in the educational interventions in the settings being compared, these interventions may ultimately
be of less significance than differences between the populations being studied that
derive from quite different factors. A focus on learning, rather than education per se,
will, I suggest, make it more likely that these other factors and perspectives will be
taken into account. This in turn should encourage a challenge to the established boundaries of the field that will provoke new questions and concerns as well as eventually,
produce new insights that will challenge the dominance of prevailing discourses about
what is desirable in education and how this may best be achieved.

Some Problems of Methodology
Shifting the focus of comparative study from education to learning also requires the
development and use of new research tools that take full advantage of contemporary
advances in technology in their ability to capture and compare social reality. Such
developments make it possible to anticipate the possibility that the twenty-first century
will witness significant development in terms of the rigour, scale and innovation of
comparative methods.
Thirty years ago, writing in a special issue of the journal Comparative Education
devoted to the then ‘state of the art’, I suggested that ‘comparative education is not a
discipline but a context’ (Broadfoot, 1977), that it needs to be conceived as part of a
more generally conceived – the word repetition is deliberate here – interpretive social
science perspective. The challenges for comparative education are thus the challenges
for social science as a whole. As comparativists, we endeavour constantly to ‘make the

--- [PDF Page 1227 / Book Page 1257] ---

Time for a Scientific Revolution? 1257

familiar strange’, to recognize that in a ‘science’ where words are the principal tools,
there must be a continual search for new epistemologies, new methodological tools
and new vision. Yet comparative studies also provide a particular challenge since of
all the methodologies of social science, they are potentially among the most powerful providing as they do something of a ‘virtual’ laboratory’ for the study of different
approaches to aspects of social organization. It is the recognition of this potential that
is fuelling the significant growth of large-scale international comparative studies at
the present time such as the European Social Survey (www.europeansocialsurvey.org)
which involves a series of collaborative surveys between more than 20 countries to
compare key facets of contemporary life in those countries.
But if comparative studies offer perhaps the best approximation in the field of social
science to the systematic research methods of natural science, they are also associated
with some of the most difficult methodological challenges. This is particularly the case
in relation to the comparative study of learning since the latter involves such a complex
interaction of different factors. Thus, as I outline below, a ‘comparative learnology’ is
likely to require sophisticated methodological approaches that take full advantage of
the new social research technologies now being developed.

Cultures and Contexts
Not surprisingly, the challenges facing the development of comparative education are
broadly shared with other applied social fields such as Social Policy. At the present time
all social science disciplines have to respond to the challenge of globalization which is
reflected in the increasing importance of an international focus both for research problems and in the organization of research teams. The recent European Union initiative
to establish ‘Networks of Excellence’ (www.frontierseu.org/networks), for example,
is typical of the growing trend towards larger, international collaborations in research
projects and the development of communities of researchers drawn from several
nations. But whilst such cooperation is in principle supportive of both the rationale
and the practice of comparative studies, it also highlights the endemic problems of
working across contexts and cultures.
Whilst these problems accompany both quantitative and qualitative studies, it is with
regard to the latter that some of the core issues of comparative studies become particularly intractable. The difficulty of achieving equivalence of concepts and comparability
of meaning between cultures and contexts, for example, or the representativeness of
the cases chosen for study is particularly salient when generalizability depends on a
relatively small number of cases. The logic informing the choice of case or country
selection will critically affect the validity of the study. Whilst the standard assumption
is to compare ‘most similar cases’ this may not always be the most fruitful design and it
will not be easy to know this at the outset of a qualitative study. Where studies depend
heavily on words, rather than numerically coded data, there may be problems working
with raw data that is rarely fully translated or where the data have been translated, since
such data are inevitably subject to the overlay of human interpretation by others such
as interviewers and translators, as well as by the researchers themselves. Moreover, the

--- [PDF Page 1228 / Book Page 1258] ---

1258

Broadfoot

data that form the basis for analysis are often summaries of cases – cases that are often
not comparable if produced by an international team especially if they are derived
from Government sources.
Yet difficult as such issues are methodologically, they must be addressed if a sufficiently rigorous basis for comparative qualitative studies is to be provided. For, as
Stenhouse (1979) argued, there is a need for a much greater emphasis on evidence
in the conduct of comparative studies because it is through the provision of evidence
that:
[e]xperience is made public to invite judgment in dialogue, and such judgement
rests upon the possibility of an appeal to evidence. This evidence, the fundamental data source for comparative education, must be description; and I am going
to argue that since it became a self-conscious academic study, comparative education has paid too little attention to observation and description, preferring to
emphasise such abstractions as statistics and measurements on the one hand and
school ‘systems’ on the other. … [A] comparative base for critical interpretation
is of very great importance.
I am … asking that we develop in our field a better grounded representation of
day-to-day educational reality resting on the careful study of particular cases.
(Stenhouse, 1979, pp. 8, 10)

Sharing Access to Data
If the starting point for a ‘comparative learnology’ is the individual learner’s lived reality, their feelings and experiences, then the sort of observation and description called
for by Stenhouse must be the starting point. This approach requires the application of
specific qualitative methods including the capture of biographical and visual data, in
order to understand the diversity of individual experience and the impact of change,
that is, methods that can capture the intersection of time and space. Such case-based,
rather than variable-based comparisons, provide for an understanding of the different
layers of context. They can form the basis of controlled comparisons or be simply in
the form of a patchwork of qualitative case-studies.
But whatever their design, the data produced by studies that emphasise observation
and evidence present a particular challenge in terms of their accumulation, storage
and future access. Where large sums of money have been spent on a cross-national
comparative project, it is clearly desirable that the products are stored in a form such
that they can be readily accessed by other researchers in the future. Once again, it
was Stenhouse who exhorted researchers to be ‘meticulous about their records and,
as soon as they have completed their study, such records of first hand observation and
interviewing need to be lodged in national archives which could be replicated internationally on microfiche’.
If the first part of Stenhouse’s exhortation has proved difficult enough to achieve – the
UK requirement to lodge all qualitative data derived from ESRC sponsored research

--- [PDF Page 1229 / Book Page 1259] ---

Time for a Scientific Revolution? 1259

in the ‘Qualidata’ national archive, for example, has proved costly and demanding for
researchers in terms of organization, funding, legal obligations and protection – how
much more challenging will be achieving similar repositories on an international
scale, with all the legal and language issues involved. The rapid development of ‘grey
literature’ available on the internet coupled with the development of open access
repositories represents a significant step forward in our collective technical ability to
share both data and analyses. However, significant challenges remain concerning the
management of and access to such sources. As with any large research team, there
are more or less complex issues of ownership, authorship and the archiving of data,
the increasing prominence of research governance and ethics issues and the requirement for transparency in relation to respondents, suggests a growing need for agreed
international protocols and standards, research guidelines and an ethical code. But at
present there is no obvious international body to translate such pressures into action.

Funding Constraints
The problems associated with large-scale data management and access are compounded
by prevailing research funding regimes. Historically, comparative education studies
have found it difficult to attract funding. More recently, the growing recognition on the
part of governments in particular of the value of comparative studies has meant that
such funding is now more readily available. Yet the latter remains both largely national
in focus and short-term. Not only does this make it difficult to set up more internationally focused projects, it also renders studies and the data they produce, vulnerable to
national political agendas and protectionism with regard to access. Although there are
some green shoots appearing with regard to international cooperation on data storage
and access, such developments remain a long way short of the sustained international
effort that would be needed to establish data repositories on the kind of significant
international scale that currently prevails in other fields such as Medicine.

The Skills Gap
There is also the problem of ‘the skills gap’– an international cadre of researchers who
are trained to a sufficiently high level not only in the basic quantitative and qualitative methodologies of comparative education, but in the specific linguistic, theoretical
and methodological skills needed to undertake a rigorous comparative study. The
exceptionally challenging task of studying two or more locations each with its several levels of context and culture that impact in a complex way on learning, calls for
individuals with very specific experience and training. The anthropologist undertaking
an ethnographic study of a particular classroom setting or cultural learning tradition
is faced with an exponentially more complex task if the study becomes a team-based
and multi-site comparison as several recent comparative education studies have illustrated (Osborn et al., 2003; Alexander, 2000). The need for researchers to work in
increasingly interdisciplinary teams, and to be able to access and use ‘metadata’ of all
kinds, is likely to require a significant increase in the level of methodological training

--- [PDF Page 1230 / Book Page 1260] ---

1260

Broadfoot

available to both new and experienced researchers if they are to be equipped with the
skills to take advantage of these new facilities.
The result of all these problems associated with pursuing comparative research, as
Holmwood (2005) has argued, is that a great many comparative studies, including a good
number of those in the field of comparative education, have exhibited depth without
breadth in the form of an in-depth, narrowly oriented study of a single setting or case or,
at the other extreme, breadth without depth, manifest in large-scale, often quantitative,
cross-national comparative projects seeking to garner basic data from multiple cases.
The pursuit of comparative studies of learning or what I have termed ‘comparative learnology’, arguably requires the rich descriptive power of a qualitative approach
since only this kind of approach can preserve cultural integrity and hence validly represent the situational wholeness of learning. Whilst it would be wrong to decry the
value of more quantitative and large-scale comparative surveys, for both hypothesis
formation and hypothesis testing, I submit that such studies are more likely to reinforce outmoded ways of thinking about educational delivery and particularly about
learning. The spurious seductiveness of what the nineteenth-century British Prime
Minister, Benjamin Disraeli, referred to as ‘lies, damned lies and statistics’ has a great
capacity for reification. As is widely acknowledged, statistical data alone are unlikely
to be able to explain and situate the patterns they document.
Figure 1 provides a typical example in this respect. Using data drawn from the
OECD PISA study, it presents a very interesting set of data concerning the relationship between achievement in Mathematics as a function of within and between school
differences and social background. Powerful as such comparisons are they are likely to
be substantially more valuable if embedded in a much more comprehensive database
of different kinds of data involving sustained and sophisticated interdisciplinary data
collected over a long period of time.
By the same token qualitative studies are bedeviled by the difficulty of producing
findings that are sufficiently large scale and convincing in their rigour to be able to
challenge accepted orthodoxies. The successful realization of a ‘comparative learnology’ providing comprehensive and generalized insights into learning will require both
these challenges to be overcome. This will require both a step change in the scale of
data collection and management currently being undertaken, more sustained funding
and a significant increase in international cooperation.
So far I have argued that the potential contribution of comparative education, like
other comparative fields of study, has been limited both by the burden of an accumulation of different and abstract epistemological positions which can be found in the
history of the field and by the limitations inherent in established approaches to datagathering and analysis. In the third section of this chapter, I explore the prospects for
overcoming these constraints in terms of the potential to expand exponentially the
scale and quality of the enterprise whilst retaining the ecological validity of the subject. I deal first with the potential contribution of new methodological tools and then
finally, with the epistemological perspective which should drive the future use of these
powerful new research instruments.

--- [PDF Page 1231 / Book Page 1261] ---

Figure 1. Variance in student PISA 2003 Mathematics achievement partitioned into within and between school components
Source: OECD (2004, p. 383)

Time for a Scientific Revolution? 1261

--- [PDF Page 1232 / Book Page 1262] ---

1262

Broadfoot

New Questions, New Tools
As suggested above, one of the most promising contemporary developments in comparative studies is the potential contribution of new technologies. At the most basic
level, such technologies are transforming the possibilities for international collaboration between researchers. The advent of ‘access grid nodes’, for example, which has
made it possible to have virtual electronic meetings, is transforming the constraints
of time and cost that inhibited such collaboration in the past. Such opportunities for
live discussion and sharing have in turn made much more practicable the blending of
different cultural perspectives so necessary to authentic comparative studies.
Even more significant, potentially, is the capacity for new technologies to transform
the scale of data collection and storage. It is becoming increasingly possible to capture
live performances of various kinds, not only in more familiar oral and video recordings, but also using digitization. This in turn permits access to data at a distance as well
as more sophisticated comparisons of its content. Thus, for example, data from the
three existing sweeps of the European Social Survey (ESS), which aims to provide a
high quality measure of long-term change in international attitudes, currently involves
27 European countries and has produced a vast volume of comparative information
about these countries, which is readily accessible to academics around the world using
their own desk-top computers.
Moreover, access to huge international data-sets seems set to grow exponentially as
a result of advances in ‘E Science’. This is the capacity to transport huge volumes of
digital data by means of ‘the grid’ – a very high powered international computer network. Developed by natural scientists, these technologies are now being harnessed by
social scientists to make possible the advent of ‘E Social Science’. It is now possible
to begin to use such techniques for retrieving archived data, for example, – to capture
historical reality in all its richness. Thus for example, in the UK the ‘JISC’ Digitization
programme is making possible the translation of some 600 volumes of census reports
relating to the British Isles covering the period from 1801 to 1933 which will be available to any researcher who wishes to access it. News stories dating back to 1896 and
television newsreels from 1955 are also being made into a digital historical archive.
At present such projects are not focused directly on education but it is easy to see
how the availability of huge volumes of digital data – whether numeric, pictorial or
text-based – will transform our collective capacity to interrogate the reality of social
life on a comparative basis. In due course, the availability of ‘qualitudinal’ surveys –
longitudinal qualitative data-bases of aspects of social life in different countries – will
complement the existing quantitative, longitudinal surveys which have long been the
bedrock of epidemiological studies in public health and to an extent, in education.
Such developments make it possible to begin to imagine the advent of comparative
studies of a quite different order of magnitude than in the past, with data-bases and
associated search tools that begin to rival some of the most prestigious natural science
installations such as the high speed particle collider at CERN in Switzerland that is
provided by means of scientific collaboration between many nations. If it is now not too
difficult to begin to envisage a future in which the collective capacity to do comparative
studies will be vastly enhanced by the availability of huge, well-organized and textually

--- [PDF Page 1233 / Book Page 1263] ---

Time for a Scientific Revolution? 1263

rich data-bases, complete with user-friendly interfaces. Such facilities are also likely to
bring with them new methodological challenges in terms of data-management, data ownership and access, the protection of confidentiality and so on. As well as requiring much
more sophisticated ethical and administrative protocols, the operation of such ‘comparative laboratories’ on a collaborative international basis presents quite new political and
methodological challenges. This is already apparent in the attempts by the European
Union to set up such a European Observatory for the social sciences (EHROS).
To take advantage of such developments it will be necessary for scholars in the
field of comparative education, as in other comparative social science fields, to be
highly trained professionals in methodology, as well as in their chosen subject of study,
capable of working across other cultures and disciplines as a global community of
researchers. As is increasingly being recognized, the pressing social problems and
issues of our age are both global and complex, requiring an unprecedented degree
of interdisciplinary and international collaboration. As I have suggested, one of these
contemporary global issues, is the need to address the very substantial new challenges
facing the world of education through the use of comparative methods that will permit
a better understanding of learning in all its contexts and modes.
These methodological and organizational developments have the potential to take us
a long way from the traditional territory of comparative education. They suggest the
possibility of the collection and coordination of data concerning education and learning
to become as sophisticated and coordinated internationally as is currently the case for
other fields such as health or climate change whilst retaining the necessary depth and
range of qualitative material that is essential to sustain the cultural integrity of the data.
This has not typically been the case up to now for, as the following statement from the
UK Economic and Social Research Council illustrates, even where substantial international and interdisciplinary coordination of data management has taken place:
[t]he heavy investment by international organizations such as The Council of
Europe, Eurostat, the International Labour organization, the United Nations
and the World Health Organisation in data mining and post hoc harmonization
of national data, this has not been matched by a similar level of attention to
methodology, methods training, research design and the research process among
funders. As a result, many of the projects supported by international organisations are limited to series of parallel (noncomparable) studies. Frequently,
national teams collect data about a specific phenomenon in their own countries
without prior discussion of crucial methodological issues, such as the social construction of concepts in different cultural conditions and research communities
national or ideological contexts. (Holmwood, 2005, p. 2)
It is increasingly being recognized that all social science is by definition global, and
that the use of comparative methods therefore is in turn fundamental to social science.
Historically, the vision of many comparative fields has been limited by discipline and scale
and by a national focus. The potential of such studies has also been limited by a failure
to work collaboratively and to be too content with a ‘cottage-industry’ approach in terms
of funding, methodological sophistication and the provision of large-scale infrastructure.

--- [PDF Page 1234 / Book Page 1264] ---

1264

Broadfoot

Although comparative education has been characterized by some commendably ambitious attempts to increase its scale and impact, such as the PISA study referred to above,
such international collaborations have been far from typical. Moreover, the political and
methodological challenges inherent in such collaborations have inevitably led to limitations and compromises in the depth and comparability of the data collected.

Towards a Neo-Comparative Education
In this chapter, I have argued that with the new methodological possibilities that political and technological advances are now increasingly opening up it is time to engage in
the collective challenge of ‘re-engineering’ comparative education. This does not simply mean the pursuit of richer, deeper, larger-scale and more collaborative studies. Nor
does it mean the creation of sustained comparative ‘observatories’ or data laboratories
housing data on a scale hitherto undreamed of in the world of social science yet accessible from the desk-top computer, important as both such contemporary developments
promise to be. New technical and methodological opportunities such as these can only
be of limited usefulness unless they are accompanied by a willingness to think through
anew the questions that drive such data-gathering and analysis.
For, however sophisticated the technologies for data collection and management
become, as far as the social sciences are concerned, there must also be provision for
the more reflexive engagement of the researcher with context and culture. There is a
fundamental difference between the natural sciences and the human sciences since, as
Habgood (1998) has argued, the latter are fundamentally interpretive. The philosophical
foundations of the human sciences, he suggests, are defined in terms:
which cannot exclude the role of the human mind in expressing intentions,
generating meaning and discerning values. … The human sciences seek for
understanding through a process of interpretation and total lived experience of
being human … without allowing individual disciplines to obscure the complexity and interconnectedness of actual human existence (p. 6). … But as we
reflect on what we ourselves are, and on what our history has made us, all the
disciplines are relevant because we stand at the point where they all meet, both
as observers and as objects of study. (p. 10)
Comparative education has always been explicitly or implicitly reformative or, as
Nicholas Hans famously put it ‘intentionally reformative’. The reason for undertaking
comparative education studies has not typically been simply that of scholarly interest,
though there is a place for this. Rather, as with most other branches of educational
research, the goal historically has been to find ‘what works’ and to use such insights
to inform educational policy-making and educational practice. Whilst few would want
to quarrel with this broad aspiration as a prospective goal, in practice its pursuit rests
on a judgement about what constitutes reform or improvement. In order to map out a
journey, it is necessary to have a clear view of the destination. This in turn implies the

--- [PDF Page 1235 / Book Page 1265] ---

Time for a Scientific Revolution? 1265

need for a root and branch examination of the epistemological foundations of what we
now know as ‘comparative education’.
The key argument of this chapter has been that what we currently refer to as ‘comparative education’ needs to broaden its focus to embrace learning of all kinds as
its central focus. I have suggested that the contemporary field is constrained by the
conceptual constraints associated with modernist assumptions about educational
delivery. Such concepts, which were the product of a very different time, remain an
important and fruitful focus for comparative education study. However, as the world
of education itself becomes subject to increasingly radical change, so, I have suggested, the centre of gravity for comparative education needs to shift towards a more
central focus on learning rather than education per se. We need to begin to question
whether the world of education in the future will need classrooms and schools, books
and teachers, syllabuses and tests as we know them today, How will new technologies with their capacity for individualizing learning; for making it fun; for providing
immediate feedback; and for being accessible at any time and in any place, impact on
different cultures? What will be the balance of learning in and out of formal institutions, at home, school and work, at different ages and for different purposes? What
kinds of learning will be most important? Will learning how to learn, for example,
replace ‘learning that’ or ‘learning how’ as the key driver? Where will moral and
spiritual learning figure compared to other kinds of curriculum content and skills
development in the societies of the future?
On the answers to these and similar questions rests the legitimate focus for future
comparative studies of education. In particular, I have suggested that the comparative education of the future will need to be capable of both framing and capturing the
diversity of learning that goes well beyond what is conventionally encompassed in the
term ‘education’ at the present time. The advent of this shift in the focus of study for
comparative education happily coincides with the growing availability of much more
powerful research tools for data collection and analysis. The capacity of these new
tools to capture the rich complexity of daily life and to make such data widely available
on an international basis offers, I suggest, an unprecedented opportunity for comparative education to upscale from a ‘cottage industry’ endeavour to that of a multinational
corporation. It is to be hoped that in the future, large-scale and sustained international
collaborations of highly trained teams will increasingly provide for the comprehensive
study of learning, the scale of collaboration hitherto only associated with international,
quantitative studies of achievement.
To the extent that it is able to develop such a capacity for interdisciplinary and
qualitative studies of learning on a significant scale, comparative education is likely to
move from being either the blunt tool of policy-makers on the one hand or the arcane
scholarly endeavour of academics on the other, to being a powerful force for change
in the way we think about education. I believe that such a ‘neo-comparative education’
that is centred on the processes of learning itself, can make a significant contribution
to the urgently needed re-examination of the goals of education in the contemporary
globalized world. Appropriately, (if ungrammatically), termed ‘comparative learnology’,
this new orientation might be the first step in a scientific revolution.

--- [PDF Page 1236 / Book Page 1266] ---

1266

Broadfoot

References
Alexander, R; Broadfoot, P., & Phillips, D. (1999). Learning from comparing: New directions in comparative educational research. Oxford, UK: Symposium.
Alexander, R. (2000). Culture and pedagogy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bouzakis, J. (Ed.) (2000). Historical-comparative perspectives: Festschrift in honour of Andreas Kazamias.
Athens: Gutenberg.
Bray, M. (Ed.) (2003). Comparative education: Continuing traditions, new challenges and new paradigms.
Kluwer. Netherlands: Dordrecht.
Broadfoot, P. (1977). Decision-making in education – the comparative contribution. Comparative Education
Special Issue, Summer, 13(2), 133–137.
Broadfoot, P. (1999). Stones from other hills may polish the jade in this one. Presidential address to inaugural
meeting of British Association for International and Comparative Education (BAICE). Compare 29(3).
Broadfoot, P. (2000). Comparative Education for the twenty-first Century: Retrospect and Prospect
Comparative Education 36(3), 358–371.
Brown, M. (1999). Problems of Interpreting International Comparative Data In B. Jaworski & D. Phillips
(Eds.), ‘Comparing Standards Internationally’ Oxford Studies in Comparative Education vol 9 no 1
pp. 183–207.
Claxton, G. (1999). Wise-Up: The challenge of lifelong learning. London: Bloomsbury.
Crossley, M., & Broadfoot, P. (1992). Comparative and international research in education: Scope, problems
and potential British Educational Research Journal, 18(2), 99–112.
Crossley, M., & Jarvis, P. (Eds.) (2000). Comparative education for the twenty-first century. Comparative
Education, 36(3), 261–375.
Crossley, M., & Jarvis, P. (Eds.) (2001). Comparative education for the twenty-first century: An international
response. Comparative Education, 37(4), 405–531.
Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish. Translated by Alan Sheridan. London: Allen Lane.
Gardner, H. (1993). Multiple intelligences. New York: New Horizons Basic Books.
Goldstein, H. (2004). International comparative assessment: How far have we really come? Review Essay
Assessment in Education, 11(2), 227–234.
Habgood, J. (1998). Theology and the sciences. The Athenaeum Lecture, London.
Holmwood, J. (2005). Small and large – N comparative solutions Paper presented at ESRC seminar on
comparative research methods, University of Bristol December.
Hufton, N. R., Elliott, J. G., & Illushin L. (2003). Teachers’ beliefs about student motivation: Similarities and
differences across cultures. Comparative Education, 39(3), 367–389.
James, M., & Brown S. (2005). ‘Grasping the TLRP nettle: A preliminary analysis and some enduring issues
surrounding the improvement of learning outcomes’. The Curriculum Journal, 16(1), 7–30.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
McGaw, B. (2004). The role of the OECD in international comparative studies of achievement. OECD Paris
mimeo.
OECD (2004). Denmark, lessons from PISA 2000. Paris: OECD.
Osborn, M., Broadfoot, P., McNess, E., Planel, C., Ravn, B., & Triggs, P.(2003). A world of Difference?
Comparing learners across Europe. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Pagani, F. (2002). Peer review: A tool for cooperation and change – an analysis of an OECD working
methods. Paris: OECD. (www.oecd.org/about)
Perkins, D. (1995). Outsmarting IQ: The emerging science of learnable intelligence New York: The Free
Press.
Stenhouse, L. (1979). Case studies in comparative education: Particularity and generalisation Comparative
Education 15(1) 7–14.
Watkins, D., & Biggs, J. (Eds.) (1996). The Chinese learner. Hong Kong: CERC and ACER.
Watson, K. (Ed.) (2001). Doing comparative education research: Issues and problems Oxford: Symposium.

