================================================================================
Chapter 78: Reclaiming a Lost Legacy: The Historical Humanist Vision in Comparative Education
Author(s): Andreas M. Kazamias
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1267–1276
PDF Pages: pp. 1237–1246 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1237 / Book Page 1267] ---

78
RECLAIMING A LOST LEGACY: THE HISTORICAL
HUMANIST VISION IN COMPARATIVE
EDUCATION
Andreas M. Kazamias

Prologue
The history of comparative education in the second half of the twentieth century has been
marked by periodic “systems crises”, in Alvin Gouldner’s meaning of the term. The historian can identify such “systems crises” in the late 1950s and early 1960s, in the mid-1970s
and early 1980s, and in the late 1990s and the opening years of the new millennium. “The
central implication of a crisis”, according to Gouldner, “is not that the ‘patient will die’, but
rather that the system “will change in significant ways from its present of condition”, and
that such change may produce “a basic metamorphosis in the total character” (Gouldner,
1970, p. 341). As a result of these critical episodes, comparative education may not have
undergone “a metamorphosis of its total character”, but it changed in significant ways.
One significant change has been the metamorphosis of comparative education from an
essentially historical-philosophical-humanistic episteme to an essentially social scientific
episteme. The concern of this chapter is twofold. First, it briefly examines critically the two
varieties of comparative education as systems of thought or modes of inquiry and ways of
knowing. The systems in question have drawn their theoretical insights and methodological approaches from the domains of ‘history’ and ‘social science’, and will be referred to
as ‘historical comparative education’ and ‘scientific comparative education’ respectively.
The second concern of this chapter is to make a case for another intellectual system, mode
of inquiry and mode of knowing, or another variety of comparative education, which,
drawing from both history and social science, avoids their respective limitations. This
alternative system will be referred to as “comparative historical analysis”.

Historical-Philosophical-Humanistic Comparative Education
As examined in greater detail in the first section of this Handbook, the dominant approach
to the study of comparative education until the 1950s, as exemplified by such notable
comparative scholars as Michael Sadler, Isaac Kandel, Nicholas Hans and Robert Ulich,
was what may be referred to as the “historical-philosophical-humanist” or the “historicalhumanist-meliorist” approach. Other comparativists, for example, Brian Holmes has
referred to the major representatives of this genre of comparative education as “historian
1267
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1267–1276.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1238 / Book Page 1268] ---

1268

Kazamias

comparativists” or “historian comparative educationists” (Holmes, 1965, p. 64). In epigrammatic form, the main characteristics of the “historical-philosophical-humanistic”
generation of comparative education discourse have included the following:
– Comparative education is a ‘human science’, as connoted and denoted by the Greek
term episteme and the German Wissenschaft; it is not an empirical or positivistic
social science. According to Hans, “comparative education as an academic discipline
is just on the border line between the humanities and sciences and thus resembles
philosophy, which is the formulation of both” (Hans, 1959, p. 299).
– Related to the above, comparative education, to use Karl Popper’s classification of the
sciences, is a “historical science” not a “generalising social science”. As a “historical
science” its epistemic focus is on the illumination and explanation of the particular,
of specific events, not on universal historical laws (Popper, 1957, p. 254).
– Related to the above, comparative education is a hermeneutic, explanatory episteme
that aims at historical interpretation. In one of the many statements on the nature of
comparative education, Kandel has written:
The thesis that the study of education without a study of all the backgrounds
which give meaning is to reduce it to absorption with techniques which, however useful, furnish only a narrow approach to the fundamental concepts and
purposes of education. It is significant that the earliest and still the most living
contributions to the philosophy of education deal with education not in isolation but in their political, social and ethical setting. … The real contribution of
the history of education lies in introducing the student to an appreciation of the
relativity of education to the multiplicity of the forces in its contemporary setting. … Comparative education, the study of current educational theories and
practices as influenced by different backgrounds, is but the prolongation of the
history of education into the present (Kandel, n.d., pp. 164–165).
And again:
[T]he study of comparative education as a method of clarifying and interpreting
educational issues has its proper and rightful place by the side of the study of the
history of education; to ignore these two methods of approach is to fail to recognize
their value for building a philosophy of education and as a consequence to run into
the danger of spinning educational Penelope’s webs (Kandel, n.d., p. 185).
– In so far as it deals with ‘education’, not just in the narrow sense of ‘schooling’
but in the broad sense of paideia/culture, comparative education’s main concern
as a ‘human science’ should be with the ‘human being’, the anthropos (‘man’).
It should, therefore, be anthropocentric (‘man-centred). As such, it should be pervaded by a ‘humanistic’ philosophy, and it should be concerned with the great
problems – political, social but also ethical – which ‘humankind’ faces.
In the 1960s, a period during which social science emerges as a hegemonic intellectual
system, the historical-philosophical-humanistic discourse in comparative education,
as indicated in Section One of this Handbook, was criticised by a new generation of
scientifically minded comparativists, but also by revisionist historians. As a consequence,

--- [PDF Page 1239 / Book Page 1269] ---

Reclaiming a Lost Legacy: The Historical Humanist Vision 1269

the methodological, epistemological and pari passu the ideological trajectory of comparative education was veering towards the social scientific path.

Social Scientific Comparative Education
As with the historical-philosophical-humanist motif in comparative education, the
social scientific motif that became dominant in the years following the first system
crisis of this episteme in the 1960s is examined in great detail in the first section of this
Handbook. And as with that motif, here I shall refer rather briefly to the distinguishing
features of this genre of comparative education discourse and comment critically on
it. It might be helpful at the outset to delineate some of the most important features of
social science and the scientific method.
The ultimate purpose of the non-human sciences is prediction and control. In pursuing this purpose, scientists in the main formulate explicit hypotheses, test them in
laboratories or other sites/contexts, and seek to establish generalisations or universal laws. While natural/physical scientists seek to establish universal laws concerning
physical phenomena, social scientists attempt to do so with respect to social phenomena. Another feature of science is that the findings are subject to replication for
purposes of confirmation or refutation. Furthermore, one of the essential concerns of
the social scientist is explanation, that is, in addition to describing social phenomena,
the social scientist is also interested in explaining why such phenomena are the way
they are. But it should be noted here that ‘explanation’ in the empirical social sciences
is different from historical explanations.
As a participant in the debates on the nature and scope of comparative education in the
comparative education crisis of the 1960s (Kazamias, 1963), I cited Nadel’s method of
“co-variations” as a good example of the comparative method as used in the social sciences.
According to Nadel, variations of social phenomena are first observed, and then general
uniformities or regularities are arrived at. Such correlations or co-variations are not causal
connections; they are of the type: “X varies as Y does” or “when A occurs, B also occurs”
(Nadel, 1951, pp. 222–226). Although I judged Nadel’s method of “co-variations” to be
“an extremely valuable scheme” for research in comparative education, I also pointed out
that it had certain “limitations” and “dangers” if not used carefully. “As is the case with
most social ‘general laws’”, I wrote, “the ‘if A then B’ type of law cannot but be a limited
one, for obviously the S(n) situations are limited”. Then I commented on the nature of
“scientific laws” in the social sciences, particularly in sociology, which at the time informed
comparative studies in education, particularly “functional sociology”. I then wrote:
In so far as sociology is a science, sociological laws must necessarily correspond
to scientific laws with universal applicability and with explanatory and predictive
powers. Some sociologists have indeed attempted … to establish universal propositions or general laws of human behavior. However, as Barrington Moore has noted,
it is safe to assert that ‘generalizations of social science nowhere approach the range
and cogency of those in physics and chemistry (Kazamias, 1963, p. 391).
In subsequent assessments of the “functional sociological approach” to comparative
education, I wrote:

--- [PDF Page 1240 / Book Page 1270] ---

1270

Kazamias

The structural-functional perspective of the ‘60s has however: a) resulted in
reductionist tendencies; b) restricted thee types of questions raised; c) forced comparative educators into a conservative ideology regarding schools; and d) led them
to overlook important aspects of educational change (Kazamias, 1972, p. 408).
Furthermore: “Structural-functionalism, as a framework to analyze and interpret
society and social changes has been assessed as consensus-oriented, politically conservative, and a historical” (Kazamias & Schwartz, 1977, p. 162). In the same vein,
Benjamin Barber averred:
Despite its vaunted neutrality, functionalism is pervaded by instrumental values such as stability (homeostasis) and efficiency (‘good functioning’ per se)
that give it a static and politically conservative temper … at the same time, by
refusing to deal frontally with categorical purposes and human projects, functionalism depoliticizes its subject-matter and trivializes its contents (Barber,
1972, pp. 430, 435).
Another variant of scientific comparative education was advocated by positivistic
social scientists, the most prominent of whom were Harold Noah and Max Eckstein of
Columbia University and George Psacharopoulos, formerly of the London School of
Economics and later of the World Bank. As I wrote elsewhere:
Noah and Eckstein, two influential comparativists, advocated a scientific
comparative education that would conform to all the epistemological and methodological accoutrements of what Benjamin Barber had called ‘methodologism’
and we had then called ‘methodological empiricism, namely, hypothesis formation and hypothesis testing, verification, control, scientific explanation, prediction,
quantification, positivism and theory construction (Kazamias, 2001, p. 441).
Some of the contemporary comparativists, including this writer, were critical of the
emerging social scientific discourse in comparative education, especially the positivist motif. Among other things, we were critical of the emergent scientific paradigms
for being “ahistorical”. Also, as noted above, I was critical of the traditional historical-philosophical-humanistic approach. Instead, I called for a “revisionist historical approach,
one that would combine history with social science” (Kazamias, 1961, 1963). I referred
to this approach as “comparative historical analysis”, one that would construct a comparative historical educational episteme akin to comparative history and comparative
historical sociology.

Comparative History, Comparative Historical Sociology,
and Comparative Historical Education
Comparative history, according to Marc Bloch, the historian of the French Annales
School of historiography, is a purely scientific discipline, oriented towards knowledge
and not towards practical results. History, Bloch further notes, “is animated not by the

--- [PDF Page 1241 / Book Page 1271] ---

Reclaiming a Lost Legacy: The Historical Humanist Vision 1271

love of the past, but by a passion for the present; it is this faculty of understanding the
living [that] is, in very truth, the master quality of the historian” (Bloch, 1964, p. 43;
Larsen, 2001). And in the same epistemological vein, the eminent Max Weber has
noted that comparative history uses the comparative method as a tool of dealing with
explanation of a given historical problem.
Looking at comparative history more from a sociological, that is, a social scientific
rather than a historical perspective, Theda Skocpol, a comparative historical sociologist, noted that there are at least three variants of comparative history:
Some comparative histories, such as the Rebellious Century. 1830–1930, by
Louise and Richard Tilly, are meant to show that a particular general sociological
model holds across different national contexts. Other studies, such as Reinhard
Bendix’s Nation-Building and Citizenship and Perry Anderson’s Lineages of the
Absolutist State, use comparisons primarily to bring out contrasts among nations
or civilizations taken as synthetic wholes. But there is still a third version of
comparative history – which I am here labeling the method of comparative historical analysis – in which the overriding intent is to develop, test, and refine
causal, explanatory hypotheses about events or structures integral to macro-units
such as nation-states (Skocpol, 1974, p. 36).
And again, from the same perspective, by Skocpol and Somers:
[C]omparative history serves as an ancillary mode of theoretical demonstration.
Historical instances are juxtaposed to demonstrate that the theoretical arguments
apply convincingly to multiple cases that ought to fit if the theory in question is
indeed valid … The point of the comparison is to assert a similarity among the
cases – similarity, in terms of the common applicability of the overall theoretical
arguments that … (is) presenting.
And again,
[I]t is characteristic of all works of parallel comparative history to elaborate
theoretical models and hypotheses before turning to historical case illustrations
(Skocpol & Somers, 1980).
These references highlight quintessential elements of comparative history that would
inhere in a reinvented historically oriented episteme of comparative education. One
is the element of explanation and interpretation for the purpose of understanding any
aspect of the educational enterprise. This epistemic element alone differentiates the
comparative historical approach to the field from other prevalent approaches, particularly from the positivistic scientific paradigms. It also places this type of comparative
analysis in the category of the interpretive-explanatory rather than the predictive sciences. There is a great difference between these two modes of comparative study, an
elaboration of which is beyond the scope of this chapter. In other words, comparative
historical analysis deals with explanation and interpretation rather than prediction. It
is a retrospective rather than a prospective analysis, in the sense that it begins with

--- [PDF Page 1242 / Book Page 1272] ---

1272

Kazamias

particular historical conditions, causes if you like, that are related to the system/event
under consideration.
The other quintessential element of comparative history that is implied above, that
would be germane to a reinvented historical approach to comparative education is the
use of concepts, models and theory in the comparative analysis of educational phenomena. Most historians are not theoretical, but most comparative historians use to a
degree more or less theoretical insights from other disciplines. Most social scientists
and sociologists, however, are theoretical. Sociologically oriented historical comparativists, with varying degrees of emphasis on the generality of theory, seek to combine
social theory with historical analysis and interpretation.
In some such studies, for example, Neil Smelser’s Social Change in the Industrial
Revolution, specific historical patterns, structures, institutions or processes are
approached, analysed or illuminated in terms of, or as illustrations of explicit, formal conceptual models drawn deductively from sociological theoretical traditions.
Preoccupation with an explicit conceptual model, likewise deduced from sociological
theory (in this case a combination of functionalism and Marxism), characterises also
Immanuel Wallerstein’s “world system” approach as applied in his book Modem World
System. The difference between these two approaches is the generality of the theory.
Smelser formulates a middle-range theory of social change, while Wallerstein offers
a model with universal applicability, purporting to explain global developments from
the Neolithic Revolution to recent times.
In still other forms of comparative history, theories (e.g., functionalism, Marxism,
modernisation, postcolonialism, or other types), or formal conceptual models may not
be explicitly invoked or used. Instead, however, there is recourse to concepts of limited
or more general applicability (e.g., ‘class’, ‘capitalism’, ‘power’, ‘conflict’, ‘violence’,
‘reproduction’, ‘dependence’, ‘democratisation’, ‘globalisation’, ‘systematisation’
and ‘segmentation’), which provide the ‘lenses’, or the medium to select, organise and
interpret the historical material.
Most historically oriented and theoretically or, conceptually minded comparative
historians generally avoid the use of comprehensive theories of the type noted above.
One species of the theoretically minded comparative historians is what has been called
the “eclectic user” described as follows:
This scholar is interested in theory but can’t find a comprehensive theory that is
fully satisfying. So, the ‘eclectic user’ puts together different theoretical insights
wherever they seem to apply, or wherever they help illuminate a particular historical
situation. Sometimes an eclectic historian will be very explicit about eclecticism and
even try out different theories on the same set of historical data. (Kaestle, 1984)
There have been conspicuously few historically oriented comparative educational
studies that have used theory either in the systematic comprehensive sense, or in the
‘eclectic’ sense. Among these few, the following are noteworthy:
Margaret Archer, Social Origins of Educational Systems (1979).
Andy Green, Education and State Formation (1990).

--- [PDF Page 1243 / Book Page 1273] ---

Reclaiming a Lost Legacy: The Historical Humanist Vision 1273

Philip Foster, Education and Social Change in Ghana (1965).
Andreas Kazamias, Education and the Quest for Modernity in Turkey (1966).
Andreas Kazamias, “Transfer and Modernity in Greek and Turkish Education”, in
A. M. Kazamias & E. H. Epstein (Eds.), Schools in Transition (1968).
Kazamias, A. M., & Massialas, B. G., Tradition and Change in Education: A
Comparative Study. Englewood Cliffs, NJ. (1965).
Muller, D., Ringer, F., & Simon, B., The Rise of the Modem Educational System
(1989).
Carnoy Martin, Education and Cultural Imperialism (1974).
Carnoy Martin, & Joel Samoff, Education and Social Transition in the Third World
(1990).
Shipman M. D., Education and Modernisation (1971).
Michalina Vaughan & Margaret S. Archer, Social Conflict and Educational Change
in England and France, 1789–1848 (1971).
Another characteristic of comparative historical studies is that such enquiries belong
more to the qualitative than to the quantitative research tradition, which, among other
things, involves comparisons of configurations. These aspects of the comparative historical epistemological and methodological perspective were well stated by Charles C.
Ragin in his book The Comparative Method (1987) as follows:
Not only is the qualitative tradition oriented toward cases wholes as configurations, but it also tends to be historically interpretive; historically oriented
interpretive work attempts to account for specific historical outcomes or sets of
comparable outcomes or processes chosen for study because of their significance
for current institutional arrangements or for social life in general. Typically, such
work seeks to make sense out of different cases by piecing evidence together in
a manner sensitive to chronology and by offering limited historical generalisations that are both objectively possible and cognizant of enabling conditions and
limiting means – of context.
Ragin further explains:
Most comparativists, especially those who are qualitatively oriented, also seek to
interpret specific experiences and trajectories of specific countries (or categories
of countries). That is, they are interested in the cases themselves, their different
historical experiences in particular, not simply in relations between variables
characterizing broad categories of cases (Ragin, 1987, pp. 3–6).
The last point made by Ragin above points to yet another and final for our purposes
here, quintessential element of historical comparative educational studies. From our
perspective, the comparative historian is interested in interpreting and illuminating
specific experiences and trajectories, i.e., in the particular cases themselves. In this
respect also, the comparative historical approach to education differs from the social
scientific variants as presented above, especially the methodological-empirical and the
world systems ones.

--- [PDF Page 1244 / Book Page 1274] ---

1274

Kazamias

The historical comparative studies cited above are examples of comparative
historical research that is carried out mostly at the macro level of sociocultural analysis.
I should like to add here that there are other noteworthy historical comparative studies
that examine synchronically educational problems and issues at the micro level, and
diachronically aspects and problems of education in the same society. Also there are
studies focusing on one society, a form of historical comparative education demonstrated in A. Sweeting’s study of Hong Kong (Sweeting, 1999).

Re-Inventing the Historical Humanist Vision
in Comparative Education
In arguing for the reclamation of the disappearing historical legacy in comparative
education, I have elsewhere emphasised that history is also a humanistic episteme:
“it deals with the human condition, with human beings as subjects and not as commodities or numbers, with human cultures as wholes and not narrowly as economic
cultures, and with human values, in short with humanistic and humanizing knowledge,
in the broad meaning of the term” (Kazamias, 2001, p. 447). And in my critical comments above, I pointed out that the historical-philosophical-humanistic discourse of
comparative education, was pervaded by a humanist philosophy and was concerned
with the great problems – political, social and ethical – that mankind faces.
Reclaiming the humanistic element in comparative education, is, in my opinion,
also implied in Patricia Broadfoot’s vision of a “neo-comparative education”. In her
words:
We need to recongnise that there is an implicit value position in any conceptualisation of a problem and in the choice of method to study it. Comparative
educationists therefore need to be willing to engage in fundamental debates
about the nature of ‘the good life’ and about the role of education in relation
to this in a world where, increasingly, nothing can be taken for granted. In our
unique role that enables us to straddle cultures and countries, perspectives and
topics, we have a responsibility to carry the debate beyond the discussion of
means alone, and towards ends (Broadfoot, 1999, pp. 228–229).

Epilogue
Recently, some comparativists, older players like Rolland Paulston, Max Eckstein,
Robert Cowen, Joe Farrell, Wolfgang Mitter, Jurgen Schriewer, Val Rust, Robert
Arnove and Andreas Kazamias, and newer ones like Patricia Broadfoot, Vandra
Masemann, Nelly Stromquist, Anthony Welch, Francisco Ramirez, and Carlos Torres
to name a few, have taken the challenges of the onset of the new millennium and of
the postmodern turn in sociocultural and politico-educational theorising/thinking as an
opportunity to both reflect upon the intellectual tradition of comparative education and
to engage actively in charting new epistemological and methodological trajectories

--- [PDF Page 1245 / Book Page 1275] ---

Reclaiming a Lost Legacy: The Historical Humanist Vision 1275

or paradigms. In the new era of late modernity and even postmodernity, the stage is
being set for the performance of a new dramaturgical act in the multifaceted protean
episteme of comparative education. At the 2001 Washington, D.C. conference of the
Comparative and International Education Society (CIES), Marianne Larsen, a young
comparativist, instructed us and the larger community of comparative educators in
these words:
At the 2000 CIES Conference, Rolland Paulston encouraged us to use our imaginations to envision new spatial, visual, and discursive forms of truth, while
Andreas Kazamias proclaimed that we needed to reinvent the historical in comparative education so that we can better understand the world. While we may
initially conclude that these two approaches are completely divergent, this is not
entirely the case. Within the wider discussions about the future of comparative
education, there are multiple methodological and epistemological choices for all
comparative researchers. We have much to gain from challenging the barriers
that limit wider debate and dialogue. Comparative education could benefit from
both reinventing our past tradition of historical research, while imaginatively
adopting the pluralistic stance, multi-interpretive strategies and general incredulity towards totalizing meta-narratives that post-modernism brings to the social
scientific tradition (Larsen, 2001).

References
Bloch, M. (1964). The historian’s craft. New York: Vintage.
Broadfoot, P. (1999). Stones from other hills may serve to polish and jade of this one: Towards a neoconservative ‘learnology’ of education. Compare, 29, 217–231.
Hans, N. (1959). The historical approach to comparative education. International Review of Education,
5(3), 299–307.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education: A comparative approach. New York: Humanities Press.
Kandel, I. L. (n.d). The historical approach to the study of education. In The National Society of College
Teachers of Education, National backgrounds of education. Yearbook XXV of The National Society of
College Teachers of Education. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kazamias, A. M. (1961). Some old and new approaches to methodology in comparative education.
Comparative Education Review, 5(2), 90–96.
Kazamias, A. M. (1963). History, science and comparative education: A study in methodology. International
Review of Education, 7, 383–398.
Kazamias, A. M. (1972). Comparative pedagogy: An assignment for the ‘70s. Comparative Education
Review, 16.
Kazamias, A. M. (2001). Re-inventing the historical in comparative education: Reflections on a protean
episteme by a contemporary player. Comparative Educaation, 37(4), 439–449.
Larsen, M. (2001). Reinventing the historical in comparative education: Bridging the gap through Foucault.
Paper delivered at the annual conference of the Comparative and International Education Society in
Washington, D.C.
Nadel, S. F. (1951). The Foundations of social anthropology. London: Cohen & West.
Ragin, C. (1987). The comparative method, moving beyond qualitative and quantitative strategies. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Rust, Val et al. (1999). Research strategies in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 43(1).
Skocpol, T., & Somers, M. (1980). The uses of comparative history in macrosocial inquiry. Comparative
Studies in Society and History, 22(2), 174–197.

--- [PDF Page 1246 / Book Page 1276] ---

1276

Kazamias

Sweeting, A. (1999). Doing comparative historical education research: Problems and issues from and about
Hong Kong. Compare, 39, 269–281.
Watson, K. (1999), Comparative education research: The need for reconceptualisation and fresh insights.
Compare, 29(3).
Weber, M. (1968). Economy and society. New York: Bedminster Press.

