================================================================================
Chapter 79: Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education
Author(s): Robert Cowen
Handbook: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Section: Section 8: The Cutting Edge - Questioning the Future
Book Pages: pp. 1277–1294
PDF Pages: pp. 1247–1264 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1247 / Book Page 1277] ---

79
THEN AND NOW: UNIT IDEAS
AND COMPARATIVE EDUCATION
Robert Cowen

Introduction
We have never seriously developed, in comparative education, comparative interpretations of the educational processes patterned by tyranny, war, or revolution. Why not?
We do not have a comparative education which offers comparative understandings of
educational processes of city states (whether Italian or Greek). Why not? We have lots
of narratives about education in small states. Have we ever aspired to a comparative
education of big states? We have some analyses of colonialism and its educational patternings. We have nothing serious and comparative on empires. Why not?
In other words, we have only seen some social spaces, only some social times,
and only some political processes. Are there any ways to understand that? What have
been our rules of epistemic order and what social processes have helped to frame
them and our shifting agendas of academic attention? And now – what might we
worry about, other than the fact that there are simply not enough people to do the
work that needs to be done.

Then and Now
There were once some simple stabilities, comforting certainties, in comparative education: there were methodologies. In London, it was wise, as an MA student, to know
your positivist science (bad) from your hypothetico-deductive science (good). Overall,
methodologies served as a vital exclusionary principle: knowledge of that literature distinguished comparative educationists from other academic tribes (such as sociologists).
There was a second certainty in comparative education in the mid-1960s: all comparative educationists would acquire strong area-specific knowledge about areas in
which they did not live. They would look outwards, for example, to Eastern Europe
and the USSR, or to France and Germany, or to Japan or to China. Ideally, that meant
residence there, the acquisition of the relevant languages, and a delight in knowing
the foreign culture. Thus the autobiographical capital of one expatriate generation of
comparative educationists (Bereday, Hans, Kandel, Lauwerys, and so on) was made
into the expected, routinised, institutionally transmitted, intellectual capital of the next
generation. These themes can be traced in the recommendations of George Bereday
1277
R. Cowen and A. M. Kazamias (eds.), International Handbook of Comparative Education, 1277–1294.
© Springer Science + Business Media B.V. 2009

--- [PDF Page 1248 / Book Page 1278] ---

1278

Cowen

(1964) in Teachers College Columbia for the training of doctoral students and in the
‘comparative education’ staffing of that institution at its peak. In the comparative education department in London the same policy of recruiting area specialists – normally
an epistemic disaster – was used in the same time period. Overall, however gained (and
it might be gained through a first degree in languages or in experiences as a member
of the Armed Forces and it still helped to be ‘foreign’ and an immigrant), area-specific
knowledge of ‘foreign’ places was a vital exclusionary principle: it was knowledge
which distinguished comparative educationists from other academic tribes (such as
sociologists).
The consequence of these two patterns was quite extraordinary. Even the golden
glow of memory, and the genuine pleasure I had as a student in learning, thinking,
and talking about France and Japan or the USSR or the USA or about philosophies
of science and about methodologies cannot hide how intellectually dull was the
literature that was being produced. Of course – to criticise only friends – Nigel
Grant’s well-written book on the USSR (1968) was longer and more detailed than
Janusz Tomiak’s subsequent book (1972) on the same place, but it was and is difficult to find a sustained intellectual argument in either text. W. D. Hall’s books on
France (1965, 1976) were extremely well informed, but what was their theoretical
argument? Such books were among the best of their kind, but they were books of
narrative. They constituted a sort of comparative education waiting-to-happen, the
nadir of which was probably the effort to put together standardised descriptions of
educational systems in particular regions, with some comments on social context
(McLean & Cowen, 1983).
The ‘Anglo-Saxon’ methodological literature was also a distraction from the
important task of creating a comparative education with a complex intellectual problematique. The methodological literature took up a lot of time and journal space – in a
period when there were very few persons specialising in comparative education. The
methodological debate also constructed a sort of comparative education-in-waiting.
However, what was being waited for never showed up. Comparative education had one
of its discontinuities.
Nevertheless in the mid-1960s the field of study, to define itself inside the university
(in places such as the USA, Canada, the UK, and Australia), needed to offer apparently
distinctive methodological approaches at a time of severe competition for prestige and
university space between the philosophy of education, the history of education, sociology of education and psychology – the so-called foundations of education (Cowen,
1982). When the people in comparative education were from all over the place (literally and also) in terms of their original academic disciplines there was apparently,
as measured by the flurry of publication (Fraser, 1964; Brickman, 1966; Fraser &
Brickman, 1968; Hausmann, 1967; Noah & Eckstein, 1969), a need ‘to have a history’
and to have specialist methodologies.
As a crucial caveat, it should again be noted that the full comparative history of
comparative education has not yet been written. So, later, it would be important to
trace the ways in which these propositions were not true even of, say, France, the
Nordic countries, Italy, Spain, and Germany (and of course Japan and South Korea,
China and the USSR). In much of Europe, and certainly in West Germany, the internal

--- [PDF Page 1249 / Book Page 1279] ---

Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education 1279

sociology of the university and the philosophic grounding of ‘educational studies’
were producing a different academic tradition in comparative education (Mitter, Rust,
in these volumes) although the German agenda of external attention (its ‘area-studies’)
rapidly followed political lines of power. Both propositions are true for East Germany
too, of course, for different reasons.
As it happened, while the English-speaking field of study was reinventing itself
around its new histories and its new approaches, there was a rapid shift in the ‘reading
of the global’.
Comparative education (as in West Germany) was suddenly being re-shaped by new
lines of international power and foreign policy and the availability of research funding. That changed what was studied and researched: Latin America, China, Japan,
Southeast Asia, the Middle East, and Africa became newly salient. There was international competition for international influence, not least in Africa, the Middle East,
and in the Indian subcontinent. In the Institute of Education in London, for example, changing epistemic labels reflected changing international politics: the former
‘Colonial Department’ was replaced by ‘education in tropical areas’ which rather rapidly mutated into ‘education in developing countries’. Later, this labelling changed
again, at least twice.
More generally, the word ‘international’ was not only taken into departmental titles –
as happened off and on in the Institute of Education in London – but also into professional discourse as a definer of a field of action and influence. Fascinatingly, this
occurred more and more in the titles of more and more professional Societies (Manzon
& Bray, 2007).
Given those sharpened foreign politics, the shift into ‘education and development’,
and the obvious ability to describe specific cultural contexts and educational patterns,
and its new pretensions to scientific status, ‘comparative education’ was in a better
position to make claims for university resources – but the price was high.
First – and it took some time for the epistemic consequences to become clear –
‘comparative and international’ education was politically positioned in terms of US
and British foreign policy very differently from the earlier academic and pedagogically
centred study of comparative education in the English-speaking world in universities
such as La Trobe University in Melbourne, some Canadian universities, and in a few
universities in Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.
Second, this new political context – and the substantive ‘research’ agenda derived
from international politics, the involvement of governments in ‘development’, and the
sharper political competition (Fraser, 1965) for international students – highlighted a
strange lacuna: there was no clear, agreed, intellectual agenda of attention of any theoretical complexity within English-speaking academic comparative education itself.
The plea by Noah (in 1974) to pursue ‘loose fish’ was extraordinarily revealing.
Third, there was very little work being published, apart from some short and very
good papers, which combined theoretical and conceptual clarity with a comparative
interpretation; in other words, there were few papers being published that were deliberately theory-oriented and these were mostly by sociologists, including R. H. Turner
(1964) analysing sponsored and contest mobility; Earl Hopper (1971) typologising
educational systems; and several of the essays in Halsey, Floud and Anderson (1961)

--- [PDF Page 1250 / Book Page 1280] ---

1280

Cowen

interpreting the apparent imperatives in the relation of industrial economies to educational systems. These essays helped to begin to put the narrative genie – the infinitely
extendable project of writing up accounts of specific local contexts – back into its
bottle (for the time being), and the methodological debate was interrupted by a shift in
intellectual attention marked by the writings of Carnoy (1974) on cultural imperialism,
Altbach and Kelly (1978) on colonialism, and finally Robert Arnove (1980) in a serious theoretical essay discussing world systems analysis.
Clearly, changes were occurring in comparative education but some of the motifs
were coming from ‘outside’. There were at least four such ‘outside’ influences.
Firstly, some ideas were appearing that had not normally been utilised in comparative
education (in North America and in Western Europe) and those ideas included Marxism
and inspired variations on it by, for example, Paulo Freire. There was a Marxist motif
in the writings on colonialism which were themselves an anticipatory grace note on
the important question raised by Arnove (1980) about a comparative education which
looked at a hierarchical international world of power. Secondly, and as indicated already,
some of the best comparative writing of the period was coming from sociologists. For
example, Turner and Hopper were analysing comparatively the social contextualisation of ambition – a theme not normally explicitly explored (then) in the comparative
education literature. Thirdly, there was a flurry of comparative work from historians
of education. This again was a body of work offered by persons whose self-identification was from outside of comparative education. The scholars included Wilkinson
(1964, 1969), Vaughan and Archer (1971), Ringer (1979), and Scotford-Archer (1979).
The fourth influence – also external to comparative education unless some work by
Kazamias on Turkey (1966) is included here – was the analyses of the collapse of the
social structures of agrarian societies with the ‘advance’ of modernisation, construed
sociologically, historically, comparatively and superbly by scholars such as Skocpol
(1979) as social revolutions. There was also excellent work being done on ‘black swan’
countries whose histories contradicted conventional modernisation theory – for example, by Beasley (1972, 1975) and Hall and Beardsley (1965) on Japan.
Thus, ‘comparative education’ was revitalised intellectually from ‘outside’ in the
sense that it was for the first time sensitive to a range of theories of dependencia from
Latin America, taken up and reworked in North America. A new generation of scholars
who had experienced the 1968 student movement reconfigured colonialism: this was
now no longer to be seen as a slightly unfortunate social fact which had existed before
seriously liberal and theoretically informed education and development projects could
begin (or worse, be planned) for the ‘Third World’. Now finally, within comparative
education, colonialism was interpreted as a major social and historical force, which
had shaped countries and educational systems and identities, and these forces and
their consequences needed sustained, theoretical, comparative exploration. In parallel, the themes of revolution and the sociological and historical shifts into modernity,
beginning in the nineteenth century and continuing into the twentieth were becoming
available for comparative exploration – by comparative educationists, that is. Up to
this point the literature of comparative education had been a little thin on revolutions
– although, as usual, good narrative historical accounts can be found (Barnard, 1969;
or even – though this was not the main point of his text – Passin, 1965). The insertion

--- [PDF Page 1251 / Book Page 1281] ---

Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education 1281

of colonialism and world systems analysis (of the kind which Arnove was outlining)
was very promising in the sense that such perspectives would, almost axiomatically,
address international political, economic, and educational relations simultaneously.
These, then, were all clear intellectual and theoretical re-positionings – coming
from ‘outside’ – of what would count as good work in comparative education. What
was being rejected?
Assumptions about the social universe and the purpose of comparative education
included four ‘rules of order’ which had shaped the field in its academic discourses
in the 1950s and most of the 1960s – as well as covertly affecting most of the methodological discourse and shaping the mid-Atlantic project of the (World) Yearbooks of
Education of that period. The rules of epistemic order included construing time as an
arrow; educational reform as a series of gradualist linearities; social and educational
systems as evolving equilibria; and the assumption that the purpose of comparative
education was to reform educational systems.
Gradually all of these assumptions fractured in academic comparative education
(if not in ‘international’ education) in the subsequent decade, partly as a result of the
intellectual challenges identified above. These challenges disturbed the low level problematique that comparative education had been content to busy itself with: describing
educational systems and educational policy and ‘contextual dynamics’; noting ‘similarities and differences’; and of course rehearsing and reprising its ‘methodological
moment’: which in retrospect and at first glance seems to be merely a moment of
slightly fractious discussions between people of wildly different cultural and disciplinary backgrounds about how to understand what (if it was to be called ‘comparative
education’).
These outside influences helped to re-balance the agenda – the triad of what I
called earlier in these volumes ‘transfer, translation and transformation’. This triad
of relations was being made freshly visible (not least through the theme of colonialism). However, our concern with the triad was much longer and deeper: the Prussian
elementary school, of interest so long ago, was ‘comparative’ in that sense. It too
had raised the issues of transfer, translation, and transformation. But that agenda had
become temporarily obscured, not least by the ways in which Jullien and Sadler had
been interpreted as ‘the histories’ of the field were being constructed.
Primarily the outside influences sketched above were intellectual, but it should also
be noted that they affected the field at a time when there were major shifts in world
politics: the Cold War was changing shape and constructing cultural and economic
and political competition in terms of what would now perhaps be called ‘soft power’
in parts of East Asia, notably Japan, and Korea, and in Africa, and in much of Latin
America. ‘Satellite or proxy wars’ (if such technical terms may be used of wars which
killed so many people) were becoming a visible pattern; and the Vietnam War itself
was achieving major international visibility.
These major political changes suggested a re-reading of the global which began
to redefine ‘comparative education’. Partly as a consequence (and occasionally as a
scandalous consequence) academics were being newly used by Western, liberal, and
democratically elected governments as applied social scientists. This process began to
include ‘comparative and international’ educationists in increasing numbers.

--- [PDF Page 1252 / Book Page 1282] ---

1282

Cowen

Thus the breakout from an almost compulsive concern with methodology and the
interminable descriptions of context – which in my view followed from a highly ideological overvaluation of the ‘living spirit’ aspect of the problematique which Sadler
(Higginson, 1979) had posed in his short essay on ‘how far can we learn anything of
practical value’ – was through the double-disturbance of new epistemological options
and a different reading of the global. The theme of colonialism in that sense was the
symbolic marker of a major shift in the field – but the field was pulled into new patterns of research and agendas of intellectual attention and anxiety not merely by an
epistemic shift but also by political shifts.

Now and Then
Overall, it can be suggested that this happens – ‘now and then’, to borrow a vernacular
expression – in comparative education. That of course raises the question of when and
why ‘now and thens’ occur. And it raises another problem – these jumps, or irregularities look at first as if they fracture the field: they must be abnormal because these
moments are when our Shameful Discontinuities occur and clearly discontinuities are
bad (are they not?).
It might be more analytically useful to suggest that discontinuities are productive
and necessary. Not only will they happen anyway (the social world changes faster than
our theorisations of it), but they are also very stimulating – as has just been argued. The
discontinuities mark a double-shift: a shift in episteme which is our normal concern,
the thing we normally discuss; and a shift in international politics which we also talk
about professionally – but which we rarely snap analytically together with the changes
in epistemic assumptions within the field.
In other words, the interpretative argument which is being proposed here is that
comparative education and its re-stimulation and rebirths – and thus its new potentials
– are far from being Shameful Discontinuities which are a special problem for us in
comparative education. Rather, they are analytically understandable.
Typically, however, we see our history and ourselves in a rather peculiar way. Even
noting that new generations of scholars have to make intellectual room for themselves,
we have in comparative education probably gone too far in so frequently contrasting
two singularities – a ‘before’ and an ‘after’. One way and another, we have invented
quite a range of labels to identify a number of proposed singularities. The process
began early with the invention of categories such as ‘the precursors’ (Noah & Eckstein,
1969). We still find the shifts from one singularity to another to be puzzling, and we
tend to anguish about the discontinuities – one marker of which is, at such moments of
bewilderment, the creation of ‘state of the art’ issues of the journals – unless, that is,
a millennium is immediately at hand. The markers may also include new claims about
the importance of a missing perspective (e.g., sociology or anthropology or feminism
or postmodernism), there will be cris de cœur in opposition or in reproof, and the field
may ‘read the global’ and think about itself in a fresh way. However, it is probably
important to emphasise that an epistemic claim is not in itself sufficient – academics in
particular make new epistemic claims all the time. The double-shift of new epistemic
claims and of a new reading of the international political economy is necessary.

--- [PDF Page 1253 / Book Page 1283] ---

Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education 1283

Hypothetically (again, given the absence of a comparative history of comparative
education) it can be suggested that – with strong local variation such as in Canada,
mainland China, Germany, and South Africa where either the sociology of university
knowledge was different or there were different political challenges – there have been
three such moments since 1945.
One has already been illustrated to give some sense of the complexity of what would
have to be traced in looking at the shift away from concern for methodologies and
narratives about ‘context’ (in Edmund King’s vocabulary, ‘cultural envelopes’), into a
concern for colonialism, the histories and sociologies of societies moving from feudalism to various forms of ‘modernity’, and world systems perspectives. It was suggested
earlier that these epistemic disturbances were also affected by major international
political events, such as the ways in which the Cold War took shape sociologically, in
new patterns of international political relations – to be fought by proxy (and brutally)
in some places and softly, by cultural and educational policies, in others.
The Second Discontinuity – another set of ‘outside’ possibilities or potential influences – was drawn to the attention of comparative educationists particularly by Val
Rust’s (1991) very alert list of things that might define the beginnings of postmodern
moments in the field of study. Outside of comparative education, multiple epistemic
claims were on offer for fresh ways to think. Rust traces those claims well: the eclectic
surface structure of Rust’s article represents accurately the astonishing eclecticism of
the epistemic options which were being discussed ‘outside’ of comparative education.
However, the early 1990s were also a moment marked by a massive historical shift in
contemporary power structures, notably in Europe, and the emergence of new forms of
‘state’ – including regional ‘states’ and a new salience for post-socialist states (Birzea,
1994; Karsten & Majoor, 1994; Mauch & Sabloff, 1995; Sting & Wolf, 1994). In other
words, new state formations – including the European Union – were rapidly identified
as a normal puzzle of the field, and the reading of the global and the new political shifts
in Europe rendered temporarily invisible some of the epistemic claims within the range
that Rust had identified.
The Third Discontinuity might, in a full (future) analysis, be identified as the moment
when the politics of the economic changes termed ‘globalisation’ overlapped with the
mature politics of neo-liberalism by the mid-1990s (OECD, 1996, 1996a). Whilst these
shifts in the international political economy were being analysed, the second, and of
course later, part of the double-shift – the epistemic competition took place.
There were two very different claims. One was that it is a rationalised world of effective and efficient schooling, of measurement and evaluation – even a world in which
educational systems should be replaced by skill-formation systems. Thus the correct
way forward for comparative education would be to strengthen empirical research that
collects robust and relevant data of especial use to policy-makers. These motifs are
extremely well explored, with a sharp critical sense, in the recent World Yearbook on
educational research and policy and steering the knowledge based economy (Ozga,
Seddon & Popkewitz, 2006); and more briefly in Hartley (2004) and in St Clair and
Belzer (2007).
There was also a clear and strong counterclaim which drew from a major academic
literature and new thinking within educational studies and comparative education: that

--- [PDF Page 1254 / Book Page 1284] ---

1284

Cowen

it is a postmodern world (e.g., Edwards & Usher, 2000) and postmodern approaches
are the way forward for comparative education (e.g., Ninnes & Mehta, 2004).
Of course there are important caveats to be made about ‘a discontinuity’, any discontinuity – shameful or otherwise. As the history of heresies tends to show (viewed
either from the perspective of the heretics or from the perspective of whichever is the
true church at the time) things do not just stop. And then totally change. There are
routine continuities. The excellent work of the historians who were thinking comparatively is one example, as well as continuing claims about the importance of an
historical perspective. That work continues in the writing of Muller and colleagues
(1987), Andy Green (1990), and the strongly argued themes of Kazamias (2001).
Similarly, continuing concerns for identity are easily identifiable not merely in the
cultural motifs of the writers from within the London school of comparative education (Lauwerys, 1965) but, for example, in the later and original thinking about
comparative education and the editorial decisions of Burns and Welch (1992), in the
‘colonial’ literature (Mangan, 1993), and in the excellent analysis of Fortna (2000)
which is remarkably good in that it offers a grasp of the relationships between social
structures, history, and educated identity. These questions of identity included, very
powerfully, the theme of gender (see Stromquist in these volumes) and knowledge
and legitimacy and class and the State (Welch, 1992, 1993). There were even early
questions about comparative education as an applied science (Cowen, 1973) and later
ones about methodology (Holmes, 1981).

And So?
And so – it would seem in 2007 – we are yet again in a discontinuity. We not only have a
double-shift: clear epistemic claims (Ninnes & Burnett, 2003) but also a change in the
international political economy and how that is ‘read’ (Coulby, Cowen & Jones, 2000;
Dale & Roberston, 2005). We also have ‘markers’ of something being wrong: strange
lacunae have been noted (Cook, Hite & Epstein, 2004) and at least one very clear
cri de cœur has been offered (Epstein & Carroll, 2005). We have a moment, in other
words, reminiscent of the moment mentioned earlier when Harold Noah expounded
his theory of ‘fast fish and loose fish’, and of the other moment not mentioned earlier
when Psacharopoulos (1990) pointed out the futility and irresponsibility of thinking
vague thoughts when comparative education could be rooted in the real world. His real
world, that is.
I personally do think we are in a moment of what I am calling a ‘discontinuity’
(although obviously the evidence is still emerging, not least in the literature which is
coming out in the journals). However, I think this current ‘discontinuity’ contains an
interesting reversal in our normal sense of (and disappointment in) ourselves.
Currently, it may be worth stressing that comparative education is confident as an
‘applied science’ – though it should not be (Cowen, 2006) – and a bit anxious about its
epistemic identity when, it will now be argued, it should not be.
To take the argument forward, where might we start, other than by re-reading almost
all the chapters in these volumes? Or by noting that intellectual work in the field

--- [PDF Page 1255 / Book Page 1285] ---

Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education 1285

of study has become more exciting than it has been for some time (e.g., Arnove &
Torres, 2003; Burbules & Torres, 2000; Charle, Schriewer &Wagner, 2004; Coulby
& Zambeta, 2005; Dale & Roberston, 2005; Jones, 2007; Paulston, 1999 [reprinted
in these volumes]; Ninnes & Mehta, 2004; Nóvoa & Lawn, 2002; Ozga, Seddon &
Popkewitz, 2006; Phillips & Ochs, 2004; Phillips & Schweisfurth, 2006; Schriewer,
2006; Steiner-Khamsi, 2004).
We could start with my cliché (though I hasten to add it was not a cliché when
I first wrote it) that there are several comparative educations. We still have, for example, a ‘comparative education’ of solutions offered by agencies such as the OECD or
the World Bank; a comparative education of international evaluation – IEA studies and
PISA and the effective and efficient schools movement is not yet dead; a ‘comparative
education’ of the politically sanctified or politically correct dichotomised binaries (traditional/modern; developed/developing; capitalist/socialist; East/West; North/South);
and a specialist and good ‘comparative higher education’ literature.
Nevertheless, it is possible to suggest what is rarely suggested – that there are some
basic and relatively invisible assumptions which frame much of the academically
driven comparative education in any given time period. The ‘normal-puzzles’ of any
one time period vary, but there are certain basic themes which all scholars in comparative education have explored over a long time period: there is a surprisingly similar
deep agenda.
In other words, I am suggesting that academically driven, university-based, forms of
comparative education with whose literature we typically concern ourselves is focused
around a rolling and shifting agenda but that this agenda alters within and around a
constellation of core ideas.
It is these core ideas in the field of study which almost unite it – and which also
permit an understanding of its little tectonic plate shifts, what I have called here its
discontinuities. The discontinuities occur within a basic frame of ‘unit ideas’ used in
comparative education. (I acknowledge with pleasure that the phrase ‘unit ideas’ is
taken from Robert Nisbet (1967) and his brilliant book The Sociological Tradition.)
I have suggested elsewhere (Cowen, 2002) that the unit ideas of comparative education are:
Space
Time
● The State
● Educational system
● Educated identity
● Social context
● Transfer
● Praxis
●
●

What happens at any particular moment is that one or a couple of these unit ideas
become almost invisible.
For example, when I wrote about ‘time’ in comparative education in the early 1980s
(Cowen, 1982) the issue of concepts of time was almost invisible except for some
remarkable thinking in sociology (Martins, 1974). Comparative educationists did not

--- [PDF Page 1256 / Book Page 1286] ---

1286

Cowen

do time (they did space). Historians ‘did time’ (to borrow a phrase): time was part
of their work agenda. Now it has become very easy to trace concepts of time in the
literature (Cowen, 1998, 2002) and there has been an explosion of concern for time
and space as a major theoretical problematique in comparative education – see illustratively Sobe and Fischer (and the literature they cite) on space-time in these volumes.
It is possible to work through each of the ‘unit ideas’ showing how each of the
concepts has been defined in the past and how our use of the concepts has trapped
us into certain kinds of work or certain perspectives – although things are loosening
up rapidly. For example, the concept of ‘the State’ in comparative education from
its naive treatment in the inter-war and post-1945-war literature has been shaken by
post-structuralist perspectives – and the obvious fact of the growth of regional forms
of governance. The theme of ‘empire’ (as a political formation) is attracting new visibility in the historical and social sciences – and attention has recently been give to
global forms of governance (Jones, 2007). The theme of a ‘market state’ is also almost
certainly worth a full exploration (Bobbitt, 2003).
Similarly, I earlier suggested (in one of the short editorials in these volumes) that
the concept of ‘educational system’ had helped to trap us into a modernist comparative
education that implicitly ruled out explorations of education in the city states of Italy;
or the education of the courtier in eighteenth-century France or in Tokugawa Japan; or
a comparative analysis of Athens and Sparta and what I would call their ‘educational
Rosettas’; or the education of elites and the social use of what is too casually called a
lingua franca – Latin – in the Roman Empire and afterwards (Heather, 2005; Waquet,
2001). What is required, of course, is to rethink the concept of ‘educational system’ and
the assumption that our praxis is to reform such systems. We thus, by extension and
immediately, broaden the range of ‘states’ – the political formations – which we think
of as worthy of attention. For example, our comparative education is peculiarly limited in another astonishing way – we developed no comparative education theorisation
which dealt with tyrants and tyranny and the associated educational patterns – and this
in a century that contained Hitler and Stalin and Mao. Similarly we developed no comparative theorisations (in comparative education) of educational processes constructed
by ‘men on horseback’ – and this was in a century of interventions in politics by the
Brazilian, the Greek, the Japanese and the Turkish armed forces, even though the hints
were there in the social science literature (Voigt, 1939; Lipset & Solari, 1967).
However, the crucial strategic point is that all of the unit ideas now need rethinking.
The question is, only partly, what were the earlier thematics of the unit ideas? A crucial
question is also what are they becoming?
The ‘unit ideas’ are – all of them – important in thinking through something which
is at the core of comparative education: the triadic relations of ‘transfer’ and its doubleosmotic problem; the embeddedness of aspects of education in a culture of origin and
their insertion into a different social-osmotic pattern which carries its own immunologies or permeologies. We do not know what those immunologies or permeologies are.
Thus we are not very clear, at the moment, on ‘translation’ – how the old institution
changes in its new context; for example, how the ‘German’ university will change in its
new context, the USA or Greece or Sweden. And thus we are completely unclear also
on the theme of transformation – though work on ‘shape-shifting’ exists in the literature

--- [PDF Page 1257 / Book Page 1287] ---

Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education 1287

(Beech in these volumes; Ishii, 2003; Kim, 2001; Larsen, 2004; Law, 1996; Popkewitz
in these volumes; Shibata, 2005; Tanaka, 2005). Without such work, and the unit ideas
are crucial to approaching such work, one of our basic concepts in comparative education – shape-shifting – will remain weakly identified, stuck in a narrative phase of thick
or thin stories of the shape-shifting of educational institutions and ideas as they travel.
‘Shape-shifting’ is of course a silly idea: nebulous and difficult to conceptualise.
Unfortunately it is probably necessary to tackle the task if we are to comprehend the
triadic relations of transfer, translation, and transformation.
Fortunately, Albert Einstein is alleged to have suggested that ‘[i]f at first the idea is
not absurd, then there is no hope for it’. So, in addition, to shape-shifting, I think there
are two other analytical themes which might help to rethink comparative education
currently.

Possibilities and Compressions
One is the idea of ‘transitologies’. A ‘transitology’ can be thought of as a very specific
form of ‘revolution’ – but avoids some of the ambiguities of that word. Thus, a transitology could be defined as ‘the processes, within a period of 10 years or so, of the more
or less simultaneous destruction and reconstruction of political visions of the future;
the state apparatuses (police, army, bureaucracies, political institutions); the economic
and social stratification system(s); and the deliberate reform and restructuring of the
educational system so that it can be used as part of the construction of the transitology’
(Cowen, 1999, 2000).
The point in such an apparently cumbersome concept is that it permits us to see
something else. The time-space compression which is a transitology, somewhat like
a lightning flash, illuminates simultaneously the forms of expression of social power
(economic, political, cultural) in the ‘educational system’ and it shows, briefly and brilliantly, the shifts in those compressions of social power in educational form including,
of course, shifts in ‘educated identity’. Thatcher’s Britain, Mao’s Cultural Revolution,
Attaturk’s Turkey, the ‘collapse’ of East Germany (Poland, Hungary, the USSR): all
these are – subject to sustained scholarly critical review – transitologies.
Thus the theoretical question is: How do you decode those shifts in the compression
of social power into educational form? How do you do that, while avoiding describing
‘the educational system’ in the routine categories of comparative description which –
as argued earlier in these volumes – overlap with categories useful in the administration, finance and management of primary, secondary, tertiary education?
The question can probably be cracked theoretically if we begin by thinking about
‘educated identities’ (whether classed, gendered, raced or defined by region or religion) and certain crucial educational processes and keeping in mind the Wright
Mills problem of making sense of historical forces, social structures, and individual
biographies.
Thus, one of the questions gets to be: What were the ‘sacred spaces’ and ‘holy routes’
in the Soviet educational system and what were its forms of ‘consecrated knowledge’? –
and so on. (Clearly the model of an ‘educational Rosetta’ is quite complex and must

--- [PDF Page 1258 / Book Page 1288] ---

1288

Cowen

meet a range of criteria such as covering and comprehending non-elite educational
processes.) Here the language in this sketch of possibility is chosen deliberately because
of the comparative shock of imposing on Soviet secularities, which the political and
economic and social system so much stressed, a vocabulary from another discourse.
Overall, then, I believe it might be possible to develop a theory of educational
Rosettas – capturing the codings of social power in educational form. Thus when the
shift in educational patterns occurs (in ‘East Germany’ or in states swept up by the
World Bank into the knowledge economy) what is potentially revealed are the rules of
the grammar of educational systems and the way they osmotically absorb context and
the ways they interact with international political, economic, cultural, and educational
relations. Such an aspiration – to understand the codings of power in educational forms
– necessitates the embracement of post-colonial, postmodern, and post-structuralist
lines of analysis which are already revitalising comparative education.
Again, it is an openness question: comparative education must not retreat, intellectually, inwards, onto itself. But nor should it, without the most careful reflection about
the social and political role of universities, expand casually outwards so that it accepts,
as fit and proper, those topics which the international agencies (or the European Union)
say are important problems.
However, such an academic aspiration – to understand shape-shifting and the codings of power in educational Rosettas – is absurd. Good, or at least ‘good’ according
to Einstein.
Shape-shifting and the codlings of power in educational Rosettas, and returning to
the triad of relations (transfer, translation, and transformation) and reading the global
in fresh ways – those kinds of absurdities – are among the things that might get us out
of the long-running modernist trap in comparative education: the siren call and the
Faustian contract of being useful to governments. There are other things to do, including trying to reveal the ways in which compressions of power in certain educational
forms stop exactly what they are supposed to be facilitating: education.
Our contemporary ‘crisis’, our current ‘Shameful Discontinuity’ in comparative
education is not, for once, the problem of a low level intellectual problematique. Our
problem is probably that we have become even more bloated than we were in the late
1980s (Halls, 1989): too many meanings are currently loaded onto the concept ‘comparative education’.

Conclusion
We probably have to recognise three things to help us rethink. One is that the
‘methodological moment’ of the 1960s was not about methodology – but about the
meta-narratives of comparative education: meta-narratives which would define its
choice of narrative form, the nature of its attempted generalisations; and in counterpoint, as Geogre Parkyn once discussed, those particulars which it was – despite the
fact that they were particular – prepared to accept as ‘comparative education’; and the
politics of its emancipatory position. What and who were to be ‘emancipated’ by its
knowledge?

--- [PDF Page 1259 / Book Page 1289] ---

Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education 1289

The second theme is one which was underplayed in my earlier analysis in this
chapter and writing this chapter itself has convinced me of its central analytical importance: the university and its work-climate is a crucial part of ‘comparative education’
(Cowen, 1997).
The fascinating theme here would be a full comparison within North America of at
least two comparative educations. It is not merely that Canada’s different domestic politics shape Canadian education in a different way from the comparative education of
the USA. Nor is it merely the biographies of individuals such as Mallea or Zachariah,
Doug Ray or Joe Katz, Hayhoe or Masemann, or David Livingstone or David Wilson
which define the field. It is also the Canadian university and its social and pedagogical
commitments to a Canadian domestic and political context (Larsen, Majhanovich, &
Masemann, 2007; Wilson, 1994) and to Canada’s international political position. The
same general point can also be made by emphasising extreme differences in domestic
and international politics: it is not merely that the state-socialist USSR, or the Nazi
regime or current neo-liberal states have different domestic and international politics.
It is also the case that the university in brutal or subtle ways (the Nazi university, the
Soviet university, the neo-liberal managed university) abolishes or redefines ‘comparative education’. ‘The university’ does this not only by – mutatis mutandis – exiling or
shooting scholars, or by limiting intellectual horizons, but also by rewarding scholars
in fresh ways.
Currently, for example, maintaining any kind of academically driven intellectual
agenda is difficult in a range of neo-liberal states amid the pressures for the social
sciences and for educational studies to show that they can be applied. The serious historical question for the university – knowledge applied to what by whom and for what
and for whom – is still with us amid the banalities of systems of quality assurance and
evaluation as these are currently practised in a remarkable range of countries, and not
just England.
The third possibility would be to review those forms of ‘comparative education’
which are called ‘international’. What is the current meaning of this label and what
political purposes is it serving? Are those forms of comparative education which are
called ‘comparative and international’ now mainly declarative and hortatory? What do
concepts of ‘post-development’ mean for the ‘international’? Is ‘international education’ now part of a world movement for the construction of peace? The issue is of vital
and strategic importance as Jennifer Chan (2007) – although not in the vocabulary of
‘the international’ – has shown incisively (and delicately) in her analysis of competing
epistemes in global governance reforms.
‘Comparative and intercultural education’ as an agenda for the social construction
of world interculturality? Clearly there are worse agendas around which to stabilise
ourselves – even the social sciences – than the search for social justice and an interculturality appropriate for our times and our place: the world.
However, before we embrace such an honourable – and ancient – vision, it is crucial to see that we have ‘comparative educations’ because what we call comparative
education, in its growth, in its shape-shifting, is itself part of international political,
economic, cultural and educational relations. It exists at the intersection of international and domestic politics but it has, in its century-old form, a very special and

--- [PDF Page 1260 / Book Page 1290] ---

1290

Cowen

privileged home: the university and therefore it has had for a century a very special
academic shape.
We need that base and we need those earlier shapes and those earlier questions and
discussion and some hints of failure: they give us a perspective on the possibilities of
being damaged by banalities about academic quality as well as hints about the dangers
of being liberated by totalising visions.
Overall, then, this chapter has suggested that there are deep continuities in the academic, university-based, work of comparative education and that the field, which looks
every now and then as if it is in terminal crisis, is not. It was, however, suggested in the
first half of the chapter that the field itself is exceptionally responsive to the intersection of domestic and international politics, and thus its surface agendas often alter at
speed at various times – those ‘discontinuities’ about which we get so anxious. The
surface agenda of comparative education is also dramatically different in different
places. It is lines of international power, and epistemic shifts, and domestic politics
which help us to begin to think about local variations in ‘comparative education’ – as
a sustained analysis of comparative education in Canada and the USA (or in East and
West Germany) would probably illustrate.
However, the second half of the chapter emphasised some of the strategic, crucial and
relatively permanent concepts which, it was suggested, unite the field of comparative education, in addition to the core triad of ‘transfer’, ‘translation’, and ‘transformation’. These
themes are called, borrowing from Robert Nisbet, the ‘unit ideas’ of comparative education. Stressing those ideas would permit us to rethink and rewrite a lot of our history.
Stressing those ideas, and perhaps a couple more such as transitologies and educational Rosettas and shape-shifting, might permit us to rethink and rewrite a lot of our
future, too.
At the very least, stressing what I am calling the unit ideas of comparative education
might also permit us to un-learn; to escape the modernist traps of comparative education which encourage us to retain older assumptions: (i) that thinking about education
only after about 1800 is not only normal but intellectually acceptable; (ii) that one
of our major jobs is to be useful to democratically elected governments in terms of
policy advice; and (iii) that we have a special responsibility for reforming education
and people’s lives in other bits of the world. As an academic, I do not accept any of
those propositions. Let us hope we can continue to work out, generation by generation, a subtler and more important vision of our political and human and academic
responsibilities.
At the very least we should begin to understand that the academic field of study
traditionally called ‘comparative education’ is itself part of the international political, economic, cultural and internationally historical relations which it studies.
Furthermore, we exist, in universities, as an academic voice much affected in terms
of ‘hot topics’ by the intersection of domestic and international politics. That is probably why – more so than, say, sociology as a field of study or philosophy as a field of
study – we have such visible ‘discontinuities’. And that is why we need to continue
to struggle to comprehend, under our local chameleon-like and varied exteriors, what
our more or less permanent agenda is – other than catching locusts (or loose fish) and
apparently changing colour now and then.

--- [PDF Page 1261 / Book Page 1291] ---

Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education 1291

However, chameleons (if I am correctly informed) do not really change colour.
I think we do not either. We have an agenda and in my view it is a permanent one,
an academic one, and a worthy one: to reveal the compressions of social and economic and cultural power in educational forms especially as these are most visible
in their moments of transfer, translation and transformation. Understanding those
processes would permit us to speak truth unto the State; and a few other people
as well.

References
Altbach, P. G., & Kelly, P. G. (Eds.) (1978). Education and colonialism. London: Longmans.
Archer, M. S. (1979). Social origins of educational systems. London; Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Arnove, R. F. (1980). Comparative education and world systems analysis. Comparative Education Review,
24, 48–62.
Arnove, R. F. & Torres, C. A. (Eds.) (2003). Comparative education: The dialectic of the global and the
local (2nd edn.). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Barnard, A. C. (l969). Education and the French Revolution. Cambridge: At the University Press.
Beasley, W. G. (1972). The Meiji restoration. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Beasley, W. G. (1975). Modern Japan: Aspects of history, literature and society. London: Allen & Unwin.
Bereday, G. Z. F. (1964). Comparative method in education. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Birzea, C. (1994). Educational policies in the countries in transition. Strasbourg: Council of Europe
Press.
Bobbitt, P. (2003) The shield of Achilles: War, peace and the course of history. London: Penguin.
Brickman, W. W. (1966). Prehistory of comparative education to the end of the eighteenth century.
Comparative Education Review, 10(February), 30–47.
Burbules, N. C., & C. A. Torres. (Eds.) (2000). Globalization and education: Critical perspectives.
New York: Routledge.
Burns, R. J. & Welch, A. R. (1992), Introduction. In R. J. Burns & A. R. Welch (Eds.), Contemporary
perspectives in comparative education. New York: Garland.
Carnoy, M. (1974). Education as cultural imperialism. New York: McKay.
Carnoy, M., & Samoff, J. (1990). Education and social transition in the Third World. Princeton, NJ; Oxford:
Princeton University Press.
Chan, J. (2007). Between efficiency, capability and recognition: Competing epistemes in global governance
reforms, 358–376. In Jones, P. (Guest Ed.). Comparative Education (Special Issue 34): Global governance, social policy, and multilateral education, 43: 3.
Charle, C., Schriewer, J., & Wagner, P. (Eds.) (2004). Transnational intellectual networks: forms of academic knowledge and the search for cultural identities. Frankfurt, New York: Campus Verlag.
Cook, B. J., Hite, S. J., & Epstein, E. H. (2004). Discerning Trends, Contours, and Boundaries in Comparative
Education: A Survey of Comparativists and Their Literature, 123–149. Comparative Education Review, 47.
Coulby, D., Cowen, R., & Jones, C. (Eds.) (2000). Education in Times of Transition: World Yearbook of
Education 2000. London: Kogan Page.
Coulby, D. & Zambeta, E. (Eds.) (2005). Globalization and Nationalism: World yearbook of education 2005.
London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Cowen, R. (1973), ‘A query concerning developments within and the responsibilities of comparative education’. Canadian and International Education, 1, 15–29.
Cowen, R. (1982). The place of comparative education in the educational sciences. In l. Cavicchi-Broquet &
P. Furter (Eds.), Les sciences de l’education: perspectives et bilans europeens. Geneva: CESE.
Cowen, R. (1982). The concept of time in comparative education: an initial comment. In R. Cowen &
P. Stokes (Eds.). Methodological Issues in Comparative Education. London: London Association of
Comparative Educationists.
Cowen, R. (1997). Autonomy, the market and education. In D. Bridges (Ed.) Education Autonomy and democratic citizenship. London: Routledge.

--- [PDF Page 1262 / Book Page 1292] ---

1292

Cowen

Cowen, R. (1998) Thinking Comparatively About Space, Education and Time. An Approach to the
Mediterranean Rim. In A. M. Kazamias & M. G. Spillane (Eds.), Education and the Structuring of the
European Space: North-South, centre-periphery, identity-otherness. Athens: Seirios Editions.
Cowen, R. (1999). Late Modernity and the Rules of Chaos: An initial note on transitologies and rims. In
R. Alexander, P. Broadfoot, & D. Phillips (Eds.) Learning from Comparing New Directions in
Comparative Educational Research, Vol.1, Contexts, Classrooms and Outcomes. Oxford: Symposium.
Cowen, R. (2000). Fine-tuning educational earthquakes. In D. Coulby, R. Cowen & C. Jones (Eds.),
Education in times of transition: World Yearbook of Education 2000. London: Kogan Page.
Cowen, R. (2002). Sketches of a Future. In Internationalisierung: Semantik und Bildungsstem in vergleichender Perspektive [Internationalisation: Comparative education systems and Semantics] 271–283.
In Caruso, M. and Tenforth, H-E. (Eds.), Peter Lang: Frankfurt-am-Main.
Cowen, R. (2002). Moments of time: a comparative note 413–424. In History of Education, 31, 5.
Cowen, R. (2006). Acting comparatively upon the educational world: puzzles and possibilities, 561–573.
Oxford Review of Education, 32, 5.
Dale, R., & Roberston, S. (Guest Eds.) (2005). Comparative Education (Special Issue, 3): Globalisation and
education in knowledge economies and knowledge societies, 41, 2.
Edwards, R., & Usher, R. (2000). Globalisation and pedagogy: Space, place and identity. London and New
York: Routledge.
Epstein, E. H., & Carroll, K. T. (2005). Abusing ancestors: Historical functionalism and the postmodern
deviation in comparative education. Comparative Education Review, 49(February), 62–88.
Fortna, B. C. (2000). Imperial classroom: Islam, the State and education in the late Ottoman Empire.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fraser, S. E. (1964). Jullien’s plan for comparative education 1816–1817. New York: Teachers College
Columbia University.
Fraser, S. E. (1965). Governmental policy and international education. New York: Wiley.
Fraser, S. E., & Brickman, W. W. (1968). A history of international and comparative education: Nineteenthcentury documents. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman.
Grant, N. (1968). Soviet education (Rev. ed.). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Green, A. (1990). Education and state formation: The rise of education systems in England France and the
USA. London: Macmillan.
Hall, J. W., & Beardsley, R. K. (1965). Twelve doors to Japan. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Halls, W. D. (1965). Society, schools and progress in France. Oxford: Pergamon.
Halls, W. D. (1976). Education, culture and politics in modern France. Oxford: Pergamon.
Halls, W. D. (Ed.) (1989). Comparative education: Contemporary issues and trends. London: Kingsley;
Paris: UNESCO.
Halsey, A. H., Floud, J., & Anderson, C.A. (Eds.) (1961). Education, economy, and society: A reader in the
sociology of education. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
Hans, N. (1958). Comparative education: A study of educational factors and traditions (3rd edn.). London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hartley, D. (2004). Education as a global positioning device: Some theoretical considerations. Comparative
Education, 39(4), 439–450.
Hausmann, G. (1967). A century of comparative education, 1785–1885. Comparative Education Review,
11(February), 1–21.
Heather, P. (2005). The fall of the Roman Empire: A new history. London: Macmillan.
Higginson, J. H. (1955). Sadler’s studies of American education. Leeds: University of Leeds Institute of
Education.
Higginson, J. H. (1961). Sir Michael Sadler: A centenary brochure, July 3, 1961. Leeds: [s.n.].
Higginson, J. H. (1979). Selections from Michael Sadler: Studies in world citizenship. Liverpool: Dejall &
Meyorre.
Holmes, B. (1965). Problems in education: A comparative approach. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Holmes, B. (1986). Paradigm shifts in comparative education. In P. G. Altbach & G. P. Kelly (Eds.), New
approaches to comparative education. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Hopper, E. (1971). Readings in the theory of educational systems. London: Hutchinson.

--- [PDF Page 1263 / Book Page 1293] ---

Then and Now: Unit Ideas and Comparative Education 1293
Ishii, Y. (2003). Development education in Japan: A comparative analysis of the contexts for its emergence,
and its introduction into the Japanese school system. New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Jones, P. (Guest Ed.) (2007). Comparative Education (Special Issue 34): Global governance, social policy,
and multilateral education, 43, 3.
Karsten, S., & Majoor, D. (Eds.) (1994). Education in Eastern Central Europe: Educational changes after
the fall of communism. Munster: Waxmann.
Kazamias, A. M. (1966). Education and the quest for modernity in Turkey. London: Allen & Unwin.
Kazamias, A. M. (2001). Re-inventing the historical in comparative education: Reflections on a protean
episteme by a contemporary player. Comparative Education, 37(4), 439–449.
Kim, T. (2001). Forming the academic profession in East Asia: A comparative analysis. New York and
London: Routledge.
King, E. J. (1973). Other schools and ours: Comparative studies for today (4th edn.). London: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
Larsen, M. A. (2004). A comparative study of the socio-historical construction of the teacher in midVictorian England and Upper Canada’. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis. Institute of Education, University of
London.
Larsen, M., Majhanovich, S., & Masemann, V. (2007). Comparative education in Canadian universities. In
C. Wilhuter. & N. Popov (Eds.), Comparative education as discipline at universities world wide. Sofia:
Bureau of Educational Services.
Lauwerys, J. A. (1965). General education in a changing world. International Review of Education, 11,
385–401.
Law, W. (1996). Fortress state, cultural continuities and economic change: Higher education in mainland
China and Taiwan. Comparative Education, 32, 377–393.
Lipset, S. M., & Solari, A. E. (1967). Elites in Latin America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mangan, J. A. (1993). The imperial curriculum: racial images and education in the British colonial experience. London: Routledge.
Manzon, M. & Bray, M. (2007). Comparing the comparers: patterns, themes and interpretations.
In V. Masemann, M. Bray & M. Manzon (Eds.), Common Interests, uncommon Goals: Histories of the
world council of comparative education societies and its members. Dordrecht: Springer.
Martins, H. (1974). Time and theory in sociology. In J. Rex (Ed.), Approaches to sociology. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Masemann, V., Bray, M., & Manzon, M, (2007). (Eds). Common Interests, Uncommon Goals: Histories of
the World Council of Comparative Education Societies and Its Members. Dordrecht: Springer.
Mauch, J. E., & Sabloff, P. L. W. (Eds.) (1995). Reform and change in higher education: international perspectives. New York and London: Garland.
McLean, M., & Cowen, R. (1983). International handbook of education systems: Vol.3, Asia, Australasia
and Latin America. Chichester: Wiley.
Müller, D. K., Ringer, F. K., & Simon, B. (1987). The rise of the modern educational system: structural
change and social reproduction, 1870–1920. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nash, P., Kazamias, A. M., & Perkinson, H. J. (Eds.) (1965). The educated man; studies in the history of
educational thought. New York: Wiley.
Ninnes, P., & Burnett, G. (2003). Comparative Education Research: Poststructuralist possibilities.
Comparative Education, 39, (3), 279–297.
Ninnes, P., & Mehta, S. (Eds.) (2004). Re-imagining comparative education: Postfoundational ideas and
applications for critical times. New York: RoutledgeFalmer.
Nisbet, R. A. (1967). The sociological tradition. London: Heinemann.
Noah, H. J., & Eckstein, M. A. (1969). Toward a science of comparative education. New York: Macmillan.
Noah, H. J. (1974). Fast Fish and Loose Fish in Comparative Education. Comparative Education Review,
18, 341–347.
Nóvoa, A., & Lawn, M. (Eds.) (2002). Fabricating Europe: The formation of an education space. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic.
OECD (1996). Lifelong learning for all. Paris: OECD.
OECD (1996a). The Knowledge based economy. Paris: OECD.

--- [PDF Page 1264 / Book Page 1294] ---

1294

Cowen

Ozga, J., Seddon, T., & Popkewitz, T. S. (2006). World yearbook of education 2006. Education research and
policy: Steering the knowledge-based economy. London: Routledge.
Passin, A. (1965) Society and education in Japan. New York: Teachers College Press.
Paulston, R. (1999). Mapping comparative education after postmodernity. Comparative Education Review,
38(2), 438–463.
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (Eds.) (2004). Educational Policy Borrowing: Historical perspectives. Oxford:
Symposium.
Phillips, D., & Schweisfurth, M. (2006). Comparative and International Education: An introduction to
theory, method and practice. London: Continuum.
Psacharopoulos, G. (1990). Comparative education: From theory to practice, or are you A/neo.* or B/*.ist?
Comparative Education Review, 34, 369–380.
Ringer, F. K. (1979). Education and society in modern Europe. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Rust, V. D. (1991). Postmodernism and its comparative education implications. Comparative Education
Review, 35, 610–626.
Shibata, M. (2005). Japan and Germany under the U.S. occupation: comparative analysis of post-war education reform. Lanham, MD; Oxford: Lexington Books.
Schriewer, J. (Guest Ed.) (2006). Comparative Education (Special Issue 32): Comparative methodologies in
the social sciences – cross-disciplinary inspirations.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (Ed.) (2004). The global politics of educational borrowing and lending (pp. 29–53).
New York: Teachers College Press.
Simson, R. (1983). How the PhD came to Britain: A century of struggle for postgraduate education.
Guildford: Society for Research into Higher Education.
Skocpol, T. (1979). States and social revolutions: A comparative analysis of France, Russia and China.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
St Clair, R. S., & Belzer, A. (2007). In the market for ideas: How reforms in the political economy of
educational research in the US and UK promote market managerialism. Comparative Education, 43(4),
471–488.
Sting, S., & Wolf, C. (Eds.) (1994). Education in a period of social upheaval: Educational theories and
concepts in Central-Eastern Europe. Munster: Waxmann.
Tanaka, M. (2005). The cross-cultural transfer of educational concepts and practices: A comparative study.
Didcot: Symposium.
Tomiak, J. J. (1972). The Soviet Union. Newton Abbot: David & Charles.
Turner, R. H. (1964). Sponsored and contest mobility and the school system. Amercian Sociological Review.
25(855), 867.
Vaughan, M., & Archer, M. S. (l97l). Social conflict and educational change in England and France 1789–
1848. Cambridge: At the University Press.
Voigt, F. A. (1939). Unto Caesar (3rd edn.). London: Constable.
Waquet, F. (2001). Latin, or, the empire of the sign: From the sixteenth to the twentieth century. London and
New York: Verso.
Welch, A. (2000). New times, hard times: Re-reading comparative education in an age of discontent. In
J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse formation in comparative education (pp. 189–225). Frankfurt/M: Lang.
Welch, A. R. (1992). Knowledge culture and power: Educational knowledge and legitimation in comparative
perspective. In R. J. Burns & A. R. Welch (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives in comparative education
New York: Garland.
Welch, A. R. (1993). Class, culture and the State in comparative education: Problems, perspectives and
prospects. Comparative Education, 29, 7–27.
Wilkinson, R. (1964). The prefects: British leadership and the public school tradition, a comparative study
in the making of rulers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilkinson, R. (Ed.) (l969). Governing elites: Studies in training and selection. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wilson, D. (1994). Comparative and international education: Fraternal or siamese twins? A preliminary
genealogy of our twin fields. Comparative Education Review, 38, 449–486.

