================================================================================
Back Matter: Biographical Notes, Subject Index, and Author Index
Book: International Handbook of Comparative Education (2009)
Editors: Robert Cowen and Andreas M. Kazamias (Section Editor: Elaine Unterhalter)
Publisher: Springer (Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London, New York)
Book Pages: pp. 1297–1351
PDF Pages: pp. 1268–1321 (in raw/比较教育学国际手册2009Cowen.pdf)
================================================================================

--- [PDF Page 1268 / Book Page 1297] ---

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

Robin Alexander is a Fellow of Wolfson College at the University of Cambridge
and Professor of Education Emeritus at the University of Warwick. He was formerly
Professor of Education at the University of Leeds. In 2002 his Culture and Pedagogy
won both the American Educational Research Association (AERA) Outstanding Book
Award and First Prize in the (UK) Society for Educational Studies Book Awards. He
is currently directing the Primary Review, an independently funded enquiry into the
condition and future of English primary education and the largest such enquiry for 40
years. His other books include Learning from Comparing (two volumes, with Patricia
Broadfoot, Marilyn Osborn, and David Phillips, 1999 and 2000), Policy and Practice
in Primary Education (1997), Versions of Primary Education (1995), Change in
Teacher Education (1984), Primary Teaching (1984) and many others. His Essays
on Pedagogy was published in 2008. See www.robinalexander.org.uk, www.primaryreview.org.uk.
Michael W. Apple is John Bascom Professor of Curriculum and Instruction and
Educational Policy Studies at the University of Wisconsin, Madison and Professor
of Educational Policy Studies at the Institute of Education, University of London.
He has written extensively on the relationship between knowledge and power in
education. Among his recent books are The State and the Politics of Knowledge
(2003), The Subaltern Speak: Curriculum, Power, and Educational Struggles (2006),
Educating the “Right” Way: Markets, Standards, God, and Inequality, 2nd edition
(2006), and Democratic Schools: Lessons in Powerful Education, 2nd edition (2007).
Robert F. Arnove is Chancellor’s Professor Emeritus of Educational Leadership and
Policy Studies, Indiana University, Bloomington. He is an Honorary Fellow and a Past
President of the Comparative and International Education Society (CIES), and a past
chair of the Special Projects Committee of the World Council of Comparative Education
Societies. He has served on the editorial boards of the Comparative Education Review
and Compare. He has written extensively on educational and social change, with
a special focus on Latin America. He is the lead editor of Comparative Education:
The Dialectic of the Global and the Local (now in its third edition).

1297

--- [PDF Page 1269 / Book Page 1298] ---

1298 Biographical Notes

Jennifer Ashkenazi, a graduate of the Department of Educational Policy Studies at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, completed her PhD in August 2007. Jennifer received
both her BA and MA from UW Madison, in German Literature and in Educational
Policy Studies, respectively. Her dissertation is a comparative-historical study of modern
Turkish educational policies and the continued presence of Islam within the officially
secular national education system during the twentieth century. Jennifer has been studying
and working in Istanbul and Ankara, Turkey, and in Jerusalem, Israel for the past four
years. She is interested in the development of national education and education policies
of various Middle Eastern countries, examining in particular the policies of religious
education in individual nations. She is also researching the educational policies of the
European Union, especially the education of Turks in Germany, as a case study of the
education of foreigners and immigrants in the EU.
Wayne Au is an Assistant Professor of Secondary Education at California State
University, Fullerton, USA. He is an editor for the progressive education journal,
Rethinking Schools, writes extensively on critical educational theory and social justice
education, and is author of the forthcoming book, Unequal By Design: High-Stakes
Testing and the Standardization of Inequality forthcoming from Routledge.
Leslie Bash is Principal Lecturer in Education at Anglia Ruskin University where he
is programme leader for the doctorate in education and supervises a significant number
of international PhD students. After graduating in sociology from the University of
London he qualified as a secondary social studies teacher and subsequently taught in
urban schools while undertaking postgraduate studies in comparative education. For
the last 25 years he has worked in teacher education and has pursued research interests
in, and has written on, aspects of education policy; teacher education; urban education;
education and work; and the links between ethnicity, nationhood, and education systems.
More recently, his work has focused on globalisation and intercultural encounter in
education, with contributions to recent international conferences and the 2005 World
Yearbook of Education. His publications include: The Education Reform Act (with
David Coulby) and the World Yearbook of Education: Youth, Education and Work
(ed. with Andy Green).
Jason Beech is Director of the BA in Education in the Universidad de San Andrés
in Buenos Aires, Argentina, where he also teaches Comparative Education and
Education Policy. He has a PhD in Comparative Education from the Institute
of Education, University of London. His main interests are the transfer of specialised
knowledge about education in the global educational field and conditions of reception
in different local contexts. He has published articles and book chapters in Argentina,
Brazil, Denmark, Spain, Switzerland, the UK, and the USA.
Deevia Bhana teaches Gender and Education at the University of KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa. She writes on gender, childhood sexualities, and HIV/AIDS.
Patricia Broadfoot has been Vice-Chancellor of the University of Gloucestershire,
UK since September 2006. She was previously Professor of Education and Pro
Vice-Chancellor at the University of Bristol, UK. She holds a Bachelor degree in

--- [PDF Page 1270 / Book Page 1299] ---

Biographical Notes 1299

Sociology from the University of Leeds, a Masters in Education from the University
of Edinburgh, a PhD in Sociology of Education from the Open University, UK and a
Doctor of Science degree from the University of Bristol.
She has written widely in the field of Comparative Education, especially comparative studies of aspects of the education systems of England and France including jointly
authored books: Perceptions of Teaching: Teachers’ Lives in England and France
(1993); Promoting Quality in Learning: Has England Got the Answer? (2000); and
A World of Difference? Comparing Learners Across Europe (2003). She was Editor
of the journal Comparative Education from 1992 until 2004 and the President of the
British Association for International and Comparative Education from 1996 to 1997.
Andrew Brown is a Professor of Education, and Dean of the Doctoral School at the
Institute of Education, University of London. He is a sociologist exploring the relationship between everyday professional and academic discourse and practice and the
(re)production of social relations. His areas of interest include parental participation
in schooling, doctoral and research education, and the uses of digital technology.
Publications include Professional Doctorates: Integrating Professional and Academic
Knowledge (with David Scott, Ingrid Lunt, and Lucy Thorne, 2004, McGraw-Hill),
Digital Technology, Communities and Education (World Yearbook of Education 2004)
(co-edited with Niki Davis, RoutledgeFalmer) and Doing Research/Reading Research:
A Mode of Interrogation for Education (with Paul Dowling, 1998, RoutledgeFalmer –
second edition forthcoming). He has worked as an international consultant on teacher
education, school development, and research capacity-building projects in Bangladesh,
Brazil, Indonesia, Japan, Kenya, and South Africa, and has taught on masters and
doctoral programmes in Brazil, China, and South Africa.
Jim Carl is an Associate Professor and Chair of the Department of Curriculum and
Foundations at Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio. He focuses on the nineteenth-century origins of mass schooling in Europe and the United States as well as
the history and politics of urban school reform in the post-World War II era. Currently,
Carl is sorting out the social and political forces behind school voucher programs
in four U.S. states – Louisiana, New Hampshire, Wisconsin, and Ohio – as part of a
larger study tentatively titled “Freedom of Choice: Vouchers Movements in American
Education, 1955–2002.”
Dr Nazir Carrim is a Senior Lecturer at the School of Education of the University of
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. His field of expertise is in sociology
of education and his current research interests and teaching is in the area of human
rights (in) education, identities and policies in education and processes of educational
reform in South Africa. He has published in journals such as Compare, Cambridge
Journal of Education, Race Ethnicity and Education, and International Studies in
Sociology of Education. He has recently been involved in an international collaborative research project on inclusion and exclusion in education between South Africa
and India, and another on democracy, human rights, and citizenship education with
Sweden, Yugoslavia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Mozambique.

--- [PDF Page 1271 / Book Page 1300] ---

1300 Biographical Notes

Claudio Mourais Castro is a Brazilian economist. He has a Masters Degree from
Yale University and has a PhD in Economics from Vanderbilt University. He has taught
at the Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro, the Vargas Foundation, the University
of Chicago, the University of Brasilia, the University of Geneva, and the University of
Burgundy (Dijon). He was a former Chief of the Training Policies Branch of the
International Labour Office (Geneva). He has worked in a Technical Division of
the World Bank and was Division Chief of the Social Programs Division of the InterAmerican Development Bank. Presently he is the President of the Advisory Council
of Faculdade Pitágoras. He has published over 35 books and around 300 scholarly
articles, mostly on education and vocational training.
Linda Chisholm is a Director in the Education, Science, and Skills Development
Research Programme at the Human Sciences Research Council, South Africa. She
has played a key role in national curriculum review and revision processes. She is a
previous Chair and Professor of Education at the University of KwaZulu-Natal and
Director of the Wits Education Policy Unit. She has published widely on education
policy change, curriculum, teachers and management, youth and gender. Her books
include the edited collections Changing Class: Education and Social Change in
Post-apartheid South Africa (2004) and Gender Equity in South African Education,
1994–2004 (2005).
Michael Crossley is Professor of Comparative and International Education and JointCoordinator of the Research Centre for International and Comparative Studies at the
Graduate School of Education, University of Bristol, UK. Professor Crossley is the
current Editor of Comparative Education and was Chair of the British Association for
International and Comparative Education (BAICE) from 2002 to 2004. He is a member
of the Editorial Board for Compare and the International Journal of Educational
Development and a founding Series Editor for the Bristol Papers in Education:
Comparative and International Studies. Professor Crossley has published widely in the
field and undertaken teaching, research, and consultancy work in numerous countries
worldwide. Major research interests relate to theoretical and methodological scholarship on the future of comparative and international education; research and evaluation
capacity and international development cooperation; and educational development in
small states. In 2005 he was elected as an Academician (AcSS) by the UK Academy of
Learned Societies for the Social Sciences.
David Coulby is Professor of Education and Head of International Activities at Bath
Spa University, UK. From 1994 to 2005 he was one of the two Series Editors for the
World Yearbooks of Education series. Since 1995 he has been an Editor of Intercultural
Education. His most recent books are Beyond the National Curriculum: Curricular
Centralism and Cultural Diversity in Europe and the USA (Falmer, 2000); Education
and Warfare in Europe (with Crispin Jones) (Ashgate, 2001); and The World Yearbook
of Education 2005: Education, Globalization and Nationalism (with Evie Zambeta)
(Routledge Falmer, 2005). He is currently working on an international publication on
Intercultural Education, Religion, and Modernity. He has been a visiting professor at
universities in the USA, Japan, and Greece.

--- [PDF Page 1272 / Book Page 1301] ---

Biographical Notes 1301

Robert Cowen is Emeritus Professor of Education in the University of London Institute
of Education, the immediate Past President of the Comparative Education Society in
Europe, and a Senior Research Fellow of the University of Oxford. Formerly, he was at
various times a Professor or Visiting Professor in the University of Brasilia, the Catholic
University of Leuven in Belgium, the University of La Trobe in Melbourne, and SUNY,
Buffalo. He is a member of the Editorial Board of Comparative Education. His most
recent publications include ‘Acting comparatively upon the educational world: puzzles and possibilities’, in Oxford Review of Education, Vol. 32, No. 5, Nov. 2006; and
‘Comparing and transferring: visions, politics and universities’, in Higher Education and
National Development: Universities and Societies in Transition, David Bridges, Terence
McLaughlin, and Jolanta Stankeviciute (eds.). Routledge: London and New York, 2007.
Roger Dale is a sociologist of education who is currently employed as Professor
of Education in the Centre for Globalisation, Education, and Societies, University of
Bristol. Prior to that he was Professor of Education at the University of Auckland,
following almost 20 years teaching sociology of education at the UK Open University.
Much of his earlier work was concerned with the relationship between the state and
education, and education policy. These interests continue, now accompanied by a
focus on conceptions of relationships between globalisation and education, one of
whose products has been the journal Globalisation, Societies and Education, which
he co-founded with Susan Robertson in 2003. The main thread of his current work
is the consequences of the tendential separation of neo-liberal globalisation and the
institutions of modernity, of which education is taken as representative.
Dr Jianhong Dong is currently the Director of the Division of Education, Chinese
National Commission for UNESCO. Previously, she has worked as first Secretary
in Education for the Chinese Permanent Delegation to UNESCO. She specialized in
comparative education at the Institute of Education, University of London, United
Kingdom. She started serving as a member of the International Literacy Prizes’ Jury
in 2006.
Joseph W. Elder is Professor of Sociology/Languages and Cultures of Asia in the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA. He received his BA and MA from Oberlin
College in Ohio and his PhD from Harvard University. His knowledge of education in
India draws on his many years of experience with Indian academic institutions as the
University of Wisconsin’s faculty coordinator for its College-Year-in-India Program.
Elder has been Director of the University of Wisconsin’s Center for South Asia, and
for eight years he served as President of the American Institute of Indian Studies, the
major consortium facilitating the study of India by America-based scholars.
Márcia Cristina Passos Ferreira holds degrees in Mathematics and Physics from
Pontifícia Universidade Católica (PUC) and in Graph Mathematics from Texas A&M
University-Commerce (USA). She holds a degree in Pedagogy from the University of
Franca and she also holds an MA degree (with Distinction) in Leadership, Teaching,
and Values in Education from the Institute of Education in the University of London.
Her interests include vocational technical education and the modernisation of societies.
Her residence outside of Brazil and her interest in alternative pedagogy gave her a

--- [PDF Page 1273 / Book Page 1302] ---

1302 Biographical Notes

strong interest in comparative education and all her recent work and current research
has a comparative perspective.
Maria Figueiredo-Cowen started her career as a Lecturer and Senior Administrator in the
State University of Montes Claros, in Brazil. She was also a regional adviser to CAPES,
a research agency of the Ministry of Education. She studied at the Sorbonne, in Paris.
She undertook her MSc in University Planning and Administration at the University of
Wisconsin, USA. Later she obtained her PhD from the Institute of Education, University
of London where she became the Brazilian Lektor, appointed by the Institute of Education
in partnership with the Brazilian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Her publications include
Paulo Freire at the Institute (with Denise Gastaldo) (London, Institute of Education
University of London, 1995); and ‘Models of Teacher Education and Shifts in Politics: a
note on Brazil’ (with Robert Cowen) in Colin Brock and Simon Schwartzman (eds.) The
Challenges of Education in Brazil (Oxford, Symposium Books, 2004).
Melissa Fischer is a PhD student in the Cultural and Education Policy Studies
programme at Loyola University, Chicago. She earned her bachelors degree from
Syracuse University in Inclusive Elementary and Special Education, her masters in
Elementary Education at Bowie State University, and her School Administration and
Supervision Certificate from Johns Hopkins University. Melissa taught for five years
in Montgomery County Public Schools prior to moving to Chicago to begin her doctoral
studies at Loyola. Her research focuses on the education of immigrant students within
the urban school setting, more specifically the academic achievement and identity
formation for this population within the United States.
Eva Gamarnikow is a sociologist of education who has worked for many years in the
field of critical education policy analysis. Since the election of New Labour in 1997
she has researched and written, with Tony Green, about the way social capital ideas
are used as a policy strategy for social justice in changing policy contexts: the EAZs,
specialist schools and academies, and citizenship education. She is currently involved in
a ‘Four Country Symposium’ (England, Brazil, South Africa, and India) on ‘Education,
Equality and Social Justice’ funded by the British Council, and was responsible for
producing the paper on England. Eva began her career as a medical sociologist and
as a sociologist of work, which situates the chapter’s concern with work, employment
and the occupational structure, as well as its health policy examples. Her other research
interests are in human rights and the right to education. She teaches in all these fields
at masters and doctoral level.
Luis Armando Gandin is a Professor in the School of Education at Federal University
of Rio Grande do Sul in Brazil. He has a PhD in Education from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison, is the editor of the Journal Currículo sem Fronteiras (http://www.
curriculosemfronteiras.org), and has published five books and several book chapters
and scholarly articles in many countries. He has research interests in sociology of
education, educational policy, and progressive educational reforms.
Jose Luis García Garrido is Emeritus Professor of Comparative and International
Education at the Spanish Open University (Universidad Nacional de Educación a

--- [PDF Page 1274 / Book Page 1303] ---

Biographical Notes 1303

Distancia), in Madrid, and a member of the Academia Scientiarum et Artium Europaea
(with headquarters in Salzburg, Austria), after several years being Vice-President.
He has taught Comparative Education in several universities in Spain and other countries, and has also played roles of responsibility in the Spanish Ministry of Education
and international organizations. In his field of specialization and research, he has been
particularly involved in the field of Comparative and International Education as well as
educational reforms and evaluation of education systems at international level. He has
visited a great number of countries all over the world to study their educational systems,
to elaborate studies, to advise governments, to participate in many international conferences and congresses, to deliver lectures, etc. His written works include 25 books and
about 300 studies and articles in International and Spanish specialized journals.
Gerald Grace established the first Research and Development Centre for Catholic
Education in Europe, at the University of London, Institute of Education in 1997.
He is currently the Director of the Centre. His recent research study, Catholic Schools:
Mission, Markets and Morality (2002) has attracted much international interest and a
version in Spanish was published in 2007, as Misión, Mercados y Moralidad en las
escuelas católicas. He is the Co-editor, with Joseph O’Keefe, SJ, of the International
Handbook of Catholic Education, published in two volumes in 2007 by Springer, the
Netherlands.
Carl A. Grant is Hoefs-Bascom Professor of Teacher Education in the Department of
Curriculum and Instruction at the University Wisconsin-Madison, and Professor in the
Department of Afro-American Studies. Professor Grant has written or edited 25 books
or monographs on multicultural education and/or teacher education. He has also written
more than 135 articles, chapters in books, and reviews. He served as President of the
National Association for Multicultural Education (NAME) from 1993 to 1999 and the
editor of Review of Educational Research (RER) (1996–1999). Professor Grant is a
former classroom teacher and administrator; Chairperson of the Department of AfroAmerican Studies (1987–1990); and Chairperson of the Department of Curriculum
& Instruction (2002–2005). Professor Grant has been a Fulbright Scholar in England,
researching and studying multicultural education.
Jagdish Singh Gundara is Emeritus Professor of Education at the Institute of
Education at the University of London. He holds the UNESCO Chair in International
Studies and Teacher Education at the School of Culture and Lifelong Learning.
He was appointed as the first Head of International Centre for Intercultural Education
in 1979 and retained this position till 2006.He is a founding member and the current
President of the International Association of Intercultural Education which is based
in Brussels. He was the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Scarman Trust,
based in London and following the death of the first President of the Trust Lord Leslie
Scarman, he was elected as the second President of the Trust. Professor Gundara is a
founding member of the International Broadcasting Trust (IBT), and Vice-Chairman
of the Board of IBT. He was a Commissioner of the Commission for Racial Equality
until its closure in August 2007. He has been the President of the Evens Foundation
Intercultural Education Jury since 1997. His research interests include curriculum

--- [PDF Page 1275 / Book Page 1304] ---

1304 Biographical Notes

studies; development studies; comparative education; citizenship education; multilingualism and asylum and refugee issues. He is the author of Interculturalism, Education
and Inclusion (Paul Chapman, 2000) and co-editor of Intercultural Social Policy in
Europe (Ashgate, 2000) and has published extensively in the fields of human rights
and education in multicultural studies.
Silvina Gvirtz has a PhD in Education. She is the Director of the School of Education
of Universidad de San Andrés and Researcher of the CONICET (National Council
for Scientific and Technical Research). In 2003 she was awarded the John Simon
Guggenheim Fellowship, for the project: “A comparison of models of school
governance in Argentina, Brazil, and Nicaragua” and in 2004 she was awarded the
20th Anniversary Prize of the National Academy of Education of Argentina for her
book De la tragedia a la esperanza. Hacia un sistema educativo justo, democrático y
de calidad. She has published 12 books, the last one of which is La Educación ayer,
hoy y mañana. El ABC de la pedagogía, AIQUE Editorial, Buenos Aires, 2007.
She has also published more than 20 articles in refereed journals of different countries,
such as England, Germany, Portugal, Australia, Israel, Venezuela, and Belgium. She is
Director of the Educational Series of Granica Publishing, and Director of the Yearbook
of the Argentine Society of the History of Education.
Andy Hargreaves is the Thomas More Brennan Chair in Education at the Lynch
School of Education, Boston College. Prior to that, he was Professor of Educational
Leadership and Change at the University of Nottingham, England and Co-director
of and Professor in the International Centre for Educational Change at the Ontario
Institute for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto. He is the author and
editor of more than 20 books in the fields of teacher development, the culture of the
school, and educational reform. His book Changing Teachers, Changing Times received
the 1995 Outstanding Writing Award from the American Association of Colleges for
Teacher Education, while his 2003 book, Teaching In the Knowledge Society received
outstanding writing awards from the American Educational Association and the
American Libraries Association. His most recent book, coauthored with Dean Fink, is
Sustainable Leadership, 2006.
Peter Jarvis is Professor of Continuing Education at the University of Surrey. He
was Chairman of the Editorial Board of Comparative Education and founding editor
of The International Journal of Lifelong Education. He has written and edited about
35 books, his latest being a trilogy on Lifelong Learning and the Learning Society
published by Routledge between 2006 and 2008. In addition, there is his latest edited
book The International Handbook of Lifelong Learning, also published by Routledge
in 2008. One of his specialist interests is human learning on which he has published a
number of books, including the first volume of the trilogy Towards a Comprehensive
Theory of Human Learning. He is currently working on a further volume looking at
the process of learning to be a person in society. He has received many awards for his
work, including a number of honorary doctorates, has been visiting and guest professor
at a number of universities in different parts of the world, and is a frequent speaker and
lecturer on many aspects of adult and lifelong learning.

--- [PDF Page 1276 / Book Page 1305] ---

Biographical Notes 1305

Pella Kaloyiannaki received her PhD from the University of Paris Sorbonne, and
she is currently Professor of Comparative Education and Political Socialization at
the University of Crete, Greece. Some of her main publications are The European
Dimension in Education, the Cretan Case-Study, 1992 (in English); Greek Pupils and
Political Socialization Research Study and International Approach (Athens, Grigoris
Publications, 1992) (in Greek); Comparative Education a French Approach (Athens,
Atrapos Publications, 2002). She has also edited three volumes on European education
and comparative education, including Andreas Kazamias on Comparative Education:
Towards a Promethian Humanism in the New Kosmopolis, 2007. Currently she is the
Deputy Chair of the Department of Elementary Education of the University of Crete
and Vice-President of the Greek Comparative Education Society.
Eleni Karatzia-Stavlioti has studied Pedagogic in Cyprus and Economics at the
Economics Department of the School of Law, National and Kapodestrian University
of Athens. She also holds a Master of Arts in the Economics of Education awarded
by the Institute of Education, University of London and a PhD awarded by the same
institution. She has served in various positions in Greek education such as teacher,
school principal, educational advisor, educational counselor, and vice president of
the Department of Quality in Education at the Hellenic Pedagogical Institute (HPI).
She has worked as an expert at the Greek Ministry of Education and the European Union
on issues of her specialization. She is currently an Assistant Professor at the University of
Patras, Department of Primary Education, Division of Sociology and Educational Policy
teaching Educational Evaluation. She has published on issues related to educational and
economic evaluation, pupil assessment, and learning in Greece and abroad.
Andreas Kazamias is Emeritus Professor of educational policy studies of the
University of Wisconsin (USA) and Emeritus Professor of comparative education of
the University of Athens (Greece). For many years he served as university teacher and
researcher in comparative education and the history of education in the United States and
Greece. In the USA he was a founding member of the Comparative and International
Education Society (CIES) and for a period of time Editor of the Harvard Educational
Review and the Comparative Education Review. He also served as President of CIES
and the Greek Comparative Education Society. He is the author or co-author of numerous books and scholarly articles on comparative education and the history of education,
and notably: Tradition and Change in Education: A Comparative Study (co-author);
Politics, Society and Secondary Education in England; and Education and the Quest
for Modernity in Turkey. He is honorary fellow of CIES, and honorary member of
the Comparative Education Society in Europe (CESE). He holds honorary doctorates
from the University of Bristol (England) and the University of Ioannina (Greece), and
he is an associate member of the Academy of Athens.
Nancy Kendall is Assistant Professor of Educational Policy Studies at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison. Her research interests include the interrelations of Education
for All, political democratization, gender, childhood and vulnerability, and HIV/AIDS
in Southern and Eastern Africa. Her research has examined the effects of the concomitant introduction of Free Primary Education and political democratization on school

--- [PDF Page 1277 / Book Page 1306] ---

1306 Biographical Notes

experiences in Malawi; mechanisms for providing development education funding
directly to communities in Zimbabwe; and the effects of US funding for abstinenceonly-until-marriage education on HIV/AIDS and sexuality education practices in the
United States, Malawi, and Mozambique. She is currently working with children in
communities that have been heavily affected by AIDS to examine their experiences
with formal schooling and compare these to community and international expectations for schooling outcomes. Her work has been published in Comparative Education
Review, Compare, the International Journal of Educational Development, Peace
Studies, CICE, and the International Review of Education.
Ayesha Khurshid is a PhD student in the department of Curriculum and Instruction
at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. She holds a masters degree in Human
Development and Family Studies from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and
a masters in Economics from Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. Her
research interests focus on women’s education, community-based schooling, and
social justice education. She has worked as an activist–researcher in Pakistan before
joining graduate school in the USA.
Terri Kim is a Lecturer at Brunel University, and an Associate of the Centre for Higher
Education Research and Innovation (CHERI), Open University in the UK. Previously,
she worked as a research consultant for OECD/CERI; a Visiting Research Scholar
in International Relations at LSE in London; a Brain Korea 21 Contract Professor at
Seoul National University in Korea; a Visiting Scholar at the I.E.C., Collège de France
in Paris. Currently, she is an editorial board member of the Gender and Education
journal, and international convener of the Higher Education Thematic Group for the
World Congress of Comparative Education Societies (WCCES). Her research interests
include international politics, historical sociology, neoliberal economic globalisation,
higher education policy, governance, organisational change, international academic
recruitment policy and practice, and transnational academic mobility and identities.
She is the author of Forming the Academic Profession in East Asia: A Comparative
Analysis (Routledge, 2001).
Eleftherios L. Klerides was born in Cyprus. He studied or worked (as a schoolteacher)
in Cyprus, Greece, England, and France. He holds a Masters degree in Comparative
Education from the Institute of Education, University of London. He completed a PhD
thesis at the same university on the discursive reconstruction of national identity in
school histories in Cyprus and England, funded by the A.G. Leventis Foundation in
Paris. His research interests include comparative education theory and history, the study
of national identities, nationhood and history teaching and writing from a comparative
perspective, social theory on discourse and critical discourse analysis.
Harris Lambropoulos holds a degree in Pedagogic from Greece; a Diploma of
Education in the Economics of Education of the Institute of Education, University
of London; a Master of Arts in Management, Planning, and Administration of the
University of Reading, England. He was awarded his PhD by the London School of
Economics on Economics of Education and Human Resource Development. He has
worked as an expert at the Greek Ministry of Education and the European Union on

--- [PDF Page 1278 / Book Page 1307] ---

Biographical Notes 1307

issues of his specialization. He is currently an Assistant Professor at the University
of Patras, Department of Primary Education, Division of Sociology and Educational
Policy teaching Economics of Education. He has published on issues related to
Economics of Education and Human Resource Development in Greece and abroad.
Marianne A. Larsen is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Education, University
of Western Ontario in London, Canada. She completed her PhD in Comparative
Education from the Institute of Education, University of London. Her doctoral thesis
was titled: “A Comparative Study of the Socio-Historical Construction of the Teacher
in Mid-Victorian England and Upper Canada.” She teaches courses in History and
Social Studies curriculum at the undergraduate level. Her graduate teaching includes
courses in Comparative Education, Sociology of Education, and Policy Studies. Her
research areas include global citizenship education; teachers’ work, both historical and
contemporary; and comparative education methodology and theory. She has been a
member of the Comparative and International Education Society of Canada executive
for two years as the program chair, and continues to remain active within the society.
She is also a member of the Comparative Education and International Society and the
Comparative Education Society in Europe.
Wing-Wah Law is Associate Professor in the Faculty of Education, University of Hong
Kong. He got his PhD in Comparative Education from the Institute of Education, the
University of London. His recent publications include: “Globalization and Citizenship
Education in Hong Kong and Taiwan,” in Comparative Education Review (2004);
“Translating Globalization and Democratization into Local Policy: Education Reform
in Hong Kong and Taiwan,” in International Review of Education (2004); “Citizenship,
Citizenship Education, and the State in China in a Global Age,” in Cambridge Journal
of Education (2006); “Globalization, City Development and Citizenship Education
in China’s Shanghai,” International Journal of Educational Development (2007); and
“Globalization and Multileveled Citizenship Education: A Tale of Two Chinese Cities,
Hong Kong and Shanghai,” in Teachers College Record (2008). His research interests
include education and development; higher education; citizenship education; values
education and curriculum; and education in Chinese societies including Mainland
China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan.
Denis Lawton has spent most of his career at the Institute of Education, London
University. He began in 1963 in the Sociology Department, then in 1968 transferred
to the Curriculum Studies Department, and from 1983 to 1989 was Director of the
Institute of Education. His first book was Social Class, Language and Education
(RKP, 1968), and his most recent book was Education and Labour Party Ideologies
1900 to 2001 and Beyond (RKP, 2004). Most of his recent writing has been at the interface of historical, sociological, and political studies of the English education system.
Whilst not claiming to be a comparative educationist, he has always been interested in
the problems of comparisons in the field of education. He has been joint author with
Robert Cowen for several publications.
Ramon Leyendecker works as an international curriculum researcher and consultant.
He graduated as a teacher, and received his Masters in Educational Training and Systems

--- [PDF Page 1279 / Book Page 1308] ---

1308 Biographical Notes

Design at Twente University in the Netherlands, where he is currently completing his
PhD. He has conducted various studies about secondary education in sub-Saharan
Africa, and completed research and consultancies in other international contexts. He
has also lived and worked in sub-Saharan Africa for many years.
Bob Lingard holds the Andrew Bell Chair of Education in Moray House School of
Education at the University of Edinburgh. He has also been Professor at the University
of Sheffield and the University of Queensland. His research interests include globalization and education policy. His most recent books include The Routledge/Falmer
Reader in Education Policy and Politics (2007) and Teachers and Schooling Making a
Difference (2006). He is also editor of the journal, Discourse: Studies in the Cultural
Politics of Education.
Ana Isabel Madeira holds a MSc in Sociology (from the London School of Economics
and Political Science) and is currently a Research Assistant at the Faculty of Psychology
and Education Sciences University at Lisbon University in the area of History and
Comparative Education and Sociology of Development. Her research interests include
comparative education, history of colonial education, sociology of education. She was
a research member of the Lisbon PRESTIGE team and participated in several joint
and personal publications of the network (see publications). Her PhD thesis was about
colonial education titled Learning to Read, to Write and to Pray: An Historical and
Comparative Analysis of the Educational Discourses About Education in Mozambique
(1850–1950).
Dimitris Mattheou is Professor of Comparative Education in the University of
Athens, Department of Primary Education. He is President of the Greek Comparative
Education Society, a former Vice-President of CESE, Head of the Centre for Comparative
Education, International Education Policy and Communication and Co-editor of the
Greek biannual journal Comparative and International Education Review. He has
served as Vice-President of the Greek Pedagogical Institute, Head of the National
Institute for the In-service Training of Teachers and member of various national policy
making committees. He is the editor of several books and the author of many articles in
academic journals (mostly in Greek). His research interests include policymaking with
special reference to higher education and to issues of quality and of change management.
(His webpage address is http://www.primedu.uoa.gr/ dmatth)
Tristan McCowan is Lecturer in Education and International Development at the
Institute of Education, University of London. His research interests include citizenship education, curriculum theory, and education in Brazil. From 2002 to 2003 he
was Coordinator of the Observatory of Latin American Education Policy in Rio de
Janeiro. Recent journal articles have been published in Higher Education, Journal of
Education Policy and International Journal of Educational Development.
Gary McCulloch is Brian Simon Professor of the History of Education at the Institute
of Education, University of London. His recent publications include Cyril Norwood
and the Ideal of Secondary Education (Palgrave Macmillan, 2007), Documentary
Research in Education, History and the Social Sciences (RoutledgeFalmer, 2005), and

--- [PDF Page 1280 / Book Page 1309] ---

Biographical Notes 1309

The RoutledgeFalmer Reader in the History of Education (RoutledgeFalmer, 2005).
He is the past President of the History of Education Society (UK) and a former Editor
of the international journal History of Education.
Sonia Mehta is a transplanted foreign-student-turned-lecturer in comparative education
studies. She received her BA in literature from St. Xavier’s College, Ahmedabad, India,
MA in literature, comparative literature, and language studies from Pune University,
India. She received her second MA from SUNY, Buffalo in Comparative Education and
went on to receive a doctoral degree in the Sociology of Education and Comparative,
International Studies in Education under the guidance of Lynn Ilon, Rolland Paulston,
and Greg Dimitriadis. Her current research seeks to find new ways of doing educational,
sociological, and historical research which are inclusive of difference, and of (as yet)
unnamed alternative epistemes. She does this using the tools of both literary criticism
and educational pedagogy. She is an educational consultant for ‘Mountain Children’s
Forum’, an NGO working with children in the Himalayan foothills.
John Metzler directs educational programs and initiatives for the African Studies
Center at Michigan State University where he also holds an adjunct position in
the College of Education. He has taught and carried out research and project work
on educational issues in Southern Africa since 1972. He has also been involved in
project work in Tanzania and Ghana. He earned his PhD in Educational Policy Studies
and Comparative Education with a minor in African Studies from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison.
Wolfgang Mitter is Emeritus Professor of Education at the German Institute for
International Educational Research (DIPF) and Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University
of Frankfurt am Main. He was Head of Department (1972–1998) and Director (1978–
1981; 1988–1995) of the DIPF. He was Chairman of the Kommission für Vergleichende
Erziehungswissenschaft in der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Erziehungswissenschaft
(1970–1972; 1987–1989), and President of the Comparative Education Society in
Europe (CESE, 1981–1985), the World Council of Comparative Education Societies
(WCCES, 1991–1996), and the World Association for Educational Research (WAER,
1997–2000). He is a member of the Academia Europaea and the Russian Academy
of Education. He has led research projects on comparative topics, particularly on
education in Eastern and Central Europe, and has published extensively on theoretical
aspects of comparative education, politics of education and history of education. He
is a member of the Editorial Board of the German journal Bildung und Erziehung and
was its chief editor (1981–1996).
Robert Morrell teaches in the Faculty of Education, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
South Africa. He edited Changing Men in Southern Africa (University of Natal Press/
Zed Books, 2001), African Masculinities (Palgrave/University of KwaZulu-Natal
Press, 2005) (with Lahoucine Ouzgane), and Baba: Men and Fatherhood in South
Africa (HSRC Press, 2006) (with Linda Richter). He has conducted research into, and
written on, various aspects of gender in education, including corporal punishment,
violence, and youth masculinities.

--- [PDF Page 1281 / Book Page 1310] ---

1310 Biographical Notes

Guy Neave is Principal Senior Researcher at the Centro de Investigacão de Politicas
do Ensino Superior (CIPES) Porto, Portugal and honorary Professor, Centre for
Higher Education Policy Studies, Twente University, Netherlands. In his time, he has
done a number of interesting things – Professor of Comparative Education at London
University, Institute of Education from 1985 to 1990, editor of Higher Education
Policy for 19 years, series editor of Issues in Higher Education. With Burton R. Clark,
he was editor-in-chief of the Encyclopedia of Higher Education (4 vols 1992) and
honorary vice-president of the British Society for Research into Higher Education.
An historian, specialized in French political history, he has written exhaustingly and
comparatively on higher education policy in Western Europe.
Elected in 1998 as Foreign Associate by the National Academy of Education of the
United States of America, he lives in the Far West of the Paris Basin.
Liliana Olmos is Professor of Contemporary Literature and Research Coordinator of
the Paulo Freire Institute at UCLA. She did her undergraduate and graduate work in
Contemporary Literature in Argentina (University of Córdoba) and in the United States
(MA in Education). She is currently pursuing her doctoral studies in International and
Comparative Education at the University of California, Los Angeles. She is a Founding
Member of the Paulo Freire Institute at UCLA (2002) and Founder Associate Director
of the Paulo Freire Institute, Buenos Aires, Argentina (2003). In collaboration with
Carlos Torres, she is the editor of the volume In the Shadow of Neoliberalism; Twentyfive Years of Education Reform Initiatives in Sixteen Countries.
Donatella Palomba is a Full Professor of General Education (Pedagogia Generale) in
the Faculty of Lettere e Filosofia, Department of Philosophy, University of Rome “Tor
Vergata,” Director of the International Doctorate in Educational Sciences, Member of the
Executive Board of the Distance Education Unit of the University, Tor Vergata referee
for the “Bologna Process.” She is President of SICESE – Italian Society of Comparative
Education; and a Past President of CESE – The Comparative Education Society in
Europe. For more than two decades, she has acted in international and comparative studies in education, her main research areas being European Education, Citizenship and
Intercultural Education, Innovation in Higher Education, Distance Education. On many
occasions she has acted as a scientific consultant for the Italian Ministry of Education in
relation with European and international projects, and the OECD Country Report. Her
last publication is From Clerici Vagantes to Internet – A Comparative Perspective on
Universities (edited with Anselmo R. Paolone), Rome, Aeacne Editrice, 2006.
Jenny Parkes is a lecturer in Education, Gender, and International Development at
the Institute of Education, University of London. She has worked for many years with
young people as a researcher, educational psychologist, and teacher. Her specialist
interest is in research with young people living in violent neighbourhoods, with a
particular focus on South Africa. Selected publications include ‘Tensions and troubles
in young people’s talk about safety and danger in a violent neighbourhood’, Journal of
Youth Studies (2007); ‘The multiple meanings of violence: Children’s talk about life in
a South African neighbourhood’, Childhood (2007); ‘Resisting the magnet: A study of
South African children’s engagements with neighbourhood violence’, in R. Stevenson

--- [PDF Page 1282 / Book Page 1311] ---

Biographical Notes 1311

and G. Cox (eds.) Perspectives on Violence and Violent Death (forthcoming); and ‘The
power of talk: Transformative possibilities in researching violence with children in
South Africa’, International Journal of Social Research Methodology (forthcoming).
George Pasias is an Assistant Professor of Comparative Education in the Department
of Special Education of the University of Thessaly. He teaches Comparative Education,
European Union Educational Policy, and European Dimension in Education. He is the
author of several books and articles in Greek and English. Areas of research interest include:
comparative education, European educational policy, European citizenship, knowledge society, globalisation in the education. Recent publications: European Dimension
in Education (Athens: Gutenberg, 2003) (co-authored with St. Pandides) [in Greek],
European Union and Education: 1950 – 2007, Vol. I & II (Athens: Gutenberg, 2006) [in
Greek]. He is a member of the Comparative Education Society in Europe (CESE), the
Greek Comparative Education Society, and the Hellenic Pedagogical Society.
Rob Pattman teaches sociology at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa and
has research interests in gender, young people, ‘race’, and sexuality. He wrote, with
Stephen Frosh and Ann Phoenix, Young Masculinities (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2002)
and with Fatuma Chege, Finding Our Voices: young people, gendered and sexual identities and HIV/AIDS in education (Nairobi: UNICEF, 2003). He edited, with Sultan
Khan, Undressing Durban (Durban: Madiba Press, 2007).
Miguel A. Pereyra is chair of Comparative Education at the University of Granada
and President of CESE (Comparative Education Society in Europe). Trained both as
an educationist and a historian, he specialises in historical sociology of educational
reforms and the international diffusion of academic educational knowledge. Lately
he has edited (with T. S. Popkewith and B. Franklin) Cultural History & Education
(New York, RoutledgeFalmer, 2001), and (with J.C. González Faraco y J.M. Coronel)
Infancia y escolarización en la modernidad tardía (Madrid, Akal. 2002). Juan Carlos
González Faraco is associate professor of Anthropology of Education at the University
of Huelva and Adjunct Professor of Anthropology at the University of Alabama as well
as a member of the European Network of Experts in the Social Sciences of Education
and Training (NESSE). Antonio Luzón and Mónica Torres are Assistant Professors
of Comparative Education at the University of Granada specialized in comparative
educational policy.
David Phillips is Professor of Comparative Education and a Fellow of St Edmund
Hall, University of Oxford. He has written widely on issues in comparative education, with
a focus on education in Germany and on educational policy borrowing. He served as
Chair of the British Association for International and Comparative Education (BAICE)
from 1998 to 2000, and is an Academician of the British Social Sciences Academy and
a Fellow of the Royal Historical Association. He is currently a member of the board of
directors of the Comparative and International Education Society (CIES). He was for
20 years editor of the Oxford Review of Education and serves on the editorial boards of
various journals, including Comparative Education and 21st Century Society. He now
edits the online journal, Research in Comparative and International Education, and is
series editor of Oxford Studies in Comparative Education.

--- [PDF Page 1283 / Book Page 1312] ---

1312 Biographical Notes

Tom Popkewitz is a Professor and former Chair in the Department of Curriculum and
Instruction at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He holds a BA degree in History,
an MA in Teaching and Curriculum, and a Doctorate in Curriculum with an emphasis
on the sociology of knowledge and political science. He teaches courses related to
school reforms, paradigms of educational research in curriculum studies, and comparative curriculum studies. He has written or co-edited over 25 books, including:
Paradigms and Ideology of Educational Research (1984), The Political Sociology Of
Educational Reform (1991), Struggling for the Soul (1998), and Cosmopolitanism and
the Age of School Reform (2008). Other projects have included comparative studies
of national educational reforms in Asia, Europe, Latin America, Southern Africa, and
the USA. He has been awarded five honorary doctorates from foreign universities and
the 2005 Teachers College, Columbia University Distinguished Alumni Award. His
research has been translated into Chinese, Danish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian,
Japanese, Portuguese, Norwegian, Russian, Spanish, and Swedish.
Vimala Ramachandran works at the Educational Resource Unit in New Delhi. Her
research interests are elementary education, girls’ education, and women’s empowerment. She has published extensively on primary education, girls’ education and
women’s empowerment and writes in Economic and Political Weekly (Mumbai)
and New Indian Express (Chennai). Her books include Gender and Social Equity
in Primary Education (2004) and Getting Children Back to School: Case Studies in
Primary Education (2003). She has extensive experience in qualitative research, programme development, and process documentation. She was the first National Project
Director of Mahila Samakhya (1988–1993), a Government of India programme based
in the Department of Education.
Anita Rampal is Professor of Elementary and Social Education at the Department
of Education, Delhi University. She has been involved with the National Curriculum
Framework 2005 and is Chairperson of the NCERT Textbooks at the primary stage.
Her special interests include participatory curriculum development, with a focus on
critical pedagogy and indigenous knowledge, cognition and communication of science and mathematics, and policy analysis for equity in education. She was a Nehru
Fellow, the Hon. Director of the National Literacy Resource Centre and has been
involved with the Hoshangabad Science Teaching Programme, National Literacy
Campaigns, and the People’s Science Movement. She has written reports and research
articles, co-authored books such as the Public Report on Basic Education (PROBE),
Numeracy Counts, Zindagi Ka Hisaab, and also produced films on women’s education and participation.
Fazal Rizvi is a professor in educational policy studies at the University of Illinois,
where he directs its online Masters programme in Global Studies in Education. (See <
gse.ed.uiuc.edu>.) He has held a number of academic and administrative appointments
in Australia, including Pro Vice-Chancellor (International) at the Royal Melbourne
Institute of Technology and the foundation director of Monash Center for Research
in International Education. He has published widely on cultural globalization
and education policy, student mobility and international education, and the shifting

--- [PDF Page 1284 / Book Page 1313] ---

Biographical Notes 1313

dynamics of higher education. His current project relates to higher education reforms
in India. He also is serving as an international panel member on the UK’s Research
Assessment Exercise RAE2008.
Susan Robertson is Professor of Sociology of Education, University of Bristol. She
is also the founding co-editor of the journal Globalisation, Societies and Education
as well as Coordinator of the Centre for Research on Globalisation, Education, and
Societies. Her current areas of teaching and research interest include globalisation,
global governance, policy formation, state theory, and teachers’ labour.
Yiannis Roussakis, MEd, has worked as a teacher in primary education and is currently a doctoral candidate in Comparative Education at the University of Athens and a
researcher in the Centre for Comparative Education, International Education Policy and
Communication of the University of Athens. He has taught comparative education and
European education policy as in-service training courses for primary and secondary
education teachers and he has lectured on these subjects in the intensive programmes
organized by the Socrates Erasmus Network on Comparative Education. His current
research focuses on European Union education policy issues and on teacher initial
and in-service training in comparative perspective. Some of his recent publications
are: A. Kazamias & Y. Roussakis (2007), Education for and beyond the knowledge
society: A critical analysis of the European discourse on education, in Comparative
and International Education Review, 8, 71–91; Y. Roussakis (2006), Knowledge,
employability, competitiveness: Constructing the European education area, in Deltio,
34, 15–20 [in Greek]. He is a member of the Comparative Education Society in Europe
and the Greek Comparative Education Society.
Val D. Rust is Professor of Education at the University of California, Los Angeles.
He is the Chair of the Social Sciences and Comparative Education Division of the
Department of Education, Associate Director of the Center for International and
Development Education, and the Director of the Education Abroad Program at UCLA.
Brian Johnstone and Carine Allaf are first-year doctoral students specializing in comparative education in the Social Sciences and Comparative Education Division of the
Department of Education at UCLA.
Vinathe Sharma-Brymer is currently working as a consultant in gender and education
in India. She is also setting up an organisation called ActionAble India through which
she is hoping to bring positive interventions in primary and higher education in India.
She is continuing her research project on the perceptions of educated Indian women by
collecting narratives of educated women and their daughters. Vinathe obtained her PhD
and MEd Honours degrees in Education from University of Wollongong, Australia.
She taught undergraduate and postgraduate courses in education at the Universities of
Canberra and Wollongong. She has worked as a researcher in the areas of education
and psychology. Before settling down in Australia she was a consultant and a trainer
of teachers for grass-roots organisations in India. She has also worked for national
and international donor agencies, as a founder lecturer and head of the department of
psychology in an undergraduate college, and as a journalist.

--- [PDF Page 1285 / Book Page 1314] ---

1314 Biographical Notes

Masako Shibata is an Assistant Professor in the Graduate School of Humanities and
Social Sciences, the University of Tsukuba, Japan. She is an editorial board member of
Research in Comparative and International Education and The Japan–UK Education
Forum. For her comparative research, she has won a number of awards, including
the CESE Women’s Network Prize awarded by the Comparative Education Society in
Europe. Her most recent book is Japan and Germany under the U.S. Occupation: A
Comparative Analysis of Post-War Education Reform (2005, Lexington Books). She
has also published articles and book reviews in various academic journals, such as
Compare, History of Education, Oxford Review of Education and Pacific Affairs, and
in the series of Oxford Studies in Comparative Education. Currently she is conducting
research on the teaching about World War II as “collective memories” in Germany
and UK from the 1950s onward. The research is funded by the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS).
Iveta Silova is an Assistant Professor of Transcultural, International, and Comparative
Education at Lehigh University (Pennsylvania, USA). Her research focuses on the
study of globalization, democratization, and policy “borrowing” in education. Her
publications cover a range of issues critical to understanding post-socialist education
transformation processes, including gender equity trends in Eastern/Central Europe
and Central Asia, minority/multicultural education policies in the former Soviet Union,
as well as the scope, nature, and implications of private tutoring in a cross-national
perspective. Her most recent research documents the influence of international NGOs
on education policymaking in the Caucasus, Central Asia, and Mongolia. She is the
author of From Sites of Occupation to Symbols of Multiculturalism: Re-conceptualizing
Minority Education in Post-Soviet Latvia (Information Age Publishing, 2006)
and coeditor (with Mark Bray and Virginija Budiene) of Education in a Hidden
Marketplace: Monitoring of Private Tutoring (Open Society Institute, 2006).
Noah W. Sobe is Assistant Professor of Cultural and Educational Policy Studies at
Loyola University Chicago where he also serves as the Associate Director of the
Centre for Comparative Education. His research focuses on globalization and the
international circulation of curricula and pedagogy with a particular geographic
focus on Central and Eastern Europe. Professor Sobe’s work has appeared in journals such as Educational Theory, Paedagogica Historica, and Current Issues in
Comparative Education. He is also author of Provincializing the Worldly Citizen:
Yugoslav Student and Teacher Travel and Slavic Cosmpolitanism in the Interwar Era
(Peter Lang, 2008).
Gita Steiner-Khamsi, PhD, Professor of Comparative and International Education
at Teachers College, Columbia University, New York (since 1995). Prior to her immigration to the United States, she was founder and, for 10 years, director of the policy
analysis division for multicultural education at the Ministry of Education, Canton of
Zurich (Switzerland). Guest professorships: Humboldt University, Berlin; Stanford
University; O.I.S.E. at the University of Toronto; and University of London Institute
of Education. Member of the Board of Directors of the Comparative and International
Education Society (CIES) and 2009 President of CIES. She published 4 books and

--- [PDF Page 1286 / Book Page 1315] ---

Biographical Notes 1315

over 80 journal articles and book chapters. The two most recent publications are
The Global Politics of Educational Borrowing and Lending (Teachers College Press,
2004) and Educational Import: Local Encounter with Global Forces in Mongolia
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2006). She does analytical work and applied research in
Mongolia, Central Asia, and Europe.
Nelly P. Stromquist is Professor in International Development Education at the
University of Southern California. She specializes in issues related to comparative
education and gender, which she examines from a critical sociology perspective. Her research interests focus on the dynamics among educational policies
and practices, gender relations, equity, and social change, particularly in Latin
America. She is the author of numerous articles and several books. Most recently,
she wrote Feminist Organizations and Social Transformation in Latin America
(2006); Education in a Globalized World. The Connectivity of Economic Power,
Technology, and Knowledge (2002); and Literacy for Citizenship: Gender and
Grassroots Dynamics in Brazil (1997). She is also the editor of The Professoriate
in the Age of Globalization (2007), La construcción del género en las políticas públicas. Perspectivas comparadas desde América Latina (2006); Distant
Alliances. Promoting the Education of Girls and Women in Latin America (with
Regina Cortina, 2000), Globalization and Culture: Integration and Contestation
Across Cultures (with Karen Monkman, 2000).
Carlos Alberto Torres is Professor of Social Sciences and Comparative Education,
and Director of the Paulo Freire Institute at UCLA. A political sociologist of education, he did his undergraduate work in sociology in Argentina (BA and teaching
credential in Sociology, Universidad del Salvador), his graduate work in Mexico (MA
Political Science. FLACSO) and the United States (MA and PhD in International
Development Education, Stanford University), and post-doctoral studies in educational
foundations in Canada (University of Alberta). He is also the Founding Director of the
Paulo Freire Institute in São Paulo, Brazil (1991), Buenos Aires, Argentina (2003), and
UCLA (2002). Former Director of the Latin American Center at UCLA (1995–2005),
Past President of the Comparative International Education Society (CIES), and Past
President of the Research Committee of Sociology of Education, ISA, he is the author
or coauthor of more than 60 books and 200 research articles and chapters in books.
Elaine Unterhalter is Professor of Education and International Development at the
Institute of Education, University of London. Her research interests are gender, education
and development. She has published widely on education policy and inequalities in
South Africa, India and Bangladesh, theorisations of gender, education and development,
and the progress of the Millennium Development Goals. Her books include Gender,
Schooling and Global Social Justice (Routledge, 2007), co-edited with Melanie Walker
Amartya Sen’s Capability Approach and Social Justice in Education (Palgrave, 2007),
co-edited with Sheila Aikman Beyond Access: Transforming Policy and Practice for
Gender Equality in Education (Oxfam, 2005) and co-edited with Sheila Aikman and
Tania Boler Gender Equality, HIV, and AIDS - A Challenge for the Education Sector
(Oxfam, 2008).

--- [PDF Page 1287 / Book Page 1316] ---

1316 Biographical Notes

Professor Chengxu Wang, born on 15th June 1912, obtained his first degree (BEd)
in National Zhejiang University in 1936, Teachers Diploma in 1940, and MA degree
in 1941 from Institute of Education, University of London, UK. From 1936 to 1938,
he was an assistant at Department of Education in Zhejiang University. From 1941 to
1942, he was a Lecturer of Department of Adult Education in University of Nottingham
and Research Follow of Institute of Education in University of London for the following
years (1942–1946). Once back to China, Mr. Wang became a Professor of Education.
From 1947 to 1952, he worked in Zhejiang Teachers College as the Head of Department
of Education. Since 1958, Mr. Wang had been Director of Centre for Comparative
Education Studies and Director of Institute of Higher Education of the College for 40
years. During this period, he was also Member of UNESCO Education Committee in
Asia and Pacific and Director of UNESCO APEID Associated Centre in Hangzhou
University (from 1984), Research Fellow of Centre for Education Development
Studies in Ministry of Education (1986–1998) and Luce Foundation Visiting Scholar
in University of Southern California (1985–1986). Mr. Wang is now Advisor of China
Comparative Education Society, Honorary Chairman of Zhejiang Higher Education
Society and Honorary Chairman of Zhejiang Tao Xing Zhi Society. He is currently
the tutor of PhD students. Professor Wang has written and translated a huge number of
works in the field of comparative education.
Anthony Welch works at the University of Sydney, Australia, but also has experience at universities and research institutes in Australia, UK, USA, Europe, and the
Asia-Pacific. He is both a policy specialist, researching national and international
educational reforms and practice (mostly in higher education), and a specialist in
cross-cultural analysis and research, with extensive experience in many countries.
A consultant to governments in Australia and internationally, as well as international
organisations, his publications which now number more than 100 often address practical policy issues. His work appears in eight languages. A Fulbright (New Century)
Scholar for 2007–2008, among his books are the jointly authored Education, Change
and Society. (Oxford 2007); The Professoriate: Profile of a Profession (Springer
2005); Globalization and Educational RE-Structuring in Asia and the Pacific (London,
Palgrave/Macmillan 2003); Third World Education: Quality and Equality (New York:
Garland 2000); and Class, Culture and the State in Australian Education: Reform or
Crisis? (New York, Peter Lang 1997).
Wim Weymans (1975) studied history, philosophy, and political theory in Antwerp
(BA), Cambridge (MPhil), and Leuven (PhD). He did an internship at the European
Commission (‘blue book stagiaire’) at the Directorate General of Research (DG RTD)
in the summer of 2005. He was also a visiting scholar in Paris, Darmstadt, Köln, and
New York. As a Fulbright visiting scholar in Berkeley (Fall 2006) he was affiliated at
the Centre for the studies of higher education (CSHE). Since 2006 he has also been a
member of the international ‘Euredocs’ network (coordinated by Sciences Po, Paris).
He examined how we could represent ‘the past’ or ‘the people’ by drawing on theorists
such as Certeau, Skinner, Gauchet, Lefort, and Rosanvallon. He has published in journals like History & Theory (2004), European Journal of Political Theory (2005), and
Redescriptions (2007). In his future research he will try to connect Foucault’s concept

--- [PDF Page 1288 / Book Page 1317] ---

Biographical Notes 1317

of governmentality with theories of democracy in order to develop new critical tools
that could help us examine recent policy trends, particularly in Europe.
Thyge Winther-Jensen is Emeritus Professor of Comparative Education at the Danish
University of Education, Copenhagen. Previous to that he was Docent in Comparative
Education, History of Educational Ideas and Adult Education at the Institute of
Education, University of Copenhagen. He was President of the Comparative Education
Society in Europe from 1996 to 2000. Among his writings are Undervisning og menneskesyn hos Platon, Comenius, Rousseau og Dewey [Teaching and the View of Human
Nature in Plato, Comenius, Rousseau, and Dewey] (Copenhagen. Akademisk forlag
2004, 2nd edition, 3rd impression (orig. 1989) ). Voksenpædagogik [Adult Education]
(Copenhagen: Akademisk forlag 2004, 3rd edition (originally 1996) ), and Komparativ
pædagogik. Faglig tradition og global udfordring [Comparative Education. Academic
Tradition and Global Challenge] (Copenhagen: Akademisk forlag, 2004).

--- [PDF Page 1289 / Book Page 1318] ---

SUBJECT INDEX

A
Africa, 4, 6, 22, 92, 101, 104, 124, 134,
172, 181–193, 220–221, 277–293, 362,
365–366, 374, 380, 393, 404, 408, 410,
428, 512, 543, 592, 642
AIDS, 97, 278, 429, 703–704,
708–712, 1039
Applied comparative education, 341
Archaeology, 249, 1052–1053, 1055
B
Banality problem, 961, 963–964
Benchmarking, 447, 487, 493
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), 880–881,
883–884, 886
Binary, 421, 611, 628, 783, 792, 965, 972,
974, 1014, 1036, 1148, 1151, 1190,
1192–1194
Bologna process, 301, 305, 317, 343, 480,
488, 489, 545, 551–552, 570, 571, 573,
576–582, 584, 1072
Borrowing, 14, 23, 25, 30, 33–34, 37, 69,
115, 126, 133, 297–300, 304, 310, 313,
315–316, 346, 367, 374, 456–457
Brahman, 873–875, 880–881, 883–886, 934
Brazil, 5, 8, 104, 184, 338, 344, 348–349,
352–354, 382, 386–387, 391, 404, 411,
462–463, 466–468, 472, 473, 475,
519–535
Britain, 18, 89–91, 95, 96, 129, 143, 169,
171–173, 175–177, 197, 386, 504, 551,
553, 580, 587, 629, 761, 860, 876,
878, 882, 885, 893, 928, 999, 1011,
1014–1016, 1025, 1051, 1066,
1069, 1071
British Empire, 45, 105, 169–177,
876, 1241, 1244
Business efficiency, 587, 590, 592, 593,

C
Cartography, 229, 484, 968, 972, 975–981,
984–987, 1192, 1195, 1199, 1201, 1202
Catholicism, 50, 143, 375, 391, 838–840,
842, 852, 910, 918, 921
Comparative Education Society in Europe
(CESE), 7, 91–92, 98, 1175
Challenges, 76, 84, 96, 98, 115, 132, 152,
175, 226, 257, 261, 263–265, 270–271,
304, 365, 378
Children’s perspectives, 741–743
Church (the), 27, 30, 173, 186–188, 192, 196,
197, 200, 205–207, 219-220
Citizenship education, 268, 269, 616, 717,
901, 1017, 1031, 1135
Coherence, 430, 444, 458, 566, 569–584,
749, 929, 933, 1053, 1105, 1134
Comparative and international education,
21, 23–25, 53, 101–102, 105–107, 115,
121, 122, 145, 155, 162, 167, 359, 360,
368, 374, 965, 968, 978, 979, 983, 1045,
1055, 1143–1145, 1147, 1150, 1153,
1173, 1183
Comparative education
aims of, 39–40, 61, 182, 1061, 1156
epistemologies of, 115, 292, 653, 1249, 1257
laws, 61–65
methodologies of, 61–65, 68, 85, 114, 127,
128, 130, 155, 1259, 1277
policy making, 40, 54, 60, 64, 66, 67, 69,
81, 162, 411, 438, 1035, 1073, 1178,
1184, 1264
research, 3, 107, 134, 151, 155, 297, 299,
316, 915, 917–918, 1046–1050, 1054,
1056, 1057, 1144, 1145, 1149, 1150,
1153, 1155, 1156, 1184, 1190, 1192,
1211, 1213, 1216, 1222, 1250
scientific paradigms, 59–69

1319

--- [PDF Page 1290 / Book Page 1319] ---

1320 Subject Index
Comparative methodologies, 65, 68, 127,
155, 1055, 1213, 1254, 1259, 1277
Comparative research in education, 182,
1173, 1176–1178, 1228
Competition, 74, 78, 82, 94, 97, 163, 257,
262, 269, 271, 279, 347, 406, 412, 413,
429, 443, 445, 460, 467, 479, 505, 513,
523, 525, 526, 535, 543, 548, 561, 562,
564, 569, 573–576, 578
Conditions of possibility, 348, 1054, 1243
Conflict theory, 152–154, 209–210
Confucianism, 857–870, 1137, 1211
Consensus theory, 61, 62, 76, 101, 114, 126,
131, 146, 198, 209, 214, 277, 289, 386,
389, 395, 440, 459, 528, 571, 579, 662,
670, 787, 790, 1179, 1234, 1270
Contemporary reforms, 386
Context-sensitive research, 1182
Convergence, 88, 108, 153, 201, 262, 271,
314, 480, 482, 485, 486, 488–492, 519,
520, 535, 545, 547, 562, 570, 571, 605,
633, 698, 838, 1072, 1073, 1151, 1152,
1160, 1181
Coordination, 13, 80, 110, 442, 487,
490–495, 554, 562, 571, 575, 621, 722,
1117, 1118, 1263
Cosmopolis, 807, 811, 1079–1107
Cosmopolitanism, 12, 22, 228, 380, 385–399,
787, 788, 796
Cultural identity, 113, 247, 267, 271, 948,
1225–1229, 1234–1236, 1244
Culturalism, 999
Curriculum reform, 102, 219, 266, 312, 592,
685–698
D
Debate, 6, 61, 63, 67, 77, 79, 82, 84, 97, 99,
106, 121, 128, 151–154, 164, 169
Democracy, 18, 28, 32, 38, 41, 47, 50, 51, 60,
73, 81, 84, 114, 144
Democratization, 84, 108, 154, 227, 233,
243, 252–254, 278, 291, 292, 296, 313,
314, 316, 437, 504, 505, 716, 718, 724,
725, 728, 1041, 1218
Dependency theory, 104, 153, 258, 259, 425,
604, 1228
Deskilling of teachers, 1090
Development theory, 653, 781–796
Developmental state, 257–271, 863, 865

Differentiation, 146, 165, 174, 200, 208–210,
231, 235, 261, 361, 386, 389, 481, 565,
569–584, 814, 929, 937, 972, 1030,
1035, 1164, 1235, 1239
Digital technology, 1159–1171
Discontinuity, 92, 325, 625, 1047, 1053,
1283, 1284, 1288
Discourse analysis, 181–182, 658, 793, 933,
1191, 1195–1200, 1225–1235
Discourse, educational, 25, 48, 60, 190, 252,
344–356, 373, 377, 480–482, 484, 608,
641, 808, 809, 907, 1085–1087, 1090,
1113, 1189
Discursive strategies, 232, 381, 1238
Driving forces, 88, 93, 97, 552, 554, 1002
E
East Asia, 8, 257, 259–263, 270, 346, 681,
682, 857, 858, 860, 937, 1032, 1086,
1209, 1210, 1222, 1237, 1281
Eastern Europe, 4, 82, 91, 95, 98, 144, 220,
305, 317, 327, 362, 365, 366, 373, 491,
541, 542, 917, 1134, 1162, 1277
Economic development, 60, 74, 75, 82, 208,
209, 218, 235, 258, 259, 261, 263, 283,
284, 287, 289, 291, 345, 346, 424, 441,
451, 499, 503, 509, 514, 519, 522, 524
Economic growth, 68, 84, 102, 103, 147,
218, 257–262, 292, 347, 419, 422,
415–428, 439, 441
Economic system, 19, 144, 346, 499–501,
508, 514, 524, 607, 895, 1081
Economics and education, 439, 1134
Education
and development, 422, 426, 791, 1134,
1169, 1279, 1280
policy, 67, 82, 101, 105, 106,
189, 190, 200, 201, 221, 284, 291, 300,
302, 321
Educational actors, 223–235
Educational borrowing, 25, 30, 34, 69, 133,
297–300, 313, 316, 367, 1133, 1149,
1156
Educational governance, 181, 231, 232, 396,
447, 1117, 1118, 1123, 1124
Educational Panopticon, 487
Educational reform, 5, 6, 18, 21, 23, 27–31,
37, 38, 42–44, 48, 54, 67, 75, 81, 84
Educational sovereignty, 87

--- [PDF Page 1291 / Book Page 1320] ---

Subject Index 1321
Educational system, 5, 6, 26, 37, 38, 40–43,
46, 47, 49–51, 55, 60, 64
Educational transfer, 246, 341–356,
1061–1074
Educational transformation, 295–317, 505,
1002
Elementary education, 5, 28, 29, 200, 202,
203, 245, 246, 508, 669–682, 814, 841,
1066, 1067
Empiricism, 12, 53, 55, 139, 147, 774, 823,
827, 833, 1270
Empowerment, 84, 109, 394, 397, 657, 661,
665, 669, 671, 686, 913, 1032, 1041,
1177
Encyclopedism, 32, 531, 834
England, 4, 11, 20, 24, 27, 33, 37, 38, 42, 43,
47, 49–51, 53, 59, 93, 124, 131, 141,
142, 145, 164
Enlightenment, 8, 11, 12, 17–20, 25, 26, 28,
37, 41, 42, 89
Episteme, 12, 20, 23, 33, 37, 39, 40, 44–46,
52, 56, 69, 139, 143–145, 148, 151, 153,
337, 338, 382, 1079–1080, 1095, 1221,
1228, 1267–1271, 1274, 1275, 1282,
1289
Equality of opportunity, 226, 483, 611, 629,
749, 794, 1029, 1031, 1033, 1034
Equity and social inclusion, 110, 227, 232,
234, 235, 292, 406, 412, 437, 450, 489,
548, 612, 1010, 1040
Eurocentric culture, 38, 41, 45, 51, 129, 142,
144, 145, 253, 408, 656, 657, 805, 806,
984, 1094, 1095, 1097, 1104
Europe of knowledge, 480, 481, 484, 486,
487, 489, 490, 584, 804–808, 1086,
1087
European Area of Higher Education, 488,
569, 570, 1072
European dimension, 93, 98, 310, 315, 317,
362, 484, 551, 562, 571, 612
European Institute of Technology, 577
European Research Area (ERA), 569–571
European Research Council (ERC), 576–580,
584
European Union (EU), 96, 98, 110, 217,
225, 235, 252, 253, 261, 265, 295, 300,
304–317, 321–334, 343, 355, 361, 381,
393–397, 445, 479–481, 483, 487, 490,
491, 548

Europeanization, 239
Evaluation, 24, 130, 134, 148, 197, 211,
221, 229, 253, 317, 348, 470–471,
474, 475, 483, 484, 492, 501, 541,
552, 555–566
F
Factorial analysis, 49, 50
Faculty psychology, 23, 30
Feeling, 15, 23, 40, 188, 195, 227, 325, 635,
663, 710, 734, 758, 761, 774, 829, 830,
833, 891, 1103, 1104, 1106, 1107, 1220,
1226, 1227, 1255, 1258
Femininity, 704, 710, 1030, 1035, 1038
Feminists
movement, 1027
theory, 1037
Foreign influences, 125, 133, 323, 342
Former Soviet Union, 129, 130, 257,
295–317, 373, 375
Foucault, M., 181, 191, 192, 361, 399, 480,
621, 767, 792, 968, 970, 971, 976, 977,
980, 984–986, 1046, 1051–1057, 1177,
1198, 1200, 1202, 1238, 1242, 1243,
1255
France, 4, 8, 9, 11, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 37, 38,
47, 49, 51, 59, 90, 92, 95
Franco regime, 218, 220
French Revolution, 12, 24, 28, 87, 378, 379,
770, 829, 1015, 1016
Functionalism, 62, 65, 131, 132, 135, 145,
148, 152, 155, 514, 966, 1191, 1270,
1272
G
Games, 15, 170, 171, 382, 710,
758, 829, 973
Gender, 6, 80, 94, 152, 155, 176, 220, 221,
281, 287, 292, 311, 313–315, 405
Germany, 4, 8, 9, 26, 30, 38, 43, 44, 47,
49–51, 59, 82, 88–91, 93, 95–97, 122,
124
Global educational discourse, 344–354
Global educational field, 342, 344, 349, 353,
355, 356
Global policies, 1032, 1040
Globalisation, 3, 5, 6, 93, 96, 97, 337, 342,
373, 376, 380–383, 403,
404, 412–413

--- [PDF Page 1292 / Book Page 1321] ---

1322 Subject Index
Globalisation (cont.)
from above, 101, 113
from below, 101, 113–114
discourse, 621–630
Governmentality, 192, 481, 485, 493
H
Heterodoxy, 1143
Higher education, 81, 88, 102, 107, 109, 112,
115, 126, 127, 200, 203, 263, 264, 287,
291, 292, 305, 312–314, 317,
333, 343, 346
Hindu, 377, 380, 614, 682, 750, 752, 767,
873–886, 1000, 1009, 1168
Hindutva, 880–886, 1000
Historical functionalism, 146, 1191
Historical method, 55, 1049, 1050, 1058
Historical research, 54, 156, 176, 883,
1045–1057, 1149, 1274, 1275
History of the present, 1055
HIV, 278, 423, 429, 703, 704, 707–712, 794,
1039
Homo economicus, 419, 420, 1079,
1085–1089
Human capital formation, 442, 445, 625–630
Human nature, 19, 30, 825, 1094
Human resource, 146, 230, 260, 263–265,
291, 292, 324, 329, 332, 345, 347, 423,
437, 450, 483, 525, 527, 614, 634,
637–641, 643, 644, 680, 681, 756, 883,
884, 943, 1088, 1220
Humanism, 50, 60, 104, 135, 143, 183, 246,
323, 437, 811, 834, 917, 975, 980, 1079,
1094, 1098, 1102–1107
Humanistic education, 18, 41, 44, 59, 134,
805, 1094, 1095, 1097, 1104
Humanistic knowledge, 806, 810,
1090, 1098
Humanities, 11, 30, 39, 42, 56, 59, 65, 89,
92, 94, 123, 214, 291, 331, 608, 843,
844, 851, 978, 1020, 1041, 1096–1100,
1104–1106, 1144, 1179, 1268
I
Information and communication technologies
(ICT), 302, 375, 382, 383, 451, 479,
485, 486, 525, 620, 621, 623, 624, 1162
Idealism, 25, 29, 43, 165, 171, 463, 474, 543,
934, 984

Ideology, 11, 17, 23, 28, 29, 32, 38, 42, 47,
78, 102, 104, 108, 110, 134, 142, 154,
189, 244–247, 252, 284, 405–407, 411,
443, 447, 459, 474
Imam-Hatips, 897–899
Imperialism, 133, 152, 169–171, 176, 177,
186, 279, 280, 338, 343, 374, 378, 380,
381, 474, 475, 658, 751, 771, 791, 1015,
1048, 1105, 1228, 1273, 1280
India, 105, 109, 113, 129, 149, 170, 172, 338,
344, 365, 366, 404, 409, 421, 443, 591,
592, 605, 623, 653
Indigenous knowledge, 133, 653, 753, 754,
759–761, 768, 777, 952, 957, 1182
Industrialisation, 6, 337, 499–501, 519–535,
655, 845, 857, 863, 892, 1095
Inequality, 103, 133, 149, 226–228, 232, 331,
406, 408, 410, 419, 421, 425, 462, 526,
528, 621, 622, 627, 629, 630, 645, 656,
669, 671, 672, 675, 679, 681, 682, 687,
706, 707, 740, 751, 758, 789, 792, 917,
953, 986, 991, 995, 996, 1002, 1010,
1013, 1015, 1025, 1035–1037, 1041,
1088, 1148, 1199, 1230
Informal education, 278, 485, 715, 991,
1012, 1160, 1163, 1171
Information society, 263, 395, 483, 484, 488,
643, 807, 809, 943, 953, 957,
970, 1084
Instrumental rationality, 81, 808–810, 1081,
1085–1089, 1092
Intergovernmental agencies, 79, 438, 488,
490, 491, 551, 566, 569, 572, 1072
International agencies, 110, 312, 314,
341–356, 472, 543, 610, 612, 613, 633,
690, 717, 1011, 1021, 1050, 1173, 1215,
1288, 1296
International debates, 519
International development, 106, 251, 289,
343, 417–432, 781, 787, 792, 973, 1028,
1032, 1176, 1180
International education, 3, 20–25, 30, 32, 33,
53, 90, 101, 102, 105–107, 109, 111
International organizations, 80, 82, 304, 312,
427–429, 443–446, 633, 639, 640, 645,
1034, 1087, 1216, 1263
International transfer, 1174, 1175, 1183,
1184
Internationalism, 22, 41, 48, 49, 144, 269

--- [PDF Page 1293 / Book Page 1322] ---

Subject Index 1323

L
Laissez-faire, 38, 43, 142, 165, 183, 187,
507, 540
Learner centred, 685–698
Liberal reform, 250, 589, 1152
Liberalism, 6, 29, 32, 38, 43, 47, 78, 79, 84,
85, 108, 140, 142, 167, 184, 186, 244,
245, 247, 427, 438, 459, 500, 555, 556,
629, 687, 716, 717, 729, 787, 790, 795,
796, 840, 848, 849, 1003, 1038, 1083,
1086, 1091, 1137, 1221, 1283
Life-long learning, 110, 302, 614
Linguistic realisation, 1238–1241
Lisbon strategy, 480, 485, 486, 489, 491, 492
Literacy, 112, 134, 264, 278, 295, 308, 312,
314, 317, 367, 374, 428, 439, 448, 449,
451, 506, 527, 596, 624, 627, 643–645,
657, 660, 664, 670, 674, 696, 719, 753,
760, 783, 784, 786, 791, 819, 869, 877,
936, 937, 944, 945, 956, 962, 994, 1093,
1149, 1161

Measurement of educational performance,
438, 447, 948
Meliorism, 23, 33–34, 48, 49, 55,
140, 141
Methodologies, 65, 68, 84, 114, 127, 128,
130, 155, 695, 696, 784, 787, 793, 986,
1055, 1134, 1212, 1220, 1250, 1254,
1255, 1257, 1259, 1277, 1278, 1283
Migrant education, 364–367
Migration, 93, 97, 284, 359–368, 444, 613,
654, 657, 727, 739, 858, 867, 868, 928,
943, 946, 1014, 1190
Minorities, 253, 302, 317, 338, 359–368,
407, 410, 461, 596, 680, 705, 708, 821,
1011, 1014, 1015
Modernisation, 25, 67, 146, 147, 152,
162–164, 479, 484, 486, 488, 523, 524,
534, 535, 604, 663, 749–761, 781–789,
792, 796, 804, 843, 844, 847, 857, 858,
860, 863–866, 868, 870, 889, 892,
894–896, 934, 1021, 1069, 1228, 1232,
1272, 1273, 1280
Modernism, 94, 135, 147–149, 228, 984,
986, 1190, 1275
Modernities, 857–870, 907–921
Modernization theory, 258, 968,
974, 986
Multicultural education, 366,
403–413, 439
Multilogue, 1189–1203
Muslim, 240, 241, 314, 376, 594, 595, 614,
678, 680, 875–884, 890, 892–895, 899,
900, 934
Myth, 174, 208, 218, 261, 829, 984, 1015,
1051, 1079, 1080, 1085, 1090, 1101,
1102

M
Madrasas, 875, 877, 890, 896
Malawi, 284, 425, 426, 428, 430, 431, 691,
692, 708
Managerialism, 107, 115, 587–598, 641
Markets, 82, 109, 257–262, 270, 271, 279,
343, 344, 430, 437, 440, 441, 446, 456
Masculinity, 703–707, 710, 711, 740, 996,
1030, 1033, 1035, 1038, 1039
Mass schooling, 81, 103, 189, 387, 388, 390,
417, 422, 503, 505, 507, 508, 512, 514,
783

N
Narratives of salvation, 225
National cultural identity, 113, 247, 267, 271,
948, 1225–1229,
1234–1236, 1244
National education, 27, 31, 33, 45, 88, 94, 95,
105, 107, 142, 197, 204, 248, 250, 252,
253, 255, 296, 300, 317, 323, 328, 343,
446, 481, 491, 592, 785, 838, 839, 841,
852, 889, 891, 892, 898–901, 903, 927,
1062, 1072, 1087, 1114–1118, 1125,
1150, 1228, 1235

Islam, 368–371, 374, 875, 881, 883, 889,
890, 893–899, 902, 903, 1137
Islamic education, 889–892, 898, 903
Islamic intellectuals (ulema), 889–892, 894,
895
K
Kemalism, 896
Knowledge economy, 111, 112, 265, 381,
437, 440, 443–451, 480, 483, 488, 489,
500, 501, 519–521, 524–532, 535
Knowledge, techno-scientific, humanistic,
331, 479, 483, 807–811, 1081, 1085,
1086, 1089, 1097, 1101, 1103, 1105

--- [PDF Page 1294 / Book Page 1323] ---

1324 Subject Index
Nationhood, 75, 174, 261, 296, 406, 1225–
1229, 1231, 1233–1237, 1242–1244
Nation-state, 49, 73, 74, 79–81, 103, 115,
141, 163, 239, 242, 244, 247, 251, 261,
289, 291, 292, 395, 417, 422, 424, 429,
430, 433, 504, 1090, 1103, 1114, 1176
Nature (principle of), 824, 825
Neo-institutionalist theory, 1151, 1152
Neoliberalism and development, 78, 79, 84,
85, 167, 427, 459, 556, 1003, 1038
New Zealand, 4, 169, 172, 175, 590, 1027,
1166
Nomads, 366, 367
Non-governmental Organization (NGO), 111,
112, 420, 421, 423, 428, 677, 695
O
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD, 80, 96, 218, 219,
303, 305, 308, 309, 311, 317, 344–348,
437–453, 638
Orthodox Church, 241, 244, 251
Osmotic problem, 339, 963
Oxford, 3, 42, 43, 89, 126, 141, 169
P
Paideia, 38, 52, 53, 56, 161–167, 239, 244,
245, 247, 251, 253, 804–806, 809–811,
1079–1107, 1268
Paradigm, 12, 17, 59–69, 92, 130, 139, 140,
143, 146–148, 162, 230, 269, 361
Pedagogy, 12, 19, 22–24, 32, 84, 90, 98, 112,
121, 122, 127, 141, 145, 155, 201, 220,
230
Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA), 69, 96, 303, 308,
329, 446–449, 452, 644, 869, 962, 1062,
1073, 1123, 1149, 1174, 1260, 1261,
1264, 1285
Policy-orientation, 95–96
Policy-oriented comparative education, 342
Political realist theory, 101
Political system, 76, 81, 82, 152, 160, 161,
236, 239, 246, 259, 265, 277, 287, 660,
729, 756, 817, 841, 1132
Politics of schooling, 398
Populational reasoning, 392
Positivism, 17, 59, 62, 148, 150, 201, 837,
845, 852, 1221, 1270

Postcolonial theory, 654, 656, 792, 793, 795,
796
Postmodern, 167, 377, 379, 381, 382, 580,
768, 965, 966, 970, 972, 974–982, 998,
1036
Postmodernism, 792–793, 909, 965, 966,
968, 970, 978, 979, 981, 1036, 1041,
1045, 1046, 1050–1052, 1056, 1057,
1137, 1177, 1225, 1282, 1295
Post-socialist transition, 298–300, 304, 308,
309, 313, 317
Poststructuralism, 999
Primary education, 26, 29, 30, 124, 185, 263,
278, 287, 291–293, 309, 409, 420, 423,
425, 427–429, 473, 504, 505, 507, 508,
510, 512, 543, 591, 624, 641, 642, 671,
674, 691, 719, 724, 725, 786, 788, 848,
893, 896, 924, 925, 936, 938, 1011,
1121, 1160, 1168, 1180
Private education, 13, 15, 167, 219, 220, 224,
628, 841, 901, 902
Protestantism, 191, 377, 390, 863, 864, 910
Psychological pedagogies, 220
Public education, 12, 15, 20, 21, 24, 25, 28,
29, 32, 34, 73, 78, 79, 81, 82, 84
Public schools, 15, 31, 32, 112, 170, 171,
174, 187, 200, 222, 223, 230, 264, 365,
409, 411, 507, 508, 511, 594, 595, 725,
728, 805, 832, 838, 840, 841, 884, 893,
899, 901, 903, 916, 1038, 1092, 1097
Q
Qualitative research, 128, 672, 792, 975,
1176, 1181, 1184
R
Rationalism, 12, 51, 89, 239, 391, 804, 823
Reading the global, 337, 338, 1288
Reason, 9, 12, 15, 17, 19, 23, 25, 29, 40
Recontextualization, 1160, 1170
Redistribution, 30, 627, 791, 796, 991, 992,
1032, 1037, 1084, 1105
Reform, 5, 6, 13, 18, 19, 24, 25, 27–29, 31,
33, 34
Reformist rhetoric, 230
Religion, 6, 14, 21, 24, 27, 29, 30, 39, 51, 97
Religious education, 15, 16, 23, 814, 815,
818, 820, 841, 842, 847, 849, 851–853,
891, 892, 896–899

--- [PDF Page 1295 / Book Page 1324] ---

Subject Index 1325
Religious instruction, 15, 16, 23, 32, 244,
832, 876, 877
Rights, 6, 32, 103, 113, 186, 209, 218, 220,
240, 251, 263, 268, 270, 282, 292, 295
Risk, 146, 203, 228, 230, 259, 312, 332, 333,
383, 386, 389, 396, 439, 456, 485, 578,
582, 583, 635, 707, 730, 734, 736–738,
743, 758, 819, 914, 953, 978, 980, 1056,
1153, 1220
S
Savarkar, V.D., 880
School, 4, 7, 9, 11, 16, 17, 20, 26–29, 31, 41,
42, 44, 46, 48, 54, 59
environments, 1039
history, 171, 753
Schooling, 6, 27, 31, 49, 56, 75, 78, 81, 82,
88, 97, 102, 103, 105, 108
human, 16, 17, 39, 56, 139, 388, 389, 816,
1053, 1079, 1098, 1101, 1264, 1268
positive, 12–14, 17, 25, 37, 140
Secondary education, 15, 29, 30, 38, 42, 44,
81, 102, 104, 149, 174
Secular education, 840, 853, 899, 903
Secularism, 12, 239, 373–383, 782, 837,
858, 894, 896–899, 910, 911, 934,
1021–1022, 1083
Sensualism, 833
Social and education sciences, 392
Social change, 74, 82–84, 149, 217–235,
257, 271
Social exclusion, 217–235, 253, 365, 366,
396, 450, 481, 627, 630, 670–672, 680,
729, 809, 1010, 1016, 1083
Social inclusion, 227, 232, 234, 235, 450,
489, 548, 612, 1010, 1040
Social justice, 68, 113, 134, 208, 406, 408,
409, 449, 522, 534, 535, 627, 720, 730,
781–796, 914, 915
Social protest movements, 101, 113
Social redemption, 221, 390
Social relations, 56, 79, 152, 258, 342,
405, 408, 419, 445, 446, 450, 540,
654, 658, 738
Social system, 62, 74, 101, 225, 524, 737,
738, 975, 1010, 1288
Socio-cultural theory, 39, 52, 141
Sociology, 7–9, 51, 59, 60, 64, 65, 83, 90,
123, 127, 130, 135, 146, 147, 163

Soul, 15, 18, 23, 29, 102, 388, 810, 824, 849,
919, 1081, 1090–1092, 1095, 1102,
1106, 1107
Space, 3, 26, 94, 101, 106, 107, 112,
113, 123
Spain, 4, 12, 90, 93, 217–235, 321–334, 365
Spanish Socialist educational policy
formation, 217–235
State agencies, 729, 1040
State formation, 78, 79, 103, 141, 166,
195–215, 239, 245, 247, 248, 251,
254, 260, 261, 384, 504, 515, 1091,
1272, 1283
Status attainment, 504, 505
Student mobility, 302, 359, 361–364,
367, 574
Systems of reason, 229, 232, 368, 385, 398
T
Teacher education, 6, 80, 109, 224, 296, 338,
348, 354, 386, 393, 396, 411, 439, 513,
719, 721, 729, 963, 968, 983, 1011,
1023–1024, 1169, 1214
Textbooks, 80, 97, 122, 171, 172, 269, 270,
296, 312, 313, 347, 395, 420, 472, 474,
679, 751, 752, 755–759, 761, 787, 832,
852, 878–880, 883, 884, 893, 901, 902,
1019, 1022, 1030–1031, 1199, 1212,
1219, 1234, 1236, 1238, 1241–1244
The other, 8, 17, 23, 27, 42–44, 48, 51, 54,
56, 63, 67
Theory shifts, 93
Totalitarianism, 47, 144
Training, 21, 26, 27, 30, 40, 65, 78, 81, 97, 98
Transfer, 23, 34, 65, 182, 228, 245, 246, 298,
299, 313, 315, 338, 339, 341–356
Transformation, 26, 61, 74, 75, 79, 85, 148,
154, 164
Transitologies, 297, 1201, 1287, 1292
Translation, 12, 121, 124, 270, 339, 340, 351,
352, 448, 693, 926, 931, 1216, 1232,
1262, 1281, 1286–1288, 1290, 1291
U
Understanding, 5, 17, 39, 40, 47, 49, 52, 54,
61, 62, 69, 73, 77, 83, 84, 102, 105, 106,
109, 114
UNESCO, 3, 9, 68, 91, 108, 110, 134, 219,
277, 292, 303

--- [PDF Page 1296 / Book Page 1325] ---

1326 Subject Index
Unit ideas, 1225, 1244, 1277–1291
United States, 4, 11, 24, 25, 27, 31, 37, 38,
41–43, 45, 51, 53
Universalism, 12, 88, 94, 139, 392, 395, 398,
406, 771, 772
Universities, 4, 7, 27, 87–90, 95, 106, 112
V
Vedas, 873, 874, 881, 884, 885
Verstehen, 975, 1050
Violence, 228, 265, 332, 408, 653, 654, 669,
677, 703–712
Vocational technical education, 520, 524,
533, 534, 963
Vocationalism, 542, 593

W
Westernisation, 687, 889, 891,
894–896, 900, 902
Women’s education, 660, 662, 663, 665,
1028, 1031
Work, 4, 6–9, 11, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 37, 41,
42, 45
World Bank, 64, 79–82, 84, 96, 106, 107,
110, 217, 219, 259,
260, 263
World-culture theory, 101–103, 105–108, 114,
225, 314, 604, 633, 1151, 1152, 1154
World-systems
analysis, 101–115
theory, 257–259

--- [PDF Page 1297 / Book Page 1326] ---

AUTHOR INDEX

A
Abadzi, H., 791
Abdullah, H., 771
Abercrombie, N., 625
Abouchedid, K., 900–902
Abrahamson, E., 946, 957
Abrahamson, M., 270
Abrantes, P., 223
Abreu, M., 994
Abuateya, H.S., 736
Achcar, I., 530
Achinstein, B., 950
Ackers, J., 933
Acton, T., 366
Adams, D., 60, 67, 68, 424
Adams, J.Q., 1066, 1067
Adamson, B., 5, 1176
Addison, J.T., 485
Adesina, O.C., 783
Afshar, H., 660, 662
Ahmed, Z.N., 978, 985
Aho, E., 954, 957
Ahuja, G.M., 883
Aikman, S., 783, 1133
Akarsu, F, 898
Akito, O., 268
Akşit, B., 896
Alahiotis, S., 637, 645
Al-Ajeel, M., 734
Al-Asfour, A., 734
Albarea, R., 339
Albertini, T., 1136
Albisetti, J., 511, 806, 1095
Alcalde, G., 421
Alderman, H., 421
Aldrich, R., 817
Aldridge, S., 629

Alexander, R.J., 3, 124, 155, 751, 803, 804,
923–939, 963, 1133, 1160, 1162, 1235,
1250, 1253, 1259
Alkire, S., 795
Allaf, C., 121–135
Alleman-Ghionda, C., 501
Allender, T., 172, 591
Almond, G.A., 164, 277, 303
Alston, J.P., 864
Altbach, P.G., 68, 131, 132, 155, 425, 633,
1047, 1143, 1228, 1280
Althusser, L., 166, 222, 281, 630
Álvarez-Mendiola, G., 393
Alves, M.C.L., 843
Amadeo, J., 74, 77
Amano, I., 861
Ambrose, B., 771
Ambrose, S., 782
Ambrosoli, L., 207
Amin, S., 99, 1016
Ammermüler, A., 305
Ampofo, A.A., 662
Amsden, A.H., 259
Anderson, B., 481, 1229, 1230, 1237
Anderson, C.A., 17, 54–56, 61–63, 65, 67,
68, 148, 149, 968, 975, 1048, 1279
Anderson-Levitt, K.M., 108, 109, 314,
1151–1153
Anderson, P., 164
Anderson, R.D., 174, 509
Ando, T., 1220
Ankersmit, F., 1051
Ansell, C.K., 858, 1115
Antoniou, D., 805, 1094
Anweiler, O., 297
Anyon, J., 1002
Anzar, U., 431

1327

--- [PDF Page 1298 / Book Page 1327] ---

1328 Author Index
Apffel-Marglin, F., 998
Appadurai, A., 364, 444, 1151, 1153
Appleby, J., 1051
Apple, M., 79, 515, 718, 917–919, 932,
991–1004, 1093, 1177
Appleton, S., 640, 642
Apter, D., 782
Archer, D., 423, 791
Archer, M.S., 505, 925, 932, 1280
Argy, F., 645
Argyris, C., 930
Aries, P., 4504
Aristotle, 161
Armstrong, K., 916, 921
Armytage, W.H.G., 126
Arnold, M., 11, 37, 38, 41, 51, 55, 59, 123,
141, 142, 146, 1062
Arnot, M., 364, 705, 996, 1031, 1038
Arnove, R.F., 3, 17, 101–113, 134, 153, 155,
426, 1181, 1280, 1281, 1285
Aronowitz, S., 1098–1100
Arrighi, G., 428, 1028
Arrowsmith, J., 492
Arthur, J., 920
Artz, F.D., 508
Asad, T., 894
Ascelrad, H., 524, 526
Ascenzi, A., 201, 203
Ashcroft, B., 658
Ashkenazi, J., 889–903
Ashton, D., 260
Asplund, R., 641
Aston, T.H., 506
Atkinson, D., 1146
Augustinus, A., 901
Au, W., 991–1004
Axtell, J., 512
Ayittey, G., 277
Azevedo, F., 844, 847
Azevedo, J.C., 725
B
Baaklini, A., 901
Bache, A.D., 124
Bachrach, P., 1036, 1038
Badham, L. 492
Bailey, C., 508
Bainton, D., 1182
Baird, M., 107, 113

Baker, D.P., 1151
Bakhtin, M.M., 1179, 1201
Balfour, S., 217
Ball, S.J., 79, 352, 355, 492, 588, 619, 686,
1002, 1101, 1123
Balogh, T., 419, 425
Banks, C.A., 405
Banks, J., 404, 405
Barakat, H., 900
Baran, P., 521
Baratz, M., 1036, 1038
Barbagli, M., 200, 201
Barbarin, O.A., 734, 737
Barber, B.R., 66, 147, 149, 1090–1092
Barcan, A., 591
Barker, G.T., 706, 707, 740
Barkey, K., 296, 305
Barlett, L., 223
Barnard, H.C., 11, 24–25, 31–34, 37, 125,
140, 141, 508, 1069
Barnett, T., 278, 521
Barney, D., 1082
Baron, S., 479
Barros, R., 526
Bartholomew, J.R., 8
Barth, P., 824
Bartkowski, F., 361
Basham, A.L., 874
Bash, L., 539–549
Bassey, M., 1150
Bastos, J.A.S.L., 529, 530
Basu, A., 663
Batelaan, P., 1011, 1014
Bates, R., 794
Baudon, R., 980
Bauer, M., 555
Bauman, Z., 235, 1009, 946, 967, 983, 1017,
1083, 1090, 1230, 1232
Bawden, R., 610
Bayart, J.-F., 277
Beadie, N., 513
Beane, J.A., 992, 1004
Beard, C.A., 1051
Becker, B., 737
Becker, C., 1051
Becker, G.S., 260, 626, 633, 634,
645, 788
Becker, R., 735–737
Beck, U., 604, 607, 984, 986, 1114

--- [PDF Page 1299 / Book Page 1328] ---

Author Index 1329
Beech, J., 339–354, 358, 1071
Behr, A., 783
Behrman, J., 642, 1042
Belkanov, N., 311
Bellah, R., 857
Bell, B., 754
Bell, C.C., 735
Bell, D., 621, 623, 857, 1084, 1096
Belzer, A., 1178, 1285
Benadusi, L., 208, 209, 211
Benavot, A., 108, 109, 1151
Bendix, R., 1215
Beneria, L., 427
Benhabib, S., 664
Benjamin, W., 393
Bennell, P., 427, 642, 789
Bennett, A., 1180
Benwell, B., 1231, 1233, 1234, 1239
Beoku-Betts, J., 662
Bereday, G.Z.F., 8–10, 17, 23, 25, 30, 33, 34,
46, 52, 61, 62, 64, 65, 93, 122, 128, 131,
1156
Berger, M.T., 863, 870
Berger, P.L., 857, 908
Berger, S., 1233
Berggreen-Merkel, I., 486
Berg, M., 505, 506
Bergmann, L., 831
Berg-Schlosser, D., 1147
Berkes, N., 895, 896
Berkey, J., 886
Berkhofer, R., 1051, 1052
Berliner, D., 448
Berlinguer, L., 213
Bernal, M., 246
Bernetti, J., 840
Bernstein, B.B., 349, 686, 907, 908, 911,
918–920, 996, 1097
Bertoni Jovine, D., 205
Bethell, L, 715
Bets, R., 183
Bhabha, H.K., 182, 656, 792, 1229, 1231,
1232
Bhambhri, C.P., 882
Bhana, D., 703–712, 738, 740
Bhasin, K., 660, 663
Bhattacharya, S., 750, 879
Bhopal, K., 366
Biddulph, S., 710

Biesta, G., 1095
Biggs, J.B., 867, 879, 1251
Billig, M., 1229, 1230, 1232, 1233, 1239
Bills, D., 514
Birdsall, N., 292, 526
Birzea, C., 296, 297, 300, 304, 315
Bjork, R., 68
Blackburn, S., 1130
Black, J.K., 522
Blackmore, J., 1034
Blair, T., 580
Blake, N., 1137
Blaug, M., 260, 634, 637
Bloch, M., 503, 1050, 1270, 1271
Blommaert, J., 1242
Bloom, D.E., 682
Bok, D., 601
Boktor, A., 891
Boli, J., 102, 103, 105, 181, 422, 504, 505,
834
Bolívar, A., 224
Bonal, X., 218, 220, 221, 223
Bonder, G., 1038
Bontekoe, R., 1136
Borer, D.A., 863, 870
Borg, C., 492
Bornschier, V., 604
Boron, A., 76, 77
Boskier, R., 975
Bossy, S., 265
Boster, J., 754
Botha, T., 694
Bourdieu, P., 441, 444, 509, 615, 645, 932,
992, 995, 996
Bourne, R., 1017
Bouzakis, J., 1253
Bouzakis, S., 248, 250
Bowen, J., 29
Bowen, W., 68
Bowers, C.A., 998
Bowles, S., 281, 512, 932, 995, 996, 998
Bowman, M.J., 67, 980, 1048
Bowra, C.M., 1080
Boyd-Barrett, O., 218, 220
Boyd, C.P., 223
Boyden, J., 733, 734, 736, 741
Boyd, W., 174
Boyles, D.R., 1092, 1093
Bozkurt, G., 899

--- [PDF Page 1300 / Book Page 1329] ---

1330 Author Index
Bradley, H., 1036
Brainard, J., 1147
Brandford, S., 718
Brandi, D., 973
Branz-Spall, A.M., 365
Braslavsky, C., 529, 532, 838, 839, 841
Braudel, F., 374
Braverman, H., 624
Bray, M., 3, 1150, 1176, 1177, 1211, 1238,
1250, 1279
Brecher, J., 113
Breen, R., 629
Brendon, P., 169
Brewer, W.V., 25–30
Bricheno, P., 705, 710
Brickman, W.W., 21, 24, 32, 121, 123, 131,
1155, 1173, 1278
Bridges, D., 1137
Brighouse, H., 795
Brinkley, D., 782
Broadfoot, P., 3, 155, 923, 976, 1047, 1134,
1225, 1235, 1238, 1249–1265, 1274
Brock, C., 89, 98, 1229
Brock-Utne, B., 761
Brogan, D.W., 805
Brown, A.J., 375, 1159–1171
Brown, D., 514
Browne, D., 473
Browne, G.S., 38
Brown, M., 1255
Brown, P., 223, 446, 623, 629
Brown, S., 1253, 1254
Brubacher, J.S., 806
Bruner, J.S., 742, 935
Brunn, M., 365
Bryk, A., 920
Buchert, L., 260, 424, 430
Buenfil Burgos, R., 387, 391
Bujra, J., 710
Bulhões, M.G., 994
Bullivant, B., 403
Bundy, C., 736
Bunting, M., 177
Bunwaree, S., 660, 662
Buras, K.L., 1000–1002
Burbules, N.C., 364, 381, 430, 625, 997,
1092, 1130, 1285
Burde, D., 364
Burgat, F., 894

Burke, P., 169
Burleigh, M., 376
Burnett, A., 378
Burnett, G., 360, 1045, 1133, 1134, 1225,
1229, 1284
Burns, R.J., 1177, 1284
Bush, J., 176
Butler, J., 710, 1036
Butler, N., 573, 576, 578-580, 582, 583
Buttery, E.A., 864,
Butts, R.F., 19, 25, 31, 246
Byrne, C., 736, 740
C
Cahill, D., 412
Caine, G., 737
Cairns, E., 735
Cairns, J., 373
Caldart, R.S., 718–721, 994Calero, J., 223
Calhoun, C., 1232–1234
Callahan, R., 592, 593
Camaroff, J.L., 1153
Cameron, A., 1123
Campbell, A.E., 172, 173
Campbell, C., 588, 589, 594, 595, 710
Campisano, C.J., 1155
Campobassi, J., 839, 840
Campos, I., 219
Canestri, G., 202-204, 207
Cantle, T., 1015
Carabaña, J., 221
Cardini, A., 343
Cardoso, F.H., 101, 104, 521, 522
Cardoso, G., 1166
Carl, J., 503–515
Carnoy, M., 75, 109, 110, 112, 154, 165–167,
281, 284, 347, 425, 426, 430, 504, 515,
633, 686, 698, 783, 791, 1228, 1280
Carrim, N., 765–778
Carroll, K.T., 1046, 1057, 1284
Carter, V.K., 660
Caruso, M., 1071
Casanova, J., 219, 921
Cassirer, C., 826
Castells, M., 112, 259–261, 350, 480, 619,
620, 769, 807, 808, 953, 954, 956, 1082,
1084, 1085, 1166
Castle, K., 171, 177
Castro, C.M., 455–476, 852

--- [PDF Page 1301 / Book Page 1330] ---

Author Index 1331
Cave, P., 1134
Cerych, L., 298, 305
Chabal, P., 277
Chabbott, C., 418, 785
Chakravarty, S.D., 409, 410
Chambers, R., 1177, 1180
Chanana, K., 661, 663
Chandrashekar, B.K., 664
Chang Tok-Sun, 860
Chan, J., 1289
Charle, C., 1285
Chase-Dunn, C., 114
Chatterjee, P., 782
Chatty, D., 740, 742
Chege, F., 708–711
Cheng, Y.,1210–1213
Chen, Y.P., 365
Chernilo, D., 1114
Chevalier, A., 541
Chilton, S., 1036
Chiosso, G., 208
Chisholm, L., 685–698
Chitty, C., 817
Choi, S-K., 866
Choksi, A., 1177
Cholezas, I., 643, 645
Christensen, P., 741
Christie, P., 689, 696
Christina, R., 112
Christodoulakis, N., 485
Cicchetti, D., 737
Cipolla, C., 503
Clark, B.R., 561
Clarke, J., 587, 1001
Clarke, P., 926
Claxton, G., 1251
Clayton, S., 61
Clayton, T., 104, 107,
108, 111
Cleaver, F., 707
Clifford, J., 361, 363
Clignet, R., 183, 187, 188
Clogg, R., 242, 243, 249
Cochran, J., 892, 893
Cochran-Smith, M., 411
Coe, C., 686, 698
Cohen, J., 1106
Cohen, M., 60
Cohen, P., 512

Cohn, E., 633, 637, 641
Colclough, C., 426
Cole, M., 742, 995, 996, 998
Coleman, D., 347, 784
Coleman, J.S., 147, 163, 164, 303, 645
Coles, R., 735
Coli, D., 203
Colley, L., 176
Collier, P., 419, 787
Collins, P., 1036
Collins, R., 8, 505
Collis, B., 1166
Comenius, J.A., 825, 935, 936
Condillac, E.B., 828
Confucius, 858, 860–862, 865, 866
Conle, C., 1194
Connell, R.W., 709, 710, 1027, 1035
Considine, M., 587
Cook, B.J., 106, 1284
Cook, G., 923
Coolahan, J., 171
Coomans, F., 1011
Coombe, C., 708
Cooper, D.E., 1130, 1132, 1136, 1139
Cooper, F., 182, 281
Copeaux, E., 898
Copelman, D.M., 994
Corby, R., 424
Cornia, A., 421
Cornwall, A., 706
Corral, A., 366
Cosgrove, D.E., 359
Costello, P., 791
Coulby, D., 373–383, 1284, 1285
Coulthard, R.M., 933
Cousin, V., 11, 23–34, 37, 124, 125, 140, 141,
1069
Cowen, R., 3–10, 68, 89, 93, 94, 123, 129,
297, 337–342, 344, 345, 352, 499–501,
589, 640, 804, 923, 961–964, 982,
983, 1045, 1049, 1050, 1056, 1062,
1081, 1089, 1101, 1133, 1155, 1159,
1160, 1177, 1190, 1221, 1277–1291,
1295–1296
Cramer, J.F., 38
Crane, D., 382
Cranney, B., 664
Crawford, K., 1235
Cremin, L.A., 32, 512

--- [PDF Page 1302 / Book Page 1331] ---

1332 Author Index
Crossley, M., 128, 430, 657, 698, 923, 1045,
1047, 1133, 1173, 1184, 1225, 1235,
1238, 1249, 1250
Crowder, M., 183
Crow, R., 899, 900
Cruikshank, B., 387
Cuban, L., 697
Cuesta, R., 218
Cuhna, F., 644
Cummings, W.K., 1148, 1149
Curren, R., 1132
Currie, J., 262
Curtis, A., 265
Curtis, B., 504
Cury, C.R.J., 842, 845, 850, 852, 853
D
Daiute, C., 743
Dale, R., 110, 162, 542, 686, 1000, 1013–
1025, 1176, 1284, 1285
d’Allondans, G.A.,223
Daloz, J.-F., 277
Dalrymple, W., 8
Daly, M., 1035
Darby, D., 1178
Dardees, J.W., 861
Das Gupta, K., 656
Dasgupta, P., 787
David, M., 705
Davies, D., 544
Davies, L., 740, 1133
Davies, N., 8, 20, 59, 60
Davies, S., 1084
Davin, A., 756
Davis, C., 1171
Davis, K., 877
Davis, N., 375, 1160
Davis, P., 786
Dawes, A., 734–738
Dawkins, R., 379
De Bary, W.T., 862, 875, 876, 880
de Berry, J., 741
DeCoster, T., 390
Deem, R., 107
De Groof, J., 555
deJong-Lambert, W., 1144
Delanty, G., 262, 480
de la Rocha, M.G., 1038

Deleuze, G., 390
Delors, J., 525
Demerath, P., 109
Demie, F., 363
Deng, X.P., 264
Denison, E.F., 363, 640
Derrida, J., 769, 771
Derrington, C., 366
Dertilis, G., 243
Deschamps, H., 183
Desrosieres, A., 448
Deuchler, M., 860
Deutsch, E., 1136
Devi, M., 658
de Weert, E., 554, 561
Dewey, J., 688, 830, 955
de Wit, K., 570
Dexter, S., 1168
Diamond, L., 297
Diaz, M., 555
Diéguez, J.L., 224
Diggins, J.P., 390
Dill, D., 555
Dimaras, A., 245–248, 804,
805, 1094
Dimier, V., 188
Dimitriadis, G., 997
Di Palma, G., 1115
Di Tella, T., 522
Dlodlo, T.S., 753
Dodge, K.A., 737
Doherty, C., 1165, 1166
Dollar, D., 419
Donald, D., 738
Donghi, H., 523
do Ó, J.R.,388
Dore, R., 636, 637, 1174
Dos Santos, T., 101
Douglas, D., 513
Dowling, P.C., 1165
Downs, R.B., 31, 32
Doyal, L., 787
Dragona, T., 1235
Dreze, J., 671
Driver, R., 757
Drucker, M., 1084
Drucker, P., 623, 808, 948
D’Souza, A., 591

--- [PDF Page 1303 / Book Page 1332] ---

Author Index 1333
Dubrow, N., 735–738
Duignam, P., 184, 187, 189
Duijzings, G., 376
Duminuco, V., 920
Dunleavy, M., 1168
Dunne, M., 740
Dussel, I., 360, 405, 406, 997
Dyer, C., 366, 367, 1177
E
Easton, P., 419, 504
Echevarría, J., 221
Eckert, C.J., 860, 862
Eckstein, M.A., 7, 9, 16–18, 23, 25, 30,
32–34, 40, 44, 46, 53–55, 59–66, 93,
121, 123, 131, 133, 140, 141, 147–149,
152, 345, 1064, 1149, 1151, 1156, 1175,
1278, 1282
Edelman, M., 219
Edwards, R., 112, 127, 262, 412, 755, 972,
1284
Egitim Sen, 995
Eisemon, T.O., 783
Eisner, E.W., 976, 1105
Elder, J.W., 873–886
Eley, G., 1229
Elfers, A.M., 364
Elgar, E., 644
Eliot, T.S., 1295
El Khawas, E., 561
Elliott, C., 426
Elliott, J., 881, 1183
Elliott, R.K., 1130, 1132
Ellsworth, E., 998
Elmore, R.F.,686, 697, 698
Elshtain, J.B., 1090, 1092
El-Solh, R., 900
Emerson, R., 247
Emirbayer, M., 299
Encuentro, F., 223
Enders, J., 554, 561
English, L.M., 360
Epperson, D., 61
Epstein, D., 996
Epstein, E.H., 46, 54, 93, 106, 129, 153,
978, 979, 1046, 1047, 1050,
1057, 1284
Epstein, I., 360, 973

Erevelles, N., 998
Erkkilä, K., 978
Ertl, H., 486, 491, 492, 1071, 1149
Escobar, A., 418
Escolano, A., 218
Esteva, G., 417
Etcheverry, G., 526, 531
Evans, M., 956
Evans, P., 259, 260
Evans, R.J., 1051
Evers, C.W., 1132F
F
Fagerlind, I., 299, 418, 783
Fairbank, J.K., 378
Fairbanks, L., 734
Fairclough, N., 1233, 1238, 1239, 1241–1244
Falcon, F.J.C., 844
Falk, R., 1028, 1083, 1090
Falleto, E., 101, 104
Fanon, F., 284
Faraco, J.C.G., 217–235
Farrell, J.P., 60, 65
Farrell, S., 926
Faure, E., 610
Feinberg, W., 1137
Fejes, A., 393
Ferguson, J., 359, 417, 422, 423, 428, 430,
1116
Ferguson, N., 169, 171
Fernandez-Armesto, F., 374
Ferreira, M.C.P., 519–535
Fewsmith, J., 268, 378
Feyerabend, P., 1080
Fick, A.C., 735, 737
Fiechter, G., 522
Field, J., 483, 602, 809, 811, 1087, 1101
Figueiredo-Cowen, M.C.M., 837-854
Filmus, D., 524, 526–528
Finegold, D., 1071
Fine, M., 743, 992
Fine, R., 1114
Fink, D., 944
Finkelstein, B., 512
Fischer, M.G., 359–368
Fitz, J., 627
Fletcher, R., 375
Floud, J., 68, 146, 147

--- [PDF Page 1304 / Book Page 1333] ---

1334 Author Index
Flynn, M., 920
Fonagy, P., 737
Foray, D., 445
Fortna, B.C., 1284
Foster, P.J., 17, 54–56, 62, 65, 123, 131, 146,
148, 149, 183, 188, 543, 1048
Foster, S., 1235
Fotopoulos, T., 1084, 1090, 1091
Foucault, M., 191, 192, 361, 399, 480, 621,
767, 968, 977, 1052–1054, 1177, 1198,
1200, 1238, 1242, 1243, 1255
Fox, C., 660, 1182
Franca, L., 848, 849
Frangoudaki, A., 1235
Frank, A.G., 258
Frank, G., 104
Franz, S., 107
Fraser, N., 793, 991, 992, 1037
Fraser, S.E., 12–16, 18, 20–25, 32, 37, 121,
122, 140, 1062, 1073, 1278, 1279
Frayha, N., 900–902
Freire, P., 77, 78, 134, 161, 718, 719, 791,
993, 997, 998, 1004, 1093, 1177
French, H.W., 365
Frieden, J., 426
Friedrichs, R.W., 8
Frigotto, G., 462, 717
Fujita, T., 1218
Fukuyama, F., 261
Fuller, A., 540
Fuller, B., 426
Fuller, C.J., 885
Furedi, F., 810, 1100, 1104
Furlong, D., 427
Furlong, J., 1178
G
Galbraith J.K., 621
Gallagher, J., 279
Gallagher, M., 916
Gallant, T.W., 249
Gallart, M.A., 524, 526–527, 530–532
Galtung, I., 604
Gamarnikow, E., 619–630
Game, A., 1199
Gandin, L.A., 715–730, 992, 1002, 1003
Ganguly-Scrase, R., 664
Gann, L., 184, 187, 189
Garbarino, J., 735–738

Garcia, B.L., 366
Gardner, H., 1253
Garmezy, N., 737
Garoupa, N., 541
Garrido, J.L.G., 221, 321–333
Garza, E., 365
Gasper, D., 781, 787
Gautherin, J., 18
Geckler, P., 695
Gee, J., 587
Gellner, E., 909, 1226, 1229, 1233
Genro, T., 723
Gentili, P., 717, 718
Gereffi, G., 259–261
Gerskovits, B., 297
Gerth, H.H., 500
Geske, T.G., 633, 637, 641
Gewirtz, S., 588
Ghosh, R., 660, 663
Ghosh, S.C., 874, 875
Giddens, A., 107, 228, 261, 342, 520, 620,
909, 984. 1082
Gifford, L., 186
Gifford, P., 186, 187, 189
Gilbert, C., 950
Gilborn, D., 588
Gillette, M., 411
Gilley, B., 378
Gimeno, J.S., 997
Gimeno Sacristán, J., 224
Gino, J., 1164
Ginsburg, M., 75
Gintis, H., 281, 512, 932, 995, 996, 998
Giroux, H.A., 133, 932, 991,
996, 1091
Giry, S., 406
Gispen, K., 511
Githay, L., 530
Gitlin, A., 728
Glanz, L.E., 733
Glasser, A.L., 128
Glenn, C., 405, 406
Glenn, D., 1156
Glenny, L.A., 554
Godon, R., 302
Goldberg, D.T., 770
Golden, C., 513
Goldman, M., 378
Goldstein, H., 1181, 1182, 1255

--- [PDF Page 1305 / Book Page 1334] ---

Author Index 1335
Gold, T.B., 261
Goldthorpe, J.H., 629
Goodenow, R., 974, 975
Good, G., 1098, 1099
Goodnow, J., 742
Goodson, I., 942
Goodwin, J., 233, 299
Goonatilake, S., 754
Gordon, T., 407
Gore, E., 526
Gore, J., 996
Gorman-Smith, D., 737
Gorostiaga, M.J., 978
Gough, I., 787
Gounko, T., 566
Govender, L., 696
Govinda, R., 876
Grabar, O., 890
Grace, G., 907–920
Gramigna, A., 218
Gramsci, A., 992, 996
Grant, C.A., 403–413
Grant, N., 1134, 1175, 1278
Gray, J., 1012
Greece, K., 239–254
Greeley, A., 920
Green, A., 167, 223, 239, 244, 261, 365, 486,
504, 1091, 1106, 1235, 1259
Green, J.M., 1009
Green, P., 365
Grégoire, R., 1071
Greider, W., 590
Grew, R., 509
Griffiths, G., 658
Griggs, M., 737
Grigorenko, E., 1183
Grillo, R., 417
Grollios, G., 809
Grotius, H., 824
Grubb, W., 503
Grue-Sørensen, K., 823, 828
Guattari, F., 393
Guena, A., 644
Guha, P., 663
Guile, D., 620, 808
Gu, M., 1214, 1215
Gundara, J.S., 1009–1023
Guppy, N., 1084

Gupta, A., 1116
Gutman, A., 281
Guttman, M.C., 706
Guzmán, V., 1033
Gvirtz, S., 354, 837–854
H
Haahr, J.H., 492
Haas, E., 438
Habermas, J., 25, 93, 589, 593, 605, 1171
Habgood, J., 1264
Habte, A., 426
Hacking, I., 392
Haggard, S., 258
Hahm, C., 857
Haikio, M., 953
Halbertal, M., 1136
Halbertal, T.H., 1122
Halliday, M.A.K., 1199
Hall, J.W., 1280
Hall, N., 1103
Hall, S., 657, 805, 996
Halls, W.D., 28, 89, 123, 805, 1094, 1288
Halsey, A.H., 68, 146, 519, 1279
Halsey, A.J., 68, 147
Hamilton, D., 387
Hammerness, K., 397
Hammersley, M., 1177
Hancock, M., 664
Handy, C., 808
Hann, D.M., 735
Hansen, H., 511
Hans, N., 24, 38–41, 50, 54, 56, 143, 161,
339, 1015, 1047, 1048, 1049, 1277
Hanson, S.E., 296
Harber, C., 740, 783, 1134
Harbison, F., 64, 67, 147
Hardman, F., 933
Hargreaves, A., 807, 810, 943–957, 1089,
1093, 1107, 1178, 1093
Hargreaves, D., 950
Harker, R., 175
Harley, K., 686, 694, 695
Harrigan, P., 509
Harris, A.J, 146, 147
Harris, M., 758
Harriss, J., 432
Harrold, P., 428

--- [PDF Page 1306 / Book Page 1335] ---

1336 Author Index
Harry, B., 366
Hart, H.L., 784
Hart, J., 742
Hartley, D., 107, 1282
Harvey, D., 106, 239, 755
Hasan, M.A., 645
Hasan, R., 1199
Hastings, A., 911
Hausmann, G., 1278
Havighurst, R.J., 716
Haydon, G., 1132
Hayhoe, R., 1179, 1182
Hearn, J., 429
Heater, D., 715
Heather, P., 1286
Heath, J.A., 641
Heathorn, S., 177
Hecht, T., 738, 741
Heckman, J., 644
Heidenheimer, A.J., 162
Heinecke, W.F., 1168
Held, D., 79, 107, 163, 261, 440, 443, 444,
479, 605
Henderson, P., 739
Henrickson, L., 130
Henry, D.B., 737
Henry, M., 438, 444, 447
Henze, P., 897
Herdt, G., 742
Heredero, J.M., 1192
Herkommer, S., 223
Herman, A., 8
Herz, B., 790
Herzog, J.D., 49
Heward, C., 660, 662
Hewitt, R., 1015
Heyman, R., 128
Heyneman, S.P., 110, 295, 460
Heyting, F., 1138
Hickling-Hudson, A., 656, 1045, 1177, 1197
Higginson, J.H., 45, 1063, 1175, 1282
Highet, G., 124
Hilgendorf, E., 890
Hilker, F., 88, 121, 122
Hill, A., 427
Hillage, J., 1178
Hill, D., 790
Hill, M.A., 790
Himanen, P., 953, 956

Himmelfarb, G., 1051
Hinchliffe, K., 637, 638
Hingel, A.J., 487
Hinsdale, B.A., 124
Hiratsuka, M., 1219
Hirsch, F., 589
Hirst, P.H., 261, 821, 1131, 1132
Hite, S.J., 106, 1284
Hoadley, U., 686, 698
Hobsbawm, E.J., 378, 506, 1233
Hoddinott, J., 642
Hodson, D., 492
Høffding, H., 830
Holmes, B., 17, 30, 32, 33, 41, 46, 53, 54, 55,
60, 63, 65, 1182, 1268
Holmes, K., 1182
Holmwood, J., 1260, 1263
Honey, J., 170, 507
Hooks, B., 662, 997
Hopkins, D., 524
Hopper, E., 1279, 1280
Horton, M., 997
Horton, R., 760
Hossain, N., 787
Hostens, G., 492
Howell, S.L., 660
Howitt, P., 445
Howitt, W., 1064
Hsü, L.S, 858, 859, 862
Huang, F., 597
Hubbard, J., 734
Hudson, M., 900, 901
Hufton, N.R., 1251
Huisman,M., 551
Huisman, J., 584
Huitema, D., 560
Hultqvist, K., 387
Hume, D., 378, 379
Humes, W., 174
Humphreys, S., 740
Hundt, G.L., 740, 742
Hunter, M., 707
Hunter, W., 473
Hunt, L., 1051
Hurn, C.J., 147
Husén, T., 1071
Húsen, T., 68, 96, 148
Hussain, A., 623
Hutchins, R.M., 1096

--- [PDF Page 1307 / Book Page 1336] ---

Author Index 1337
Hutton, W., 620
Huxley, T.H., 811
Hwang, B.T., 861
Hyam, R., 782
Hyden, G., 277
Hyland, T., 869
Hyndman, M., 591
Hypolito, A.M., 411
I
Ianni, O., 462, 521
Ichilov, O., 1133
Iglesias, F., 845, 846
Ikeda, S., 1219, 1220
Ilon, L., 492
Ingdahl, W., 583
Ingels, A., 633
Inkeles, A., 782
Ipaye, B., 183
Ishii, Y., 1287
Ishikawa, M., 644
Ishizuki, M., 1217
Issawi, C., 892
Isusi, I., 366
J
Jacinto, C., 530
Jacob, M., 1051
Jacoby, R., 992
Jaeger, W., 1104
James, A., 733, 741
James, C.E., 407
James, M., 1253, 1254
Jameson, F., 378
Jamrozik, A., 234
Janmaat, G.J., 233
Jansen, J., 686, 689, 696, 698, 1069
Jarrar, S., 890, 900
Jarvis, P., 601–616, 1133, 1249
Jayawardena, K., 662, 782
Jefferson, R.L., 225
Jefferson, T., 121
Jeffery, P., 663
Jeismann, K., 512
Jeliazkova, M., 565
Jemolo, A.C., 205
Jenkins, E.J., 734, 735
Jenkins, K., 1051
Jenks, C., 733

Jennings, M., 685
Jensen, O.B., 570
Jepperson, R., 399
Jesson, J., 175
Jessop, B., 1123
Jewitt, C., 1161
Jewkes, R., 708
Jianhua, F., 365
Johnes, G., 633, 636, 639, 641
Johnson, C., 259, 263, 863
Johnson, M.S., 233, 296, 308
Johnson, R., 996
Johnstone, B., 121–135
Jones, A., 1134, 1135, 1235, 1237
Jones, C., 1014
Jones, P.E., 21, 30, 37, 45, 110, 140, 347,
783, 784, 1284–1286
Jones, S., 736, 738, 739
Jones, T.J., 287
Jordan, G., 805, 1095
Jørgensen, M., 1233
Jover, G., 1135
Judt, T., 8, 217
Jules, D., 993
Jullien de Paris, M.-A., 23–25, 28, 30, 32–34,
37, 87, 94, 121, 122, 140, 145
K
Kabeer, N., 660, 790
Kadioğlu, A., 896, 898
Kaestle, C., 507, 510, 512, 513
Kahn, H., 863
Kaim, B., 710
Kaldis, W., 245
Kalkavage, P., 1106, 1107
Kallaway, P., 791
Kaloyannaki, P., 11–34
Kaluwa, B., 426
Kalyvitis, S., 485
Kamat, 793
Kamat, S., 112
Kamens, D.H., 108, 1151
Kaminer, D., 734, 735
Kandel, I.L., 7, 24, 38–43, 45–51, 53–56, 59,
60, 64, 93, 123, 125, 127–129, 131, 134,
143–146, 151, 161, 165, 166, 503, 1175,
1226–1228, 1267, 1268
Kanpol, B., 403
Kant, I., 19, 43

--- [PDF Page 1308 / Book Page 1337] ---

1338 Author Index
Kaplan, S., 895
Kapustin, B., 298
Karabel, J., 147
Karakasidou, A.N., 377
Karatzia-Stavlioti, E., 633–647
Karpat, K., 895
Karpov, V., 298
Karsten, S., 1283
Kassotakis, M., 252
Katsikas, C., 246, 247
Katsuhisa, I., 978
Katz, L., 513
Katz, M.B., 281, 503, 513
Kay, C., 259, 260
Kay-Shuttleworth, J., 360
Kazamias, A.M., 3–6, 11–34, 37–57,
139–156, 161–167, 241, 243, 245, 250, 252,
254, 483, 485, 508, 540, 643, 803–811, 895,
896, 968, 1046, 1048–1050, 1079–1107,
1225, 1228, 1235, 1238, 1244, 1267–1275,
1280, 1284, 1295–1296
Kedourie, E., 1229
Keeling, R., 570
Kehm, B., 556
Keiner, E., 182
Keith, S., 425
Kellner, D., 128
Kellner, H., 1051
Kell, P., 997
Kelly, C., 425
Kelly, G.P., 426, 662, 1047, 1149, 1190, 1228
Kelly, M.J., 708
Kelly, P.G., 1280
Kelsh, D., 999
Kemmis, S., 1177
Kendall, N., 417–432, 1039
Kendall, S., 366, 417-432
Kennedy, K., 510
Kennedy, M.K., 1178
Kent, A., 708, 709, 711
Kenway, J., 444, 446, 975, 1033, 1035–1039
Kerbow, D., 362
Kerr, C., 607, 1098, 1099
Khalifah, B., 901
Khilnani, S., 679
Khurshid, A., 403–413
Kida, H., 263, 264
Kido, M., 1219, 1220

Kilbride, P., 738, 741
Kimball, B.A., 1096, 1104
Kim, T., 857–870, 1287
Kim, Y-P, 861
Kingdon, G., 642
King, E.J., 65, 67, 89, 92, 95, 427, 790, 924,
1045, 1048, 1063, 1175, 1220,
King, K., 430
Kirby, M., 625
Kivisto, P., 403–405
Kiwanuka, M.S., 187
Kladis, D., 1084
Klare, M., 375
Klees, S., 419, 504
Klerides, E., 1225–1245
Kliebard, H.M., 593, 806, 832, 994, 1097
Knight, E.W., 26–28, 31, 32
Knijnik, G., 719
Knowles, L.C.A., 43
Knox, C., 733
Koehl, R., 1045
Kogan, M., 561
Kohli, W., 1132
Ko, J.-H., 995
Kokosalakis, N., 244
Koliopoulos, J.S., 244–247, 249
Kordatos, J.K., 249
Korten, D.C., 616, 1102
Kostelny, K., 735–738
Kostis, K.P., 242, 243
Kothari, U., 417
Koukou, H.E., 245
Kozma, R., 1162
Kraak, A., 689
Krasner, S., 270
Kress, G., 975, 1161, 1163
Krieger, J., 1028
Kristeva, J., 1235
Kuenzer, A., 462
Kuhn, T.S., 61, 64, 69, 571, 1252
Kumar, K., 182, 934, 1241
Kumashiro, K., 998
Kume, K., 1069, 1217
Kuster, S., 284
Kwikkers, P., 553
Kwong, J., 365
Kwon, K., 864
Kymlicka, W., 715

--- [PDF Page 1309 / Book Page 1338] ---

Author Index 1339
L
Labaree, D., 514, 515
Lacqueur, T., 507
Ladson-Billings, G., 405, 406, 411, 955, 996,
998
Lahelma, E., 360
Laitner, S., 580
Lakoff, G., 223
Laksamba, C., 614
Lalita, R., 663
Lamberti, M., 510
Lambert R., 573, 576, 578–580,
582, 583
Lambropoulos, H., 633–647
La Mettrie, J.O., 827, 828
Landmann, M., 827
Langohr, V., 893
Lanzendorff, U., 556
Lapidus, I., 890
Lariccia, S., 196
Larsen, M.A., 156, 1045–1057, 1178, 1243,
1271, 1275, 1287, 1289
Laska, J., 1190
Latour, B., 1189
Lauder, H., 223, 344, 626
Lauglo, J., 162
Lauwerys, J.A., 9, 55, 89, 92, 95, 96, 123,
131, 1277, 1284
Lave, J., 761
Law, N., 1162, 1163
Lawn, M., 314, 360, 393, 394, 396, 570,
1285
Lawson, T., 362
Lawton, D., 813–821
Law, W.W., 257–271, 1287
Lazar, M., 1028
Lazerson, M., 503
Leach, E., 928
Leach, F., 707, 708, 740, 741
Leach, J., 1168, 1169
Le Bon, G., 188
Leclercque, J.-M., 18
Leed, E., 360
Lee, K., 640
Lee, R., 739
Lee, S-h., 864
Lefoka, P., 1177
Leftwich, A., 259

Legg, K.R., 243
Leibfried, S., 1115
Leicester, M., 602
Lei, J.L., 404, 407, 408
Leinster-Mackay, D., 171
Leirvik, O., 376
Leloudis, J., 513
Leonardo, Z., 998
Lepre, A., 212
Lerner, D., 783
Leslie, L., 601
LeTendre, G.K.,1151
Levett, A., 735, 738
Levi Faur, D., 1120
Levinson, B., 104, 686
Levinson, M.P., 366
Levy, A., 176, 177
Levy, M.J., 67
Lewin, K., 425, 1181
Lewis, B., 895, 896
Lewis, D.L.,993
Lewis, M.L., 737
Leyendecker, R., 685-698
Leys, C., 791
Liang, Z., 365
Liebman, W.M., 972, 978
Liebowitz, R.D., 1156
Liew, L.H., 263
Lijphart, A., 297
Lilly, T., 171
Lima, A.A., 846-849
Lincicome, M., 266
Lindblad, S., 225, 230, 235, 314, 368, 393,
396
Linderstrøm-Lang, C.F., 825
Lindert, P., 505, 507, 509, 510, 512
Lindhardt, P.G.,831, 832
Lindqvist, S., 559
Lingard, B., 314, 437–452, 620, 626
Lipset, S.M., 1286
Lipsett, A., 581
Lipton, M., 955
Li, Q., 1210-1215
Lisovskaya, E., 298
Litt, E., 162
Little, A.W., 425, 923, 924, 1174
Littlewood, P., 223
Livingstone, D.W., 260

--- [PDF Page 1310 / Book Page 1339] ---

1340 Author Index
Livingston, G., 993
Llach, J.J., 528
Locke, J., 824
Lockheed, M.E., 345, 347, 427
Lodge, A., 791
Lodge, G., 863
Lofstedt, J.-I., 1082
Lomnitz, L., 79
Longwe, S.H., 660, 663
Longworth, N., 314
Loomba, A., 656, 658, 792
Lopez, M.E., 365
López Rodó, L., 219
Lorion, R.P., 735
Lortie, D.C., 950
Louis, W.R., 169, 186
Louro, G.L., 717
Lovlie, L., 805
Lowe, R., 169, 507, 1235
Lub, A., 555
Lucas, C., 601
Lucas, R., 640
Lugg, R., 793
Luhmann, N., 298, 299, 1149, 1155
Luke, A., 1166, 1198, 1199
Luke, C., 996
Lumerman, J.P., 523
Lumsdaine, D., 421
Luna, F., 523
Lundvall, B.A., 445
Luthar, S.S., 737
Luttwack, E.N., 620
Luzón, A., 217–235, 395
Lyford, J.P., 1096
Lynch, K., 791, 1036, 1037, 1041
Lynch, M., 737
Lyotard, J.-F., 342, 378, 479, 590, 1057, 1081
M
Maassen, P., 551
Macedo, D., 998, 1093
Mace, J., 633, 635–639, 641, 643, 644
Machel, G., 736
Machin, S., 629
Maciel, L.S.B., 843, 844
MacIntyre, A., 1136
MacKenzie, J.W., 176
MacKinnon, C., 772, 773

McLure, M., 1202
Maclure, J., 590, 591
Macrae, M., 428
Madeira, A.I., 181–193
Madrick, J., 503, 506
Magno, C., 297, 298, 313
Magoula, Th., 636
Maher, I., 492
Majhanovich, S., 1289
Majoor, D., 1283
Makoba, J., 429
Malcolm, C., 689
Malepa, M., 736
Malim, F.B., 173
Mallaby, S., 469
Mallinson, V., 38, 40, 41, 55, 67, 89, 123,
338, 1226, 1227
Mamdani, M., 281
Mandela, N., 773
Mangan, J.A., 169, 170, 1284
Mankekar, P., 663
Mann, H., 11, 23–25, 31–33, 37, 124, 125
Mann, S., 1103
Mannah, S., 709, 1042
Manning, M.L., 397
Manzo, K., 418, 420
Manzon, M., 7, 1279
Maravegjas, N., 479
Marginson, S., 107, 115, 262, 1123
Margiotta Broglio, F., 205
Marquand, D., 584
Marsden, W.E., 171
Marshall, G., 624
Marshall, J.D., 1136
Marshall, T.H., 626, 715
Marsh, D., 261
Martens, K., 439
Martin, D.C., 919, 1231, 1232
Martinez, C., 299, 314, 1155
Martinez, P., 735
Martins, H., 1114
Martins, J.de S., 721
Martin, T.J., 1134
Martinussen, J., 263
Marton, F., 867
Masemann, V.L., 7, 128, 155, 427, 1156,
1175, 1289, 1175, 1190, 1196
Masolo, D.A., 1136

--- [PDF Page 1311 / Book Page 1340] ---

Author Index 1341
Mason, M., 1176, 1225, 1235
Massialas, B.G., 37, 40, 140, 141, 144, 146,
147, 153, 164
Massonnet, P., 378
Masten, A.S., 734
Mathews, J., 1177
Mattheou, D., 59–69, 641
Matthews, I., 737
Matthews, J., 656
Mauch, J.E., 1283
Maxwell, K., 845
Mayall, B., 738, 741
Maynes, M.J., 508
Mayo, P., 492
Mayor, F., 346
May, S., 404, 1133
Mazower, M., 60, 377
Mazumdar, M., 665
Mazur, A., 1033, 1034
MacLure, M., 1202
McAll, Ch., 223
McCarthy, C., 991, 996, 997
McClean, M., 804
McConnochie, K., 175
McCowan, T., 715-730, 791
McCulloch, G., 169-177, 945
McDowell, L., 705
McGaw, B., 1254
McGrath, S., 696
McGrew, A., 440, 443, 444, 479, 1082
McKinley, E., 754
McKnight, D., 388
McLaren, P., 403, 981, 991, 997, 998
McLaughlin, J., 693
McLaughlin, M., 686, 693
McLaughlin, T.H., 1129-1138
McLean, M., 59, 162, 1097, 1278
McLeish, E., 297
McLuhan, M., 974
McMahon, W.W., 644
McNair, J.M., 218
McNeely, C., 633
McNeill, D., 570
McPherson Waiti, P., 754
McRobbie, A., 996
Mehta, S., 1045, 1178, 1225, 1284, 1285
Meister, L., 609
Melnick, A., 79
Melton, J., 510

Mendelsohn, M., 736
Merson, J., 859
Messner, M., 1027
Metcalf, A., 1199
Metzler, J., 277–293
Meyer, J.W., 181, 225, 228, 314, 385, 399,
418, 422, 633, 1121, 1123, 1151
Micklethwait, J., 370, 376
Micklewright, J., 305, 308
Mignolo, W.D., 768, 770, 776, 777
Miliband, R., 163, 164
Miller, D., 1233
Miller, H., 589, 591, 593
Mill, J.S., 805
Mills, C.W., 500
Mills, S., 1238
Mincer, J., 634
Minh Ha, T., 792
Miskowiec, J., 971, 977
Mitchell, C., 708–710
Mitter, W., 87–98, 297, 298, 300
Modood, T., 628
Moehlman, A.H., 38
Mohamed, H., 689
Mohanty, C.T., 655, 659, 662, 663, 734, 792,
1028
Mok, K.H., 588, 596, 598, 1083, 1088
Mokyr, J., 506, 511
Molina, L.M., 366
Mollis, M., 107
Molyneux, M., 1027, 1036
Monaghan, R., 733
Monk, D., 636
Monkman, K., 109, 113, 381, 430, 1091,
1092
Monteiro, M.A., 462
Montesquieu, C., 829
Moodley, K.A., 405
Moon, B., 1168, 1169
Moon, R., 927
Moore, H., 740
Moosa, F., 735–737
Morduchowicz, A., 841
Moreira, J.R, 716
Montero, J.R., 225
Moreno, L., 223
Morgenstern de Finkel, S., 219
Morishima, M., 857, 869
Morojele, M., 1177

--- [PDF Page 1312 / Book Page 1341] ---

1342 Author Index
Morrell, R., 703–712, 740
Morris, P., 261
Morrow, S., 692
Mosselson, J., 363
Moss, G., 624, 1163, 1164
Motala, S., 791
Mottahedeh, R.P., 1136
Muckle, J., 926
Muldoon, O.T., 733, 736, 740
Mulgan, A., 173
Müller, D.K., 504, 505, 511, 1284
Muller, J., 687, 689, 696, 698
Munck, R., 781
Mundy, K., 110, 111, 423, 427–429, 785,
787, 788
Mungaray-Lagarda, A., 553
Munro, P., 994
Murphy, D., 920
Murphy, L., 111, 423, 427, 428, 785
Murray, N., 1062
Murray, T.R., 181
Musgrave, P., 591
Mvungi, M., 783
Myers, A., 64, 67, 147
N
Nadel, S.F., 1269
Nader, K., 734
Nagel, E., 60
Nagle, J., 846
Naison, M., 994
Nakasone, Y., 265, 268
Nakosteen, M., 890
Nambissan, G., 675, 677
Nanda, V.E., 771
Narodovsky, M., 841
Nash, M., 513, 1038
Nash, P., 38, 52
Nason, S., 1023
Nathan, A.J., 378
Nathan, J., 175
Navarro, Z., 722
Nayak, A., 705
Neave, G., 551–566, 572, 1101
Neto, A.S., 843, 844
Newman, J., 1001
Nias, J., 950
Niceforo, O., 211, 213
Nicoll, K., 393

Nieto, S., 411
Nijambi, W.N., 662
Ninnes, P., 360, 1045, 1133, 1134, 1178,
1190, 1191, 1199, 1225, 1229, 1284,
1285
Nisbet, R.A., 1285, 1290
Njenga, F., 734, 735
Njeru, E., 739, 741
Nkomo, M., 791
Nkwale, M., 735–737
Noah, H.J., 7, 9, 16–18, 23, 25, 30, 32–34,
40, 44, 46, 53–55, 59–66, 93, 121, 123,
131, 133, 140, 141, 147–149, 152, 345,
1064, 1145, 1148–1151, 1153, 1156,
1175, 1278, 1279, 1282, 1284
Nocella, L., 234
Noddings, N., 1107
Northwood, A.K., 734
Norwood, C., 171, 174
Novick, P., 1051
Nóvoa, A., 182, 183, 192, 343, 362, 385, 492,
504, 570, 1125, 1285
Nuntiandi, E., 920
Nussbaum, M.C., 793, 794, 796, 1102, 1107
Nyamai, C., 734, 735
Nyerere, J., 544
Nzomo, J., 787
O
Oakes, J., 955
Oancea, A., 300, 304
O’Brien, R., 261
Ochs, K., 126, 1061, 1068, 1070–1072, 1074,
1174, 1285
Odora-Hoppers, C., 689, 753, 1038
O’Doud, M., 978
Offe, C., 165
Offenberg, R.M., 362
Ogawa, R., 950
Ogunniyi, M.B., 760
O’Hearn, D., 781
Ohmae, K., 261, 588, 590
O’Keefe, J., 920
Okiy, R.B., 662
Oksenberg Rorty, A., 1132, 1135
Olds, K., 1123, 1124
Olmedo Reinoso, A., 223
Olmos, L.E., 73–85
Olneck, M., 364

--- [PDF Page 1313 / Book Page 1342] ---

Author Index 1343
Olsen, J.P., 551
O’Malley, P., 218, 220
O’Neill, O., 584
Osborn, M., 1176, 1181, 1253, 1259
Oshako, T., 736
Osirim, M.J., 662
Osler, A., 770, 775
Osofsky, J.D., 735, 737
O’Sullivan, E., 614, 1104, 1106
Oteiza, T., 1236
Otto, H., 794
Ouzgane, L., 706
Ovodenko, A., 566
Özdalga, E., 898, 899
Ozga, J., 620, 626, 1283, 1285
Özkirimli, U., 1227, 1231–1233
P
Pagani, F., 1255
Page, E., 794
Paine, T., 378–380
Painter, M., 587, 593
Palan, R., 1123
Palmer, R.R., 12, 17–20, 22, 25, 37
Palomba, D., 195–214
Pandian, A., 997
Pan, J., 1179
Papadopoulos, G.S., 437–439, 441, 442
Papandreou, A., 251–253
Papathanasopoulou, A., 1104
Papatsiba, V., 362
Pardo, C., 737
Parekh, B., 403–405, 657,
658, 782
Paris, M., 176
Parkes, J., 733–743
Parkinson, M., 162
Parnes, H., 64
Parsons, T., 258
Pasias, G., 479–493
Passeron, J.C., 645, 932, 995
Passin, H., 341, 1280
Pastore, J., 524, 527, 530
Pateman, C., 1035
Paterson, H., 174
Patramanis, A., 1114
Patrinos, H., 641, 642, 645, 650
Pattison, M., 1062
Pattman, R., 703–712

Paulston, R.G., 89, 132, 153, 360, 965–983,
1045, 1055, 1143, 1190, 1179, 1195,
1198, 1200, 1285
Pauly, E.L., 852
Payne, W.H., 126
Pazzaglia, L., 204
Pedlar, M., 614
Pelgrum, H., 1162
Pelgrum, W.J., 1163
Pereira, P.T., 641
Pereyra, M.A., 80, 217–235, 395
Perez-Dominguez, S., 411
Perkins, D., 1253
Perkinson, H.J., 52
Perry, B.D., 735, 737
Perry, L., 1030
Peruga, R., 221
Pesmazoglou, S., 643
Peter, G., 265
Peterson, P.E., 162
Peters, R.S., 1130, 1132
Petrakis, P.E., 641, 644, 645
Petropoulos, J.A., 244
Pettit, G.S., 737
Phillips, A., 1037
Phillips, D., 126, 127, 258, 298–300, 304,
491, 1061–1074, 1133, 1149, 1174,
1285
Phillips, L., 1233
Philpin, C.H.E., 506
Phirippis, E.K., 246, 247
Pieroni, J.L., 530
Pieterse, J.N., 658, 782
Pike, M., 1018
Piletti, C., 848
Piletti, N., 848
Pilger, J., 605, 610, 616
Pinar, W.F., 751
Pinheiro, P.S., 733, 737
Pinson, H., 364
Pitkanen, K., 954
Pitkanen, P., 405
Pittau, G., 915
Plato, 540
Plomp, T., 1163
Poerksen, U., 419
Poku, N., 278
Polesel, J., 208, 210
Pollack, M.A., 482

--- [PDF Page 1314 / Book Page 1343] ---

1344 Author Index
Pollard, S., 505, 508
Pollitt, C., 558
Poovey, M., 359, 361
Popkewitz, T.S., 80, 182, 225, 228, 230, 314,
360, 368, 385–399, 1283, 1285, 1287
Popper, K., 54, 67, 93, 128
Porter, B., 176
Poster, M., 974, 1051, 1052, 1055
Postlethwaite, T.N., 181, 1174
Poulantzas, N., 164
Powell, G.B., Jr., 277
Power, C.N., 1011
Power, M., 584
Prasad, E., 677
Pratt, N., 1150
Preston, J., 223
Preston, P.W., 781
Preti, O., 532
Pritchett, L., 640
Procter, R.E., 1098
Prout, A., 733
Provasnik, S., 505
Przeworski, A., 297, 1147
Psacharopoulos, G., 148, 152, 419, 427,
635–637, 643–645, 645, 650, 788, 1284
Pucci, B., 852
Puelles, M., 218
Puiggrós, A.Y., 79, 838–840
Punamaki, R., 734
Puri, G., 881
Pusey, M., 589
Pusser, B., 363
Putnam, R.D., 225, 450
Pynoos, R.S., 734
Q
Qayyam, A., 975
Qi, J., 387, 391
Qin-Hilliard, D., 430
Quist, H.O., 1071, 1154
R
Rabobank, 547
Rachid, A., 530
Radaelli, C., 490
Rado, P., 297
Raftery, D., 170, 174
Ragin, C.C., 1150, 1153, 1273
Rai, A., 752

Rai, S., 782
Raju, B.H., 783
Rakotomanana, M., 978
Ramachandran, V., 664, 669–682
Rambla, X., 221, 223
Ramirez, F.P., 102, 103, 105, 181, 225, 314,
422, 505, 1151, 1152
Ramos, L., 526
Rampal, A., 749–761
Ramphele, M., 740
Rancière, J., 389
Ranger, T., 1229
Rankin, K., 421
Rapley, J., 781
Rappleye, J., 1071
Rasis, 1098
Ratcliffe, M., 428
Rattner, H., 524
Ravitch, D., 342
Rawls, J., 787, 1018
Raynor, J., 796
Raz, J., 784
Reader, S., 785, 795
Readings, B., 582–584, 1095, 1100
Realmuto, G.M., 734
Reboul-Scherrer, F., 937
Redding, D., 1023
Reddy, M.C.R., 663
Reddy, V., 1174
Reed-Danahay, D., 362
Reese, W., 504, 512, 513
Reeves, C., 687, 698
Reid, I., 624
Reilly, J., 736, 740
Reimers, F., 426
Rein, M., 522, 523, 534
Reisigl, M., 1238, 1241, 1243
Renjini, D., 664
Resh, N., 108, 109
Resler, H., 625
Resnic, J., 633
Resnik, J., 420
Reynolds, D., 926
Reynolds, P., 736, 739
Rhoten, D., 109, 110, 430
Richardson, T., 570
Rich, P., 171
Richter, L.M., 734, 737
Richters, J.E., 735

--- [PDF Page 1315 / Book Page 1344] ---

Author Index 1345
Ricuperati, G., 202–204, 207
Riles, A., 361
Ringer, F.K., 507, 509, 806, 1280
Rist, G., 418, 419
Ritchie, D., 1015
Ritzer, G., 604
Rizvi, F., 437–452, 1177
Roberston, S., 1284, 1285
Roberts, D.D., 1051
Roberts, J.A.G., 375
Roberts, J.M., 28
Robertson, S.L., 110, 1113–1125, 1176
Roberts, P., 378
Robeyns, I., 795
Robinsohn, S.B., 95
Robinson, R., 279
Robson, C., 127
Rocha, J., 718
Rodgers, D.T., 392
Rodney, W., 101
Rodríguez, J.L., 224
Rodwell, G., 591
Rogers, J., 955
Rogoff, B., 761, 1183
Romero, L.A., 522, 523
Romer, P., 445, 644
Rosa, J.M., 522, 523
Rosanvallon, P., 573
Rose, N., 192, 448
Rose, N.S., 360, 361
Rosenblatt, L.M., 1106, 1107
Rosen, D.M., 739
Rosen, L., 1152
Ross, H., 983
Rostow, W.W., 258, 289, 781
Roussakis, Y., 252, 254, 479–493
Roy, A., 657
Roy, K., 874
Rozada, J.M., 221
Rubenstein, W.D., 507
Rubinson, R., 181
Ruccio, D., 80
Ruddock, G., 934
Ruggie, J.G., 1115, 1116
Rumberger, R.W., 363
Rury, J., 504
Rusconi, G.E., 206
Russell, B., 824

Rust, V.D., 121–135, 970, 1045, 1047, 1190,
1274
Rutkowski, D., 443
Ryan, D., 644
Ryan, P., 548
S
Sabloff, P.L.W., 1283
Sachs, A., 772
Sachs, J., 1183
Sadler, M., 9, 38–47, 51, 54–56, 59, 60, 67,
88, 89, 94, 141–143, 341, 356, 925,
1047, 1061, 1063, 1174, 1175, 1226,
1228
Sáenze-Obegón, J., 387, 390
Sagasti, F., 421
Saha, L.J., 289, 418, 783
Sahlberg, P., 954, 957
Sahlins, M., 228
Said, E.W., 175, 176, 182, 656, 658,
792, 926
Sainath, P., 676
Salem, T., 845–851
Saltzman, W., 735
Samoff, J., 73, 75, 79, 81, 154, 166, 291, 417,
418, 686, 698, 783, 1273
Samson, M., 689
Samuel, R., 176
Sanders, C, 579
Sandiford, P., 38, 88, 122
Sani, R., 204
San Segundo, M.J., 221
Santerini, M., 201
Santos, M., 366
Santos-Rego, M.A., 411
Saqib, G., 892
Saqib, J., 890
Sarkin, J., 408, 410
Sartre, J.P., 77
Sassen, S., 262, 270, 1020
Saussure, L., 188
Saviani, D., 522
Sayer, J., 364
Sayre, G.M., 360
Scafidi, B., 364
Schafft, K.A., 363
Schama, S., 508
Scheele, J.P., 558, 560
Scheeringa, M.S., 735

--- [PDF Page 1316 / Book Page 1345] ---

1346 Author Index
Schein, S., 1098
Scheler, M., 609
Schied, F.M., 660
Schirato, A., 441
Schissler, H., 362, 1237
Schlechty, P., 948
Schmuck, R., 61
Schneider, F., 122, 126, 1047, 1226
Scholte, J.A., 449, 1082
Schön, D., 930, 975
Schoppa, L.J., 264, 265
Schraeder, P., 421
Schrag, C.O., 973
Schriewer, J., 3, 9, 90, 93, 94, 181, 182, 298,
299, 314, 315, 686, 1071, 1145, 1149,
1155, 1183, 1190, 1285
Schugurensky, D., 81
Schultz, T.W., 260, 289, 419, 633, 788, 789
Schultz, W., 68, 147
Schultze,W., 90
Schuster, K., 1035
Schwartz-Hahn, S., 556
Schwartz, K., 42, 46, 47, 59, 66, 67, 131,
132, 144, 146, 147, 968
Schwartzman, S., 843, 844, 846, 848
Schweder, R.A., 742
Schweisfurth, M., 1064, 1065, 1174, 1285
Schwille, J., 1154
Scoppola, P., 206
Scott, J.W., 1195
Scott, M.F., 640
Seager, J., 705
Secombe, M.J., 405
Seddon, T., 1283, 1285
Seedat, S., 734, 735
Seidmann, G., 693
Seidman, S., 1191
Seijuq, A., 405, 406
Sellers, C., 512
Selner, D., 1177
Selwyn, N., 1166
Sema T., 346, 347
Semeraro, A., 199, 201, 207
Sen, A., 663, 665, 671, 787, 793–796, 1020
Senese, G., 1095
Sen, G., 427
Senge, P.M., 808
Sennett, R., 946, 947
Serrão, J.V., 844

Sethi, H., 675
Sevilla, D., 221
Sewell, T., 705
Shaffer, H., 634
Shaoqing, L., 365
Sharma-Brymer, V., 655–665
Sharma, V., 658, 661
Sharpe, J., 659
Sharpe, K., 934
Shaw, P., 951
Shaw, T., 174
Sheehan, 589
Sheffield, J., 425
Sherington, G., 588, 594
Shibata, M., 388, 1209–1222, 1287
Shi, C., 111
Shirley, D., 956
Shore, C., 570
Shor, I., 134, 997
Shorris, E., 1104, 1105
Shouli, Z., 365
Shukla, S., 130
Siebert, S.W., 485
Silberschmidt, M., 706
Silova, I., 295–317
Silvera, A., 891, 892
Silver, B., 1028
Silver, H., 234, 506
Simola, H., 233, 1174
Simon, B., 42, 506, 507, 923, 994
Simon, J., 175, 694
Simpson, M.A., 735
Sim, S., 376
Sinclair, J.McH., 933
Singh, J.P., 663
Singh, M., 997
Singh, P., 1166
Singh/Waghai, A., 883
Sinha, R.P., 409
Sirowy, L., 633
Sislian, J., 1175
Sklair, L., 603
Skocpol, T., 163, 165, 166,
1271, 1280
Skoufias, E., 1042
Slaughter, S., 601, 1083
Sleeter, C.E., 404, 406–408, 411
Slemon, S., 182
Sloan, K., 378

--- [PDF Page 1317 / Book Page 1346] ---

Author Index 1347
Smale, W., 566
Smart, N., 1132
Smelser, D.H., 80
Smelser, N.J., 129
Smith, A.D., 634, 709, 825, 1227, 1229,
1232, 1233
Smith, D.H., 165, 782
Smith, G., 1113
Smith, L.T., 175, 658, 992
Smith, R., 737, 860, 861
Smolicz, J.J., 405
Snow, C.P., 1097
Sobe, N.W., 359–368
Sobreira, M.I.F., 845
Soja, E.W., 359
Solari, A.E., 1286
Soldani, S., 200, 202
Solow, R., 640
Soltis, J.F., 1132
Somers, M., 1271
Sommers, M., 1193
Soon-Yong, P., 376
Sooryamoorthy, R., 664
Sorensen, G., 261
Sorkin, D., 1094
Soros, G., 449, 1090
Southwell, M., 345
Southworth, G., 950
Soysal, Y.N., 362, 395, 1237
Spadolini, G., 205
Sparkes, A.C., 366
Sparks, D.L., 685
Sparr, P., 421
Spencer, H., 804
Sperling, G.B., 790
Spiegel, A.D., 733
Spillane, M.G., 98
Spindler, G.D., 1180
Spindler, L., 1180
Spivak, G.C., 657, 659, 767, 792, 793
Spreen, C.A., 696, 1069
Sprigade, A., 1066, 1071
Spring, J., 281, 483, 492, 809, 833, 1085,
1086, 1088, 1101
Squadrito, K., 770
Stacki, S., 109
Stake, R., 128
Stamatakis, D., 641, 644, 645
Stamatis, C.M., 808, 1084

Stambach, A., 686, 698, 1152
Stanko, E., 739
Stanton, C., 890
Starida, A., 540
Starkey, H., 770, 775
Staropoli, A., 556
Starrett, G., 892, 893
Starr, J.B., 378
Stasiulis, D., 782
St Clair, R.S., 1178, 1283
Steele, H., 737
Steele, M., 737
Stefanidis, I.D., 249, 250
Stefanos, A., 998
Stehr, N., 480, 608
Stein, D.J., 734, 735
Steiner-Khamsi, G., 7, 8, 126, 182, 298, 299,
314–316, 344, 367, 686, 698, 1071,
1143–1156, 1285
Stenhouse, L., 1176, 1258
Stephens, W.B., 506
Stevenson, H.W., 926
Stewart, F., 784, 785
Stigler, J.W., 742, 926
Stiglitz, J., 549, 610
Sting, S., 1283
Stirrat, R., 417
Stokoe, E., 1231, 1233, 1234, 1239
Stoler, A.L., 182
Stolpe, I., 1071, 1148, 1150, 1151
Stone, D., 480
Stowe, C., 11, 23–25, 31–33, 37, 124, 125,
140, 141, 1069
Straker, G., 735–737
Strand, S., 363
Strathern, M., 584
Strauss, B.G., 128
Stray, C., 544
Streeten, P., 784
Stromquist, N.P., 381, 430, 660, 661, 791,
1027–1042, 1083, 1090–1092, 1183
Stronach, I., 1202
Strong, T.B., 174
Stuart, J., 1177
Studwell, J., 378
Sturman, A., 405
Suarez, A., 530
Suárez-Orozco, M.M., 364, 430
Subotzky, G., 262

--- [PDF Page 1318 / Book Page 1347] ---

1348 Author Index
Subrahmanian, R., 1027, 1032, 1038
Suda, C., 739, 741
Suen, H.K., 859
Suleiman, R., 734
Sullivan, J., 920
Suny, R.G., 1229, 1232
Sutton, M., 111, 112, 686
Suzuki, M., 1220
Svoronos, N.G., 242, 243
Swartz, L., 735
Sweeting, A., 1046, 1047, 1049, 1235, 1274
Sznaider, N., 1114
Szyliowicz, J., 895, 896, 900
T
Taber, P.K., 664
Tabulawa, R., 430, 686, 687, 690
Tagore, R., 665
Tahir, G., 367
Tai, H.-C., 863, 870
Takayama, K., 1000
Talamo, G., 199, 200
Talbani, A., 660, 663
Talbot, C., 364
Talbott, J.E., 806, 1095
Tanaka, M., 341, 1071, 1287
Taneja, N., 884
Tan, J., 426
Taquieff, P.-A., 1083, 1091
Target, M., 737
Tassopoulos, I., 248–250
Tate IV, W.F., 996
Taylor, C., 438, 444, 770, 771
Taylor, M., 380
Taylor, N., 689, 696
Taylor, S., 742
Teal, F., 640, 642
Tedesco, J.C., 530, 531, 838, 839, 841
Teitelbaum, K., 992, 994
Teixeira, A., 847, 848, 851
Teixeira Soares, A., 844
Templeton, R.G., 123, 129
Tenorth, H.-E, 1071
Terrill, R., 378
Terzian, S., 513
Terzi, L., 794, 795
Tessarin, M., 539
Teune, H., 1147
Thabet, A., 734

Tharu, S., 663
Thelin, J., 514
Therborn, G., 165
Theret, B., 1125
Therianos, C.N., 246, 247
Therkildsen, O., 428
Thiruchandran, S., 662
Thomas, G.M., 105
Thomas, N., 182
Thomas, R.M., 129, 162, 1150, 1176, 1177,
1238
Thompson, A., 176
Thompson, E., 720
Thompson, G., 261
Thompson, M., 863
Thomson, P., 450
Thornton, J., 279
Thornton, M., 705
Thorpe, M., 710
Thrift, N., 1123, 1124
Tibawi, A., 890, 893
Tibi, B., 894
Tiburcio, L., 426
Tiffin, H., 182, 658
Tikly, L., 656, 657, 698, 1045, 1133, 1177,
1180, 1225, 1228, 1229, 1244
Tilak, J., 421
Tilly, C., 1147, 1150, 1153, 1154
Tjeldvoll, A., 310
Tobin, H., 1121
Tolan, P.H., 737
Tolley, K., 513
Toloudi, F.I., 377
Tomaševski, K., 309, 310, 1015
Tombazos, S., 1082
Tomiak, J.J., 1134
Tomlinson, H., 408, 410, 412
Tomlinson, S., 627
Tomusk, V., 564
Tooley, J., 1178
Torcal, M., 225
Torney-Purta, J., 1154
Torres, C.A., 3, 73–85, 107, 155, 167, 364,
381, 410, 426, 430, 625, 982, 994, 997,
1046, 1092, 1181, 1285
Torres, J.A., 220, 221
Torres, J.S., 1000
Torres, M., 217–235
Toulmin, S., 66, 148

--- [PDF Page 1319 / Book Page 1348] ---

Author Index 1349
Touraine, A., 770
Tozer, St., 1095
Trahar, S., 1182
Trainor, J.C., 1219
Tredoux, C., 734, 735
Treib, O., 571
Tretheway, A.R., 49, 140
Trow, M., 553, 561
Tsagloglou, P., 643, 645
Tsinisizelis, M., 479
Tsoucalas, C., 248
Tsuchimochi, G., 129, 130
Tsuneyoshi, R., 1148
Tudin, P., 736
Tulasiewicz, W., 89, 98, 1229
Turi, G., 200, 202
Turner, D.A., 980
Turner, J.K., 363
Turner, R.H., 542, 1279, 1280
Turney, C., 591
Tu, W.-M., 857, 859, 862, 863, 1137
Tyack, D., 512, 1121
U
Uchendu, V., 783
Ugolini, R., 197
Ul Haq, M., 793, 794
Ulich, R., 38, 39, 41, 43, 49, 51, 52, 56, 59,
123, 143, 144, 146, 1047–1049, 1267
Umakoshi, T., 1221
Umar, A., 367
Unterhalter, E., 653, 654, 660, 689, 711, 716,
730, 781–796
Urry, J., 261
Usher, R., 112, 262, 412, 755, 972, 1284
Uyan-Semerci, P., 796
V
Vally, S., 689, 791
Valverde, M., 224
Van Buitenen, J.A.B., 874
Vance, C., 710
Vandaele, H., 87, 88, 90
van der Merwe, A., 737
Vanderstraeten, R., 1122
van der Wende, M., 570
Van Dijck, J., 1096
van Harmelen, U., 689
van Nood, E., 734, 735

Van Reenen, J., 629
Van Rensburg, P., 693
van Vught, F., 554, 557
Van Vught, J., 994
Varela, J., 220
Vari, A., 362
Vartiainen, J., 260
Vaughan, M., 1273, 1280
Vavrus, F., 429, 686, 697, 698
Veneruso, D., 196
Venezky, R.L., 1171
Ventura, S., 207, 208
Verdery, K., 298, 316
Verdisco, A., 471
Veremis, T.M., 244–247, 249
Vergopoulos, C., 1082
Verspoor, A., 427
Vestal, T.M., 20, 21
Veyne, P., 1054
Viciani, G.W., 530
Vickers, E., 1235, 1237
Victor, B., 376
Vijayalakshmi, V., 664
Vinjevold, P., 696
Vinovskis, M., 512
Violas, Paul C., 1095
Vitsaxis, V., 1080
Vizard, P., 795
Vogel, E., 863
Vogel, S., 1121
Vogt, G., 825
Voigt, F.A., 1286
von Hagen, M., 296, 305
Vostanis, P., 734
Vulliamy, G., 128, 1175, 1178, 1183
Vygotsky, L., 688
Vythilingum, B., 734, 735
W
Wade, R., 257, 259
Wagner, P., 1285
Waisman, C., 297
Walford, G., 921
Walker, M., 794
Wallace, H., 569
Wallenstein, I., 604
Wallerstein, E., 104, 114, 633
Wallerstein, I.M., 258
Walliser, J., 420, 429

--- [PDF Page 1320 / Book Page 1349] ---

1350 Author Index
Walsh, S., 709
Walsh, T., 362
Wang, C., 1209–1222
Wang, Y., 1210, 1212
Wan, M.G., 269
Wannan, J., 539
Waquet, F., 1286
Warde, A., 625
Warde, M., 387, 391
Wardle, D., 506
Warnick, B.R., 1130
Waters, M., 1082
Wa Thiong’o, N., 284
Watkins, D., 869, 1251
Watkins, W.H., 993
Watson, K., 89, 657, 698, 980, 1046, 1047,
1173, 1176, 1179, 1225, 1228, 1235,
1244, 1250
Watson, P., 298
Wazir, R., 660, 663
Webb, J., 441
Weber, E., 509
Weber, M., 337, 388, 500, 505, 562, 604,
863, 1271
Wedekind, V., 686, 688, 694, 695
Weedon, C., 805, 1095
Weiler, H., 426
Weiler, H.N., 219
Weiler, K., 984, 994, 998
Weiming, T., 1136, 1137
Weinberg, M., 722
Weiner, G., 705
Weisbuch, R., 124
Weiskel, T., 187, 189
Weis, L.M., 992, 996
Weiss, L., 270, 588, 598
Welch, A., 155, 587-598, 803, 982, 986,
1046, 1154, 1190, 1274
Welch, A.R., 115, 1177, 1284
Welmond, M., 430
Werner, E., 737
Wertsch, J., 1183
Wesseling, H., 181
West, C., 1036
West, E., 507
Westergaard, J., 625
Westerheijden, D., 556
Westerheijden, D.F., 558, 560, 565
Weston, B.H., 770, 771

Wetherell, M., 742
Wewes, S., 735
Weymans, W., 569–584
White, C., 172
White, G., 257, 259
White, H., 979
Whitehead, C., 171, 172
White, J., 1130–1132, 1137
Whiteman, N., 1167
White, P., 1131, 1132
White, S., 706
Whiteside, A., 278
Whitty, G., 230, 995, 1000
Wiener, M., 67
Wiggins, D., 785
Wilkinson, R., 170, 857, 860, 861, 1280
Williams, C., 1035, 1134
Williams, G., 685
Williams, H., 512
Williams, K., 547
Willis, P., 996
Wilson, B., 541, 543
Wilson, D., 89, 1015, 1215, 1289
Wilson, D.N., 1173
Wilson, F., 707
Wilson, J., 1132
Wilson, K., 176
Wilson, M., 975
Winterer, C., 246, 804, 1094, 1097
Winther-Jensen, T., 98, 823–834
Wirsing, R.G., 879
Wodak, R., 1229, 1231, 1233, 1238,
1241–1244
Wolf, A., 540, 546, 547, 626, 628, 633–635,
640, 642, 644
Wolf, C., 1283
Wolf, E.R., 181
Wolpe, H., 769, 791
Wong, T., 504
Wong, Y.H., 864
Woock, R., 541, 543
Woo-Cumings, M., 270, 857, 869
Woodhall, M., 635, 637, 789
Woodhead, M., 733
Wood, K., 739, 740
Woods, A., 656, 1177
Woodson, C.G., 994
Woodward, K., 1229, 1230
Wooldridge, A., 376

--- [PDF Page 1321 / Book Page 1350] ---

Author Index 1351

X
Xochellis, P.D., 377

Young, C., 281
Young, M., 629
Young, M.F.D., 803, 805, 995, 996
Youniss, J., 920
Yuankai, T., 365
Yu, L., 859
Yuval Davis, N., 782

Y
Yamashita, H., 1134
Yan, F., 365
Yang, Q.,
Yang, R., 596, 597
Yariv-Mashal, T.,492, 1125
Yates, S., 742
Yavuz, H., 897, 898
Yeatman, A., 587
Yeaxlee, B., 601
Yeomans, R., 950
Yilmaz, I., 896
Yonezawa, A., 866
Yoshikawa, S., 266
Youdell, D., 588, 996
Youdi, M., 637, 638

Z
Zachariah, M., 663
Zajda, J., 309
Zambeta, E., 254, 373, 376, 381, 1285
Zeanah, C.H., 735
Zelliot, E., 885
Zeng, K., 857–859, 861, 867
Zhang, 1213
Zhou, M., 111
Zhou, N., 860
Zhu, B., 1211, 1214
Zigler, H., 794
Zimmerman, D., 1036
Zizek, S., 769
Zolberg, A., 289
Zoller, M., 172
Zurn, M., 1115

Worsley, P., 258
Wright, E.O., 165
Wu, W., 1210–1213, 1215
Wu, Y.S., 259

