528084
research-article2014
                       JRI0010.1177/1475240914528084Journal of Research in International Education X(X)Hughes




                                    Article                                                                                            JRIE
                                                                                                                                      Journal of Research in
                                                                                                                                     International Education
                                    Theory of Knowledge aims,                                                                        2014, Vol. 13(1) 30­–45
                                                                                                                                      © The Author(s) 2014
                                    objectives and assessment criteria:                                                           Reprints and permissions:
                                                                                                                      sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
                                    An analysis of critical thinking                                                      DOI: 10.1177/1475240914528084
                                                                                                                                             jri.sagepub.com
                                    descriptors


                                    Conrad Hughes
                                    International School of Geneva, Switzerland




                                    Abstract
                                    This article analyses the construct validity of the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme’s Theory of
                                    Knowledge course in the light of claims that it is a course in critical thinking. After discussion around critical
                                    thinking – what it is and why it is valuable educationally – the article analyses the extent to which the course
                                    aims, assessment objectives and assessment instruments emphasise critical thinking. The article concludes
                                    with suggestions for improvement in the writing of the Theory of Knowledge guide so that it might place
                                    more emphasis on certain strands of critical thinking that are currently not developed in its structure.


                                    Keywords
                                    Assessment, critical thinking, Theory of Knowledge, validity



                                    Introduction
                                    The International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (IBDP), a 2-year course for students aged
                                    between 16 and 19 years, includes a core compulsory subject called Theory of Knowledge (ToK),
                                    a course ‘in critical thinking’ (International Baccalaureate [IB], 2013b: 11). While the aims,
                                    assessment objectives and assessment criteria cover some elements of critical thinking, I argue
                                    that they neglect important facets of it and tend to focus on areas of learning that are not strictly
                                    speaking critical thinking. Hence, the ToK course’s assessment structure lacks validity in the
                                    sense that it does not entirely measure ‘what it purports to measure’ (Reber, 1985: 808). In order
                                    to substantiate this argument, I will first provide an overview of established critical thinking tax-
                                    onomies in order to define critical thinking and associate it with keywords and command terms. I
                                    will then briefly describe my research method before extracting from the ToK course aims, objec-
                                    tives and assessment criteria the terminology that resonates with established critical thinking
                                    vocabulary. The findings will allow for some analysis of the degree to which the course can be


                                    Corresponding author:
                                    Conrad Hughes, International School of Geneva, 62 Route de Chêne, 1208 Geneva, Switzerland.
                                    Email: conrad.hughes@ecolint.ch
Hughes                                                                                               31

said to be one on critical thinking and reflection on directions that the course could take to be
more valid.
    My epistemological perspective is epistemic constructivist, meaning that I take knowledge to be
a human construct that is built up with concepts (see Grandy, 1998). Hence, the ToK course will be
viewed as a series of interrelated concepts that should be coherent with the concepts found in the
literature and taxonomies of critical thinking. The method used will be qualitative since the inves-
tigation is into the curricular usage of terminology and descriptors. The purpose of this study is to
examine the validity of the ToK course critically and then, according to findings, suggest ways in
which the ToK course could foster more and better critical thinking, perhaps in the next ToK guide
review. The area of study is clearly limited, and the article does not suggest that the quantity or
quality of critical thinking in ToK can be ascertained through an analysis of the guide alone.
However, a critical investigation of crucial elements of the course description (aims, objectives and
assessment criteria) certainly allows for reflection and commentary.

Critical thinking
One of the core purposes of all is to foster critical thinking. For the past 2500 years, critical think-
ing has been upheld as one of the most important thinking skills in education. Abrami et al. (2009)
claim that ‘learning to think critically is among the most desirable goals of formal schooling’ (p.
1102), and Scheffler (1973) points out that critical thinking is key to the study and understanding
of science (p. 79), while Siegel (1985) argues that the necessary autonomy to take informed deci-
sions is nurtured through critical thinking, as ‘critical thinking thus liberates as it renders stu-
dents self-sufficient’ (p. 72). At the most general level, Lipman (2003) explains how critical
thinking is a central skill in any form of applied knowledge as it entails good judgement and
reflexivity (p. 210). Furthermore, it generates behaviours that are self-corrective, allowing for
improvement in the learner. Strong adherence to critical thinking is a tradition that goes back to the
Platonic and Aristotelian traditions; it has influenced the work of major philosophers and educa-
tional thinkers, including St Thomas Aquinas, Descartes, Locke, Hume, Berkley, Kant, Russell,
Dewey, Piaget and Kohlberg.
   The 21st century, with its deluge of media-driven information, so-called big data and social
networking, clearly requires discerning judgement of sources and the ability to detect implicit bias
on the part of the reader or consumer of information (see Halpern, 1997). Iowa’s Department of
Education describes critical thinking as a ‘universal construct essential for the 21st Century’ (Iowa
Department of Education, 2013), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD, 2003) states that in today’s complex world it is essential for students to ‘think and act with
a critical stance’ (p. 5), and in 2006 the Conference Board of Canada listed critical thinking as the
skill employers expected to become the most important over time (Jerald, 2009: 48). Critical think-
ing skills involving the future (prediction, following through implications, likelihood and uncer-
tainty evaluation) are increasingly central in an environment of rapid change and socioeconomic,
demographic and environmental challenges that are riddled with complexity, volatility, uncertainty
and ambiguity.
   While the value of critical thinking as a broad notion in education is clear, defining critical
thinking more precisely is a complex matter that cannot be easily extracted from interrelated
concepts such as creative thinking, enquiry, reasoning, cognitive processes and self-engagement
(Higgins et al., 2003). Indeed, ‘critical thinking’ is often used, unhelpfully, as an umbrella term.
However, research done by Facione (1990), Paul (1990, 1992, 2011), Ennis (1996), Halpern
(1997, 1999, 2002), Anderson and Krathwohl (2001), Lipman (2003) and Moseley et al. (2004,
2005) allows us to work with a limited number of definitions and taxonomies that refer to recur-
ring skills and strategies. For the purposes of this article, I will include reason in my definition
32                                                        Journal of Research in International Education 13(1)

of critical thinking. Pure reason is syllogistic and lies at the heart of logical and mathematical
investigation, whereas the broader application of reason, its conjugation, is critical thinking.
Critical thinking and reason – or rational thought – are inextricably linked, as Siegel (1985)
makes clear:

     Critical thinking is best seen as coextensive with rationality, and rationality is concerned with reasons. For
     a person to be rational, that person must (at least) grasp the relevance of various reasons for judgments and
     evaluate the weight of such reasons properly. (p. 72)

    He points out that ‘education aimed at […] critical thinking is […] aimed at the fostering of
rationality and the development of rational persons’ (Siegel, 1988: 32).
    Ennis and Weir’s (1985) definition is that ‘critical thinking is reasonable and reflective thinking
that is focused on deciding what to believe or do’ (p. 45). Ennis detailed work on the subject that
contains dispositions, categories and sub-categories is largely consistent with that of Paul, cited
more extensively in this article as it is my belief that his listings subsume those of Ennis. A useful
summary of Ennis’ taxonomical work on critical thinking, along with that of Paul and Halpern, can
be found in the work of Moseley et al. (2004: 26–37).
    Abrami et al. (2009), meanwhile, turn to the Delphi Committee’s (Facione, 1990) definition of
those skills central to critical thinking:

     The Delphi Committee identified six skills (interpretation, analysis, evaluation, inference, explanation,
     and self-regulation), 16 subskills, and 19 dispositions (including inquisitiveness, open-mindedness,
     understanding others, and so on) that they associated with critical thinking. These skills and dispositions
     provide a complex normative framework for understanding and assessing the qualities of human cognition.
     (p. 1103)

     Halpern (1997) categorises critical thinking skills into the following:

     – memory skills;
     – thought and language skills;
     – deductive reasoning skills;
     – argument analysis skills;
     – skills in thinking as hypothesis testing;
     – likelihood and uncertainty critical thinking skills;
     – decision-making skills;
     – problem-solving skills;
     – skills for creative thinking.

(adapted by Higgins et al., 2003)
   Paul’s work on critical thinking is extremely comprehensive and ranges from the late 1960s to
the present. Elder (2010) lists Paul’s synthesis of relevant skills as ‘gathering relevant information,
making logical inferences, generating justifiable assumptions, following out implications logically
and checking information for accuracy’ (p. 5). Paul (1990) goes into great detail by detailing three
dimensions of critical thinking:

     Affective Dimensions:

     thinking independently, developing insight into egocentricity or sociocentricity, exercising fair-
     mindedness, exploring thoughts underlying feelings and feelings underlying thought, developing
     intellectual humility and suspending judgment, developing intellectual courage, developing intellectual
     good faith or integrity, developing intellectual perseverance, developing confidence in reason.
Hughes                                                                                                             33

   Cognitive Dimensions – Macro-Abilities:

   Refining generalizations and avoiding oversimplifications, comparing analogous situations: transferring
   insights to new contexts, developing one’s perspective: creating or exploring beliefs, arguments, or
   theories, clarifying issues, conclusions, or beliefs, clarifying and analysing the meanings of words or
   phrases, developing criteria for evaluation: clarifying values and standards, evaluating the credibility of
   sources of information, questioning deeply: raising and pursuing root or significant questions, analysing
   or evaluating arguments, interpretations, beliefs, or theories, generating or assessing solutions, analysing
   or evaluating actions or policies, reading critically: clarifying or critiquing texts, listening critically: the art
   of silent dialogue, making interdisciplinary connections, practicing Socratic discussion: clarifying and
   questioning beliefs, theories, or perspectives, reasoning dialogically: comparing perspectives,
   interpretations, or theories, reasoning dialectically: evaluating perspectives, interpretations, or theories.

   Cognitive Dimensions – Micro-Skills:

   Comparing and contrasting ideals with actual practice, thinking precisely about thinking: using critical
   vocabulary, noting significant similarities and differences, examining or evaluating assumptions,
   distinguishing relevant from irrelevant facts, making plausible inferences, predictions, or interpretations,
   giving reasons and evaluating evidence and alleged facts, recognizing contradictions, exploring
   implications and consequences. (p. 56)

Paul (2011) has gone further, to polarise critical thinking approaches into ‘global or specialized,
sophistic or Socratic, explicit or implicit, systematic or episodic, emancipated or constrained, and
based in natural or technical languages’ (pp. 5–24).
   Black (2008), meanwhile, working for Cambridge Assessment, reports on the following defini-
tion, developed by a panel of examiners and item writers working for that organisation:

   Critical Thinking is the analytical thinking which underlies all rational discourse and enquiry. It is
   characterised by a meticulous and rigorous approach. As an academic discipline, it is unique in that it
   explicitly focuses on the processes involved in being rational. These processes include:
   – analysing arguments;
   – judging the relevance and significance of information;
   – evaluating claims, inferences, arguments and explanations;
   – constructing clear and coherent arguments;
   – forming well-reasoned judgements and decisions. (p. 7)

   Usefully, Black et al.’s study suggests what critical thinking is not: reading comprehension,
problem solving, creativity and syllogism (Black, 2008: 11). These are described as ‘on the fringes
or outside the construct domain’, for a number of reasons. Higgins’ work, meanwhile, has been to
delineate different levels of process in the critical thinking design so as to differentiate between
perspectives, ‘dispositions’ – a term developed previously by Halpern (see Moseley et al., 2004: 8)
– and the type of knowledge dimension that is being worked (factual, conceptual, procedural or
metacognitive) (Higgins et al., 2003).
   All of the above-mentioned definitions are in some way related to Bloom’s (1956) taxonomy
and Bloom’s work revisited by Anderson and Krathwohl (2001), although the taxonomy is not one
in critical thinking specifically but rather in ‘higher order thinking skills’. Categories 4, 5 and 6 of
Table 1 clearly outline the type of thinking that one could describe as critical.
   One debate in critical thinking is to what extent it can be viewed as a transferable thinking
skill that is stable across disciplines or, on the contrary, as domain-specific with significant dif-
ferences between disciplines or domains where it is practised. Essentially, the former view is
34                                                       Journal of Research in International Education 13(1)

Table 1. Bloom’s taxonomy revisited by Anderson and Krathwohl (2001).

Category                Actions
1. Remembering          Arrange, describe, duplicate, find, label, list, memorise, name, order, recognise,
                        relate, recall, repeat, reproduce, state
2. Understanding        Classify, define, discuss, explain, express, identify, indicate, locate, paraphrase,
                        recognise, report, restate, review, select, translate
3. Applying             Apply, assemble, choose, demonstrate, dramatise, employ, illustrate, interpret,
                        manage, operate, practice, schedule, sketch, solve, use, write
4. Analysing            Analyse, appraise, calculate, categorise, compare, contrast, conclude, criticise,
                        deduce, differentiate, discriminate, distinguish, examine, experiment, question,
                        predict, test
5. Evaluating           Appraise, argue, assess, attach, choose, compare, defend, estimate, judge, predict,
                        rank, rate, core, select, support, value, evaluate
6. Creating             Compose, construct, create, design, develop, formulate, integrate, invent, organise,
                        plan, prepare, propose, re-arrange, set up, write



held by – among others – Halpern (1997), Bassok and Holyoak (1993) and Salomon and Perkins
(1998), while the latter is held by Schoenfeld and Herrmann (1982), Bereiter and Scardamalia
(1993), Ericsson and Smith (1991), Ericsson (1996) and even more strongly by Glaser (1984) and
Lave (1988). The extent to which critical thinking can be seen as generalisable and context-free
should not be oversimplified. In discussing the issue, Ritchhart and Perkins (2005) argue that

     the debate around transfer, expertise, and situated learning has been overly polarized and ideological,
     leading to sweeping declarations on both sides regarding what is possible or impossible that do not stand
     up to empirical examination. The relationship between general cognitive structures and particular situations
     perhaps needs to be understood as more complex and dynamic. (p. 791)

I will return to this debate in discussing the ToK assessment instruments. This article could con-
tinue to list definitions and taxonomies in critical thinking, synthesising research done by King and
Kitchener (1994), Pintrich (2000) and related studies such as the work of Goleman (1995),
Sternberg (1996) and Biggs and Collis (1982). Given the scope of the article, however, I will settle
with the above-mentioned definitions of Facione, Halpern, Paul, Black and Bloom (revisited by
Anderson Krathwohl) since these cover the essential views on critical thinking.
    Trying to build up a normative checklist to define critical thinking is inherently problematic as
it reduces the procedural, nuanced enterprise of critical thinking into a series of verbs that are not
necessarily in themselves proof of critical thinking since the disposition, perspective and general
context are not specified, and clearly, these factors are crucial in determining the quality of think-
ing (see Nisbett, 1993). Furthermore, while researchers agree on numerous types of thinking that
can be termed ‘critical’, there are diverging opinions about the degree to which some learning
behaviours are genuinely critical. For example, Halpern describes critical thinking as ‘the kind of
thinking involved in solving problems’ (Halpern, 1999: 2), whereas Black Labels problem-solving
as a fringe activity. In addition, Black does not view creativity as critical thinking, whereas Halpern
does.
    There are other problems, such as the range of definitions of critical thinking, that are some-
times so broad that it becomes difficult to work with the concept in a clear, concise manner. For
example, Halpern’s listing of ‘memory, thought and language’ covers just about everything con-
ceivable in human intellectual activity. Many of the descriptions are subjective. Black’s (2008)
Hughes                                                                                                  35

‘well-reasoned judgements and decisions’ (p. 7) do not go without saying, and will mean some-
thing very different depending on the epistemology and worldview being used to appreciate them.
   These are problems, contradictions and limitations that come with a qualitative, constructivist
approach to knowledge. Perceptions differ and the body of knowledge that defines critical thinking
is not a falsifiable, objectively premised construct but a series of iterations, beliefs, thoughts and
traditions that have grown organically and, to a certain extent, dialectically over time.

Research method
The above-mentioned complexity means that designing an appropriate research method to evaluate
critical thinking is particularly challenging. After all, which criteria can a course (in critical think-
ing) be held up to if there is disagreement among researchers as to what exactly constitutes critical
thinking in the first place? This complexity should not, however, prevent any attempt at analysis.
Arguments of relativity can be applied to numerous disciplines (e.g. literary and art criticism, his-
toriography, philosophy) and are a necessary part of the ontological makeup of the social sciences.
Nor should disagreements over definitions detract from the overwhelming consensus on critical
thinking: all the definitions and descriptions mentioned earlier share the fundamental principles of
discernment, analysis, judgement (or evaluation), interpretation and argumentation.
    What I aim to do is first to list the ToK course aims and assessment objectives, arguing when and
where they resonate with the different conceptions of critical thinking elaborated by Facione, Halpern,
Paul, Black and Bloom (revisited by Anderson and Krathwohl). This will establish the extent to
which the ToK guide is aligned with established published research on critical thinking. Second, I
shall investigate whether the course guide’s assessment structure has construct validity, in other
words – as stated earlier – whether it measures ‘what it purports to measure’ (Reber, 1985: 808). This
will be done by looking for alignment in command terms and vocabulary between task design and the
targeted model of cognition. These two approaches will at least offer scope and perspective that allow
suggestions for improvement in the written curriculum, so that future versions of ToK are more
clearly aligned with research on critical thinking and point to higher levels of validity.
    However, as touched upon earlier, establishing this will not necessarily determine the true extent
of critical thinking in a student’s experience of ToK. Some studies have shown that listing critical
thinking among course objectives has a reported lower effect size than advanced training of instruc-
tors or certain established ways of integrating critical thinking into student learning (Abrami et al.,
2009: 1121). To be clear, enhancing critical thinking in ToK as a whole would be context specific,
requiring a broad approach beyond curriculum design at the levels of instructional quality, teacher
professional development, appraisal and moderation of marking.

ToK
The origins of the course can be traced back to the 1960 ‘Oxford University Department of
Education report on Art and Science Sides in the Sixth Form’ (Peterson, 1987: 41), in which a
course about ‘learning to learn’ (p. 42) was developed by educators and had its first trial examina-
tions in 1969 (p. 67). Since then, ToK has developed into a core part of the IBDP and is described
as a course in ‘critical thinking’ by the IB (2013a). In the 2013 subject guide, ToK is described as

   a course about critical thinking and inquiring into the process of knowing, rather than about learning a
   specific body of knowledge. It is a core element which all Diploma Programme students undertake and to
   which all schools are required to devote at least 100 hours of class time. TOK and the Diploma Programme
   subjects should support each other in the sense that they reference each other and share some common
   goals. (IB, 2013b: 8)
36                                                        Journal of Research in International Education 13(1)

    The ToK course is assessed through two instruments: a presentation and an essay. The syllabus
is divided into four sections: ‘Knowledge in ToK’, ‘Knowledge claims and knowledge questions’,
‘Ways of Knowing’ and ‘Areas of Knowledge’. In these sections, a number of guiding principles
are established. First is the idea that ToK is about applied knowledge: it is ‘not intended to be a
course in philosophy’ and should not be devoted to a ‘technical philosophical investigation into the
nature of knowledge’. Rather, it is ‘designed to apply a set of conceptual tools to concrete situa-
tions encountered in the student’s Diploma Programme subjects and in the wider world outside
school’ (p. 16). The guide goes on to describe how knowledge can be seen as shared (e.g. in aca-
demic disciplines and schools of thought) and personal (e.g. empirical knowledge) (pp. 17–18).
The guide stresses the importance of striking a balance between these two facets of knowledge
when exploring and discussing it.
    The ToK syllabus asserts that there are two types of knowledge claims: those pertaining to the
world and those pertaining more specifically to knowledge, the second type of claim constituting
‘the core of any piece of TOK analysis’ (p. 20). Knowledge questions, more specifically, are
described as ‘open questions that in general rather than subject or context specific terms discuss
knowledge’ (pp. 20–21). Numerous examples are given, focussing on the idea that this type of
questioning reveals the constituents of knowledge (e.g. issues such as modelling, causation,
‘interpretation, anomaly, induction, certainty, uncertainty [and] belief’ [p. 21]). So both knowl-
edge claims and knowledge questions deal with the underlying general principles of knowledge.
However, the guide stipulates that knowledge questions in particular are essential for the assess-
ment process: ‘the whole point of the presentation and essay tasks is to deal with knowledge
questions’ (p. 20).
    Eight ways of knowing are listed (language, sense perception, emotion, reason, imagination,
faith, intuition and memory) and described as tools that can be used to answer the questions ‘how
do I know?’ or ‘how do we know?’ (p. 23), whereas areas of knowledge (mathematics, natural sci-
ences, human sciences, history, the arts, ethics, religious knowledge systems and indigenous
knowledge systems) are listed as the main areas of human thought where knowledge is constructed.
It is suggested that these be investigated through a ‘knowledge framework’, whereby chosen areas
of knowledge are looked at through ‘scope, motivation and applications, specific terminology and
concepts, methods used to produce knowledge, key historical developments and interaction with
personal knowledge’ (p. 28). The course syllabus implies elements of critical thinking but does not
necessarily describe a course in critical thinking in the same way that Paul, Halpern or Siegel
define such an enterprise: emphasis is placed on understanding the way that knowledge is con-
structed but not directly on thinking skills, problem solving, critiquing and evaluating. If anything,
the course is one in ‘epistemology’, a word that curiously does not feature at any point in the guide,
whereas the phrase ‘critical thinking’ features six times (pp. 3, 4, 8, 11–13), often to define the
course as a whole (pp. 4, 8, 11). Of course, the syllabus need not explicitly lay out critical thinking
tasks for students to experience critical thinking during the course, as in many ways the syllabus
implies substantial analysis, inference-drawing and construction of argument. Nonetheless, there is
some misalignment between the labelling of ToK as a course in critical thinking and a syllabus that
is essentially one in epistemology.
    The course guide attempts to clarify this point with a statement that is at best cryptic:

     TOK is a course in critical thinking but it is one that is specifically geared to an approach to knowledge
     that is mindful of the interconnectedness of the modern world. ‘Critical’ in this context implies an analytical
     approach prepared to test the support for knowledge claims, aware of its own weaknesses, conscious of its
     perspectives and open to alternative ways of answering knowledge questions. (p. 11)
Hughes                                                                                                    37

Course aims
While the syllabus description is, arguably, not specifically focussed on developing critical think-
ing skills, the five course aims relate to critical thinking more explicitly:

   1. make connections between a critical approach to the construction of knowledge, the academic
      disciplines and the wider world;
   2. develop an awareness of how individuals and communities construct knowledge and how this is
      critically examined;
   3. develop an interest in the diversity and richness of cultural perspectives and an awareness of personal
       and ideological assumptions;
   4. critically reflect on their own beliefs and assumptions, leading to more thoughtful, responsible and
      purposeful lives;
   5. understand that knowledge brings responsibility which leads to commitment and action. (p. 14)

   Not only do three of these five aims explicitly mention critical dispositions, it is clear that each
of the five aims also looks to cover an area of critical thinking. Aims 1 and 2 both essentially
describe a ‘critical approach to the constructions of knowledge’ and ‘how this is critically exam-
ined’, very much in the vein of Paul’s macro-abilities and micro-skills. Aims 3 and 4 are focussed
more on the appreciation of cultural and historical diversity – in line with the Delphi committee’s
dispositions of open-mindedness and understanding others, and metacognitive awareness – in
keeping with Paul’s affective dimensions.
   The five aims of the ToK guide, while all related to critical thinking, tend to emphasise a model
of cognition that is more focussed on the reception and analysis than on the production of knowl-
edge. Despite the implications of Aim 5, all of the aims use command terms that denote this (‘make
connections’, ‘develop an awareness’, ‘develop an interest’, ‘critically reflect’ and ‘understand’),
whereas none of them bring out the more active principles associated with creative thinking that
we find in the research of Halpern (‘hypothesis testing, likelihood and uncertainty, critical thinking
skills, decision-making skills, problem-solving skills’) or the more active elements of Bloom’s
taxonomy (revisited by Anderson and Krathwohl): ‘applying’, ‘analysing’, ‘evaluating’ and ‘creat-
ing’. Aim 5 moves towards a more active approach but only asks students to ‘understand’ respon-
sibility, action and commitment rather than to necessarily act on this knowledge. Overall, the five
aims cover a fairly narrow base. It is clear in surveying the literature, particularly the work of Paul,
that critical thinking is a comprehensive body of thought. It stands to reason, therefore, that a
course in critical thinking should cover a wide repertoire of thinking skills associated with it,
whereas the five aims of the ToK course cover a mere fraction of critical thinking skills.


Assessment objectives
The course assessment objectives cover elements of both critical thinking and epistemology:

   1. identify and analyse the various kinds of justifications used to support knowledge claims;
   2. formulate, evaluate and attempt to answer knowledge questions;
   3. examine how academic disciplines/areas of knowledge generate and shape knowledge;
   4. understand the roles played by ways of knowing in the construction of shared and personal knowledge;
38                                                      Journal of Research in International Education 13(1)

     5. explore links between knowledge claims, knowledge questions, ways of knowing and areas of
        knowledge;
     6. demonstrate an awareness and understanding of different perspectives and be able to relate these to
        one’s own perspective;
     7. explore a real-life/contemporary situation from a TOK perspective in the presentation. (p. 15)

   Aims 1, 2 and 6 use command terms specifically embedded in critical thinking terminology
(‘analyse’, ‘evaluate’, ‘understanding of different perspectives’) and clearly elaborate key critical
thinking dispositions, whereas Aims 3, 4, 5 and 7 use less critical verbs (‘examine’, ‘understand the
roles played by ways of knowing’, ‘explore’) and appear to be more concerned with investigation
than critical analysis. On the whole, the assessment objectives, like the course aims, cover a narrow
base of thinking skills and are missing not only the active parts of critical thinking that imply
action, innovation, guess work and decision-making but also a whole host of critical thinking com-
mand terms. These include, for example, many of Paul’s macro-abilities, such as ‘refining gener-
alizations and avoiding oversimplifications, developing criteria for evaluation: clarifying values
and standards, evaluating the credibility of sources of information, […] generating or assessing
solutions, analysing or evaluating actions or policies, reading critically: clarifying or critiquing
texts, listening critically: the art of silent dialogue’) (Paul, 1990: 56) and most of Halpern’s critical
thinking categories (‘Memory skills, Skills in thinking as hypothesis testing, Likelihood and uncer-
tainty critical thinking skills, Decision-making skills, Problem-solving skills, Skills for creative
thinking’) (adapted by Higgins et al., 2003).

Assessment instruments
While the aims and objectives suggest some valid operationalisation of critical thinking, and the
alignment between the course aims and assessment objectives is fairly clear, to discuss the con-
struct validity of the course one needs to turn to the precise assessment criteria, as it is on the basis
of these that students’ work will be judged. One would expect a strong degree of alignment between
the task assessment criteria, the assessment objectives and course aims, and of course at another
level, that the assessment of ToK would measure critical thinking as a construct since ToK is
described as ‘a course in critical thinking’ (IB, 2013b: 11). There are two assessed tasks, an essay
and a presentation. The essay titles

     ask generic questions about knowledge and are cross-disciplinary in nature. They may be answered with
     reference to any part or parts of the TOK course, to specific disciplines, or with reference to opinions
     gained about knowledge both inside and outside the classroom. (p. 52)

whereas ‘the presentation requires students to identify and explore a knowledge question raised by
a substantive real-life situation that is of interest to them’ (p. 55). From the outset, it is clear that
the thrust of the course assessment is on answering a cross-disciplinary essay question and design-
ing and delivering a presentation that is authentic in nature. One could argue that these endeavours
only explore extremely limited facets of critical thinking, a point to which I will return in my
conclusion.
   The ToK essay reposes mainly on the school of thought that critical thinking merits cross-
disciplinary rather than interdisciplinary focus. I have already raised the debate on critical thinking
being either domain-specific or transferable to suggest that no one response is entirely sufficient:
while the encoding of information into schemata will happen within the confines of a specific
domain, there are clearly transferable traits between and across disciplines that allow for general
Hughes                                                                                                39

courses in critical thinking. The premise of the ToK essay task is an extraction from the course’s
design whereby areas of knowledge are described as ‘specific branches of knowledge, each of which
can be seen to have a distinct nature and different methods of gaining knowledge’, and as such,
students are expected to ‘compare and contrast’ them (p. 8). This epistemological insistence on
knowledge construction being subject-specific is only partly true: ‘the contents include both general
and specific knowledge’ (Pellegrino et al., 2001: 3). While a large part of critical thinking will inevi-
tably be tied to specific domains, centring a course too stringently on this may not be entirely helpful
as one of the goals of a course in critical thinking is surely to ‘help learners to decontextualize pat-
terns of thinking’ (Ritchhart and Perkins, 2005: 792). Furthermore, too much insistence on domain-
specific epistemological constructs can lead to trivial, exclusivist beliefs about knowledge
(mathematics is about reasoning, art is about expression, science is about falsificationism, for
instance) that prevent the creative space and expanse needed for transfer and broader conceptual
appreciation of knowledge across domains (e.g. the role of belief in all areas of knowledge).
    To be fair, the guide does attempt to remedy this conflict by offering the students knowledge
questions, which are ‘general questions about knowledge’ (IB, 2013b: 21), although it should be
noted that the guide never actually gives a clear definition of what knowledge questions are.
Instead, the reader is given many domain-specific examples and told that they are ‘questions such
as …’ (p. 10), that ‘a knowledge question is somehow more general than the particular examples
which illustrate it’ (p. 21), that knowledge questions ‘are sometimes difficult to formulate precisely
but they often lurk underneath popular and often controversial subjects that are discussed in the
media’ (p. 22) and that ‘while these questions could seem slightly intimidating in the abstract, they
become much more accessible when dealt with in specific practical contexts within the TOK
course’ (p. 11). The point is that knowledge questions are core to the essay, but it is, arguably, not
altogether clear in the guide what exactly they are. Without a certain level of clarity at the outset,
it will be difficult to expect students to engage with material critically.
    The presentation, on the other hand, insists heavily on a real-world situation that the student
should relate to; this in the vein of Deweyan pragmatism, whereby knowledge needs to be made
relevant and concrete. This vision of critical thinking is linked to the guide’s predication that ToK
is not philosophy and moves away from abstractions to real-life scenarios. While this in itself
seems perfectly reasonable, one wonders what is wrong with hypothetical abstractions. After all,
some of the better-known assessments in critical thinking involve hypothetical situations such as
the well-known balance-scale problems developed by Siegler (1976) to assess students’ under-
standing of torque. The point is that measurable progress in thinking needs to be assessed against
problems or tasks that underpin contra-intuitive, troublesome scenarios that are sufficiently com-
plex to require critical thinking. This may or may not be the case in real-life scenarios.
    The essay and the presentation are assessed using ‘global impression marking […] rather than
an analytical [sic] process of totalling the assessment of separate criteria [and …] should not be
thought of as a checklist of attributes; they are intended to function only as tentative descriptions’
(p. 59). It should be noted that both tasks are assessed out of a total of 10 points, but the essay score
is doubled to give a points total of 30, which is converted into a final ToK score of either A, B, C,
D or E. Clearly, the extent to which these tasks mirror the aims and assessment objectives of the
course is contingent on the essay question that is answered and the area of development that the
student chooses for the presentation. The two broad areas that are assessed in the essay are ‘under-
standing knowledge questions’ and the ‘quality of analysis of knowledge questions’ (p. 62),
whereas there is one broad area that is assessed for the presentation (success ‘in showing how TOK
concepts can have practical application’ [p. 64]). Detailed descriptors are given for these areas to
suggest performances at banded levels. The top level, where students are fulfilling the require-
ments for 9 or 10 out of 10 points, reads as shown in Tables 2 and 3.
40                                                       Journal of Research in International Education 13(1)

Table 2. Essay on a prescribed title.

Understanding knowledge questions              Quality of analysis of knowledge       Some possible
                                               questions                              characteristics
There is a sustained focus on                  Arguments are clear,                   Cogent, accomplished,
knowledge questions connected to               supported by real-life                 discerning, individual,
the prescribed title and are [sic] well        examples and are effectively           lucid, insightful, compelling
chosen – developed with investigation          evaluated; counterclaims
of different perspectives and linked           are extensively explored;
effectively to areas of knowledge and/         implications are drawn
or ways of knowing

Source: IB (2013b: 62).


Table 3. Presentation.

Do(es) the presenter(s) succeed in showing how ToK concepts can have              Some possible characteristics
practical application?
The presentation is focused on a well-formulated knowledge question               Sophisticated, discerning,
that is clearly connected to a specified real-life situation. The knowledge       insightful, compelling, lucid
question is effectively explored in the context of the real-life situation, using
convincing arguments, with investigation of different perspectives. The
outcomes of the analysis are shown to be significant to the chosen real-life
situation and to others.

Source: IB (2013b: 64).
ToK: Theory of Knowledge.


Assessment validity
The assessment criteria for the course are well aligned with certain course aims and assessment
objectives in that they clearly emphasise making connections between real-life scenarios and
knowledge construction (Aim 1, Assessment Objectives 3 and 7), knowledge questions (Assessment
Objectives 2 and 5), different perspectives (Aim 2, Assessment Objective 6) and relationships
between ways of knowing and areas of knowledge (Assessment Objective 4). Furthermore, the
assessment criteria imply that Assessment Objective 1 will be met: namely that ‘various kinds of
justifications [are] used to support knowledge claims’ (p. 14). However, there is no evidence in the
assessment criteria that the tasks will explore Aims 3 (to ‘develop an interest in the diversity and
richness of cultural perspectives and an awareness of personal and ideological assumptions’), 4
(‘critically reflect on their own beliefs and assumptions, leading to more thoughtful, responsible
and purposeful lives’) and 5 (‘understand that knowledge brings responsibility which leads to com-
mitment and action’). This is perhaps understandable as while assessment instruments should be
aligned with the model of cognition being operationalised, this is a difficult thing to achieve when
the construct is fairly abstract and involves troublesome areas such as culture and responsibility.
These are aims that are clearly long term and not simple to nurture in an essay or a presentation.
Perhaps more problematic is the fact that Assessment Objective 6 (‘demonstrate an awareness and
understanding of different perspectives and be able to relate these to one’s own perspective’) is not
called upon in any of the descriptors for the assessed tasks, for the simple reason that there is no
mention of ‘one’s own perspective’ in the assessment descriptors.
   While there is evidence of a relatively high degree of construct validity vis-à-vis the alignment
between aims, objectives and assessment criteria, this is markedly less the case for the construct
Hughes                                                                                               41

of critical thinking in a more general sense and the extent to which the ToK assessment design
captures those thinking skills elicited by researchers as symptomatic of critical thinking. This can
be explored at two levels: first, by analysing the command terms of the assessment criteria and,
second, by pointing out which areas of critical thinking are missing in the assessment design. The
command terms employed in the assessment criteria are fairly bland in what they require: students
are asked to choose ‘well’, ‘formulate’, give ‘sustained focus’, link ‘effectively’, ‘develop’,
‘investigate’ and ‘explore’. These do not stand out in particular as salient critical thinking terms.
Less frequent are the more dynamic, specifically critical command terms, which include using
‘convincing arguments’, ‘analysing’, ‘evaluating’, ‘drawing implications’ and considering ‘coun-
terclaims’. Moreover, where there is focus, it is not so much on critical thinking but more on
connecting issues to real-life situations (this is repeated for both the presentation and the essay).
I have already argued that linking knowledge to real-life issues is not necessarily a sign of critical
thinking. The possible characteristics that are suggested are not all congruent with critical think-
ing: one can well imagine the importance of an essay or a presentation in critical thinking being
‘cogent’, ‘individual’, ‘lucid’ and ‘insightful’, but it is less clear why such work needs to be
‘accomplished’, ‘sophisticated’ or ‘compelling’. Clearly, these adjectives describe work of high
quality in general and therefore have their place; the point is that they are not specific hallmarks
of critical thinking.
   It is not so much what is in the assessment criteria that begs the question of whether this is
indeed a course in critical thinking, but what is not there. The coverage of established critical think-
ing skills is fair, but it is missing some of the more creative learning behaviours involving conjec-
ture, hypothesis testing, inference and likelihood thinking or developing criteria for evaluation.
Furthermore, the assessment criteria do not call for critiquing skills such as checking information
for accuracy or evaluating the credibility of sources of information, which is not surprising given
that the assessed task is an essay and not a commentary. The emphasis is primarily on analogic
thinking (connections and relations), when a course in critical thinking should offer more scope for
detailed, critical evaluation of sources, situations and problems that will strengthen students in
‘deciding what to believe or do’ (Ennis and Weir, 1985, 45).

Summary of critique of the ToK guide
In the light of this discussion, my critique of the guide and its reference to critical thinking can be
summarised as follows:

   1.    ToK, which describes itself as a course in critical thinking, is as much, if not more, a course
         in epistemology. The main thrust of the aims and assessment is not on critical thinking
         skills but more specifically on understanding of the way that knowledge is constructed. In
         this sense, the course lacks construct validity.
   2.    Course Aims 3, 4 and 5 and Assessment Objective 6 are not mirrored in the assessment
         tasks that have a summative purpose. This indicates a further lack of construct validity, here
         at the level of assessment design.
   3.    While the overwhelming emphasis of the essay (a component worth 2/3 of the final
         mark) is on knowledge questions, their description in the guide is at times cryptic.
         This obscures the challenge students have to address these ‘general questions about
         knowledge’ through the quality analysis that is expected for scores at the top end of
         the scale.
   4.    The main thrust of the presentation is not so much on critical thinking as on connecting
         knowledge questions to real-life issues. None of the research mentioned in this article sug-
         gests that real-life issues are necessary constituents of critical thinking.
42                                                  Journal of Research in International Education 13(1)

     5.   Many of the creative, active behaviours and thinking processes described in the research on
          critical thinking are missing from the ToK course: at no point in the aims or assessment are
          students called upon to make predictions, make inferences, take decisions or solve prob-
          lems (although, admittedly, problem solving is not recognised by all as a critical thinking
          strand).

Conclusion
Higgins warns that there is not much ‘to be gained in using […] frameworks as checklists to ensure
coverage or compliance with a particular taxonomy’ (Higgins et al., 2003), while Lipman (2003) is
equally wary of taxonomies. Ennis and Weir (1985) have explained that the assessment of critical
thinking is problematic, and it is clear that the enterprise is an elusive one that cannot be treated
entirely through a written curriculum. However, I have argued that the course would be more valid
in its alignment with research on critical thinking if these modifications were considered and the
thrust of the course were to go beyond the current emphasis on comparative and interpersonal skills
into the domains of critical reading, inference, hypothesising and evaluating.
    The reason I have considered the ToK guide critically and in a fair amount of detail in this article
is because ToK offers an opportunity to stimulate the type of thinking that is needed when, argua-
bly, volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity are more prominent on the world stage than
they have ever been. Our planet faces diabolically difficult, interrelated problems such as demo-
graphic and ecological unsustainable exponentials, poverty, a highly problematic globalised econ-
omy, corruption and, at the same time, unprecedented bursts of progress in technology and science.
In such a world climate, the educational system that students experience needs to challenge them
to solve problems, test hypotheses, make plausible inferences, deal with unexpected situations
swiftly and with few bearings, take difficult decisions and exercise enormous creativity, discern-
ment and flexibility. We live in an age where learning to learn, learning to live together and learn-
ing to adapt are paramount. It is not surprising then that critical thinking is held up as an essential
educational response, and it is important that as many students as possible experience an education
that values critical thinking. ToK, by describing itself as a course in critical thinking, offers this
educational route. However, as I have argued in this article, while some strands of critical thinking
are developed in the course, many are not. I conclude, therefore, with recommendations for the
next guide revision.
    I would argue that a more transparent requirement of critical thinking skills implies the use of
more specific predicates such as those mentioned by researchers (‘making’, ‘generating’, ‘check-
ing out’, ‘judging’, ‘evaluating’, ‘constructing’, ‘forming’, ‘clarifying’, ‘reasoning’, ‘critiquing’,
‘assessing’ and so forth). These should be clear in the aims and objectives. In Paulian terms one
could argue, therefore, that the ToK course’s vocabulary should be more ‘explicit’ and less ‘implicit’
(Elder, 2010: 6). What this implies is a reshaping of not merely the course guide’s semantics but
also the types of operational skills upon which students will be evaluated. In the present guide,
according to the aims, objectives and criteria, the course can be completed mainly through identi-
fying types of knowledge, comparing ideas across situations and epistemes and reflecting on the
creation and shaping of knowledge. While these tenets are valuable, the course description should
allow for more critiquing, conjecture, analysis and informed judgement.
    This point leads to the one of coverage of critical thinking skills. The assessment is more ‘epi-
sodic’ than ‘systematic’ in its use of critical thinking skills (Elder, 2010: 6). The concentration of
substantive skills in one descriptor (quality of analysis in the essay) and comparative dearth in
other areas (understanding knowledge questions in the essay and showing how ToK concepts can
have practical application in the presentation) means that students manifesting extremely critical
Hughes                                                                                                    43

thinking but showing less ability in understanding what the guide means by knowledge questions
will not be able to score highly. Conversely, students who are able to work with knowledge ques-
tions and apply ToK to real-life situations could score well, even if the quality of their analysis is
not strong. Fortunately, however, the global impression marking should prevent such situations.
Nonetheless, less emphasis on real-life scenarios and knowledge questions with more on analytical
thinking would surely strengthen the course’s validity.
   Finally, the active, creative side of critical thinking should feature more prominently in the sub-
ject if it is to cover critical thinking comprehensively: students should be put in situations where
they exercise thinking not only to answer essay questions or reflect on how knowledge is con-
structed but also to suggest solutions to complex problems, test hypotheses and explore likelihood
and uncertainty (Halpern, 1997), ‘explore implications and consequences’ (Paul, 1990: 56) and, of
course, work through the ‘creating’ level of Bloom’s taxonomy revisited by Anderson and Krathwohl
(2001): ‘compose, construct, create, design, develop, formulate, integrate, invent, organize, plan,
prepare, propose, re-arrange […]’. It is perhaps here that the change would be the most meaningful
and lead to a course that would not only cover critical thinking in a more balanced manner but also
stimulate thinking aligned with the challenges and opportunities that we face today.


References
Abrami PC, Bernard RM, Borokhovski E, et al. (2009) Instructional interventions affecting critical thinking
     skills and dispositions: a stage 1 meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research 78(4): 1102–1134.
Anderson LW and Krathwohl DR (2001) A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching and Assessing: A Revision of
     Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. New York: Longman.
Bassok M and Holyoak KJ (1993) Pragmatic knowledge and conceptual structure: determinants of transfer
     between quantitative domains. In: Detterman DK and Sternberg RJ (eds) Transfer on Trial: Intelligence,
     Cognition and Instruction. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, pp. 68–98.
Bereiter C and Scardamalia M (1993) Surpassing Ourselves: An Inquiry into the Nature and Implications of
     Expertise. Chicago, IL: Open Court Publishing Company.
Biggs JB and Collis KF (1982) Evaluating the Quality of Learning: The Solo Taxonomy. New York: Academic
     Press.
Black B (2008) Critical thinking: a definition and taxonomy for Cambridge assessment. Paper presented at
     34th International Association of Educational Assessment Annual Conference, Cambridge. Available at:
     http://www.iaea.info/documents/paper_2b711dd1c.pdf
Bloom H (1956) Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. Handbook 1: Cognitive Domain. New York: Longman.
Elder L (2010) Richard W Paul: a biographical sketch: foundation for critical thinking. Available at: http://
     www.criticalthinking.org/ABOUT/Fellow_Richard_Paul.cfm
Ennis RH (1996) Critical Thinking. New York: Prentice Hall.
Ennis RH and Weir E (1985) The Ennis-Weir Critical Thinking Essay Test. Pacific Grove, CA: Midwest
     Publications.
Ericsson KA (ed.) (1996) The Road to Excellence: The Acquisition of Expert Performance in the Arts and
     Sciences, Sports, and Game. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Ericsson KA and Smith J (eds) (1991) Toward a General Theory of Expertise: Prospects and Limits.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Facione PA (1990) Critical Thinking: A Statement of Expert Consensus for Purposes of Educational Assessment
     and Instruction (Executive Summary, The Delphi Report). Millbrae, CA: California Academic Press.
Glaser R (1984) Education and thinking: the role of knowledge. American Psychologist 39: 93–104.
Goleman D (1995) Emotional Intelligence. New York: Bantam.
Grandy RE (1998) Constructivism and objectivity: disentangling metaphysics from pedagogy. In: Matthews
     MR (ed.) Constructivism in Science Education. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 113–123.
44                                                       Journal of Research in International Education 13(1)

Halpern D (1997) Critical Thinking across the Curriculum: A Brief Edition of Thought and Knowledge.
     Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Halpern D (1999) Teaching for critical thinking: helping college students develop the skills and dispositions
     of a critical thinker. New Directions for Teaching and Leaning 80(Winter): 69–74.
Halpern D (2002) Thinking Critically about Critical Thinking. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
     Inc.
Higgins S, Miller J and Moseley D (2003) Taxonomies: teaching thinking. Available at: www.teachthinking.
     com
International Baccalaureate (IB) (2013a) http://www.ibo.org/diploma/
International Baccalaureate (IB) (2013b) Theory of Knowledge Guide (Course Guide). Cardiff: IB.
Iowa Department of Education (2013) Universal constructs: essential for 21st century success. Available at:
     https://www.educateiowa.gov/pk-12/iowa-core/universal-constructs-essential-21st-century-success
Jerald CD (2009) Defining a 21st century education. Available at: http://www.cfsd16.org/public/_century/
     pdf/Defininga21stCenturyEducation_Jerald_2009.pdf
King PM and Kitchener KS (1994) Developing Reflective Judgment: Understanding and Promoting
     Intellectual Growth and Critical Thinking in Adolescents and Adults. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Lave J (1988) Cognition in Practice: Mind, Mathematics and Culture in Everyday Life. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.
Lipman M (2003) Thinking in Education, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moseley D, Baumfield V, Elliott J, et al. (2005) Frameworks for Thinking: A Handbook for Teaching and
     Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moseley D, Baumfield V, Higgins S, et al. (2004) Thinking Skill Frameworks for Post-16 Learners: An
     Evaluation: Learning and Skills Research Centre. Wiltshire: Cromwell Press.
Newton DP (2012) Teaching for Understanding: What It Is and How to Do It, 2nd edn. Oxford: Routledge.
Newton DP (2014) Thinking with Feeling: Fostering productive thought in one classroom. Oxford: Routledge.
Nisbett RE (ed.) (1993) Rules for Reasoning. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
OECD (2003) The definition and selection of key competencies. Available at: http://www.oecd.org/
     pisa/35070367.pdf
Paul R (1990) Critical Thinking: What Every Person Needs to Survive in a Rapidly Changing World. Santa
     Rosa, CA: Foundation for Critical Thinking.
Paul R (1992) Critical thinking: what, why and how? New Directions for Community Colleges 20(1): 3–24.
Paul R (2011) Reflections on the nature of critical thinking, its history, politics, and barriers and on its status
     across the college/university curriculum part I. Inquiry: Critical Thinking across the Disciplines 26(3):
     5–24.
Pellegrino JW, Chudowsky N and Glaser R (2001) Knowing What Students Know: The Science and Design
     of Educational Assessment. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Peterson A (1987) Schools across Frontiers. La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing Company.
Pintrich PR (2000) The role of goal orientation in self-regulated learning. In: Boekaerts M, Pintrich PR and
     Zeidner M (eds) Handbook of Self-Regulation. London: Academic Press, pp. 452–494.
Reber AS (1985) Dictionary of Psychology. London: Penguin Books.
Ritchhart R and Perkins D (2005) Learning to think: the challenges of teaching thinking. In: Holyoak KJ
     and Morrison RG (eds) The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning. New York: Cambridge
     University Press, pp. 775–802.
Salomon G and Perkins DN (1998) Individual and social aspects of learning. In: Pearson PD and Iran-Nejad
     A (eds) Review of Research in Education, vol. 23. Washington, DC: AERA, pp. 1–24.
Scheffler I (1973) Reason and Teaching. Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Schoenfeld AH and Herrmann DJ (1982) Problem perception and knowledge structure in expert and novice
     mathematical problem solvers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
     8: 484–494.
Siegel H (1985) Educating reason: critical thinking, informal logic, and the philosophy of education. Part
     two: philosophical questions underlying education for critical thinking. Informal Logic 7(2–3): 69–81.
Siegel H (1988) Educating Reason. New York: Routledge.
Hughes                                                                                                  45

Siegler RS (1976) Three aspects of cognitive development. Cognitive Psychology 8: 481–520.
Sternberg RJ (1996) Successful Intelligence. New York: Simon and Schuster

Author biography
Conrad Hughes is Director of Education at the International School of Geneva, where he also teaches Theory
of Knowledge. He was educated in France, Swaziland and South Africa, holds a PhD in English literature
from the University of the Witwatersrand and has worked in schools in France, the Netherlands and India. He
has published articles in academic and educational journals as well as an English textbook, published by
Pearson, for students pursuing the International Baccalaureate Diploma.
