=== Page 55 ===

To view the case studies highlighted within the section, 
scan the QR code or visit royalsociety.org/sfsstudies
Chapter three
Mass media and 
misinformation
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
55

=== Page 56 ===

Mass media and misinformation
103	UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).
104	Newman, N et al. Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2025. Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University of 
Oxford (2025). See: https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2025-06/Digital_News-Report_2025.pdf 
(accessed 8 January 2026).
105	Ofcom, News consumption in the UK – Research findings (2025). See: https://www.ofcom.org.uk/siteassets/resources/
documents/research-and-data/online-research/adult-and-teen-news-consumption-survey/news-consumption-in-the-
uk-2025-research-findings.pdf?v=400636 (accessed 15 April 2026).
106	Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/public-attitudes-to-science (accessed 20 February 2026).
107	Overview and Key Findings of the 2025 Digital News Report, Reuters Institute. See: https://reutersinstitute.politics.
ox.ac.uk/digital-news-report/2025/dnr-executive-summary (accessed 19 April 2026).
108	Science Media Centre, Summary Report – Ipsos Survey on Science and the Media (2022). See: https://www.sciencemedia 
centre.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/PDF-summary-report.pdf (accessed 8 January 2026).
We live in times of great political, technological 
and environmental change and the values 
that have driven science for the benefit 
of humanity are under serious threat.
New and old media, while offering new 
opportunities to discuss scientific advances, 
are also being used to spread misinformation. 
In that context it has never been more 
important for the wider public to have access 
to trusted and reliable scientific voices and 
trusted and reliable media.
Traditional media and its challenges
Traditional media continue to be an important 
source for the public to gain access to science-
related content, but patterns are shifting, with 
new media playing an increasing role, particularly 
in younger age groups103. Scientists have had a 
long history of engaging with the media in the 
UK, supported by communications professionals 
within universities, research institutions, funding 
agencies and government bodies. The UK has 
a robust science media environment with many 
specialist journalists, although in the UK and 
elsewhere this is under threat. 
The UK also established the Science Media 
Centre in 2002. Case studies on genetic 
modification and mitochondrial donation 
published alongside this report highlight how 
the media portrayal of science can influence 
debate (see case studies: Genetically modified 
organisms and Mitochondrial donation).
Over the past two decades, the media 
environment has changed profoundly. 
News audiences for television and print 
have fallen dramatically104. The traditional 
media model has been transformed by 
two related trends: fragmentation of 
the traditional media landscape, and 
the rise of new and social media.
New media and its challenges
Consumers now have a far greater choice of 
media products – on television (owing to the 
rise of streaming services), video streaming 
sites, podcasts, and the growth of other 
online channels and content (see Figure 3). 
In particular, young people are now obtaining 
much of their news via social media channels 
rather than traditional media sources, although 
it is of note that the BBC, across all its 
channels, remains the top news source for  
12 – 15 year olds105.
These changes, however, are complex 
and fluid. Much social media content, for 
example, is generated by mainstream media 
organisations, which have an increased focus 
on driving their journalism onto social media 
platforms. Legacy news media often continue 
to set the agenda for societal debates 
and drive discussions on social media106. While 
engagement with traditional media sources 
continues to fall107, young people are still 
gaining access to content from trusted news 
sources via social media108.
CHAPTER THREE
56	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 57 ===

FIGURE 3
As part of the 2025 Public attitudes to science (PAS) survey 5,281 UK adults (aged 16 or over) 
were asked: “Over the last 2 weeks, did you actively seek out any science-related information 
from any of the following? Please exclude anything that was for your job or your studies.”109
109	UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).	
 
1,800
34%
2,134
40%
1,878
36%
711
13%
892
17%
1,299
25%
None
Traditional
media
(TV, radio,
magazine)
New media
(Social media,
YouTube)
Friends / family /
colleagues or
a WhatsApp 
group
Verbally or
online (museum, 
gallery, workshop,
or science 
communicator
Scientiﬁc
source
Number of people
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
CHAPTER THREE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
57

=== Page 58 ===

Social media offers exciting new opportunities 
for science to engage a wide variety of public 
audiences, and there are many examples of 
great content reaching large audiences; there 
are many influencers, podcasts, blogs and other 
types of content producing high-quality science 
communications. These activities are largely 
driven by a desire among scientists to inform 
others (see Chapter six: Academic scientific 
community). The new opportunities, however, 
come with the challenge of ensuring that trusted 
voices are reaching people and challenging 
misinformation, and that they are accurately 
communicating the science with its uncertainties.
Although scientists are extensive users of social 
media, the online experience can be a major 
disincentive to engagement. Challenges include 
the risks associated with posting in potentially 
contentious areas and the potential for social 
media trolling and harassment, including 
threats of physical harm, which can lead to 
disengagement from social media platforms.
Polarisation of politics, culture wars and attacks 
by some politicians on mainstream news also 
mean that facts and truth are increasingly 
contested. Evidence shows that in the UK, 
primarily among a small minority of highly 
partisan individuals, some people are opting 
in to ‘echo chambers’ where they seek out 
information which confirms their beliefs; however, 
care should be taken in asserting the extent 
of these trends. Evidence suggests this is not 
true of most people, but these individuals may 
have a disproportionate effect on news110.
110	 The Royal Society, The online information environment: Understanding how the internet shapes people’s 
engagement with scientific information (2022). See: https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/online-information-
environment/ (accessed 6 January 2026).
111	 The Royal Society, The online information environment: Understanding how the internet shapes people’s 
engagement with scientific information (2022). See: https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/online-information-
environment/ (accessed 6 January 2026).
Furthermore, now that audiences have much 
greater ability to select their preferred sources 
of information, economic and ideological 
incentives may drive commercial and other 
media providers to generate content that 
appeals to specific target groups. It can be 
difficult for scientists to make their voice 
heard when neither audiences nor information 
providers have an interest in objectivity.
The focus of this chapter is the mainstream 
media and social media. While we 
acknowledge the importance of popular 
science books (see case study: Popular 
science writing) and weaving science into 
entertainment media such as films, television 
and gaming, we do not focus on these.
Misinformation threats
Scientific misinformation is not a new 
phenomenon, but changes in the media 
landscape mean that inaccurate, misleading 
and false information can now be shared in 
large volumes and at speed. False information 
has to some extent fuelled mistrust in vaccines 
and confused discussions about tackling 
climate change. This can result in harm to 
individuals and to society. The Royal Society’s 
Online information environment report111 sets 
out a range of recommendations to tackle 
misinformation with a focus on understanding 
the prevalence and impact of misinformation, 
ensuring accurate information is made widely 
available, and supporting people with the skills 
to be able to effectively evaluate information 
presented in the media. This later point is 
a key focus of Chapter one: Education.
CHAPTER THREE
58	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 59 ===

A further challenge is the increasing demand 
being placed on communications professionals 
in higher education institutions and other 
scientific organisations, particularly given 
the financial stresses in this sector112. Such 
professionals typically face multiple competing 
priorities, including crisis and reputational risk 
management, internal communications and 
institutional marketing activities. Institutional 
leaders may also have concerns that scientists 
engaging in controversial areas could 
increase institutional workloads and damage 
institutional reputation.
Positive signs
There is, however, plenty of good news: there 
still appears to be a strong public appetite for 
science-related content. In audience surveys for 
the BBC, more than six in ten people say they 
are interested in science and, when prompted 
with a list of scientific topics, 92% said they 
were interested in at least one of them113. In 
addition, three-quarters of people state that 
it is important to have an understanding of 
science114. There is also a continued demand 
for high standards of journalism – notably 
“impartiality, accuracy, transparency and 
original reporting are what the public expects”. 
112	 Jamison, H. The Changing Role of Science Press Officers (2022). See: https://www.sciencemediacentre.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/07/The-Changing-Role-of-Science-Press-Officers-Science-Media-Centre-Report-July-2022.pdf 
(accessed 8 January 2026).
113	 BBC Marketing and Audiences, Science survey, March 2025. See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/
science-for-society/science-survey-bbc-mar-25-royal-society.pdf (accessed 19 April 2026).
114	 Ibid.
115	 UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).
116	 Majid, A. Solutions Journalism: Could it be the Antidote to News Avoidance?. Press Gazette (2022)  
https://pressgazette.co.uk/publishers/digital-journalism/solutions-journalism-news-avoidance/  
(accessed 8 January 2026).
117	 Newman, N. Overview and Key Findings of the 2025 Digital News Report (2025). See: https://reutersinstitute.politics.
ox.ac.uk/digital-news-report/2025/dnr-executive-summary (accessed 8 January 2026).
118	 Nielsen, RK. Irrelevant and Unloved: How the Press Lost its Touch. Propect (2025). See: https://www.
prospectmagazine.co.uk/ideas/media/69427/irrelevant-unloved-press-lost-touch (accessed 8 January 2026).
119	 UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).
This public support for more information about 
science is reinforced in the PAS survey, where 
62% of respondents said that they saw or 
heard too little information about science115.
The public express a desire for more positive, 
‘solutions-focused’ news, and news that will 
educate and inform116. Authoritative sources 
consistently identify news avoidance as linked 
to negativity and despair when what those 
people want from news are solutions and 
hope117. Science is especially well placed to 
deliver these kinds of stories to news media. 
Support for the BBC and its Reithian principles 
remains high, and the public professes a 
desire for high-quality trusted news118. In an 
average week, 2.2 million UK unique browsers 
visit science news content on BBC News 
Online, and this can peak at nearly 5 million.
As public audiences have an interest in the 
reliability of information they access, the 
trustworthiness of sources is a vital issue. Just 
under half of people agree that there is so 
much conflicting information about science, 
that it is difficult to know what to believe. Two 
in five people agree that the information they 
heard about science was “generally true”. 
That is down from over half in 2014. Just under 
one in ten disagree that what they see is 
generally true, leaving nearly half not sure119. 
CHAPTER THREE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
59

=== Page 60 ===

Around one in three people in the UK trust 
‘traditional’ media, though trust is even 
lower in social media sources120. Personal 
social contacts are often a key source of 
information because they are trusted. It is 
striking to note, however, that scientists are, 
in general, consistently coming out as very 
well trusted in public trust surveys, often 
with trust levels in excess of 80%121, and this 
perceived trustworthiness is an important 
asset that needs to be both capitalised 
on and protected, while also noting that 
there is a difference in scientists working in 
academia, industry and the public sector122.
Next steps
It is vital that scientists maintain a commitment 
to communicating with public audiences, 
in ways that reflect the changing media 
landscape. A deeper understanding of 
how the public consumes science-related 
content, and how this affects attitudes and 
behaviours, would help to support more 
evidence-based communications practices.
However, many platforms are now changing 
their terms of service, placing content 
behind paywalls and significantly increasing 
the costs associated with application 
programming interface (API) access to their 
data. As a result, it is now more difficult to 
fully understand how platforms work and 
how their design decisions may be affecting 
people’s engagement with online information.
120	Edelman Trust Institute, 2025 Edelman Trust Barometer. Global Report: Trust and the Crisis of Grievance (2025). 
See: https://www.edelman.com/sites/g/files/aatuss191/files/2025-01/2025%20Edelman%20Trust%20Barometer%20
Global%20Report_01.23.25.pdf (accessed 8 January 2026).
121	 Ipsos, Veracity Index (2025). See: https://www.ipsos.com/en-uk/ipsos-veracity-index-2025 (accessed 14 April 2026).
122	UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).
123	The Royal Society, The public understanding of science (1985). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/
publications/1985/10700.pdf (accessed 7 January 2026).
As highlighted in the original Bodmer report123, 
it remains important for researchers to develop 
their own media literacy, to ensure productive 
engagement with media professionals. 
Some researchers still see journalists as a 
simple channel to reach public audiences, 
or do not appreciate the demands on media 
professionals. Scientists also need to be aware 
of the increasing body of knowledge being 
generated on the effective use of social media.
Scientists should be supported to make full 
use of opportunities to engage with different 
media channels through high-quality training 
on how the media works, how to engage with 
different media stakeholders, how to generate 
engaging and accessible content and how 
to counter misinformation. It is important that 
funders and institutions value and support these 
efforts. It should not be seen as an ‘extra’ on 
top of research and teaching commitments, it 
should be recognised as a vital part of research 
and pedagogical culture. Communications 
officers will continue to have an important 
role in supporting scientists’ communications 
activities and strengthening the relationship 
between the scientific and media communities.
Science has a major advantage, as new 
knowledge provides a constant supply 
of stories in areas known to be of public 
interest. Individual science organisations are 
developing an increasing amount of content, 
but funding and coordination are problems.
CHAPTER THREE
60	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 61 ===

Beyond news, there are opportunities to 
strengthen relationships with key media 
stakeholders, such as editors, commissioners 
and producers; there are concerns about 
a decline in science programming across 
mainstream media. There are also pressures 
on funding across the sector, which can be 
addressed in part through co-funding and  
co-production.
Multiple examples exist of co-production 
of science-related programmes based on 
partnerships between scientific organisations 
and broadcasters, with spin-out content on 
social media (for example, the BBC’s Wild isles, 
which was partly funded by the Royal Society 
for the Protection of Birds, the World Wide 
Fund for Nature and The Open University). In 
these partnerships, it is important that editorial 
control remains with broadcasters. The scientific 
community could learn from the arts world, 
which is more effective at making the case for 
these kinds of co-productions, and there are 
more opportunities for science to be interwoven 
in history, drama, biography and other genres.
AI is disrupting the ways scientists and science 
press officers communicate with media 
channels and changing the way news is created 
and disseminated. AI is also having a major 
effect on internet search functions, and the 
internet is a key source of information for many, 
including politicians (see Chapter five: Policy). 
There are opportunities here for scientists and 
science communicators to be the people who 
retain scientific authority in a wild west of AI-
created content. This is a rapidly emerging field 
and will have to be monitored closely, and the 
views of the public must be considered.
Like all changes in the science-media 
environment, this can be a good or bad 
thing, and a key challenge for the scientific 
community is to understand and navigate 
these changes to maximise the positive 
potential. A key issue will be ensuring that 
AI training and the outputs generated by 
AI tools are based on accurate scientific 
information. Benefits of AI can include 
deep research, improved tailoring of 
content to audiences, summarisation, 
democratising access to knowledge, and 
spotting inaccuracies in data that humans 
miss. Problems include oversimplification, 
data breaches, lack of oversight and 
hallucinations. The central question in an 
AI-based media environment will be: How 
does up-to date journalistic content about 
science get into the emerging AI tools?
Trustworthiness is fundamental to 
communication and is easily lost. This 
applies to both the science and the media 
communities. Characteristics of trustworthy 
communication include seeking to inform 
rather than persuade, being balanced, 
acknowledging uncertainty and limitations 
of the evidence, and pre-empting 
misunderstandings. It is also important to 
acknowledge and correct where mistakes 
are made. Independence is a critical aspect 
of science, and transparency is required to 
address any possible accusations of bias, 
particularly when commercial interests are 
involved (see Chapter four: Industry and 
business sector).
CHAPTER THREE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
61

=== Page 62 ===

Misleading statements in news stories 
may originate in press releases rather 
than being due to misguided reporting124. 
The temptation to oversell scientific 
findings should be resisted, and science 
communication should be incorporated 
into wider initiatives to improve research 
integrity125. It is also important to ensure that 
the public understands that new findings are 
provisional and that replications and evidence 
syntheses are critical to building scientific 
consensus. The competitive nature of science 
also creates an incentive to maximise the 
potential impact of findings126. Expectations 
of scientists could be codified to support 
the ongoing adoption of good practice, 
building on models such as the UK Statistics 
Authority’s Code of Practice for Statistics127.
Scientists should not shy away from 
acknowledging limitations and uncertainties, 
which does not appear to confuse or deter 
readers, and may actually increase trust128. 
As discussed in Chapter one: Education, 
enhancing scientific literacy will help 
members of the public appreciate the 
nuances of scientific evidence generation.
124	Sumner P, et al. The Association Between Exaggeration in Health Related Science News and Academic Press 
Releases: Retrospective Observational Study. BMJ Dec 9: 349:g7015 (2014). See: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g7015 
(Erratum in: BMJ 2014: 349:g7666)
125	Science Communication Will Benefit From Research Integrity Standards. Nature 635, 8 (2024).  
See: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-024-03586-w (accessed 8 January 2026).  
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-024-03586-w
126	West JD and Bergstrom CT. Misinformation In and About Science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
USA 118 (15): e1912444117 (2021). See: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1912444117 (Correction in: PNAS 121 (32): e2413513121 
(2024). See: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2413513121)
127	UK Statistics Authority, Code of Practice for Statistics 3.0 (2026). See: https://code.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/  
(accessed 8 January 2026).
128	Kerr JR, et al. Transparent Communication of Evidence Does Not Undermine Public Trust in Evidence.  
PNAS Nexus 1 (5): pgac280 (2022). See: https://doi.org/10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac280
RECOMMENDATION 6
The Royal Society and others in 
the scientific community should 
convene a working group, 
collaborating with experts in media 
monitoring to analyse and respond 
to current trends in science media 
consumption across traditional and 
social media platforms.
•	 These audits of changing media 
consumption should be used by scientists 
and science communicators to support a 
better understanding of how to identify 
audiences and connect with them effectively.
•	 The Royal Society and others in the 
science community should work to ensure 
media platforms provide reasonable, 
privacy-respecting access to their data for 
researchers, to support public understanding 
of how platforms work and how their 
design decisions may be affecting people’s 
engagement with online information.
CHAPTER THREE
62	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 63 ===

RECOMMENDATION 7
Universities, funders and research 
organisations should value 
communications skills as a vital 
component of research culture to 
help counter mis- and disinformation. 
They should embed training and 
support for scientists to capitalise 
on opportunities to connect with 
audiences via social media.
•	 Training and support must be well-
developed and well-resourced.
•	 The importance of engaging with the 
wide range of media platforms should be 
recognised as a valuable part of a scientist’s 
role, with time allocated accordingly.
•	 Training should cover a range of 
skills such as an understanding of the 
social media environment, content 
production and content moderation.
•	 This training should include specific support 
for scientists to anticipate and manage 
the potential pitfalls of engagement – 
especially online harassment, trolling and 
encountering hostile and polarised debates.
•	 Guidelines and harassment policies need 
to be put in place, but also individuals 
in organisations should be assigned 
responsibility for supporting scientists 
affected by online harassment and abuse.
RECOMMENDATION 8
The science community should 
recommit to working with science 
journalists and editors to support 
and champion quality science 
journalism, and to help ensure that 
credible and trustworthy reporting 
is reaching the widest number of 
people across traditional and social 
media channels.
•	 The science community should press 
news outlets to monitor the success of 
science news stories and ensure they 
feature prominently in editorial priorities, 
given the evidence of audience desire for 
reporting on how science can help solve 
some of the problems society faces.
•	 The scientific community should send a 
strong message to the news media that 
the way to compete most effectively on 
social media and win audiences back 
to professional journalism is not to join 
a race to the bottom, but to deliver 
the high-quality news that the British 
public repeatedly say they want.
CHAPTER THREE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
63

=== Page 64 ===

RECOMMENDATION 9
The Royal Society should draw 
up and urge the scientific 
community to adopt a code of 
practice for scientists and research 
communications professionals 
engaging with the media to 
help ensure high standards 
are maintained.
•	 Modelled and adapted from the UK Statistics 
Authority’s Code of Practice for Statistics, this 
code would lay down minimum standards 
for communicating science in a measured, 
accurate and transparent way with a focus 
on the principles of trustworthiness, quality 
and value.
•	 The science community is currently trying 
to improve the standards of scientific 
literature, with increasing focus on research 
integrity and reproducibility, but these efforts 
often take place separately from science 
communication – the two endeavours should 
be merged.
RECOMMENDATION 10
The Royal Society should set 
up a working group to explore 
the possibility, design and 
implementation of a new initiative 
that provides a stimulus to 
achieve more high-quality science 
programming content.
•	 The Royal Society is in a unique position 
to act as a convener, bringing together 
novel sources of funding with scientists 
and content producers and platforms.
•	 The new initiative could also develop 
a collective voice for more and better 
science programming from the science 
and science-production communities – 
something that is noticeable in the arts 
and noticeably absent in science.
CHAPTER THREE
64	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 65 ===

CHAPTER THREE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
65

=== Page 66 ===

66	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER
