=== Page 29 ===

Chapter one
Education
To view the case studies highlighted within the section, 
scan the QR code or visit royalsociety.org/sfsstudies
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
29

=== Page 30 ===

Education
28	 UK Parliament POSTnote 746, UK STEM Skills Pipeline (2025). See: https://doi.org/10.58248/PN746  
(accessed 6 January 2026).
29	 GOV.UK, Curriculum and Assessment Review Final Report (2025). See: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
curriculum-and-assessment-review-final-report (accessed 6 January 2026).
Education provides the foundation for 
students’ later engagement with science and 
technology, personally and professionally. 
As the Bodmer report highlighted, education 
is therefore of fundamental importance to 
public engagement. This chapter primarily 
considers primary, secondary and further 
education. Higher education is considered 
in Chapter six: Academic science community.
In the UK, education is a devolved policy area. 
England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland 
each have separate education systems with 
some commonality, but differing qualification 
types, subject names, and compulsory subjects.
Science education across all four of these 
systems has the twin goals of preparing the 
subset of young people who will pursue careers 
as STEM professionals (approximately 25%28) 
while equipping all students with generally 
applicable scientific knowledge and skills, 
alongside an appreciation of its role in society. 
The benefits of the knowledge and skills 
development provided by STEM education span 
personal decision-making, active citizenship/
societal participation and employability.
Since the focus of this report is public 
engagement, this chapter gives particular 
attention to the broader purposes of STEM 
education, while recognising the need to 
increase the number of people with scientific 
and technical skills for future STEM occupations 
and the close relationship between these aims. 
It considers the STEM education that students 
require, both to engage meaningfully with 
science throughout their lives and to support 
future participation in the STEM workforce, 
alongside the factors affecting the capacity of 
the UK education system to meet these needs.
Scientific literacy
Being scientifically literate goes beyond 
simply having factual knowledge and an 
understanding of the principles underpinning 
STEM subjects; it requires an understanding 
of how science is done and how to 
evaluate evidence and its sources.
In an age when young people have 
access to virtually unlimited information 
and viewpoints, they require the skills 
to identify credible sources and weigh 
evidence. From primary school onwards, 
science education must develop the critical 
thinking needed to question and evaluate 
sources of evidence and to appreciate 
the distinctive characteristics of evidence 
generated through scientific methods.
In 2025, the independent Curriculum and 
assessment review in England stated that the 
science curriculum should equip “children 
and young people across all key stages 
with the skills to evaluate scientific claims 
critically, assess evidence from multiple 
sources and understand how science 
operates in everyday life”29. A good science 
education should also convey the provisional 
nature of scientific knowledge, and why this 
uncertainty is essential to scientific progress, 
while helping young people to understand 
that scientific ideas may sometimes be 
unfairly rejected because they challenge 
deeply held beliefs or cultural identities.
Over the past 40 years, science education has 
seen shifts in emphasis between approaches 
that highlight debate, discussion, student 
engagement and understanding the nature of 
science, and those that place greater focus 
on the acquisition of technical knowledge. 
CHAPTER ONE
30	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 31 ===

A significant influence in shaping more 
integrative perspectives was Beyond 200030, 
a landmark report commissioned by the 
Nuffield Foundation and the Wellcome Trust, 
which argued for a broader conception of 
scientific literacy. Its ideas informed both 
international thinking and the development of 
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD) Programme for 
International Student Assessment (PISA), 
which assesses how effectively education 
systems enable students to apply scientific 
and mathematical understanding in real-world 
contexts (see case study: PISA international 
comparisons in educational attainment). In 
England, these principles were reflected 
in the development of Twenty first century 
science31, a suite of curricula and qualifications 
adopted by around 60% of secondary 
schools, designed to consider how science 
works alongside core scientific knowledge.
Currently, the curriculum in England adopts 
a more traditional, knowledge-based focus, 
with relatively limited emphasis on structured 
opportunities for discussion and engagement. 
At the time of writing, the programmes of 
study for the next iteration of the science 
curriculum have yet to be published, and it 
remains to be seen how far future reforms 
will reflect these international trends.
30	 Millar R, Osborne J. Beyond 2000: science education for the future (1998) Nuffield Foundation.  
See: https://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Beyond-2000.pdf (accessed 19 April 2026).
31	 Natalie DB. Twenty First Century Science Has Not Had a Negative Effect on Student Progression to A Level. (2014), 
Nuffield Foundation. See: https://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/news/twenty-first-century-science-has-not-had-a-
negative-effect-on-student-progression-to-a-level (accessed 19 April 2026).
32	 Seah WT et al. Reimagining Mathematics Education for the 21st Century in the 21st Century. Journal of Educational 
Research in Mathematics 31 (3): 393–404 (2021). See: https://doi.org/10.29275/jerm.2021.31.3.393  
(accessed 6 January 2026).
33	 The Royal Society, A new approach to mathematical and data education (2024). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/
policy/projects/maths-futures/mathematical-and-data-education-policy-report.pdf (accessed 6 January 2026).
34	 Watson J and Smith C. Statistics education at a time of global disruption and crises: a growing challenge for the 
curriculum, classroom and beyond. Curriculum Perspectives 42: 171–179 (2022). See: https://doi.org/10.1007/s41297-
022-00167-7
Mathematical and data literacy
In an increasingly digital and data-driven 
world, it is vital that all young people acquire 
the knowledge and skills required to interpret 
and use data effectively32 – ‘data literacy’. 
Few occupations, areas of study or aspects 
of daily life will remain untouched by this 
data revolution. Data skills will be a key 
competency in most jobs, not just specialist 
technical roles. Furthermore, encouraging a 
foundational level of understanding of data, 
including probability, risk, uncertainty and 
data reliability, will enable citizens to make 
informed choices about their lives and futures.
As outlined in the Royal Society’s Mathematical 
futures report, a mathematical education builds 
multiple skills, including problem-solving, 
logical thinking, abstraction and data literacy33. 
Data literacy is dependent upon foundational 
knowledge and skills in mathematics and 
statistics, but also incorporates issues such 
as data sources, reliability, completeness and 
visual representation. The mathematical and 
data education of the future needs to provide 
students with both foundational mathematical 
knowledge and skills, and the general 
quantitative literacy to apply such knowledge 
and skills in educational, employment and 
everyday contexts. In addition, the ability to 
engage with scientific concepts is dependent on 
a sound understanding of statistics and data34.
CHAPTER ONE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
31

=== Page 32 ===

AI literacy
AI has rapidly become an integral part of 
everyday life. AI has enormous potential to 
deliver societal benefits and is likely to be a 
tool that all young people will use throughout 
their lives. However, responsible use of AI tools 
requires an understanding of how they work 
and their potential limitations. Greater AI literacy 
will be required to ensure that young people 
are able to think critically about AI tools and use 
them appropriately: to amplify human cognition 
and creativity, not to replace or outsource it35.
Sustainability education
Climate change and biodiversity loss are 
profound, defining challenges of the twenty 
first century. STEM education has a critical role 
to play in conveying the importance, urgency 
and complexity of these challenges, as well as 
ways of addressing them, ensuring that people 
are equipped with the knowledge, skills, 
and confidence to take meaningful action to 
contribute to a more sustainable future. More 
pragmatically, national education systems 
should address the UK’s need for a workforce 
equipped with ‘green skills’36.
35	 Ng DTK, Leung JKL, Chu SKW and Qiao MS. Conceptualizing AI Literacy: An Exploratory Review, Computers and 
Education: Artificial Intelligence 2: 100041 (2021). See: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100041
36	 PWC, Energy Transition Will be Constrained by Green Skills Gap of c.200,000 Workers: PwC Green Jobs Barometer 
(2022). See: https://www.pwc.co.uk/press-room/press-releases/Energy-transition-constrained-by-c200000-jobs-PwC-
GJB.html# (accessed 6 January 2026).
37	 Department for Education, Data set from A level and other 16 to 18 results. Time-Series: A Level Subject Entries and 
Grade By Gender (2024). See: https://explore-education-statistics.service.gov.uk/data-catalogue/data-set/2f6bffba-
735d-4801-8ae3-f0f058044da4 (accessed 6 January 2026).
38	 The Royal Society, The public understanding of science (1985). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/
publications/1985/10700.pdf (accessed 7 January 2026).
39	 Archer L, Moote J, MacLeod E, Francis B & DeWitt J. ASPIRES 2: Young People’s Science and Career Aspirations, 
Age 10–19. London: UCL Institute of Education (2020). See: https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10092041/15/
Moote_9538%20UCL%20Aspires%202%20report%20full%20online%20version.pdf (accessed 6 January 2026).
40	 The Royal Society, Science education tracker 2023 (2024). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/
science-education-tracker/science-education-tracker-2023.pdf (accessed 6 January 2026).
The opportunity to address sustainability 
through whole-school approaches would help 
students to appreciate the multidisciplinary 
nature of climate change and the complex social, 
economic, cultural and political dimensions of 
this global challenge.
System challenges
The UK’s education systems need to address 
significant inequities, in both attainment and in 
the aspiration they engender in learners. These 
challenges do exist within STEM, but the problem 
exists across the whole system. While progress 
has been made in the diversity of young people 
choosing to study STEM subjects at school, there 
remains a notable difference between genders 
in the uptake of certain subjects, particularly 
physics, mathematics and computer science37. 
Highlighting the real-world relevance of these 
subjects, for example in health and climate 
change, could help to increase their appeal to a 
larger number of students, including more girls38.
Social inequalities, such as those associated 
with gender, disadvantage, geography and 
ethnicity, can limit the extent to which young 
people see science as a viable pathway39. 
Across all age groups, students from 
socioeconomically advantaged families are 
more likely to express science aspirations. 
Education systems need to address widely 
differing ‘science capital’ on young people’s 
expectations, aspirations and opportunities40.
CHAPTER ONE
32	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 33 ===

Practical work and enquiry-based learning
Science gains its evidence through 
experimentation and other empirical 
processes, which is why practical work has 
traditionally been central to science education, 
alongside knowledge acquisition. In recent 
years, however, classroom practical activity 
has declined. The Royal Society’s Science 
education tracker, a survey of young people’s 
experiences of science education in England, 
shows that the proportion of 14 – 16-year-olds 
undertaking hands-on practical work at least 
once a fortnight fell from approximately 44% 
in 2016 to 37% in 2019, and to 26% in 202341.
As the Royal Society’s report Practical inquiry 
in secondary science education42 has shown, 
this decline is often attributed to a content-
heavy curriculum, resource constraints 
and reduced specialist technician capacity. 
Assessment systems that prioritise knowledge 
recall can also make it difficult to recognise the 
wider educational value of practical learning.
For a minority of students fortunate enough 
to have the opportunity, engaging in enquiry-
led practical science offers a different 
story. By working on authentic scientific 
problems, students experience science as a 
creative, collaborative process and develop 
a deeper understanding of how knowledge 
is generated. While high-quality enquiry 
opportunities exist, access remains uneven 
owing to financial pressures, curriculum 
demands and technical support requirements. 
Clear government endorsement, supported by 
targeted funding, would help extend access.
41	 The Royal Society, Science education tracker 2023 (2024). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/
science-education-tracker/science-education-tracker-2023.pdf (accessed 6 January 2026).
42	 The Royal Society, Practical inquiry in secondary science education: An evidence synthesis (2024).  
See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/science-education-tracker/practical-inquiry-in-science-education-
evidence-synthesis.pdf (accessed 20 February 2026).
Established programmes demonstrate the 
effectiveness of these approaches. The British 
Science Association’s CREST Awards support 
student-led investigation, while the Institute for 
Research in Schools (IRIS) enables engagement 
with authentic research using university and 
industry partnerships. The Royal Society’s 
Partnership Grants scheme similarly supports 
sustained collaborations between schools 
and STEM professionals, strengthening links 
to research and innovation communities.
This work reflects a broader shift identified 
in the 1985 Public understanding of science 
report, which emphasised learning through 
real-world experience, informal learning 
and wider discovery. In schools, this is 
often delivered through ‘STEM enrichment’. 
Some extended investigations, engineering 
challenges and ecological fieldwork are 
particularly well suited to STEM clubs, after-
school programmes and partnership activities. 
Enrichment can spark curiosity and build 
motivation, confidence and other transferable 
skills, while often providing young people with 
their first meaningful engagement with the 
natural world and with engineering, a discipline 
still largely absent from the core curriculum.
CHAPTER ONE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
33

=== Page 34 ===

Broad and balanced education
UK education systems follow a broad 
compulsory curriculum to age 16, but subject 
options are significantly narrowed thereafter in 
comparison with many other OECD countries. 
In England, post-16 students typically study only 
three subjects, whereas learners of a similar 
age in many other OECD systems continue 
with five to seven subjects. As a result, many 
students specialise early in STEM subjects, 
while an even greater proportion discontinue 
the study of science and mathematics entirely 
at age 16. While governments in Scotland 
and Wales have taken steps to counter this 
narrowing through recent curriculum reforms, 
and Northern Ireland’s 2025 Curriculum 
Review has also argued for greater breadth 
and flexibility, the overall pattern across the UK 
remains one of early specialisation. This has 
implications not only for skills development 
and progression, but also for young people’s 
preparation as informed citizens able to 
engage critically with societal issues raised 
by the applications of science.
The Royal Society has consistently argued 
that all young people should have access to 
a broad and balanced education to age 18, 
encompassing mathematics, science, humanities, 
languages and the creative arts43, 44. This breadth 
is increasingly important, given the changing 
nature of work and growing uncertainty around 
future labour market demands. Exposure to 
a wide range of disciplines helps to equip 
students with the knowledge, adaptability and 
intellectual flexibility needed to navigate a 
rapidly evolving economic and technological 
landscape, while also supporting skills 
development in communication, team working, 
and critical analysis.
43	 The Royal Society, Vision for science, mathematics and computing education (2014). See: https://royalsociety.org/
news-resources/projects/vision/ (accessed 19 April 2026).
44	 The Royal Envision (2022). See: https://royalsociety.org/news-resources/projects/education-reform/envision/ 
(accessed 19 April 2026).
Learning technology
Digital technologies continue to create new 
opportunities to enhance learning, with new 
tools emerging at a rapid pace. However, 
uptake remains uneven and access is not yet 
equitable. Where they are used effectively, 
such technologies have the potential to 
support greater inclusion, particularly for 
learners with special educational needs and 
disabilities. Emerging developments in AI may 
further transform learning experiences soon.
At the same time, there are growing concerns 
about the educational implications of these 
tools, including the use of large language 
models (LLMs) to complete conventional 
assessments, the potential effect on cognitive 
engagement when learners rely on AI rather 
than working directly with source material, 
and the challenges this poses for fair and 
valid assessment. The adoption of digital 
technologies in classrooms should therefore 
be guided by robust evidence of educational 
benefit. At present, however, there remains 
a limited evidence base on the effect of 
many of these technologies on learning and 
attainment outcomes for young people.
CHAPTER ONE
34	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 35 ===

Technical education
Technical education continues to be an 
underserved area. Recruitment of specialist 
teachers is a long-standing challenge45. 
Employers perceive the status of technical 
and vocational science qualifications as 
lower than that of general qualifications46; it 
is too early to assess the effects of recent 
reforms to technical education and the 
proposed introduction of V-levels47.
The Royal Society’s Science 2040 report 
highlights the need for well-defined 
routes into technical education, with an 
integrated approach across national 
and local governments, education 
institutions and industry partners48.
45	 Ofsted, Research and Analysis. T-Level Thematic Review: Final Report (2023). See: https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/t-level-thematic-review-final-report/t-level-thematic-review-final-report (accessed 7 January 2026).
46	 Ofqual, Official Statistics. Perceptions of Vocational and Technical Qualifications – Wave 7: The Results of a Survey 
of Perceptions of Vocational and Technical Qualifications in England. Conducted December 2024 to January 2025 
(2025). See: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/perceptions-of-vocational-and-technical-qualifications-wave-7 
(accessed 7 January 2026).
47	 Department for Education, Post-16 Level 3 and Below Pathways: Government Consultation (2025).  
See: https://consult.education.gov.uk/technical-education-and-qualifications-reform/post-16-level-3-and-below-
pathways/supporting_documents/post-16-level-3-and-below-pathways-consultationpdf (accessed 7 January 2026).
48	 The Royal Society, Science 2040: Interim report (2025). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/
science-2040/science-2040-interim-report.pdf (accessed 7 January 2026).
49	 IOP, The Physics Teacher Shortage and Addressing it Through the 3Rs: Retention, Recruitment and Retraining 
(England) (2025). See: https://www.iop.org/sites/default/files/2025-09/The-physics-teacher-shortage-and-addressing-
it-through-the-3Rs-Retention-Recruitment-and-Retraining-England.pdf (accessed 7 January 2026).
50	 The Royal Society, Science 2040: Interim report (2025). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/
science-2040/science-2040-interim-report.pdf (accessed 7 January 2026).
51	 Sibieta, L. The Teacher Labour Market in England: Shortages, Subject Expertise and Incentives. Education Policy 
Institute (2018). See: https://epi.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/EPI-Teacher-Labour-Market_2018.pdf  
(accessed 7 January 2026).
52	 Worth, J and Tang S. How to Recruit 6,500 Teachers? Modelling the Potential Routes to Delivering Labour’s Teacher 
Supply Pledge. NFER (2024). See: https://www.nfer.ac.uk/publications/how-to-recruit-6-500-teachers-modelling-the-
potential-routes-to-delivering-labour-s-teacher-supply-pledge/ (accessed 7 January 2026).
The central role of the science teaching 
workforce
The quality of science teachers is a major 
influence on educational attainment. In the 
2024 Science Teaching Survey, 43% of 
teachers in England reported that a lack of 
specialist teachers had had a detrimental 
effect on student learning outcomes49.  
Science teachers need a sound understanding 
of their subject’s up-to-date teaching 
practices, and need to have the confidence 
and opportunities to use their knowledge 
and skills creatively in the classroom.
The supply of qualified science teachers is a 
long-standing problem, particularly in physics, 
mathematics and computing50. Despite 
successive governments’ attempts to increase 
recruitment of specialist science teachers, 
lessons are too often taught by teachers 
without a relevant degree51, with certain 
geographic areas particularly badly affected, 
which usually negatively affects those pupils 
from the lowest socioeconomic backgrounds52.
CHAPTER ONE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
35

=== Page 36 ===

More efforts are needed to make teaching 
a more desirable profession. Enhancing 
professional agency would likely improve 
teacher retention53, but AI-based strategies 
may also be needed to address this stubbornly 
intractable challenge.
Within a broad curricular framework, 
enabling teachers with greater agency and 
flexibility, regarding how they teach, can create 
an environment that is more stimulating for 
both teachers and students54. The high quality 
of science education in Estonia illustrates 
the efficacy of expert and empowered 
teaching professionals (see case study:  
Re-engineering STEM education in Estonia).
53	 Arthur, L and Bradley, S. Teacher Retention in Challenging Schools: Please Don’t Say Goodbye!.  
Teachers and Teaching 29 (7–8): 753–771 (2022). See: https://doi.org/10.1080/13540602.2023.2201423
54	 Menzies, L, Parameshwaran, M, Trethewey, A, Shaw, B, Baars, S and Chiong, C. Why Teach? (2015).  
See: https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.12227.86567
55	 Gatsby Benchmarks. See: https://www.gatsbybenchmarks.org.uk/ (accessed 7 January 2026).
56	 Allen, R and Sims, S. Improving Science Teacher Retention: Do National STEM Learning Network Professional 
Development Courses Keep Science Teachers in the Classroom? Education Datalab (2017).  
See: https://www.stem.org.uk/system/files/elibrary-resources/2019/10/science-teacher-retention_0.pdf 
57	 The Royal Society. Science education for a research and innovation economy (2022). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/
media/policy/Publications/2022/2022-01-31-sci-uplift-DfE.pdf (accessed 7 January 2026).
58	 House of Lords Science and Technology Committee (2006) Science Teaching in Schools.  
See: https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200506/ldselect/ldsctech/257/257.pdf (accessed 19 April 2026).
Strengthening science teaching through 
lifelong professional learning
The confidence and creativity of teachers 
can be strengthened through subject-specific 
continuing professional development (CPD), 
as illustrated by the Raising Aspirations in 
Science Education (RAiSE) initiative in Scotland 
(see case study: RAiSE the bar). Targeted, 
high-quality CPD can introduce teachers to 
emerging areas of science and pedagogical 
practice, maintain teachers’ own curiosity, 
scientific literacy and enable them to connect 
curriculum learning with career opportunities55. 
It can make teachers feel empowered, valued 
and supported, thereby improving retention56. 
Greater retention reduces recruitment and 
training costs, making CPD a highly cost-
effective investment57. 
An earlier initiative, the national network of 
Science Learning Centres (subsequently 
STEM Learning), established jointly by the 
UK government and the Wellcome Trust at 
the start of this century, was designed to 
provide rigorous professional learning for 
science teachers58. The initial £51 million 
investment marked a step change in the 
value placed on the science teaching 
workforce and the importance of keeping 
subject knowledge and pedagogy up to date. 
CHAPTER ONE
36	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 37 ===

Independent evaluations commissioned by 
government59 and Wellcome60 found that 
the Science Learning Centres contributed 
to teacher retention61 through improved 
teachers’ confidence, subject expertise and 
classroom practice, while also contributing 
to a cultural shift by normalising sustained, 
subject-specific professional development 
and raising expectations that high-quality 
CPD should be routine62.
Next steps
A strong education provides the foundation for 
all members of society to engage meaningfully 
with science. Science education should 
not only focus on preparing those young 
people who will study and work in science 
but should also ensure that all citizens have 
a foundational understanding of science, 
including its social and ethical challenges. 
Changes in educational practice and policy, 
particularly the introduction of a broad and 
balanced education and a mathematics and 
data science curriculum, are needed if science 
education is to keep pace with evolving 
scientific, technological and societal contexts.
59	 Clarke C, Thom G. Evaluation of the Science Learning Centre Network (2011) Department for Education.  
See: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a7c1186e5274a0706e519b3/DFE-RR257.pdf  
(accessed 19 April 2026).
60	 Matterson C, Holman J. Informal Science Learning Review: Reflections from the Wellcome Trust (2012) Wellcome Trust. 
See: https://iiif.wellcomecollection.org/file/b21248047_Informal%20Science%20Learning%20Review%20reflections.pdf 
(accessed 19 April 2026).
61	 STEM Learning, STEM Learning CPD saves £58.5m in teacher training costs (2019). See: https://assets.ctfassets.net/
pc40tpn1u6ef/72BGt1nbKiAX8mtX1CJKq3/01b1a9221498685c6c2f4a9d58ae776a/teacher_retention_1p_040520_0.pdf 
(accessed 19 April 2026).
62	 Lawton R, Dallas E, Talwar R et al. Valuing the impact of science CPD (2021) STEM Learning. See: https://assets.ctfassets.
net/pc40tpn1u6ef/5bSkZ0BCNxqYQJzEnJ79Q8/dfcc440e39a96a83cfcd16e301b22859/ValuingImpactOfScienceCPD.pdf 
(accessed 19 April 2026).
Change is needed to ensure that science 
education truly meets the needs of all young 
people. Addressing persistent challenges 
– including teacher recruitment, curriculum 
design and assessment – requires bold, 
systemic reform, informed by robust evidence. 
The goal must be to create a science 
education within a coherent system that 
inspires curiosity and equips students with 
the skills to navigate a rapidly changing world, 
empowering them to engage confidently 
with science throughout their lives.
The world is changing rapidly, shaped by 
sustainability challenges, digital technologies 
and AI. Because education is a complex, 
interconnected system, real improvement 
means looking beyond small adjustments to 
rethink how the whole system works. After 
decades of minor tweaks, it is time for the bold 
changes learners need now and in the future.
CHAPTER ONE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
37

=== Page 38 ===

RECOMMENDATION 1
63	 In this chapter we have used the term ‘Governments’ to refer to the UK government (responsible for education 
in England) and the devolved governments of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Governments63 should provide an education that equips all young people 
with the understanding and experience of how scientific knowledge is 
generated and refined through observation, experimentation and direct 
engagement in scientific enquiry. In doing so, this education lays the 
foundation for lifelong scientific literacy, enabling future citizens to evaluate 
evidence, identify trustworthy sources, use data confidently and respond 
to scientific and environmental challenges in everyday life.
•	 Strengthen the focus in science education 
on understanding of scientific processes, the 
nature of evidence and the development of 
critical thinking and problem-solving skills.
•	 Support high-quality science education by 
ensuring practical work remains integral 
to learning, supported by the essential 
expertise of science technicians. This should 
include foundational practical skills and 
exposure to real research, derived through 
project- and enquiry-based initiatives.
•	 Embed sustainability as a topic throughout 
the school experience so that students 
are equipped to live well, within the 
planet’s available resources.
•	 Ensure that mathematics and technology-
focused education provide students with 
the numeracy and data interpretation skills 
essential for everyday life and the workplace.
•	 Secure long-term government and charitable 
investment in the Science education tracker 
to continue to monitor young people’s 
experience and perceptions of science.
CHAPTER ONE
38	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 39 ===

RECOMMENDATION 2
Governments should create 
conditions for a high-status, 
confident and adaptable teaching 
workforce equipped for future 
educational, scientific and 
technological change.
•	 Strengthen teachers’ professional agency 
and provide improved support for 
workload management and wellbeing.
•	 Enhance the attractiveness of teaching 
through increased professional 
recognition alongside consideration 
of flexible, innovative ways of working 
and reforms to school timetabling.
•	 Accelerate the effective use of digital tools 
(including AI) where appropriate, to improve 
teaching and learning and to complement 
the professional skills of teachers.
•	 Prioritise sustained investment in high-
quality professional development in 
subject areas where the workforce 
keeps pace with scientific, technological 
and educational change.
RECOMMENDATION 3
Governments should adopt a 
broader education system to age 18 
that develops adaptable learners, 
balances academic and technical 
pathways, sustains core subjects 
and expands chances for learners 
from disadvantaged backgrounds.
•	 Ensure that greater breadth helps 
to develop adaptable learners who 
can respond to rapidly changing 
jobs, technologies and industries.
•	 Sustain engagement with STEM 
alongside the humanities, arts and 
languages to prepare all young people 
to navigate the complex social, ethical 
and scientific issues they may face.
•	 Ensure that a broader post-16 offer 
keeps pathways open for all learners, 
reducing the early specialisation that 
disproportionately disadvantages students 
from less advantaged backgrounds.
CHAPTER ONE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
39

=== Page 40 ===

40	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER
