=== Page 79 ===

Chapter five
Policy
To view the case studies highlighted within the section, 
scan the QR code or visit royalsociety.org/sfsstudies
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
79

=== Page 80 ===

Policy
155	The Royal Society and AAAS, Science diplomacy in an era of disruption (2025). See: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/
about-us/international/science-diplomacy/science-diplomacy-in-an-era-of-disruption.pdf (accessed 8 January 2026).
156	UKRI, List of Public Sector Research Establishments (2026). See: https://www.ukri.org/publications/organisation-eligibility/
research-organisations-eligible-for-ukri-funding/#section-public-sector-research-establishments (accessed 15 April 2026).
157	Parker, M. The Rothschild Report (1971) and the Purpose of Government-funded R&D: A Personal Account.  
Palgrave Communications 2, 16053 (2016). See: https://doi.org/10.1057/palcomms.2016.53
The UK faces multiple societal challenges and 
opportunities where public policy must be 
supported by progress in science. Examples 
include decarbonisation, bolstering our 
defence, adapting to an ageing population, 
and growing microbial resistance to current 
medicines. Scientific breakthroughs have 
always shaped society, from pharmaceutical 
contraception in the 1950s to weight loss 
drugs or the rise of AI today, but science also 
supports many day-to-day functions such 
as predicting the weather, monitoring pests 
or ensuring that the measurement of time is 
sufficiently accurate to support navigation 
or financial trading. There is a wide-ranging 
interconnectedness of science with society 
and therefore with the policies debated 
in parliaments, enacted by governments, 
and applied within judicial and regulatory 
systems. The interrelationship between 
science, the judiciary and the public is 
considered separately in the case study: 
Scientific evidence in the courtroom.
This chapter briefly summarises the 
mechanisms developed over the past 
50 years to better integrate science and 
policy – specifically as it relates to public 
engagement and trust – and identifies 
six problems that could be addressed 
to make the mechanisms more effective 
and robust for the issues society is now 
facing. While not within the scope of this 
chapter, science and policymaking is also 
crucial for international science diplomacy, 
which is considered separately and in 
depth in the Royal Society’s report Science 
diplomacy in an era of disruption155.
The current mechanism for integration 
of science into government
The main sources of scientific research and 
advice for UK government policy are the chief 
scientific advisors (CSAs) and civil service 
scientists. These work alongside institutional 
structures within the public service, sometimes 
also known as public sector research 
establishments (PSREs), arm’s length bodies, 
universities and third-sector research institutions; 
all of which are referred to collectively as 
the research market. As with Parliament, the 
government may also use thinktanks as an 
evidence source for policymaking.
PSREs156 (such as the Met Office or National 
Physical Laboratory) are often designed 
specifically to provide the ongoing research 
necessary to support policy functions. For 
example, fisheries research is designed to 
enable government to set annual quotas 
for the industry.
In 1971, a report by Lord Rothschild157 set the 
tone for how government would access the 
research it needed, moving to a ‘market-based’ 
approach: government would move from being 
its own supplier to being a procurer of research 
from the research sector. It set in motion a 
process of reducing investment in PSREs 
and using investments in the research sector 
(predominantly in higher education institutions 
or independent research organisations) to 
generate the scientific research and advice 
needed for policy.
CHAPTER FIVE
80	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 81 ===

As part of this move, government needed to 
be an intelligent customer of research, and 
this brought about the gradual appearance 
of CSAs operating at senior levels within 
government departments. The intention was 
that they would gather evidence and procure 
research needed by departments while 
also providing scientific advice. It has taken 
about 50 years to achieve this objective, 
and CSAs are now a key source of scientific 
advice for senior officials and ministers.
Since 2013, some government departments 
have published areas of research interest 
(ARIs)158 to align the activities of the research 
market to the needs of government. These 
ARIs are overseen by department CSAs. 
The activity of CSAs is coordinated by the 
Government Office for Science (GO-Science), 
created in 2007, under the Government 
Chief Scientific Adviser. GO-Science has a 
budget to produce reports summarising the 
science on topical issues of the day as well 
as foresight reports taking a longer look 
at emerging trends and issues. National 
academies, including the Royal Society, have 
also become increasingly active at producing 
reports about the current state of scientific 
knowledge in areas of national interest.
158	Government Office for Science and Cabinet Office, Areas of Research Interest (2025).  
See: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/areas-of-research-interest (accessed 8 January 2026).
159	HM Treasury The Green Book (2026). See: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/the-green-book-and-
accompanying-guidance-and-documents (accessed 19 April 2026).
160	Government Evaluation Task Force (2025). See: https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/evaluation-task-force 
(accessed 19 April 2026).
161	 UK Parliament, POSTnote (2026). See: https://post.parliament.uk/type/postnote/ (accessed 8 January 2026).
In addition to CSAs, government has a Chief 
Medical Officer and a National Technology 
Adviser, and most departments of government 
have science-based advisory committees to 
provide specific advice on topics relevant 
to policy. These are populated mainly by 
non-governmental researchers who have 
requisite expertise. Across government, 
initiatives to improve the use of scientific 
information include the updating of the 
Treasury Green book159 and the creation of 
the Government Evaluation Task Force160.
Finally, an additional mechanism exists 
for delivering scientific advice during 
emergencies. Within 30 minutes of an 
emergency being declared, a Scientific 
Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) 
committee can be established as a sub-
committee of Cabinet Office Briefing 
Room (COBR), the government response 
coordinating group. SAGE committees are 
unique to each emergency because they 
accrete the specific expertise needed.
In parallel with these mechanisms within the 
executive structure of government, the UK 
Parliament and the devolved legislatures have 
developed scientific advice. The Parliamentary 
Office of Science and Technology (POST) 
provides advisory notes to both Houses 
of Parliament on significant topics161. Select 
committees in both Houses of Parliament have 
expert advisers and gather evidence from the 
scientific community via inquiries into topics 
that have a high level of scientific content.
CHAPTER FIVE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
81

=== Page 82 ===

Challenges presented by the current system
The UK’s current system for integrating 
scientific information and advice into 
policy is internationally regarded, but has 
grown in an ad hoc manner over decades. 
There is an important opportunity to build 
on its strengths and further improve and 
systematise the use of science to inform 
policymaking and improve policy outcomes. 
The Royal Society has identified some key 
challenges and areas of future focus.
MPs’ use of reliable scientific sources
It is important that Parliamentarians have 
easy access to authoritative sources of 
scientific advice and evidence. However, 
within Parliament, surveys suggest that 
authoritative sources are infrequently used 
by MPs to access scientific information. A 
poll of MPs carried out for this report found 
general agreement that scientific information 
is important, but indicated that MPs often 
accessed this information from third party 
sources that may have bias. Thinktanks 
and advocacy groups were cited as the 
main sources of scientific information (55%), 
followed by universities or academics 
(48%) and third-sector organisations (45%). 
Some of these sources are not designed to 
provide objective knowledge assessments, 
and some may present evidence designed 
to support a particular policy goal.
A minority of the 2024 cohort of new MPs 
used authoritative sources. Only 22% cited 
POST as a source and only 12% cited national 
academy reports. Nearly half (47%) used 
the internet as a main source of scientific 
information, with just 5% of Parliamentarians 
stating that they used AI. Given the recent 
rapid proliferation of AI use within search 
engine results, this percentage is likely to be 
both underestimated and increase with time. 
It was not clear how Parliamentarians made a 
judgement about how reliable this information 
was. These statistics do not take into account 
how their staff use sources, but suggest that 
MPs do not routinely access independent, 
authoritative sources of scientific knowledge.
Procurement of scientific information
A gradual shift over decades towards a market-
based procurement of science by government 
has probably improved resilience and diversity 
in the sources of scientific information, but in 
key areas it means government can struggle 
to access the scientific support for critical 
operational policy needs.
While it is beyond the scope of this report to 
review the constitution and functionality of 
the research system (including PSREs), the 
sustainability of many institutions is a long-
term issue. There is generally a low level of 
understanding within government of what it 
takes to sustain high-quality scientific capability 
in areas of key national interest, in terms of 
both skills and infrastructure. This poses risks 
for understanding the implications of significant 
contractions in the UK’s scientific capability.
CHAPTER FIVE
82	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 83 ===

FIGURE 4
In April 2025 the Royal Society commissioned YouGov to poll 108 MPs, asking: “Which of the following,  
if any, are your main sources of scientific information in your role as an MP? Please select all that apply.”
 
POST (Parliamentary Oﬃce for
Science and Technology)
Universities or
academics
National academies
Internet
Informal contacts
Think tanks / advocacy groups
such as the Policy Exchange
or The Green Alliance
AI
Third sector organisations
Other
Don't know
0%
10%
20%
30%
50%
60%
40%
14%
5%
45%
5%
55%
26%
47%
12%
48%
22%
CHAPTER FIVE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
83

=== Page 84 ===

The changing role of CSAs
Scientific advice should play a critical and 
central role in an effective policymaking 
process. It should be independent of political 
bias, with scientific findings shared freely 
within government, even where it may be 
politically inconvenient or may not fit the 
political narrative of the day. CSAs are often 
in the position of having to be both within the 
tent of government and able to challenge how 
well government uses scientific information.
The CSA network has been extended 
across government over the past 25 years, 
supported by more senior roles in analysis 
and evaluation. This has opened space for 
more diverse relationships between science 
and policy, such as helping departments and 
agencies to develop scientific questions for 
consultation. If CSAs are to fulfil the original 
intent – the oversight of the ‘intelligent 
customer’ and independent advisor role in 
government – they must be accountable both 
to government itself and to ensure that their 
advice is impartial and objective irrespective 
of the politics of the moment. There is an 
emerging risk, as seen through recent 
developments in the US, that CSAs could find 
themselves pressured where the scientific 
evidence conflicts with political narratives, 
or the ways in which they are recruited 
and managed may systematically promote 
alignment with policies, ultimately undermining 
their purpose. They need to be free to operate 
and speak freely within government, but also 
in public when appropriate.
The same could be said for others who 
provide scientific advice to government, 
including members of advisory committees. 
The potential for such biases needs 
to be kept under review. The national 
academies have the potential to 
convene expertise to serve this role.
The independence of scientists from 
government
The dividing lines between scientists who 
work for government and are subject to rules 
of procedure and those who advise and can 
operate outside those rules is not always clear.
There have been several instances in the 
past decade of confusion within the scientific 
community and the civil service about who is 
subject to civil service restrictions such as the 
pre-election period rules. It is important that 
scientists can provide impartial commentary, 
even during election campaigns. In addition, 
researchers working for government 
research agencies are sometimes the only 
experts available in particular subjects and 
it is essential that the advice they provide 
to government is available to the public.
CHAPTER FIVE
84	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 85 ===

FIGURE 5
As part of the 2025 Public attitudes to science (PAS) survey, respondents were asked:  
“How much do you agree or disagree with each of the following statements:”162
162	UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).
 
The government should act 
in accordance with public 
concerns about science 
and technology
The public is sufficiently 
involved in decisions about
science and technology
Those who regulate science 
need to communicate with
the public
16%
46%
28%
7% 1%
2%
2% 10%
44%
34%
8%
2%
22%
41%
27%
7% 2%
1%
24%
51%
19%
2% 1%
1%
Strongly
disagree
Don’t
know
Strongly
agree
Neither agree
nor disagree
Experts and not the public 
should advise the government 
about the implications of 
scientific developments
Strongly 
agree
Tend to  
agree
Neither agree  
nor disagree
Tend to  
disagree
Strongly  
disagree
KEY
CHAPTER FIVE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
85

=== Page 86 ===

Transparency of how science informs policy
How scientific information has been used 
within policy decisions is frequently not 
made explicit, which undermines public 
confidence in the extent to which government 
policies are aligned with scientific evidence. 
It is understandable that ministers will take 
decisions based on a wide variety of factors 
beyond just the scientific evidence, including 
social, political and economic factors. 
Nevertheless, evidence has shown that, 
when politicians claim to ‘follow the science’, 
decisions may be based on other factors, 
undermining public trust in science. Therefore, 
how scientific evidence has been considered 
and used in a decision, alongside other factors, 
should be clearly communicated to the public.
The case for evidence transparency has been 
well made in the past 5 – 10 years, resulting 
in changes to the Treasury Green Book and 
other guidance for policy development163. 
Despite this, there remain few instances when 
scientific evidence is published alongside 
policies. Even in cases where evidence 
has been published, it is often difficult to 
understand how it has been used to derive 
particular policy decisions. Greater effort is 
needed to explicitly link policies to scientific 
evidence and its uncertainties to reduce the 
chances of ‘post-normal problems’ (when 
the stakes are high, there is high scientific 
uncertainty and high demand for scientific 
information) becoming increasingly intractable. 
For example, it is important not only to be 
honest about scientific uncertainty, but to 
explain when relevant scientific information 
is not used, to avoid selecting only the 
scientific evidence to suit the policy.
163	HM Treasury The Green Book (2026). See: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/the-green-book-and-
accompanying-guidance-and-documents (accessed 19 April 2026).
164	Greenhalgh T, Costello A, Cruickshank S et al. Independent SAGE as an example of effective public dialogue 
on scientific research. Nat Protoc 20, 1103–1113 (2025). See: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-024-01089-6
165	UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).
Public dialogue on science
Scientific discovery and innovation are 
increasingly shaping society; science can 
engender trust by communicating how this 
is happening or might happen soon.
Until now, the scientific community has 
generally taken a responsive approach to 
communicating science to policymakers and 
politicians. While there have been examples 
of effective engagement with the public on 
science, such as through the Independent 
Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies 
(Independent SAGE) which convened during 
the COVID-19 pandemic164, better methods are 
needed to proactively inform policy and society 
about developments in technologies, such as AI 
or synthetic biology, so that their consequences 
can be influenced and managed. 
This includes the need for the scientific 
community to listen and respond to concerns, 
so that they assist the public/policy discussion 
and promote a co-evolving dialogue 
between the scientific community, the public, 
politicians and the policy community.
The PAS survey 2025165 highlights a clear 
majority that wants public views to be reflected 
in science policy, with 62% of those surveyed 
agreeing that the government should act 
in accordance with public concerns about 
science, but only 12% perceiving that the 
public is sufficiently involved in decisions 
about science and technology. The public 
largely placed responsibility for this on the 
government, with 76% saying the government 
was not making very much effort, or no effort 
at all, to consult the public on science.
CHAPTER FIVE
86	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 87 ===

The survey findings suggest that the public 
places less emphasis on scientists being 
the ones to undertake this consultation, 
with 51% agreeing with this viewpoint, while 
13% disagreed.
Both government and the scientific community 
need to develop more effective methods 
of understanding and responding to public 
attitudes to new developments in science. 
This includes communicating scientific 
developments and their potential implications 
from early stages, and listening to public views 
about what science is most important. In an 
age of mass communication, where there 
has never been a richer set of technologies 
to create effective communication between 
the public and scientists, the scientific 
community itself needs to mobilise those 
technologies to improve communication. 
RECOMMENDATION 14
The UK government should set the  
ambition to be the global leader 
in public transparency and 
systematic use of scientific evidence 
in policymaking. To support 
transparency, the UK government 
should publish a ‘scientific evidence 
statement’ alongside policies, which 
sets out explicitly how scientific 
evidence from research has been 
used in draft legislation, papers, 
policy strategy and consultations.
•	 All relevant policy statements should 
make explicit reference to a supporting 
scientific summary or synthesis (‘Scientific 
evidence statement’) in plain English.
•	 The UK government should ensure that 
all scientific advice for policymaking and 
Scientific Evidence Statements clearly 
identify areas of scientific uncertainty, in 
accordance with civil service policymaking 
guidelines in the Treasury Green Book.
CHAPTER FIVE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
87

=== Page 88 ===

RECOMMENDATION 15
The national academies should 
play an active role in holding the 
UK government to account on 
the quality and use of scientific 
evidence in policy decisions.
•	 As organisations independent of the UK 
government, the national academies should 
actively and publicly scrutinise the scientific 
evidence that is used for significant policy 
decisions by government, Parliament and the 
political parties. This is critical to ensure that 
the scientific facts are presented clearly and 
objectively, without political bias.
•	 National academies should work with 
organisations such as the Institute for 
Government and Sense about Science, 
which also play a critical role in evaluating 
the extent to which the government is 
effectively incorporating scientific evidence 
into its policymaking and the transparency 
with which it is communicated to the public.
RECOMMENDATION 16
The scientific community must 
proactively promote public dialogue 
on emerging technologies and 
scientific research so that ethical 
and policy implications are 
considered early.
•	 There is an onus on the scientific community, 
including the national academies, to feed into 
continuing, evolving dialogue with the public, 
politicians and the policy community and to 
create a receptive and supportive environment 
in which this can happen. This is an essential 
element for maintaining trust in science.
•	 Organisations such as the national 
academies, Sciencewise, Sense about 
Science and other expert independent 
facilitators are well-positioned to 
convene scientific expertise, public 
voice and government interests to 
coordinate such dialogues.
•	 Sufficient resources and support for skills 
among researchers must be allocated 
from science budgets (and other funders 
of research) to deliver this function. 
Alongside this, provision should be made 
to improve STEM research and analysis 
skills across the whole policy community, 
including within government and Parliament. 
Investing in this aspect is likely to pay 
back many times over in the long term 
through greater public trust, allowing for 
smoother adoption of new technologies.
CHAPTER FIVE
88	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 89 ===

CHAPTER FIVE
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
89

=== Page 90 ===

90	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER
