=== Page 67 ===

Chapter four
Industry and  
business sector
To view the case studies highlighted within the section, 
scan the QR code or visit royalsociety.org/sfsstudies
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
67

=== Page 68 ===

Industry and business sector
129	The Royal Society, Science and the economy: Policy briefing – part of Science 2040 (2024). See: https://royalsociety.
org/-/media/policy/publications/2024/science-2040-economic-value-of-science.pdf (accessed 8 January 2026).
130	Office for National Statistics, Research and Development Expenditure (2026). See: https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/
governmentpublicsectorandtaxes/researchanddevelopmentexpenditure (accessed 8 January 2026).
131	 CaSE, Public Attitudes to R&D 2025 (2025). See: https://www.sciencecampaign.org.uk/analysis-and-publications/
detail/public-attitudes-to-rd-2025/ (accessed 8 January 2026).
132	Taylor P. ABPI Code Updated With First Social Media Guidance (2023). See: https://pharmaphorum.com/news/abpi-
code-updated-with-first-social-media-guidance (accessed 8 January 2026).
133	The Big Bang. See: https://www.thebigbang.org.uk/ (accessed 8 January 2026).
Industry is central to the UK’s innovation 
system and critical to the translation of 
discovery to public benefit. This is done 
through the efforts of both large corporations 
and high-tech small and medium-sized 
enterprises – often founded by academics. 
The science and technology sector plays 
a key role in wealth creation, delivering 
economic benefits through multiple routes129.
More than two-thirds of research and 
innovation is carried out by the business 
sector130, which makes the links between 
researchers working in industry and public 
engagement stakeholders extremely important. 
Despite the size and importance of industrial 
innovation to the UK economy, the public is 
currently disconnected from these benefits 
in terms of research and development’s 
(R&D) role in their highest priority issues131.
Diversity of sector and motivations
It is important to recognise that industrial 
employers have many motivations for engaging 
with external audiences, including the broader 
public. These vary depending on the specific 
sector or whether the business is engaging 
directly with consumers or engaging indirectly 
through another businesses or delivery 
partners such as the NHS. Multi-national 
companies would obviously need to consider 
engagement on the global scale, which adds 
another dimension of complexity whether 
it is a UK company operating abroad, or an 
overseas company working within the UK.
Those businesses that sell their products 
directly to consumers will naturally have stronger 
levels of engagement and seek public views 
on the viability or appeal of those products. 
For business-to-business organisations, the 
motivations to engage with the broader public 
may be less clear and depend on their size or 
their sector. Some scientists, such as those in the 
pharmaceutical sector, are not allowed to directly 
engage the consumer, and Association of the 
British Pharmaceutical Industry guidelines control 
what employees can even communicate on their 
own social media channels132. This creates an 
uneven landscape for those non-UK companies 
which are not subject to the same guidelines.
Large employers are likely to have strong 
links to their communities and may be 
actively engaged in education and 
support of skills development with a view 
to their future workforce or other public 
facing activities (see case study: Siemens 
mobility). More broadly, this might take 
the form of apprenticeships, internships, 
industrial placements and funded PhD or 
postdoctoral programmes.
There are many big businesses in the UK 
which have well-established public engagement 
programmes with their local communities or 
more widely across the UK. As an example, 
many of the UK’s largest engineering 
businesses take part in the Big Bang Fair 
organised by Engineering UK every year133. 
For smaller companies or those just starting 
out, it is important to recognise that they may 
not have the resources of time or money 
to focus on wider public engagement.
CHAPTER FOUR
68	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 69 ===

It is impossible within the scope of this 
report to consider all the implications for 
public engagement and industry given the 
variances in sector, size and motivation; 
however, there are some general 
observations and recommendations that 
the Royal Society hopes will be helpful.
Corporate and social responsibility
Much industry-led public engagement is framed 
in terms of corporate and social responsibility. 
The National procurement policy statement134 
may inspire further actions by businesses 
delivering public contracts. Recent policy 
changes give statutory guidance that social 
value135 must account for 10% of total scores 
available at the final stage of the procurement 
process136. These policies align most closely 
with the broader goals of public engagement 
with science with the strategic objectives to 
break down barriers to opportunity, including 
by addressing skills gaps and facilitating 
access to training and by removing barriers to 
young people and underrepresented groups.
Organisations from the informal engagement 
with science sector (see Chapter two: Informal 
engagement with science) provide a potential 
avenue for partnerships for such social value 
goals – often being well equipped to link 
in with local communities and possessing 
matured, professionalised structures and 
methods for engagement.
134	Cabinet Office, National Procurement Policy Statement (2025). See: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
media/67ab330e1a116437c7ed88da/E03274856_National_Procurement_Policy_Statement_Elay.pdf  
(accessed 8 January 2026). 
135	Government Commercial Function, The Social Value Model (2020). See: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/940826/Social-Value-Model-Edn-1.1-3-Dec-20.pdf 
(accessed 8 January 2026). 
136	Cabinet Office, Guidance: PPN 002 Guide to Using the Social Value Model (HTML) (2025). See: https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/ppn-002-taking-account-of-social-value-in-the-award-of-contracts/ppn-002-guide-to-using-
the-social-value-model-html (accessed 8 January 2026). 
137	 UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).
Historical problems
There are high-profile cases where lack of 
effective engagement or poor practice in 
engagement has led to suspicion, distrust and 
ultimately rejection by the public. Attempts 
to introduce genetically modified foods in 
Europe (see case study: Genetically modified 
organisms) illustrates how inadequate 
public engagement can have disastrous 
consequences for industry.
Bad actors have caused reputational damage 
or suspicion beyond their own sector. The 
well-documented behaviours of the tobacco 
industry, for example in covering up the 
damage caused by their products to their 
consumers, has fuelled suspicion that the 
industrial profit motive so outweighs any other, 
that public concerns are not considered.
This has contributed to broader concerns that 
the public will view work done by researchers in 
industry to be biased towards the industry’s own 
agenda, irrespective of the evidence they have 
gathered. Trust in scientists working for private 
companies has declined from 57% in 2019 to 
47% in 2025. By comparison, trust in scientists 
working in universities stands at 87% in 2025137.
CHAPTER FOUR
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
69

=== Page 70 ===

Overcoming barriers to engage
Outside of valid reasons such as commercial 
confidentiality and time pressures, it is 
understandable why some industries and 
industrial researchers may be reluctant 
to engage more with public audiences. 
For individual researchers working in 
industry, there are the same levels of 
concern as for researchers working in the 
academic sector, including the potential 
for backlash on social media or elsewhere 
by those who disagree with their work.
It is extremely valuable for industry 
and industrial researchers to be open 
and transparent about their work and 
how it will contribute to public life, and 
there are reasons to be optimistic.
In their Discovery Decade study138, the 
Campaign for Science and Engineering 
showed that the public recognises the 
significant role that businesses play in UK 
R&D and that, despite concerns about bias, 
private R&D is not always seen negatively, 
with 53% stating that R&D was no better or 
worse when funded by private companies for 
profit versus by government and charities139. 
Further, businesses can generate a sense 
of local pride and support in the public.
138	https://www.sciencecampaign.org.uk/what-we-do/public-opinion/journey-so-far/ (accessed 19 April 2026).
139	Discovery Decade – Public Attitudes to R&D 2025 – Campaign for Science and Engineering (accessed 19 April 2026).
140	ABPI, ABPI 2024 Code of Practice (2024). See: https://www.abpi.org.uk/reputation/abpi-2024-code-of-practice/  
(accessed 8 January 2026).
Researchers working in industry have the 
potential to explain their work to public 
audiences, including how they undertake it 
and how they collect evidence. However, 
there needs to be a clear recognition that 
this is not easy. There is anecdotal evidence 
that suggests some companies support 
their researchers when they communicate 
with the public, but this does not appear 
to be widespread. Employers need to 
ensure that their researchers receive 
at least the same levels of support that 
are that are recommended elsewhere in 
this report, in both Chapter three: Mass 
media and misinformation, and in Chapter 
six: Academic scientific community.
Many companies, and the organisations 
that represent them, have recognised the 
need to build public trust and have taken 
steps to address questionable practices. For 
example, trade associations and industry 
bodies have developed wide-ranging codes 
of conduct for the pharmaceutical industry140.
CHAPTER FOUR
70	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 71 ===

Examples of industry engagement
The nuclear industry
In the face of public opposition, the nuclear 
industry’s public engagement strategy 
emphasised the need for clarity, trust, dialogue 
and consultation to build public support141. 
Over the past decade, there has been a small 
increase in public support for nuclear power 
and a decrease in opposition142 – although 
less support for local nuclear power plants143.
The life sciences
While public engagement in health-related 
science has historically centred around ethics 
and transparency, there is a growing focus 
on embedding patient voices across the R&D 
lifecycle – from early priority setting through to 
clinical trials and regulatory dialogue – and a 
significant shift towards patient-centred research.
An example is AstraZeneca’s Patient Centricity 
framework144. This framework emphasises 
co-creation with patients throughout clinical 
trials, ensuring their perspectives shape 
drug development. Efforts like the National 
Institute for Health and Care Research’s 
national standards for patient and public 
involvement further enhance how patients 
are integrated into research, making their 
voices an essential part of study design145.
141	 Nuclear Industry Council, In the Public Eye: Nuclear Energy and Society (2014). See: https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/360669/In_the_Public_Eye_-_Nuclear_Energy_
and_Society_-_NICJuly2014.pdf (accessed 8 January 2026). 
142	Statista, From What You Know, or Have Heard About Using Nuclear Energy for Generating Electricity in the UK,  
Do You Support or Oppose its Use? (2024). See: https://www.statista.com/statistics/426157/united-kingdom-uk-
attitudes-towards-nuclear-energy/ (accessed 8 January 2026). 
143	Department for Energy Security & Net Zero, Official Statistics. DESNZ Public Attitudes Tracker: Energy Infrastructure 
and Energy Security, Spring 2024, UK (2024). See: https://www.statista.com/statistics/426157/united-kingdom-uk-
attitudes-towards-nuclear-energy/ (accessed 8 January 2026). 
144	World Pharma News, First Collaborative Definition of Patient Centricity (2017). See: https://www.worldpharmanews.
com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=3886:first-collaborative-definition-of-patient-
centricity&catid=28:astrazeneca (accessed 8 January 2026). 
145	National Institute for Health and Care Research, News: NIHR Announces New Standards for Public Involvement 
in Research (2019). See: https://www.nihr.ac.uk/news/nihr-announces-new-standards-public-involvement-research 
(accessed 8 January 2026). 
146	 Camden Community Empowerment Network, Good Practice Guide to Public Engagement in Development Schemes 
(2010) http://www.camdencen.org.uk/Resources/Planning/Communities/Good%20Practice%20Guide%20to%20
Public%20Engagement%20Development%20Schemes.pdf (accessed 8 January 2026).
Transport and infrastructure
Transport and infrastructure projects are 
increasingly prioritising community consultation 
to ensure public involvement in local initiatives. 
These efforts are exemplified through a range 
of approaches and case studies, which aim to 
involve local communities in shaping systems 
that meet their needs. Lessons can be learned 
from these projects to inform good practice 
across all development and infrastructure 
schemes that have a basis in science, such as 
autonomous vehicles, wind and solar farms, 
nuclear energy, communications infrastructure 
or modernisation of the power grid.
Effective community engagement is vital in 
development schemes, particularly those 
requiring planning consent. The Planning Aid’s 
Guide to public engagement in development 
schemes outlines a structured approach to 
engagement. An example from this guide is 
the Docklands Light Railway project, which 
employed ‘local ambassadors’ to liaise with 
the community and promote station use146.
CHAPTER FOUR
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
71

=== Page 72 ===

Emerging technologies
The benefits that new and emerging 
technologies can bring to society may not 
be immediately apparent, and businesses 
working in these sectors may not have 
sufficient resources to engage the public. 
Many university spin-out companies are led 
by the original inventor of the technology, 
who may not have the time necessary to add 
a public engagement role to their workload. 
A report by Sciencewise147, on behalf of UKRI, 
found that three common social and ethical 
issues arise with any new technology: Who 
governs the technology? Who benefits from 
it? Is the technology safe and secure?
Openness to new technologies is driven 
by many demographic factors; for example, 
geographic location plays a significant role, 
with greater opportunities for the public to 
engage being predominantly in large cities 
where there is a significant and long-standing 
science infrastructure linked to the location 
of higher education institutions, STEM based 
enterprises, science museums and more 
highly educated populations148. Furthermore, 
there are differences in the trust of new 
innovations related to factors including 
gender, age, social position and interests149.
147	 UKRI, Sciencewise and British Science Association, Tomorrow’s Tech, Today: What the Public Think About Five 
Emerging Technologies, and Opportunities for Future Engagement (2022). See: https://sciencewise.org.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2022/05/Social-Intelligence-on-Emerging-Technologies-Report_FullReport.pdf (accessed 8 January 2026).
148	British Science Association and London Economics, Mapping and Analysis of Science Engagement and Inequity 
in the UK: Final Report for the British Science Association (2022). See: https://www.britishscienceassociation.org/
Handlers/Download.ashx?IDMF=e9f99e45-c55a-4c59-b626-99d2977761eb (accessed 8 January 2026).
149	Nesta, Innovation Population: The UK’s Views on Innovation (2014). See: https://media.nesta.org.uk/documents/
innovation_population_wv.pdf (accessed 8 January 2026).
Data-enabled technologies and how they 
will transform lives
While the Royal Society encourages 
public engagement across all R&D sectors 
where possible and practicable, we do 
want to highlight the current and future 
role of organisations working in the 
data-enabled technology economy.
AI and data-enabled technologies have 
huge potential to transform lives and society 
as a whole. Ensuring they are used safely 
and effectively is essential for the UK’s 
wellbeing, security and economic growth.
Data are being used to develop digital 
technologies that can help us. Training AI-
powered image recognition on medical 
scans and digital images has yielded 
results that suggest these could help with 
the diagnosis of several diseases. Image 
recognition, speech-to-text transcription, 
virtual assistants, and obstacle navigation 
can help people with vision, hearing, 
mobility and learning difficulties.
CHAPTER FOUR
72	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 73 ===

Any use of data, however, comes with 
problems relating to privacy and security. 
Everyone has the right for their data to be 
stored safely and used responsibly. Breaches 
in cybersecurity can have devastating 
effects on companies and individuals, either 
through loss of operational production150 
or the ability to conduct transactions online 
combined with the theft of customer data151.
When using personal data, it is important to 
ensure that flaws and biases within the data 
do not accentuate inequalities in society. 
Failing to do so could undermine public 
confidence in the technologies that use data.
150	Businesstech Weekly, Jaguar Land Rover Cyber Attack: Impact on Manufacturing Cybersecurity and Business 
Continuity (2025). See: https://www.businesstechweekly.com/technology-news/jaguar-land-rover-cyber-attack-impact-
on-manufacturing-cybersecurity-and-business-continuity/ (accessed 8 January 2026).
151	 Masud F. M&S Profits Almost Wiped Out After Cyber Hack Hit Sales BBC (2025). See: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/
articles/c93x16zkl9do (accessed 8 January 2026).
152	UK Research and Innovation, Public attitudes to science (2025). See: https://pas.ipsos.com/ (accessed 14 April 2026).
153	Groves, l. Going Public: Exploring Public Participation in Commercial AI Labs, Ada Lovelace Institute (2023).  
See: https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/going-public-participation-ai/ (accessed 8 January 2026).
AI is already viewed with suspicion by the 
public, with only 33% of those surveyed in the 
PAS survey believing that the benefits of AI 
outweigh the risks. This compares with 80% 
when people are asked the same question 
about vaccination152. Some public participation 
activities to understand the ‘citizen voice’ 
have been conducted in the past few years: 
Google DeepMind collaborated with the Royal 
Society of Arts in 2018 to host an ethical AI 
citizens’ jury and OpenAI organised a funding 
scheme as part of its Democratic inputs to AI 
programme (see case study: DeepMind). In 
general, though, efforts tend to be organised on 
an ad hoc basis and are not used consistently 
to inform industry practice or take significant 
account of public views153. Given the critical 
importance of these technologies, the Royal 
Society would ask organisations working in 
AI to engage actively with public audiences 
to seek their views and build them into 
their thinking for future developments.
CHAPTER FOUR
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
73

=== Page 74 ===

Third sector
154	AMRC, 2025: Our Sector’s Footprint (2025). See: https://www.amrc.org.uk/2025-our-sectors-footprint  
(accessed 8 January 2026).
The third sector is made up of organisations 
that are not part of the government or the 
private sector. They include charities, voluntary 
and community groups, social enterprises, 
co-operatives and other non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs). They are largely mission 
driven and, for many of them, engaging with 
public audiences is an integral part of their 
strategy and activities, whether for fundraising 
or volunteering purposes, consultation on key 
issues, involvement in research or advocacy.
Given the essential need of third-sector 
organisations relying on public support to 
engage with public audiences, they have 
extensive experience and expertise in 
many forms of public engagement and can 
provide helpful examples for other sectors.
It is impossible, given the diverse nature of the 
third sector, to consider all the ways that third-
sector organisations involve the public in their 
work, but a few examples are set out below.
Medical research charities
The 148 members of the Association of 
Medical Research Charities invested £1.6 
billion in research in 2024/25, supporting 
more than 25,000 researchers154. Moreover, 
many organisations with a human health 
focus actively engage specific groups of 
patient and carer communities to better 
understand their lived experience and support 
their specific needs. The Cancer Research 
UK case study shows how important these 
interactions are for both the organisation 
and the patients and carers involved.
CHAPTER FOUR
74	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 75 ===

Conservation organisations
Organisations such as the National Trust, 
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds 
and the Canal and River Trust are extensive 
landowners and play a key role in land 
management and conservation research. 
Many of them have large memberships, 
which they also engage to support their 
aims. As an example, the National Trust has 
more than 5 million members. They are well 
placed to mobilise their memberships and 
the wider public to get involved in citizen 
science research, such as the Big Garden 
Birdwatch or the Big Butterfly Count (see 
case study: Big Butterfly Count). These forms 
of citizen science projects are wonderful 
examples of how engaging the public in 
data collection can be transformational 
in providing the evidence to support 
behaviour change or policy development.
Advocacy groups
There are many NGOs whose focus is to 
campaign for policy change to support 
their mission. Many of these organisations 
will commission their own research or cite 
other scientific research to support their 
case. Sometimes there are opposing views 
quoting different research sources, all of 
which may be accurate but, which may 
address the topic from different perspectives. 
As addressed elsewhere in this report, 
the important requirement is to enable 
public audiences to be able to understand 
the whole picture, highlighting again the 
importance of scientific and data literacy 
from early years education onwards.
CHAPTER FOUR
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
75

=== Page 76 ===

RECOMMENDATION 11
The UK government should support 
R&D businesses to continue to 
develop strong links with their local 
and national communities, through 
incentives that reward those that 
create auditable and costed public 
engagement activities.
•	 Engagement with schools should include 
engagement with the teachers. Most 
teachers have never worked in industry and 
so are unaware of some careers that are 
potentially available to their students. Help 
schools to engage their students with online 
career platforms providing work experience 
opportunities to larger student audiences.
•	 Reassess the potential for visitor centres 
and work with local governments to 
create innovation zones in public spaces; 
for example, collaborations with local 
informal engagement providers, to 
provide opportunities for employers to 
engage with local communities. This type 
of engagement could be included as a 
requirement for those companies that 
receive R&D grants from public funds.
RECOMMENDATION 12
R&D businesses working in fields 
of emerging science or technology 
should engage with the public 
to demystify these technologies, 
particularly where they might be 
transformative, to understand public 
perceptions and address concerns, 
and to build trusting relationships 
that will improve social acceptance. 
Currently, this is particularly important 
for businesses working in data-
enabled technologies including AI.
•	 Focus on schools to habituate technology: 
fund schools to create access to technology 
such as digital technologies and AI, 
augmented reality, modern manufacturing 
(including three-dimensional printing).
•	 Seek opportunities to engage those 
outside the main cities and university towns. 
Engagement should not be viewed as a one-
size-fits-all activity; attention should be put 
on tailoring messages to facilitate access to 
all demographics.
CHAPTER FOUR
76	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 77 ===

RECOMMENDATION 13
Employers should ensure that industry scientists are encouraged, 
supported, and trained to speak openly about the important role 
of industry science, and are recognised for these efforts.
•	 Embed training for public engagement in the 
career pathways for new staff and incentives 
offered to the employees to encourage them 
to take up engagement opportunities; for 
example, by presenting at school open days.
•	 Ensure that trade bodies and industry 
association groups have public engagement 
on their agenda and take the lead on 
promoting best practice to their members.
•	 Encourage local, regional and national 
government to support R&D businesses in 
engaging with the public via their targeted 
inquiries and reports (developed in 
consultation with industry).
•	 Encourage scientific and business media 
to cover and engage with industrial R&D 
and innovation as part of their reporting 
and analysis.
•	 Encourage trade associations and industry 
representation bodies representing 
R&D intensive businesses to continue to 
build public engagement activities into 
their programmes.
CHAPTER FOUR
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
77

=== Page 78 ===

78	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER
