=== Page 16 ===

Recommendations
27	 In this chapter we have used the term ‘Governments’ to refer to the UK government (responsible for education 
in England) and the devolved governments of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
RECOMMENDATION 1
Governments27 should provide an education that equips all young people 
with the understanding and experience of how scientific knowledge is 
generated and refined through observation, experimentation and direct 
engagement in scientific enquiry. In doing so, this education lays the 
foundation for lifelong scientific literacy, enabling future citizens to evaluate 
evidence, identify trustworthy sources, use data confidently and respond 
to scientific and environmental challenges in everyday life.
•	 Strengthen the focus in science education 
on understanding of scientific processes, the 
nature of evidence, and the development of 
critical thinking and problem-solving skills.
•	 Support high-quality science education by 
ensuring practical work remains integral 
to learning, supported by the essential 
expertise of science technicians. This should 
include foundational practical skills and 
exposure to real research, derived through 
project- and enquiry-based initiatives.
•	 Embed sustainability as a topic throughout 
the school experience so that students 
are equipped to live well, within the 
planet’s available resources.
•	 Ensure that mathematics and technology-
focused education provide students with 
the numeracy and data interpretation skills 
essential for everyday life and the workplace.
CHAPTER ONE  |  EDUCATION
RECOMMENDATIONS
16	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 17 ===

RECOMMENDATION 2
Governments should create 
conditions for a high-status, 
confident and adaptable teaching 
workforce equipped for future 
educational, scientific and 
technological change.
•	 Strengthen teachers’ professional agency 
and provide improved support for 
workload management and wellbeing.
•	 Enhance the attractiveness of teaching 
through increased professional 
recognition alongside consideration 
of flexible, innovative ways of working 
and reforms to school timetabling.
•	 Accelerate the effective use of digital tools 
(including AI) where appropriate to improve 
teaching and learning and to complement 
the professional skills of teachers.
•	 Prioritise sustained investment in high-
quality professional development in 
subject areas where the workforce 
keeps pace with scientific, technological, 
and educational change.
RECOMMENDATION 3
Governments should adopt a 
broader education system to age 18 
that develops adaptable learners, 
balances academic and technical 
pathways, sustains core subjects, 
and expands chances for learners 
from disadvantaged backgrounds.
•	 Ensure that greater breadth helps 
to develop adaptable learners who 
can respond to rapidly changing 
jobs, technologies and industries.
•	 Sustain engagement with STEM 
alongside the humanities, arts and 
languages to prepare all young people 
to navigate the complex social, ethical 
and scientific issues they may face.
•	 Ensure that a broader post-16 offer 
keeps pathways open for all learners, 
reducing the early specialisation that 
disproportionately disadvantages students 
from less advantaged backgrounds.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
17

=== Page 18 ===

RECOMMENDATION 4
The UK government should 
improve funding opportunities 
to ensure a diverse network 
of engagement activities.
•	 Research funders (including UKRI and 
the Royal Society) should promote and 
fund diverse engagement methods that 
recognise STEM engagement opportunities 
as a core part of the UK’s social and 
cultural infrastructure.
•	 Organisations such as the Association for 
Science and Discovery Centres should 
work with HM Treasury and government 
departments to ensure that informal science 
activities, such as science festivals and 
science and discovery centres, are able to 
benefit from the same financial incentives 
as the cultural sector.
•	 National academies should establish a national 
framework with government and philanthropic 
foundations to encourage a culture of giving 
towards science engagement.
•	 Central government should integrate science 
outreach as an option for demonstrating 
social value into procurement processes to 
encourage investment in informal science 
engagement institutions and initiatives.
RECOMMENDATION 5
Build the evidence base for 
engagement practices, to optimise 
the impact of informal public 
engagement with STEM activities.
•	 The Royal Society should convene a working 
group of major stakeholders (including 
funders, science engagement organisations 
and practitioners) to design and secure 
funding for a long-term cohort study on 
the enduring effects of informal science 
engagement alongside formal education.
•	 Scientific employers and funders should 
create opportunities for professional 
development and the dissemination of 
best practices and common tools between 
adjacent sectors, such as science, the 
arts and community engagement, to 
improve overall engagement quality.
CHAPTER TWO  |  INFORMAL ENGAGEMENT WITH SCIENCE
RECOMMENDATIONS
18	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 19 ===

RECOMMENDATION 6
The Royal Society and others in 
the scientific community should 
convene a working group, 
collaborating with experts in media 
monitoring to analyse and respond 
to current trends in science media 
consumption across traditional and 
social media platforms.
•	 These audits of changing media 
consumption should be used by scientists 
and science communicators to support a 
better understanding of how to identify 
audiences and connect with them effectively.
•	 The Royal Society and others in the 
science community should work to ensure 
media platforms provide reasonable, 
privacy-respecting access to their data for 
researchers, to support public understanding 
of how platforms work and how their 
design decisions may be affecting people’s 
engagement with online information.
RECOMMENDATION 7
Universities, funders and research 
organisations should value 
communications skills as a vital 
component of research culture to 
help counter mis- and disinformation. 
They should embed training and 
support for scientists to capitalise 
on opportunities to connect with 
audiences via social media.
•	 Training and support must be well-developed 
and well-resourced.
•	 The importance of engaging with the 
wide range of media platforms should be 
recognised as a valuable part of a scientist’s 
role, with time allocated accordingly.
•	 Training should cover a range of 
skills such as an understanding of the 
social media environment, content 
production and content moderation.
•	 This training should include specific support 
for scientists to anticipate and manage 
the potential pitfalls of engagement – 
especially online harassment, trolling and 
encountering hostile and polarised debates.
•	 Guidelines and harassment policies need 
to be put in place, but also individuals 
in organisations should be assigned 
responsibility for supporting scientists 
affected by online harassment and abuse.
CHAPTER THREE  |  MASS MEDIA AND MISINFORMATION
RECOMMENDATIONS
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
19

=== Page 20 ===

RECOMMENDATION 8
The science community should 
recommit to working with science 
journalists and editors to support 
and champion quality science 
journalism, and to help ensure that 
credible and trustworthy reporting 
is reaching the widest number 
of people across traditional and 
social media channels.
•	 The science community should press 
news outlets to monitor the success of 
science news stories and ensure they 
feature prominently in editorial priorities, 
given the evidence of audience desire for 
reporting on how science can help solve 
some of the problems society faces.
•	 The scientific community should send a 
strong message to the news media that 
the way to compete most effectively on 
social media and win audiences back 
to professional journalism is not to join 
a race to the bottom, but to deliver 
the high-quality news that the British 
public repeatedly say they want.
RECOMMENDATION 9
The Royal Society should draw up 
and urge the scientific community to 
adopt a code of practice for scientists 
and research communications 
professionals engaging with the 
media to help ensure high standards 
are maintained.
•	 Modelled and adapted from the UK Statistics 
Authority’s Code of Practice for Statistics, 
this code would lay down minimum 
standards for communicating science in 
a measured, accurate and transparent 
way with a focus on the principles of 
trustworthiness, quality and value.
•	 The science community is currently trying 
to improve the standards of scientific 
literature, with increasing focus on 
research integrity and reproducibility, but 
these efforts often take place separately 
from science communication – the two 
endeavours should be merged.
CHAPTER THREE  |  MASS MEDIA AND MISINFORMATION
RECOMMENDATIONS
20	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 21 ===

RECOMMENDATION 10
The Royal Society should set up a working group to explore the  
possibility, design and implementation of a new initiative that provides  
a stimulus to achieve more high-quality science programming content.
•	 The Royal Society is in a unique position 
to act as a convener, bringing together 
novel sources of funding with scientists 
and content producers and platforms.
•	 The new initiative could also develop 
a collective voice for more and better 
science programming from the science 
and science production communities – 
something that is noticeable in the arts 
and noticeably absent in science.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
21

=== Page 22 ===

RECOMMENDATION 11
The UK government should support 
R&D businesses to continue to 
develop strong links with their local 
and national communities, through 
incentives that reward those that 
create auditable and costed public 
engagement activities.
•	 Engagement with schools should include 
engagement with the teachers. Most 
teachers have never worked in industry and 
so are unaware of some careers that are 
potentially available to their students. Help 
schools to engage their students with online 
career platforms providing work experience 
opportunities to larger student audiences.
•	 Reassess the potential for visitor centres 
and work with local governments to 
create innovation zones in public spaces; 
for example, collaborations with local 
informal engagement providers, to 
provide opportunities for employers to 
engage with local communities. This type 
of engagement could be included as a 
requirement for those companies that 
receive R&D grants from public funds.
RECOMMENDATION 12
R&D businesses working in fields 
of emerging science or technology 
should engage with the public 
to demystify these technologies, 
particularly where they might be 
transformative, to understand public 
perceptions and address concerns, 
and to build trusting relationships 
that will improve social acceptance. 
Currently, this is particularly important 
for businesses working in data-
enabled technologies including AI.
•	 Focus on schools to habituate technology: 
fund schools to create access to technology 
such as digital technologies and AI, 
augmented reality, modern manufacturing 
(including three-dimensional printing).
•	 Seek opportunities to engage those 
outside the main cities and university 
towns. Engagement should not be viewed 
as a one-size-fits-all activity; attention 
should be put on tailoring messages to 
facilitate access to all demographics.
CHAPTER FOUR  |  INDUSTRY AND BUSINESS SECTOR
RECOMMENDATIONS
22	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 23 ===

RECOMMENDATION 13
Employers should ensure that industry scientists are encouraged, 
supported and trained to speak openly about the important role of 
industry science, and are recognised for these efforts.
•	 Embed training for public engagement in the 
career pathways for new staff and incentives 
offered to the employees to encourage them 
to take up engagement opportunities; for 
example, by presenting at school open days.
•	 Ensure that trade bodies and industry 
association groups have public engagement 
on their agenda and take the lead on 
promoting best practice to their members.
•	 Encourage local, regional and national 
government to support R&D businesses in 
engaging with the public via their targeted 
inquiries and reports (developed in 
consultation with industry).
•	 Encourage scientific and business media 
to cover and engage with industrial R&D 
and innovation as part of their reporting 
and analysis.
•	 Encourage trade associations and industry 
representation bodies representing 
R&D intensive businesses to continue to 
build public engagement activities into 
their programmes.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
23

=== Page 24 ===

RECOMMENDATION 14
The UK government should set the  
ambition to be the global leader 
in public transparency and 
systematic use of scientific evidence 
in policymaking. To support 
transparency, the UK government 
should publish a ‘scientific evidence 
statement’ alongside policies, which 
sets out explicitly how scientific 
evidence from research has been 
used in draft legislation, papers, 
policy strategy and consultations.
•	 All relevant policy statements should 
make explicit reference to a supporting 
scientific summary or synthesis (‘Scientific 
evidence statement’) in plain English.
•	 The UK government should ensure that 
all scientific advice for policymaking and 
Scientific Evidence Statements clearly 
identify areas of scientific uncertainty, in 
accordance with civil service policymaking 
guidelines in the Treasury Green Book.
RECOMMENDATION 15
The national academies should 
play an active role in holding the 
UK government to account on 
the quality and use of scientific 
evidence in policy decisions.
•	 As organisations independent of the UK 
government, the national academies should 
actively and publicly scrutinise the scientific 
evidence that is used for significant policy 
decisions by government, Parliament and the 
political parties. This is critical to ensure that 
the scientific facts are presented clearly and 
objectively, without political bias.
•	 National academies should work with 
organisations such as the Institute for 
Government and Sense about Science, 
which also play a critical role in evaluating 
the extent to which the government is 
effectively incorporating scientific evidence 
into its policymaking and the transparency 
with which it is communicated to the public.
CHAPTER FIVE  |  POLICY
RECOMMENDATIONS
24	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 25 ===

RECOMMENDATION 16
The scientific community must proactively promote public dialogue on 
emerging technologies and scientific research so that ethical and policy 
implications are considered early.
•	 There is an onus on the scientific community, 
including the national academies, to feed into 
continuing, evolving dialogue with the public, 
politicians and the policy community and to 
create a receptive and supportive environment 
in which this can happen. This is an essential 
element for maintaining trust in science.
•	 Organisations such as the national 
academies, Sciencewise, Sense about 
Science and other expert independent 
facilitators are well-positioned to 
convene scientific expertise, public 
voice and government interests to 
coordinate such dialogues.
•	 Sufficient resources and support for skills 
among researchers must be allocated 
from science budgets (and other funders 
of research) to deliver this function. 
Alongside this, provision should be made 
to improve STEM research and analysis 
skills across the whole policy community, 
including within government and Parliament. 
Investing in this aspect is likely to pay 
back many times over in the long term 
through greater public trust, allowing for 
smoother adoption of new technologies.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
25

=== Page 26 ===

RECOMMENDATION 17
Vice-chancellors and other academic 
leaders should strengthen the long-
term institutional commitment to 
public engagement.
•	 Review how effectively their institution is 
supporting public engagement. Use the results 
to develop an action plan, with designated 
responsibility in the senior leadership team, 
based on an investment case that recognises 
the value of public engagement in local 
communities and beyond.
•	 Ensure that public engagement activities 
are recognised in promotions processes, 
reward and recognition measures, workload 
allocation, hiring criteria and institutional 
award programmes.
•	 Invest in staffing and infrastructure for public 
engagement, to enable time-constrained 
researchers to conduct engagement activities.
•	 Develop programmes that build 
competencies in engagement at all stages  
of research careers.
•	 Explore opportunities for regional partnering 
with other institutions to develop core 
infrastructure for public engagement.
•	 Develop stronger links with philanthropic 
bodies and local employers, schools 
and cultural venues to ensure support 
for public engagement activities.
RECOMMENDATION 18
National funding councils and 
responsible government departments 
should ensure that mechanisms of 
research evaluation recognise the 
importance of public engagement.
•	 Ensure all national evaluations for 
research and knowledge exchange 
facilitate benchmarking of university 
public engagement infrastructure, 
resource and strategic alignment and 
provide financial incentives to institutions 
which meet these benchmarks.
•	 Ensure that recognition of engagement 
is sustained in future national 
research assessment exercises.
CHAPTER SIX  |  ACADEMIC SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY
RECOMMENDATIONS
26	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER

=== Page 27 ===

RECOMMENDATION 19
Research funders (including the 
Royal Society) should ensure that 
public engagement is seen as core 
to scientific research and maximise 
researchers’ opportunities to 
undertake engagement activities; 
they should also monitor and set 
annually published targets for spend 
on engagement as a proportion of 
their research-funding budgets.
•	 Create additional training opportunities 
that reflect current knowledge gaps and 
areas of interest (for example, policy 
engagement, social media engagement, 
ethical/inclusive research practice, design 
of participatory or citizen science research).
•	 In addition to providing public engagement 
funding for individual researchers through 
normal research grant mechanisms, provide 
competitively awarded ring-fenced multi-
year funding for strategic public engagement 
projects with teams/networks of researchers 
and public engagement professionals rather 
than individuals, in order for HEIs to plan long-
term engagement strategies more effectively.
•	 Support the sharing of best practice in public 
engagement, science communication and 
evaluation methods, capitalising on the 
NCCPE’s Research Excellence Framework 
impact case study work and other 
independent reviews.
•	 Commit to repeating the Factors affecting 
public engagement by UK researchers 
survey on a five-year cycle.
RECOMMENDATION 20
The research community should 
advocate for increased institutional 
and funding support for public 
engagement, particularly early 
upstream engagement.
•	 Advocate for the importance of engagement 
within host institutions and externally.
•	 Build on the increasing emphasis on 
two-way engagement by embedding 
engagement earlier in the research cycle.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER 	
27

=== Page 28 ===

28	
SCIENCE FOR SOCIETY: HOW SOCIETY AND SCIENCE SHAPE EACH OTHER
