Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power
Edited by James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen
First published in print: 2009 | Copyright: 2010 | Cambridge University Press

Chapter 2: Infiltrating the State: The Evolution of Health Care Reforms in Brazil, 1964–1988
Tulia G. Falleti
Original print pages 38–62; PDF pages 56–80

[English original. Chapter footnotes and references are retained in their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks and fixed-width table layout are retained; verify diagrams and exact typography against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, footnotes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 38] [PDF page 56]

2

Infiltrating the State

The Evolution of Health Care Reforms
in Brazil, 1964–1988

       Tulia G. Falleti




       Policy in Brazil changes by accretion rather than by substitution.
                                                          Schmitter 1971, 256


In the last two decades, Brazil’s health care system has undergone two
major transformations: universalization and municipalization. Prior
to 1988, the administration of the health care system was centralized
in the federal government. The member states and the municipalities
had a minimal role in the management and delivery of health care.
National funding was channeled, via contracts, to the private sector,
and inequalities in the provision of services were pervasive. A large
portion of the population did not have access to health care, either
because they were uninsured or because there were no health facilities
in the areas where they lived.
   Two decades later the system has been radically reconfigured. In
the new health care system, coverage is universal, access is free, public


I am indebted to Jennifer Amyx, Marta Arretche, Marie Gottschalk, Desmond King, Ian
Lustick, Julia Lynch, James Mahoney, Quinton Mayne, Paul Pierson, Jonas Pontusson,
Celina Souza, Kathleen Thelen, Luis Enrique Urtubey De Césaris, Kurt Weyland, and
the participants at the conference “Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency,
and Power in Historical Institutionalism” (Northwestern University, October 26–27,
2007), at the University of Pennsylvania Comparative Politics Workshop (January 31,
2008), and at the Princeton’s Comparative Politics Research Seminar (April 29, 2008)
for their helpful comments. I am also thankful to the University of Pennsylvania Research
Fund and the Christopher Browne Center for International Politics at the University of
Pennsylvania for generous financial support that funded this research.

[p. 39] [PDF page 57]

services are integrated, and the delivery of health care is decentralized.
The private sector continues to exist alongside the public sector, but
its importance as a contractor for the public system has diminished
significantly. The Brazilian states and some of the large municipali-
ties are responsible for high-complexity health services, and all of the
municipalities – more than fifty-five hundred in total – deliver basic
health care services.
    This development is puzzling in light of existing theories that all
point to insurmountable political barriers to universalization in a con-
text such as Brazil. Several features of the previous system should
have dampened efforts in this direction. In particular, the fact that a
sizeable portion of the public enjoyed private-sector coverage should
have narrowed the political coalition for reform. In addition, the ini-
tial national public insurance programs were focused on “residual”
populations, who lacked the political clout to push for the extension
of such programs. Moreover, since 1964, the military government had
made great strides in building a private medical industry. From a com-
parative standpoint, the political barriers to universalization of health
seemed insurmountable (see Hacker 1998, 127–128).
    Why and how did Brazil achieve universalization of health care
despite the prior institutional evolution of its health care system?
Most scholars invoke a critical-juncture explanation, identifying polit-
ical “break points” or economic crisis as having provided the sol-
vent that unhinged the old system and opened the door for some-
thing new. The most prominent such account points to the constitu-
tional reform of 1988, in the midst of Brazil’s democratic transition
after a two-decade-long military regime (1964–1985) (Kaufman and
Nelson 2004, 44). According to this approach, the health care reforms
were possible when the political opportunity structure changed; this
occurred during an exceptional period of political opening that led to
the relaxation of the institutional and political constraints set in place
by the prior development of the health care system. In this interpre-
tation, the constitutional convention of 1987–1988 was one of these
rare and short-lived episodes when the opportunities for fundamen-
tal change of so-called locked-in institutional arrangements occurred.
Another group of scholars locates the origins of the reforms in the eco-
nomic crisis of the early 1980s, which created incentives to restructure
the economically troubled social security system that provided health

[p. 40] [PDF page 58]

services (Draibe 1994, 276, 285; Lewis and Medici 1998, 270). Similar
to the prior account, this explanation considers the economic crisis to
be the critical juncture that produced the institutional changes.
   These explanations are shortsighted, however. In this chapter, I
show that the health reforms introduced in Brazil’s 1988 constitution
and implemented throughout the 1990s were not the result of a critical
juncture (either political or economic). Instead, they were the result of
gradual changes – beginning long before the transition to democracy –
through which actors on the periphery of the existing system were able
to introduce incremental changes through processes of what the editors
of this volume call “layering.” The crucial opening for the strategies
of these “subversives” was provided by the military, which in the
1970s introduced heath care reforms that were designed to solidify
authoritarian rule by extending the state’s presence to the countryside.
The military was interested in the state’s territorial expansion to the
peripheral areas of the North and Northeast, where it had practically
had no presence. The regime was also interested in taming the social
and political demands of an increasingly active rural movement. In
an effort to legitimate its domination and co-opt rural activists, the
military government extended health care to those employed in the in-
formal economy (the majority of the rural population) and to the
unemployed.
   These efforts provided an opening for leftist health care organiza-
tions, those of the movimento sanitário (henceforth, the sanitarista
movement), to put in practice on a broader scale models of preventive
and public social medicine that they had been promoting in isolated
pockets, mostly southern municipalities ruled by the opposition. In
short, the penetration of society by the authoritarian state facilitated
the infiltration of the state by reformist elements in society. Moreover,
strengthened by a gradual process of political opening and democrati-
zation, the sanitarista movement increasingly imprinted its ideological
orientation in the health reforms that unfolded after 1976. The reforms
of 1985 merely revealed – but also codified and institutionalized – the
principles of universalism and decentralization that had already been
promoted to dominance by the actions of these “subversives” who
were able to operate on the periphery and within the logic of the
existing system, although in ways that gradually altered its trajectory.

[p. 41] [PDF page 59]

Penetrating Society: The Military Integration of Health Services
and the Extension of Coverage

Prior to 1988, health care services were organized in three subsystems:
the private sector, the public sector, and the social security sector.
The private sector covered 20 percent to 30 percent of the popula-
tion through medicine groups, cooperatives, self-management plans,
or private health insurance. Most important, however, the social secu-
rity subsystem contracted the private health sector to provide services
(expensive hospitalizations, in particular) to their members. In the
public sector, health had evolved as a responsibility of the central
government, focused on vaccination campaigns and the control of epi-
demic outbreaks. The National Ministry of Health, created in 1953,
was poorly funded and was only responsible for preventive and some
chronic care (Lobato and Burlandy 2000).
   The social security sector was the largest of the three subsystems. It
had originated in the 1920s, when the first social insurance funds were
formed by industry and provided invalidity, retirement, and survivors’
pensions, as well as medical assistance and funeral aid for industry
workers. In 1953, Brazil’s populist president Getulio Vargas envisioned
the social security system as one of the three main pillars (together with
the unions and the labor courts) of the state-corporatist arrangement.
To this end, he merged the proliferating industry funds into seven social
security institutes organized by sector of the economy. These institutes
were funded through compulsory contributions from employers and
employees, and although the state was supposed to contribute funds
as well, state contributions over time did not amount to much more
than the administrative costs of the institutes (Malloy 1979, 70, 127,
135–136).1


1   The social security institutes were autarchic public entities under the supervision of
    the Ministry of Labor, Industry, and Commerce. They were managed by a president
    appointed by the President of the Republic and a council, of four to eight members,
    where employers and employees were equally represented. After 1953, the resulting
    Institutes of Retirement and Pensions (Institutos de Aposentadorias e Pensões, IAPs)
    were the institute of workers in railway and public services (IAPFESP), of banking
    workers (IAPB), of commerce (IAPC), of industry (IAPI), of maritime (IAPM), of
    transport and hauling (IAPETC), and of civil servants (IPASE) (Malloy 1979, 97–98).

[p. 42] [PDF page 60]

Despite prior corporatist inducements, the social security sector cov-
ered only 7.4 percent of Brazil’s population in 1960, and 9 percent in
1970 (Malloy 1979, 68, 95; Weyland 1996, 89). The rural sector, the
urban self-employed, and the intermittently employed remained unin-
sured (Malloy 1979, 68; McGuire forthcoming, ch. 6). High inequali-
ties in the provision of health services plagued the system, both in the
type and the quality of services provided by the different institutes, as
well as in the services available to the populations of different regions
of the country.2
   There had been prior attempts to extend social security coverage
and reduce inequalities. In the 1940s, inspired by Britain’s Beveridge
Report, technocrats of the industrial workers’ institute (IAPI) had
called for equal and universal social protection (Oliveira and Teixeira
1986, 172–180; Weyland 1996, 90). The politicians’ incentives to
modify the system, however, were quite low, since literacy restrictions
on the vote (in place until 1985) rendered much of the rural population
and the urban poor irrelevant for electoral purposes.3 In 1945, Vargas
tried to unify the entire social security system, but the health insti-
tutes’ bureaucracies and the unions opposed the measure, which was
never implemented (Oliveira and Teixeira 1986, 157; Luna and Klein
2006, 203).4 The social insurance institutes had become important

2 The system was set up such that the institutes would provide their members with
  medical services only after other obligations had been met. Hence, the funds with
  higher per capita income members and fewer claims for sickness and invalidity could
  support better medical schemes. Large numbers of those workers often employed in
  unhealthy and dangerous jobs received the worst system of health care. Thus, the IAPB
  (banking sector), with about 153,000 affiliates in 1960, provided the best medical
  care, whereas the IAPI (industrial workers), with over 2.1 million affiliates, had the
  worst (Malloy 1979, 102, 110–111). These inequalities were compounded by the
  regional distribution of all the health services and facilities (public, social insurance,
  and private), which favored the urban areas of the Southeast, where physicians and
  hospital beds were concentrated at considerably higher per capita rates than in the rest
  of the country. In 1970, for example, there were 7.4 doctors per 1,000 inhabitants
  in the Southeast, compared to 2.3 and 2.4 doctors in the states of the North and
  Northeast, respectively. Similarly, there were 5.4 hospital beds per 1,000 inhabitants
  in the Southeast, compared to ratios of 2.8 in the North and 1.9 in the Northeast
  (Malloy 1979, 111).
3 The political support of traditional rural bosses, or coroneis, was sufficient for the

  delivery of rural votes (on coronelismo, see Nunes Leal 1997, 275–287).
4 It was decree-law No. 7526 (Lei Orgânica dos Serviços Sociais do Brasil) that tried to

  unify all the social security health institutes (IAPs) and replace them with the Institute
  of Social Services (Instituto de Serviços Sociais do Brasil, ISSB).

[p. 43] [PDF page 61]

sources of power both for politicians linked to organized labor and for
union leaders, who wanted to preserve the institutes’ current structure
(Malloy 1977, 198–199; 1979, 73). Also opposed to the integration
of the social security system were the managers and technocrats of the
other social security institutes, who had historically been committed
to a contributory system of financing (i.e., services provided only to
those who contribute) and were concerned that it would be financially
unviable to cover the large mass of the poor (Weyland 1996, 90).
    The health system remained little changed until the military regime
came to power in 1964. Under the military, the social security subsys-
tem was integrated and coverage was extended, privileging contracts
with the private sector whenever possible. As a means of reducing
the power of organized urban labor, General Humberto de Alencar
Castelo Branco (1964–1967) unified all the social security institutes in
a single institute, the National Institute of Social Insurance (Instituto
Nacional de Previdência Social, INPS), and replaced their “political”
presidents and councils with “apolitical” technocrats. In doing so, the
military regime cut one of the labor movement’s most vital institutional
pillars of power. This reform, which had been tried in democratic peri-
ods but had failed because of the unions’ opposition, was, from the
standpoint of services, an equalizing reform. All workers in the private
urban economy would have the same social security and health ben-
efits. However, inequalities persisted: the public servants and military
personnel remained in separate funds with higher levels of privileges,
and the poor in the informal sector of the economy remained excluded
(Malloy 1979, 134; Weyland 1996, 90).
    In 1971, during its most repressive phase (the presidency of Emı́lio
Médici, 1969–1974), the military government granted social security
and health coverage to the rural population, the unemployed, and
the self-employed through the Assistance Fund for Rural Workers
(Fundo de Assistência ao Trabalhador Rural, FUNRURAL). Respond-
ing to pressure from a radicalized rural movement (Erickson 1977), a
program with the same name had been created under President João
Goulart (1961–1964), but, lacking significant funds, that program was
never implemented (Malloy 1979, 120, 200–201). The military now
financed FUNRURAL with sound taxes on agricultural wholesalers
and on urban firms’ payrolls. Almost overnight, the proportion of the
population legally covered by social insurance increased from 9 percent

[p. 44] [PDF page 62]

to 90 percent (McGuire forthcoming, ch. 6). To be sure, the quality
of the services and pensions for the rural population was significantly
lower than that of the urban population. And the total resources of
FUNRURAL were still only one-tenth of the resources of the preexist-
ing system of social insurance for organized urban labor (INPS), even
though they served populations of roughly equal size (Malloy 1979,
134). Nonetheless, FUNRURAL was “the most important redistribu-
tive change ever made in Brazilian social security” (Weyland 1996, 91).
Furthermore, as McGuire explains, “FUNRURAL was the first Brazil-
ian social insurance program to break with the [contributory] principle
that benefits depended on contributions” (forthcoming, ch. 6).
   Why did the most repressive government of the military period
advance such an important redistributive reform? Two reasons are
apparent. On the one hand, the military regime implemented this
reform as a means of taming and co-opting rural activism. In the early
1960s, political turbulence and organization proliferated in the rural
areas, particularly in the Northeast.5 This mobilization was perceived
as a populist challenge on behalf of former President Goulart. FUN-
RURAL was meant to stem social discontent among the rural popula-
tion and to slow down the worrying trend of rural-urban migration.6
In the classic state-corporatist tradition, the military regime co-opted
the moderate National Confederation of Workers in Agriculture (Con-
federação Nacional dos Trabalhadores na Agricultura, CONTAG)
and entrusted the administration of FUNRURAL to this organization,
while quashing the radical elements of the rural movement.7
   On the other hand, the military sought to use FUNRURAL to
extend the presence of the nation-state in the remote rural areas of the
North and Northeast, deemed necessary for national security reasons.
The military was informed by a comprehensive doctrine of national
security, which linked the full realization of the nation’s human and

5 Independent rural organizations, the so-called peasant Leagues, had formed in the
  1950s and 1960s, aided by either the Catholic Church or the Communist Party (Flynn
  1978, 261). Some of the Leagues radicalized to the point of becoming involved in
  guerrilla warfare.
6 In 1960, 55% of Brazil’s population lived in rural areas, but by 1980 this percentage

  had decreased to 32% (Houtzager and Kurtz 2000, 402–403).
7 Of all the northeastern organizations, the radical peasant Leagues suffered the greatest

  number of prisoners and political murders after the coup of 1964 (Moraes 1970, 496;
  Malloy 1979, 131).

[p. 45] [PDF page 63]

economic potential to the primordial quest for military security and
national grandeur (Stepan 1971, 131; Malloy 1979). By creating a
system of social insurance coverage for the agricultural population,
and conferring its administration on an organization (CONTAG) that
it could control, the military aimed to extend the reach of the nation-
state in the North and Northeast and at the same time penetrate and
co-opt the rural workers’ organizations.
    However, in its move to integrate and expand the health care system,
the military regime privileged the private health sector. The extension
of health coverage largely took place through the expansion of pri-
vate health services (Lewis and Medici 1998, 281). Whereas in 1960,
14 percent of all hospital beds were in the private sector, by 1976 this
percentage had increased to 73 percent (Lobato and Burlandy 2000;
McGuire forthcoming, ch. 6). Moreover, when emergency treatment
was extended to the uninsured in 1974, the number of “emergencies”
treated by private hospitals grew beyond all expectations (Weyland
1996, 96–97).8
    The promotion of the private health sector was further facilitated
by a social security reform introduced in 1977, in which the mili-
tary separated the pension and the health care components of social
security. The National Institute for Medical Assistance in Social Secu-
rity (Instituto Nacional de Assistência Médica da Previdência Social,
INAMPS) was created to coordinate the health care services of the
social security system, and this organization instantly became one of
the main channels for the transfer of public resources to the private
sector.9 Above all else, INAMPS institutionalized a high-cost, spe-
cialized, curative, hospital-based health care system concentrated in
the profitable regions of the country (Arretche 2004, 161; McGuire


8 In 1978, the president of INPS recognized that there had been six hundred thousand
  unnecessary hospitalizations in the four years since emergencies had become covered
  by the Ministry of Social Insurance and Welfare (Escorel 1999, 55).
9 The INAMPS reimbursed doctors on a fee-for-service basis. Because office visits were

  reimbursed at a lower rate relative to cost than were diagnostic tests and hospital
  stays, there was an upsurge in hospital stays and unnecessary medical procedures.
  The INAMPS practice of paying higher fees for cesarean births, for example, led to an
  estimated 186,000 unnecessary cesarean deliveries in 1979. In 1986, 32% of all births
  in Brazil, and 64% among high-income groups in São Paulo, were by cesarean section –
  compared to the 10 to 15% rate recommended by the World Health Organization
  (McGuire forthcoming, ch. 6).

[p. 46] [PDF page 64]

forthcoming, ch. 6). Since the creation of this new overarching institu-
tion superseded and absorbed FUNRURAL, President Ernesto Geisel
(1974–1979) passed the reform over the opposition of the organi-
zation of agricultural workers (CONTAG) that the government had
previously co-opted to administer the rural program.
    By the late 1970s, then, despite the integration of the social secu-
rity institutes and the extension of coverage to a large portion of the
population, the institutional conditions were inauspicious for univer-
salization and municipalization. First, as in the United States, a system
of national health insurance had not been enacted but a sizeable por-
tion of the population was serviced by the private sector. Second, the
first nationalized insurance program, FUNRURAL, reached a substan-
tial portion of the population but it represented less than one-tenth of
the social security subsystem – existing as it did alongside the previous
industry-based programs for the urban working population. In this
sense, it was a “residual” portion of the health care system. Finally, as
they expanded coverage to the informal workers and the unemployed
and universalized emergency treatment, the military governments
made great strides forward in building a private medical industry.
    However, as we shall now see, these moves by the military toward
integration of the health system and the extension of free coverage to
previously peripheral constituencies were consequential to later reform
proposals. Moreover, the military regime’s efforts at penetrating soci-
ety in order to control it paradoxically rendered the authoritarian state
more permeable and easier to infiltrate by a reformist movement.


Infiltrating the Authoritarian State: The Sanitarista Movement’s
Reorientation of Health Care Reforms

During the military regime, a well-organized and leftist reformist health
care movement was able to penetrate the state bureaucracy, build on
the reforms introduced by the military, and redirect those reforms
toward new objectives. Like the military, the reformist movement
promoted integration of the health system and extension of cover-
age. However, unlike the military, the movement sought to strengthen
the public sector and decentralize the delivery of health services to
the municipalities. Aided by the federal structure of Brazil’s govern-
ment, members of this leftist sanitarista movement were able to occupy

[p. 47] [PDF page 65]

key positions in the health sector: in municipal opposition govern-
ments, in some national health offices, and in the Panamerican Health
Organization (Neto 1997, 63). From those positions, they either built
on existing programs or promoted new ones, guided by the movement’s
ideology, this is to say, by the movement’s definitions of public health
goals, by their conceptions of bureaucratic and political means, and
by their policy agendas. In a sense, the sanitarista movement acted as
an “ideological guerrilla,” as part of a “subversive elite,” “one whose
members share[d] beliefs about the nature of politics and economics
which differ[ed] from those usually defined as belonging to the [power]
elite” (Adler 1986, 704–705).
    The sanitarista movement originated in the developmental period
of the early 1960s, during the left-leaning government of President
Goulart. The movement stressed preventive over curative care and
understood health to be a universal human right tied to citizens’ socioe-
conomic living conditions. Health, the sanitaristas claimed, could not
be disentangled from access to decent housing, education, and employ-
ment (CEBES 1980; Ministério da Saúde 1986a). Unlike the sani-
tarismo campanhista (the rural sanitarista tradition) of the pre-1930
“Old Republic” (Paiva 2006), the developmentalist sanitarista move-
ment opposed centralization of resources and decision making, and
advocated for municipalization of health. Municipalization, the sani-
taristas argued, would bring basic health care to remote rural areas,
where not even the state-level offices reached at the time (Ministério
da Saúde 1992 [1963], 187–205; CONASS 2007, 28).10


10   In the 3rd National Health Conference of 1963, the representatives of the devel-
     opmentalist sanitarista movement demanded that health care be devolved to the
     municipal level and recommended the creation in all the municipalities of a basic
     sanitary structure that would include water and sewage infrastructure, supervision
     of food establishments, vaccination against contagious diseases, provision of basic
     health care, protection of pregnant women and children, sanitary education, and
     collection of vital statistics (Ministério da Saúde 1992 [1963], 183, 239–240). The
     municipalization of health demand notwithstanding, the proliferation of munici-
     palities was a concern at that time. The creation of new municipalities responded –
     apparently – to the electoral incentives of local leaders and to the economic incentives
     created by Law 395 (July 18, 1948), which distributed the imposto de rendas (income
     tax) in equal parts among all municipalities (Ministério da Saúde 1992 [1963], 179).
     Thus, according to the Brazilian censuses, the number of municipalities increased
     from 1,889 municipalities in 1950; to 2,766 in 1960; 3,952 in 1970; 3,991 in 1980;
     4,491 in 1991; and 5,507 in 2000.

[p. 48] [PDF page 66]

The military coup against President Goulart in 1964 was clearly
a setback for the developmentalist sanitarista movement, which had
been close to Goulart’s administration. However, even if the institu-
tional and political configuration at the national level doomed any
efforts at seeking outright national reform, the sanitaristas continued
to pursue their goals at other levels and through alternative channels.
For example, a 1968 reform mandating the creation of preventive
medicine departments in Brazilian universities opened a door for the
institutionalization of the reformist movement (CONASS 2007, 33).
Sanitarista doctors taught in these departments and gained organi-
zational strength (Escorel et al. 2005, 63). In 1976, the sanitarista
association the Brazilian Center of Health Studies (Centro Brasileiro
de Estudos de Saúde, CEBES) was created. In the pages of its influential
journal Saúde em Debate, CEBES opposed the health policies of the
dictatorship (Escorel et al. 2005, 67).11 Similar to the role of the scien-
tific and technological elite that at about the same time was developing
a domestic computer industry in Brazil, CEBES “became the home for
an ideologically assertive group – a ‘guerrilla headquarters’ of sorts –
that set itself up to sell ideas, raise consciousness, and use political
power to achieve its goals” (Adler 1986, 691).12 In fact, many of the
members of the sanitarista movement were militants belonging to the
banned Brazilian Communist Party (Neto 1997).
    The International Conference on Basic Health Care, organized in
1978 by the World Health Organization in Alma-Ata under the slo-
gan “health for everyone in the year 2000,” gave additional strength
to the progressive demands of the sanitarista movement (CONASS
2007, 35–38; Weyland 2007). The following year, another influential
sanitarista organization, the Brazilian Graduate Association in Public

11 The importance of CEBES has not declined over the years. In a study of the diffusion
   of the local Family Health Program (Programa Saúde da Familia) in more than 200
   Brazilian municipalities, Sugiyama (2008) finds that affiliation with CEBES led to an
   increase in the probability of adopting the program.
12 An important difference between the groups is that whereas the scientific group

   developing the domestic computer industry was working inside the state, in the
   Commission for the Coordination of Electronic Processing Activities (CAPRE) in
   the Ministry of Planning, CEBES was part of civil society. Nonetheless, like the
   scientists in CAPRE, the health reformists would also penetrate the state and promote
   progressive health programs. For more information on the fascinating development of
   the domestic computer industry in Brazil during the years of the military dictatorship,
   see Adler (1986).

[p. 49] [PDF page 67]

Health (Associação Brasileira de Pós-Graduação em Saúde Coletiva,
ABRASCO), was formed.
    In the late 1970s, the sanitarista movement had a three-pronged
strategy: (1) to produce and disseminate its progressive reform pro-
posals, (2) to occupy positions of power whenever possible, that is,
to infiltrate the state, and (3) to lobby Congress (Rodriguez Neto
et al. 2003, 34–35). In 1979, as a result of the pressure exerted by the
sanitarista movement, the Lower Chamber of Congress held Brazil’s
first symposium on national health policy (Escorel et al. 2005, 71). In
a position paper presented at the symposium, the sanitarista associa-
tion of health studies called for the creation of a decentralized unified
health care system (CEBES 1980). The process of political opening at
the local and later state levels (Samuels and Abrucio 2000; Falleti 2007)
afforded the members of the movement the opportunity to occupy local
government positions.13 They slowly infiltrated the public bureaucracy
from the bottom up.

The Gradual Institutional Evolution of Brazil’s Health Care System
Unlike other contemporaneous Marxist or national-populist move-
ments in Latin America, the reformist doctors in Brazil did not con-
ceive the state as a monolithic apparatus that represented solely the
interests of the dominant class and that had to be overthrown from
the outside. Instead, since the early 1970s, the sanitarista doctors affil-
iated with the preventive care and communitarian health movement
aimed to occupy positions of power in the public health bureaucracy
(Escorel 1999, 24). In effect, these doctors sought to exploit the room
for maneuver that existed as a result of their ability to exercise dis-
cretion from within a bureaucracy not of their own making. From
the perspective of the military, the sanitarista movement’s proposals
of communitarian medicine were inexpensive solutions to the increas-
ing demand for health and sanitation services that the years of the
“economic miracle” had generated (Escorel 1999, 23, 29, 49). The
bureaucratic-authoritarian regime thus created research and sectoral
institutions that emphasized technical knowledge and administrative
modernization. Those institutions were soon occupied by members

13   Interviews with Luiz Carlos Pelizari Romero (Rio de Janeiro, August 4, 2005) and
     Gilberto Hochman (Rio de Janeiro, August 15, 2005).

[p. 50] [PDF page 68]

of the sanitarista movement and became the main generators of the
health reform proposals to be analyzed here (Escorel 1999, 43–44). In
addition, and beginning with the presidency of Geisel, which initiated
a process of political liberalization (abertura, or “opening”), the Min-
istry of Health became even more “permeable” to new ideas and actors.
    Federalism also facilitated the infiltration of the bureaucracy by
health reformist leaders, particularly at the local level. To main-
tain the appearance of a vertical and horizontal division of power,
the military allowed the continuation of some elections. All legisla-
tive posts (at the national, state, and municipal levels), for example,
were elected. With few exceptions, mayors were also elected, as were
state governors, beginning somewhat later, in 1982. Thus, thanks to
the vertical division of powers characteristic of the federal arrange-
ment, the opposition won elected posts at the local level first. Elected
local officials in turn opened the doors of their municipal secretaries
of health to the members of the reformist sanitarista movement. The
municipalities of Campinas (São Paulo), Londrina (Paraná), Vale do
Jequitinhonha, Montes Claros (both in Minas Gerais), and Niteroi (Rio
de Janeiro) experimented with progressive local programs during the
1970s (Cordeiro 2001, 324; Rodriguez Neto et al. 2003, 36, 45).14
The Montes Claros project, which integrated health services in the
north of Minas Gerais, became an important institutional model for a
more extensive and ambitious program (for a detailed analysis of the
Montes Claros program, see Escorel 1999, 143–154).
    In 1976, a group of sanitarista doctors from a prestigious govern-
ment think tank (Instituto de Planejamento Econômico e Social, IPEA)
and the Ministry of Health designed a health program called Pro-
gram of Internalization of Health and Sanitary Actions (Programa de
Interiorização das Ações de Saúde e Saneamento, PIASS), which con-
sisted of a network of mini health sanitary stations in localities of low-
density population (Tanaka et al. 1992). The network was designed to
provide preventive care and sanitation to the population of poor and
small towns in the nine states of the Northeast and in Minas Gerais.
The program called for the integration of health services at the local

14   In the case of Niteroi, local officials copied the family health doctor model adopted
     in Cuba (Weyland 2007). At the time, in fact, it was quite common for sanitarista
     doctors to travel to Cuba or Italy to study the local community health programs in
     those nations.

[p. 51] [PDF page 69]

level, under the coordination of the state secretaries of health. Private
health providers did not operate in these poor and remote areas, so
the private health sector did not oppose the reform. However, because
the program would tap into social security resources, the technocrats
in the social security national bureaucracy (INAMPS) did oppose it.
But Northeast politicians (most of them from the ruling military party)
exerted enough pressure on the national government that the program
was implemented.
   With the governors’ support, the new regional program had by 1980
established small health outposts operating in 700 municipalities (56%
of the total of the Northeast and Minas Gerais). These clinics served
a population of seven to eight million people, about 20 percent of the
northeast region’s population at the time. In the states of Minas Gerais,
Bahia, Pernambuco, Rio Grande do Norte, and Alagoas, the program
was operating well. In Ceará and Paraı́ba, despite its implementation,
this basic health and sanitation program had not reached all the nec-
essary localities. Finally, in Maranhão, Piauı́, and Sergipe the program
was still in an initial phase (Hermógenes de Souza 1980, 84). By 1980
a total of 1,250 health posts (each about 40 square meters in size) had
been built in villages with populations of less than 2,000. In towns
of up to 6,000 inhabitants, 650 health centers had been built (40 to
150 square meters in size). The health posts and centers were directly
connected to higher-complexity medical facilities in the larger nearby
state cities or state capitals. The program had a sanitary component,
through which 172 systems for provision of water and 22,000 latrines
were built. Moreover, PIASS recruited and trained health agents from
the targeted regions, most of them young people without formal medi-
cal training who would not be prone to professional biases. In the first
three years of its operation this program trained 3,700 health agents,
eighty percent of whom had only an elementary education.15
   This health and sanitation program (PIASS) had important pol-
icy effects for the universalization and municipalization of health
care. First, it fostered interministerial coordination. The Ministries of
Health, Social Insurance and Welfare, and Interior were all represented
in the interministerial executive group, along with a secretary of the

15   Subsequent successful health programs in the Northeast would have similar practices
     of personnel recruitment and training (see Tendler 1997, 21–45).

[p. 52] [PDF page 70]

presidency. PIASS was one of the first programs (if not the first) to
bring together all these national ministries in a single health program.
Second, the program promoted intergovernmental coordination, as the
aforementioned national ministries and the state secretaries of health
and sanitation were all part of the coordination and supervision group.
The financing of the program also connected the national, state-, and
local-level governments. PIASS thus constituted the first systematic
attempt at vertically coordinating the actions of municipalities, states,
and the national government for the staffing, financing, delivery, and
supervision of public health services. Third, PIASS strengthened the
position of state health secretaries vis-à-vis the once all-mighty rep-
resentatives of the national social security health bureaucracy. This
proved important a few years later, when another decentralization
program appealed to the state secretaries of health. Finally, PIASS led
to the creation of the National Council of State Secretaries of Health
(Conselho Nacional de Secretários de Saúde, CONASS) in February of
1982 (Escorel et al. 2005, 71), just a few months before the first direct
gubernatorial elections were scheduled to take place.
   The PIASS health and sanitation program and the subsequent pro-
posals to extend public coverage to other regions (such as the program
Prev-Saúde) were not embraced by all the relevant actors. As it devel-
oped, the program encountered increasing opposition in the private
sector and in parts of the national bureaucracy (Tanaka et al. 1992,
4; Rodriguez Neto et al. 2003, 37–38), to the point that it could
not longer be sustained (Escorel 1999, Escorel et al. 2005, 70–71).
Nonetheless, as the financial situation of the social security system
worsened, the president commissioned a study for the comprehensive
reform of the health care system. In 1982, a national advisory board
proposed a plan that combined streamlining and efficiency measures.16
The program, known as the CONASP Plan after the name of the advi-
sory board, sought greater articulation among the federal, state, and
municipal health sectors, along the lines pioneered under the PIASS
program (Rodriguez Neto et al. 2003, 44).
   A year later, a leader of the sanitarista movement, Eleutério
Rodriguez Neto, was appointed director of the Planning Department


16   The national advisory board was named the Consultant Council of Administra-
     tion of Social Security Health (Conselho Consultivo de Adminstração de Saúde
     Previdênciária, CONASP).

[p. 53] [PDF page 71]

of the national bureaucracy. It was one of the first appointments of a
high-level sanitarista doctor to a strategic position in the social secu-
rity health administration (Rodriguez Neto et al. 2003, 47). Rodrı́guez
Neto used the CONASP Plan as a vehicle to deepen health care reform.
Based on that proposal, he advanced a wholesale reorganization of the
public and social security health sectors that had a strong decentral-
izing component. The reform program was called Integrated Health
Actions (Ações Integradas de Saúde, AIS).
   To neutralize internal opposition at the national level, Rodrı́guez
Neto engaged the state secretaries of health. In his own words, he
sought to promote “bottom-up” pressures (Rodriguez Neto et al. 2003,
47) – albeit paradoxically, from the top. Thanks to the prior political
opening that had started at the municipal and state levels, Rodrı́guez
Neto strategy’s worked: “The greater legitimacy and autonomy of
the governments elected in 1982 and in power since May of 1983,
especially in the states where the opposition won, gave the [reform]
pressures such a strength that it was possible to sign AIS [Integrated
Health Actions] agreements ‘in chain.’ Starting with São Paulo, Rio de
Janeiro, and Minas Gerais, by May of 1984 all the states had signed,
and it was officially recognized that the AIS constituted the federal
strategy to restructure the national health policy” (Rodriguez Neto
et al. 2003, 47).
   The AIS program proved quite effective. It integrated the health
services of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education and
Culture, and it coordinated the different levels of government in a
decentralized administration (Paim 1986, 172; Tanaka et al. 1992,
5). As recalled by José da Silva Guedes, former secretary of health of
the city of São Paulo, “The AIS represented an increase of 30% of
the secretary budget. It was not earmarked to pay salaries, debt, or
new construction. Instead, it was intended to improve and expand the
[health care] system. In the city of São Paulo, for example, it allowed
for the creation of a third work shift in all the sanitary units and to
have general-practice doctors in them” (quoted in CONASS 2007, 53,
author’s translation). Rodriguez Neto was removed from his post in
1984, but his removal did not affect the process of decentralization that
was already underway. As he said, by 1984 “the AIS were irreversible”
(Rodriguez Neto et al. 2003, 48, author’s translation).
   After 1985, during the civilian government of José Sarney (1985–
1990), the reformist movement occupied more posts in the national

[p. 54] [PDF page 72]

bureaucracy and sought to implement equity-enhancing reforms
(Weyland 1996, 159–164). The main opposition to health care reform
came from the private sector. Meanwhile, the sanitaristas proposed an
even more encompassing health reform: the Unified and Decentralized
Health System, which was guided by the principles of universal cover-
age, equity, decentralization, regionalization, articulation of levels of
government, and communal participation. This program would trans-
fer authority, resources, and personnel from the social security health
bureaucracy to the state and municipal secretaries of health. State and
municipal actors would be the main managers of health care. Although
the program was never implemented, it was an important antecedent
for the implementation of the Single Health System (Sistema Unico de
Saúde, SUS) that fully integrated Brazil’s public health sector (Cordeiro
2001, 324).
   The proposal to create the Single Health System had been drafted
at the 8th National Health Conference that met in Brası́lia in March
1986. The conference was described by President José Sarney as the
preconstituent assembly of the health sector (Ministério da Saúde
1986b, 31). More than four thousand people attended, among them
one thousand delegates who were equally divided between government
and civil society representatives.17 Among the government delegates,
50% were from the federal level, 22% from the state level, 18% from
the municipal level, and 10% from Congress. Of the five hundred
civil society delegates, 15% represented the private health sector, 20%
belonged to professional health entities, 30% represented unions and
urban and rural workers, 10% belonged to dwellers’ associations, 20%
represented community groups, and 5% were from political parties
(Escorel and Bloch 2005, 118). Among the nondelegate participants,
there were federal, state, and municipal authorities; health practition-
ers; health care consumers; and academics. Medical professionals, local
health authorities, and left-wing health experts represented the sani-
tarista movement. The conference was organized into 135 working
teams, 37 of which were formed by delegates and the rest by partic-
ipants (Ministerio da Saúde 1986b, 1). The working teams discussed


17   For comparison purposes, it is worth noting that the 5th National Health Confer-
     ence of 1975 counted 217 delegates and 77 nondelegate participants and the 6th
     Conference had 405 delegates and 29 observers (Ministério da Saúde 1975, 15).

[p. 55] [PDF page 73]

three issues: (1) health as a right, (2) the reformulation of the national
health system, and (3) the funding of the health care sector.
   By the time this conference was convened, the sanitarista movement
had used its position within the existing system both to forge networks
across localities and to position itself as a highly credible voice in health
care reform. It is thus not surprising that the final conference report
expressed the views of the reformist sanitarista movement in every
issue. Health was conceived as a right to be guaranteed by the nation-
state. The health system had to be public, free, integrated, and decen-
tralized. Popularly elected municipal and state health councils had to
be created to facilitate citizens’ participation and the implementation
and control of health programs. The fiscal strengthening of states and
municipalities was demanded, and the decentralization of health care
had to target the municipalities (Ministerio da Saúde 1986a; 1986b).18
This was the template that health reform followed in Brazil from 1988
onwards.
   The same networks and expertise also meant that the sanitarista
movement emerged as a strong voice with a well-shaped reform pro-
posal in the constitutional convention of 1988 – possibly the best-
organized sector (Rodriguez Neto et al. 2003, 48–52). The movement’s
demand for universal coverage was adopted in the reformed Constitu-
tion with the creation of the Single Health System. The demand for a
fully public health care system did not succeed owing to the lobbying
of the private health sector, thus both public coverage and private cov-
erage were included in the Constitution. Soon after the constitutional
reform, the National Council of Municipal Secretaries of Health (Con-
selho Nacional de Secretarias Municipais de Saúde, CONASEMS) was
created. Coordinating the action of subnational authorities, this new
council of municipal health authorities worked with the preexisting
council of state authorities; together they played an important role in
the negotiations over the regulation and implementation of the nation’s
health system from 1990 onwards. Also stemming from this reform, a
process of decentralization of health care was set in motion, such that


18   According to the annals of the conference, only one mayor, Ubaldo Dantas, of
     Itabuna, Bahia, expressed any caveats regarding the municipalization proposal. He
     considered municipalization a possible threat to the integration of the health system
     (Ministério da Saúde 1986a, 161).

[p. 56] [PDF page 74]

by 2000, 99 percent of the municipalities delivered basic health care
services in Brazil.


Conclusion

This chapter explains the remarkable transformation of the Brazil-
ian health care system – from centralized but narrow to decentral-
ized and universalistic. This change did not occur, as was commonly
assumed, abruptly, at the moment of democratic transition in Brazil,
but unfolded gradually and under the noses of (indeed, within the
very infrastructure set up by) the military regime of the 1970s and
1980s. The analysis here calls into question accounts of institutional
change that focus too squarely on critical junctures (see also Capoccia
and Keleman 2007; Falleti and Lynch 2009), as well as analyses of
institutional stasis that place unwarranted emphasis on lock-in effects
(see also Thelen 2003; Streeck and Thelen 2005). The study of health
care reform in Brazil shows that three main components were neces-
sary to ensure institutional change: subversive actors, infiltration, and
expansion.
   A well-organized subversive group of health practitioners was essen-
tial to bringing about this institutional change. Facing a national con-
text that featured a particularly strong veto player in the authoritarian
governments of the day, leftist reformers were nonetheless able to infil-
trate a bureaucratic apparatus that had been set up by the military for
its own reasons, and use this structure as a platform for introduc-
ing more subtle changes on the margins, which pushed the system in
directions more consistent with their own ideology and goals. Even if
they characterized the state as a capitalist, bourgeois, or authoritarian
apparatus, the sanitaristas pursued a strategy of change from within
the public health institutions, rather than advocating for change from
outside the system, as other leftist movements did (Weyland 1995,
1700; Neto 1997, 63). For the sanitarista movement, infiltration was
an effective means by which to take advantage of small openings.
Those small openings arose first at the local level, where the political
opposition was winning mayoral posts, and then at both the territorial
periphery of the country and the functional periphery of the health
care system, where the power holders were not invested and where
local actors could operate beyond the scrutiny of the military.

[p. 57] [PDF page 75]

In fact, it is difficult to determine the extent to which the power hold-
ers noticed the ongoing process of infiltration and either tried or cared
to reverse it. It appears that the military allowed the process of infiltra-
tion by reformists in the health care sector, just as they had in Brazil’s
technology sector (see Adler 1986). In the Northeast, the reformists’
preventive health care plans constituted an inexpensive solution for
national health problems. Moreover, by placing the administration of
a part of the health system (FUNRURAL) in the hands of the oppo-
sition (CONTAG), the military also tried to co-opt mobilized groups
and appease social discontent.
    Of particular interest in the process of state-society transformation
that took place during Brazil’s authoritarian period is that the mil-
itary’s intention to penetrate society and extend the nation-state to
the territorial periphery made the state bureaucracy more permeable
and easier to infiltrate. Like other authoritarian regimes of the right
(Bismarck in Germany, for example), the Brazilian military advanced
“progressive” social reforms as a means of co-opting and control-
ling the population and avoiding radicalization. The sanitarista move-
ment seized those opportunities and reoriented the reforms toward
new goals.
    Brazil’s federal institutions aided the sanitarista movement’s infil-
tration in several interrelated ways. First, federalism made local- and
state-level public health positions available to the members of the
reformist movement, facilitating the reform of the state from the bot-
tom up. Second, and similar to the Canadian case discussed in Hacker
(1998, 101), federalism created opportunities for political parties sym-
pathetic to health care reform to gain power at the local and state lev-
els. Governors and mayors thus became potential political allies of the
health care reformist movement in the negotiations with the national-
level bureaucracy, the national deputies and senators, and the military.
Third, federalism allowed for the implementation of innovative pro-
grams in politically distinctive and territorially bounded regions and
municipalities. Changes in the periphery did not pose a serious threat in
the eyes of military rulers and private health providers, whose interests
were focused on the hospitals of the Southern region, which constituted
the economic core of the health care system. Finally, during both the
military and democratic periods in Brazil, federal transfers to states and
municipalities were oriented (at least partially) by a criterion of fiscal

[p. 58] [PDF page 76]

equalization among the subnational units.19 As in Hacker’s (1998,
73) analysis of Canada, this feature of Brazilian federalism permitted
the poorer subnational units to play a leadership role in health care
reforms, a role that their limited fiscal resources would have otherwise
precluded.
   Expansion was the last crucial element needed to achieve univer-
salization and municipalization. Changes institutionalized in one area
of the health care sector prompted changes in other areas, both terri-
torially and functionally. Territorially, health reform programs scaled
up from the local to the regional and national levels. Public health
reforms first adopted in a few municipalities (Niteroi, Montes Claros,
Londrina, etc.) were later implemented in the states of the Northeast
and in Minas Gerais. Such programs, in turn, led to other national
health reform programs, such as the Integrated Health Actions (AIS).
Functionally, changes in one area of the health system prompted
changes in other related areas, such as in the case of the expansion from
AIS, which coordinated only the Ministries of Health and Education,
to the Single Health System, which integrated the whole health system.
   In this interpretation of the evolution of the health care sector in
Brazil, “choice points,” “branching moments,” or “critical junctures”
have little (if any) relevance in the causal narrative. Although radical
changes in the health sector were codified in the Constitution of 1988,
they only brought to light changes that had been percolating beneath
the surface and been nurtured at the local level for more than a decade.
By the time the constitutional conventionalists ruled on health care,
the sanitaristas had already established both the networks and the
expertise that put them in a position to exercise strong influence, so
that the codification and institutionalization of the practices they had
perfected over the years of military rule were politically feasible.
   A final word is in order regarding the substantive policy outcomes
of the institutional reforms analyzed here. The life expectancy of
Brazilians increased from 67 to 72 years between 1991 and 2005;
infant mortality decreased from 32 to 22 deaths per thousand infants


19   During the military period, this strategy was pursued for national security reasons
     (Stepan 1971) and also to build political support for the official ARENA Party
     in the North and Northeastern regions, which were historic bastions of political
     conservatism.

[p. 59] [PDF page 77]

between 1997 and 2004; and the number of health care professionals
increased from 1.1 to 1.4 per thousand people between 1990 and 2005
(Ministerio da Saúde 2006). Public opinion polls conducted in large
cities such as São Paulo and Salvador show that people in the bottom
40 percent of the population – those who rely the most on the public
sector for health services – have positive opinions about the current
public health system.20 Although Brazil’s continental size and immense
regional and social inequalities leave statistics based on national aver-
ages largely wanting, as McGuire argues in a cross-national study
of policy reforms and their impact on health indicators, thanks to
health care reforms that “revolutionized social policy in favor of the
poor . . . [b]y 2005, Brazil had some of the most well-designed, encom-
passing, innovative, and pro-poor social policies in Latin America”
(forthcoming, ch. 6). It is indeed very likely that universal health cover-
age and a decentralized structure that is funded with guaranteed federal
transfers and that promotes users’ participation in health councils are
largely responsible for the improvement of Brazil’s health outcomes.
The evolution of health care reforms in Brazil shows that it is possible
to break away, in a gradual and incremental manner, from the histori-
cal institutional preconditions that preclude universalization of health.
They also appear to indicate that such institutional evolution leads to
significantly better public health outcomes.


References
Adler, Emanuel. 1986. “Ideological ‘Guerrillas’ and the Quest for Technolog-
  ical Autonomy: Brazil’s Domestic Computer Industry.” International Orga-
  nization 40 (3): 673–705.
Arretche, Marta. 2004. “Toward a Unified and More Equitable System: Health
  Reform in Brazil.” In Crucial Needs, Weak Incentives. Social Sector Reform,
  Democratization, and Globalization in Latin America, ed. R. R. Kaufman
  and J. M. Nelson, 155–188, Washington, DC, Baltimore, and London:
  Woodrow Wilson Center Press and Johns Hopkins University Press.
Capoccia, Giovanni, and Daniel Keleman. 2007. “The Study of Critical Junc-
  tures: Theory, Narrative and Counterfactuals in Historical Institutional-
  ism.” World Politics 59 (3): 341–369.
CEBES. 1980. “A Questão Democrática na Área da Saúde.” Saúde em debate
  9:11–13.

20   See the public opinion data in Figueiredo et al. (2005, 135; 2007, 72).

[p. 60] [PDF page 78]

CONASS. 2007. CONASS 25 anos. Brası́lia: Conselho Nacional de Secretários
  de Saúde.
Cordeiro, Hésio. 2001. “Descentralização, Universal Access, and Equity in
  Health Reforms.” Ciência & Saúde Coletiva 6 (2): 319–328.
Draibe, Sônia M. 1994. “As polı́ticas sociais do regime militar brasileiro:
  1964–84.” In 21 anos de regime militar: Balanços e perspectivas, ed. G. A.
  D. Soares and M. C. d’Araujo, 271–309. Rio de Janeiro, RJ: Editora da
  Fundação Getúlio Vargas.
Erickson, Kenneth Paul. 1977. The Brazilian Corporative State and Working-
  Class Politics. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Escorel, Sarah. 1999. Reviravolta na Saúde: Origem e articulação do movi-
  mento sanitário. Rio de Janeiro: Editoria FIOCRUZ.
Escorel, Sarah, and Renata Arruda de Bloch. 2005. “As Conferências
  Nacionais de Saúde na Construção do SUS.” In Saúde e democracia.
  História e perspectivas do SUS, ed. N. T. Lima, S. Gerschman, F. C. Edler,
  and J. M. Suárez, 83–119, Rio de Janeiro: Editora FIOCRUZ and OPS/
  OMS.
Escorel, Sarah, Dilene Raimundo Nascimento, and Flavio Coelho Edler. 2005.
  “As Origens da Refomra Sanitária e do SUS.” In Saúde e democracia:
  História e perspectivas do SUS, ed. N. T. Lima, S. Gerschman, F. C. Edler,
  and J. M. Suárez, 59–81, Rio de Janeiro: Editora FIOCRUZ and OPS/
  OMS.
Falleti, Tulia G. 2007. “S’emparer du pouvoir ou créer du pouvoir? Les
  héritages des régimes militaires dans la décentralisation en Argentine et
  au Brésil” [To Seize or to Create? The Legacies of Militarism on Decentral-
  ization in Argentina and Brazil], Critique internationale (Presses de Sciences
  Po, Paris, France), No. 35, April-June: 101–117.
Falleti, Tulia G., and Julia Lynch. 2009. “Context and Causal Mechanisms
  in Political Analysis,” Comparative Political Studies, 42 (9), prepublished
  April 21, 2009 as doi:10.1177/0010414009331724.
Figueiredo, Argelina Maria Cheibub, Haroldo da Gama Torres, Celina Maria
  deSouza Motta, Renata Mirandola Bichir, Edgard Fusaro, and Maria Paula
  Ferreira. 2007. “Projeto Radar das Condições de Vida e das Polı́ticas Sociais.
  Fase II.” São Paulo: Centro Brasileiro de Análise e Planejamento-CEBRAP.
Figueiredo, Argelina Maria Cheibub, Haroldo da Gama Torres, Fernando
  Limongi, Marta Arretche, Renata Bichir, Maria Paula Ferreira, and Edgard
  Rodrigues Fusaro. 2005. Projeto BRA/04?052. Rede de Pesquisa e Desen-
  volvimento de Polı́ticas Públicas REDE-IPEA II. São Paulo: Centro
  Brasileiro de Análise e Planejamento-CEBRAP.
Flynn, Peter. 1978. Brazil: A Political Analysis. London and Boulder, CO:
  Ernest Benn and Westview Press.
Hacker, Jacob. 1998. “The Historical Logic of National Health Insurance:
  Structure and Sequence in the Development of British, Canadian, and U.S.
  Medical Policy.” Studies in American Political Development 12 (Spring):
  57–130.

[p. 61] [PDF page 79]

Hermógenes de Souza, José Alberto. 1980. O Modelo PIASS, Sua Programação
  e Sua Evolução para o Programa Nacional de Sérvicios Básicos de Saúde.
  Paper read at 7 Conferência Nacional de Saúde. Anais, at Brası́lia, DF.
Houtzager, Peter P., and Marcus J. Kurtz. 2000. “The Institutional Roots
  of Popular Mobilization: State Transformation and Rural Politics in Brazil
  and Chile, 1960–1995.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 42 (2):
  394–424.
Kaufman, Robert R., and Joan M. Nelson, eds. 2004. Crucial Needs, Weak
  Incentives: Social Sector Reform, Democratization, and Globalization in
  Latin America. Washington, DC, Baltimore, and London: Woodrow Wilson
  Center Press and Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lewis, Maureen, and André Medici. 1998. “Health Care Reform in Brazil:
  Phasing Change.” In Do Options Exist? The Reform of Pension and Health
  Care Systems in Latin America, ed. M. A. Cruz-Saco and C. Mesa-Lago,
  267–289. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Lobato, Lenaura, and Luciene Burlandy. 2000. “Chapter 4. The Context and
  Process of Health Care Reform in Brazil.” In Reshaping Health Care in Latin
  America. A Comparative Analysis of Health Care Reform in Argentina,
  Brazil, and Mexico, ed. S. Fleury, S. Belmartino, and E. Baris, 79–102.
  Ottawa, Ontario: International Development Research Center.
Luna, Francisco Vidal, and Herbert S. Klein. 2006. Brazil since 1980. New
  York: Cambridge University Press.
Malloy, James M. 1977. “Authoritarianism and the Extension of Social Secu-
  rity Protection to the Rural Sector in Brazil.” Luso-Brazilian Review 14 (2):
  195–210.
Malloy, James M. 1979. The Politics of Social Security in Brazil. Pittsburgh:
  University of Pittsburgh Press.
McGuire, James W. Forthcoming. Wealth, Health, and Democracy in East
  Asia and Latin America. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ministério da Saúde. 1975. V Conferência nacional de Saúde, 5 to 8 of August,
  at Brası́lia.
Ministério da Saúde. 1986a. “8a Conferencia Nacinal de Saúde. Anais.”
  Brası́lia.
Ministério da Saúde. 1986b. “8a Conferencia Nacional de Saúde. 17 a 21 de
  março de 1986. Relatório final.” Brası́lia.
Ministério da Saúde. 1992 [1963]. Anais. 3a. Conferência Nacional de Saúde,
  Fundação Municipal de Saúde, Niteroi.
Ministério da Saúde. 2006. “IDB 2006 Brasil – Indicadores e Dados Básicos
  para a Saúde.” In anual: MS, RIPSA.
Moraes, Clodomir. 1970. “Peasant Leagues in Brazil.” In Agrarian Problems
  and Peasant Movements in Latin America, ed. R. Stavenhagen., 453–501.
  Garden City, NY: Anchor Books.
Neto, Eleutério Rodrigues. 1997. “A Vio do Parlamento.” In Saúde e democ-
  racia: A luta do CEBES, ed. S. Fleury. São Paulo, S. P: Lemos Editorial &
  Gráficos Ltda.

[p. 62] [PDF page 80]

Nunes Leal, Victor. 1997. Coronelismo, enxada e voto: O municı́pio e o regime
  representativo no Brasil. 3rd ed. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Nova Fronteira.
Oliveira, Jaime A. de Araújo, and Sonia M. Fleury Teixeira. 1986. (Im)previ-
  dência social. 60 anos de história da Previdência no Brasil. Petrópolis (Rio
  de Janeiro): Vozes and ABRASCO.
Paiva, Carlos Henrique Assunção. 2006. “Samuel Pessoa: Uma trajetória
  cientı́fica no contexto do sanitarismo campanhista e desenvolvimentista no
  Brasil.” História, Ciência, Saúde – Manguinhos 13 (4): 795–831.
Rodriguez Neto, Eleutério, José Gomes Temporão, and Sarah Escorel. 2003.
  Saúde: Promessa e limites da constituição. Rio de Janeiro, RJ: Editora
  Fiocruz.
Samuels, David, and Fernando Luiz Abrucio. 2000. “Federalism and Demo-
  cratic Transitions: The ‘New’ Politics of the Governors in Brazil.” Publius:
  The Journal of Federalism 30 (2): 43–61.
Schmitter, Philippe C. 1971. Interest Conflict and Political Change in Brazil.
  Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Stepan, Alfred. 1971. The Military in Politics: Changing Patterns in Brazil.
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Streeck, Wolfgang, and Kathleen Thelen, eds. 2005. Beyond Continuity: Insti-
  tutional Change in Advanced Political Economies. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
  sity Press.
Sugiyama, Natasha Borges. 2008. “Theories of Policy Diffusion: Social Sector
  Reform in Brazil.” Comparative Political Studies 41 (2): 193–216.
Tanaka, Oswaldo Yoshimi, Eulália Maria A. Escobar, Aparecida Silvia M.
  Gimenez, Katia G. Camargo, Carmen L. S. Lelli, and Tania M. Yoshida.
  1992. “Gerenciamento do setor saúde na década de 80, no Estado de São
  Paulo, Brasil.” Revista Saúde Pública 26 (3): 185–194.
Tendler, Judith. 1997. Good Government in the Tropics. Baltimore: Johns
  Hopkins University Press.
Thelen, Kathleen. 2003. “How Institutions Evolve: Insights from Compara-
  tive Historical Analysis.” In Comparative Historical Analysis in the Social
  Sciences, ed. James Mahoney and Dietrich Rueschemeyer, 305–336. Cam-
  bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weyland, Kurt. 1995. “Social Movements and the State: The Politics of Health
  Reform in Brazil.” World Development 23 (10): 1699–1712.
Weyland, Kurt. 1996. Democracy Without Equity: Failures of Reform in
  Brazil. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Weyland, Kurt. 2007. Bounded Rationality and Policy Diffusion: Social Sector
  Reform in Latin America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
