Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power
Edited by James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen
First published in print: 2009 | Copyright: 2010 | Cambridge University Press

Chapter 3: The Contradictory Potential of Institutions: The Rise and Decline of Land Documentation in Kenya
Ato Kwamena Onoma
Original print pages 63–93; PDF pages 81–111

[English original. Chapter footnotes and references are retained in their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks and fixed-width table layout are retained; verify diagrams and exact typography against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, footnotes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 63] [PDF page 81]

3

The Contradictory Potential of Institutions

The Rise and Decline of Land Documentation
in Kenya

      Ato Kwamena Onoma




      I wanted a [land] document because it is like a marriage certificate for
      a woman. It gives you [the husband] confidence that no one will ever
      bother you.
          An old farmer in Taita Taveta, Kenya, in a 2005 interview with
          author

      [Land titles] are mere pieces of paper.
         William ole Ntimama, minister of local government, Kenya, “The
         Indigenous and the Natives,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), July 9, 1993.


Introduction

The gradual decline of institutions that secure property rights presents
us with an interesting puzzle. These institutions have a number of
features that should display positive-feedback effects and ensure their
continued strength. Land documentation systems, which constitute key
components of these institutions, can aid informed and well-connected
members of society in acquiring swathes of land, giving these actors an
incentive to perpetuate such documentation systems (Scott 1998, 48).


I thank Peter Hall, James Mahoney, Yaba Ndiaye, Abbey Steele, Kathleen Thelen,
Elisabeth Wood, and the participants in the Workshop on Historical Institutionalism
held at Northwestern University (October 26–27, 2007), as well as members of the Yale
Comparative Politics Workshop, for comments on this paper. Research for this paper
was partly funded by an International Dissertation Research Fellowship from the Social
Science Research Council.

[p. 64] [PDF page 82]

Further, because titles and other forms of land documents and records
can help them hold onto their property, we can expect landowners to
invest in ensuring the efficacious operation of these systems. Beyond
helping resolve issues of ownership, record systems create incentives
for their perpetuation by facilitating the productive use of land and
the transformation of land rights into capital (de Soto 2000). People
involved in these modes of using land thus have an interest in uphold-
ing effective record systems. Also, by rendering such exploitation of
land more profitable, these institutional arrangements draw new actors
to these land uses and so increase the pool of those dedicated to insti-
tutional stability. For these reasons, the development of land docu-
mentation systems should foster changes that reinforce rather than
undermine property rights.
    Against this background, the history of the documentation of land
rights in Kenya presents a real conundrum. Introduced by the colo-
nial administration in the early 1900s to aid the commercial activities
of European settlers, land documentation was later extended to the
African population and was warmly embraced and reinforced by the
postcolonial government after independence in 1963. But instead of
demonstrating the expected trajectory of increasing the stability of
institutions that have positive-feedback effects, the practice of title
registration gradually eroded and, by 2004, had fallen into disrepute
(Kenya 2004, 189). Many have been quick to blame the exogenous
shock of multiparty democratization in 1991 for this decline (Klopp
2000, 2002; Kenya 2004, 82).1 This focus on exogenous shocks is
consistent with much of the literature on change in institutions that
display positive-feedback effects (Mahoney 2000; Katznelson 2003).
If such institutions operate to increase support for their own continued
existence, then their decline must be due to factors external to their
workings.
    Yet this focus on the exogenous shock of redemocratization in
Kenya is a mistake. In May 1991, months before the announcement
of multiparty democracy in Kenya, the exploitation of documentation


1   Many policymakers that I interviewed similarly attributed this decline wholly to the
    redemocratization process of the 1990s. Interviews with an official of the Ministry of
    Lands in Nairobi (Ken 1), February 14, 2005, and a land control board member in
    Nyeri District (Ken 18), March 3, 2005.

[p. 65] [PDF page 83]

systems and subsequent cancellation of hundreds of title deeds by
Kenya’s High Court had led one contributor to the reputable Nairobi
newspaper Weekly Review to wonder whether the assumption that
a title gives one indefeasible rights to property was still true.2 Even
more important, much of the fraudulent exploitation of land docu-
ments and property rights that followed redemocratization mirrored
(and maybe even copied) similar activities in the 1970s. So why did
this institution, which should display strong positive-feedback effects,
change over time?
   To answer this question, I highlight the contradictory potential of
institutions in explaining gradual change. By the “contradictory poten-
tial of institutions” I mean the ability of institutions to simultaneously
cultivate and sustain dominant coalitions that support perpetuation
of these institutions and to engender marginal groups that thrive on
subverting these institutions. These marginal groups take advantage of
institutional rules by covertly violating the rules’ intended purpose –
they are precisely the parasitic variety of “symbionts” to which
Mahoney and Thelen refer in the introduction to this volume. In the
struggles between institutional backers and parasitic actors, exogenous
shocks can play a role, but not always as the sole or even the main
causes of institutional change. Exogenous shocks often only exacerbate
the existing advantage of one group or trend over others.
   The first part of this chapter details the state’s attempt to introduce
and expand land documentation in Kenya and the positive-feedback
effects these efforts had over time. The aggressive efforts of colonial
and postcolonial state officials popularized land documents in Kenya
(Meek 1949, 93–94; Kenya 2004). But by the late 1990s, following
a long process of erosion and drift, the efficacy of land documents
had dramatically declined (Kenya 2004, 189). The second part of this
empirical section thus details how the system of land documentation
contributed over time to its own decline. I locate a significant cause
of the decline in the efficacy of land documents in Kenya in the grad-
ual activities of parasitic forces nurtured and sustained by the very
system of land documentation that these forces were undermining.
The promotion of land documentation in the Kenyan environment
produced and empowered a dominant constituency of white settlers

2   “What Value a Title Deed?” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 31, 1991.

[p. 66] [PDF page 84]

and new black landed elites who supported land documentation and
forcefully advocated the “sanctity of land titles” (Kenya 2004, 16).
Vigorous efforts by the colonial and postcolonial state to encourage
land documentation created the popular expectation that possession of
a particular piece of paper could confer certain rights to a specific land
parcel (Kenya 2004, 16). But, at the same time, land documentation
fostered the rise of marginal con men dedicated to its exploitation. By
cleverly manipulating beliefs about land documentation and the legal
instruments that underpinned them, con men, working from the rela-
tive safety of their offices, were able to exchange fake land documents
for money and thereby defraud people across the country.3
   By the 1970s, well-connected politicians, copying the con men,
brought the subversive exploitation of land documents closer to the
mainstream of Kenya’s political economy. They used land documents
to amass and deploy political support. Issuing and selling fake docu-
ments became an excellent way of raising cash for electoral campaigns,
for buying the support of various individuals and groups, and for
dissuading would-be opponents. Supplying land documents to people
without actually giving them the land turned out to be an excellent way
to get them to attend political rallies. Moreover, by promising land to
document holders in various areas of the country, the politicians could
change the makeup of electoral constituencies.4
   This embrace of the fraudulent exploitation of land documenta-
tion by politicians compromised the willingness of the state to crack
down on this activity. Thus the problem was not just one of weak
state capacity. Nor was it that the system of land documentation was
not well-established in the first place. The problem was that as peo-
ple close to the state adopted the con men’s techniques, state agencies
became increasingly less willing to use their powers to stop the fraudu-
lent exploitation of land documentation by these people. The activities


3 Letter from the district commissioner, Kwale, to the district officer of the Coast
  Division, Kwale, April 4, 1968, Kenya National Archives (hereafter KNA) CC/12/47;
  letter from J. M. Masesi of Garissa to the minister for lands and settlement, June 25,
  1968, KNA CC/12/47; and letter from the managing director of the Kenya Express
  Land and Estate Agent to Mr. James Crispus, April 5, 1968, KNA CC/12/47.
4 “Vanity Shares,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), June 20, 1980; “Bogus Companies,”

  Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 23, 1980; and “Ngwataniro at Crossroads as Internal
  Problems Surface,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), December 12, 1977.

[p. 67] [PDF page 85]

of politically well-connected land-buying company executives under-
pinned a process of gradual institutional drift. State leaders failed to
adequately shore up the institutions threatened by the widespread par-
asitic activity. When senior state leaders embraced similar activities
after the exogenous shock of redemocratization in the 1990s, it only
furthered a process that was already undermining the efficacy of the
land document system in Kenya.
   The conclusion of this chapter examines the implications of the
contradictory potential of institutions for the literature on the political
economy of Kenya, as well as on institutional change and stability more
generally. As is clear from the analysis here, the extreme emphasis
on exogenous shocks such as redemocratization to explain change
in institutions that display positive-feedback effects is mistaken and
overlooks endogenous processes that drive change over time. Given
the constant possibilities for change that the contradictory potential of
institutions allows, the excessive focus on so-called critical junctures
in the study of institutional change also needs further appraisal. There
are more openings for and processes of change than such accounts,
steeped in the punctuated equilibrium model of change, permit.


The Contradictory Potential of Institutions

Streeck and Thelen (2005, 1–2) point out that a dominant strain of
research on change in institutions that display positive-feedback effects
emphasizes the consequences of sudden discontinuous changes sparked
by exogenous shocks. Such institutions are said to be characterized by
strong periods of stability produced by their positive-feedback effects
(Mahoney 2000; Pierson 2000). These periods of stability are punc-
tuated by disruptive moments of change – critical junctures – when
exogenous shocks break down the institutions, creating episodes of
contingency that allow agents to choose between alternatives (Pierson
2004, 144). This emphasis on exogenous sources of institutional
change is grounded in an understanding of institutions as unambigu-
ous entities that structure behavior in coherent and uniform ways
(Arthur 1994; North 1990, 94; Pierson 2000, 76–77). They are said
to exert what Schneiberg (2005, 103), in critical mode, has called
“isomorphic pressures” on agents through incentives and distribu-
tional consequences that create and reinforce constituencies dedicated

[p. 68] [PDF page 86]

to the survival of these institutions, and that shrink and raise the costs
to those who might be interested in institutional change.5
   A small but growing body of work has raised the possibility of
gradual instead of abrupt change, and has suggested that endogenous
factors might play a significant role in generating change in institutions
with positive-feedback effects (DiMaggio 1988, 13; Greif and Laitin
2004, 634; Thelen 2004; Schneiberg 2005, 128; Streeck and Thelen
2005; Schneiberg and Clemens 2006, 218). Such analyses are partly
grounded in an understanding of institutions as ambiguous entities (see
Comaroff 1980, 107; Thelen 2000, 105; Ngugi 2004, 472; Jackson
2005, 229). One dimension of the ambiguity of institutions is that
institutional forms do not necessarily dictate specific functions and
render all other functions impossible (Thelen 2000, 105). As Thelen
(2000, 105) has pointed out, an institution’s role can change over time
as new interests come into power or as the environment facing old
interests is altered.
   I take this line of argumentation a step further by pointing out that
self-reinforcing institutions can contain internal contradictions that
offer the potential for change. Institutions can engender and sustain
dominant constituencies who support their continued existence and
simultaneously foster parasitic groups that thrive on exploiting them
in ways that may ultimately contribute to the institutions’ decline. This
view draws insights from but also shifts away from the idea of “tem-
poral segregation”6 found in works that subscribe to what DiMaggio
(1988, 13) calls the “internal logic of contradiction” in the process of
institutionalization (Barley and Kunda 1992, 386; Schneiberg 2005,
106). According to this idea, the factors that are responsible for an
institution’s rise at time 1 then contribute to its decline at time 2.
Here, however, I show that some of the very things about institutions
that produce dominant coalitions invested in their perpetuation also
concurrently create and sustain subordinate parasitic groups whose
activities subvert the institutions. The coexistence of these forces makes
an institution, even at the height of its influence, subject to contention
and exploitation by subversive groups.

5 Leblebici et al. (1991, 336) and Thelen (1999, 392–396) point out this same portrayal
  of how institutions work.
6 I am using a term that Stephen Barley and Gideon Kunda (1992, 386) borrow from

  David Maybury-Lewis (1989).

[p. 69] [PDF page 87]

Institutions with positive-feedback effects create stable expectations
and material conditions that, ironically, can engender their own sub-
version by groups that exploit these beliefs. These groups rely on others
to play by rules that they themselves ignore. Many institutions, includ-
ing property rights systems, work by creating certain expectations in
the minds of agents about the meanings and implications of specific
acts and symbols. Thus the success of an institution depends on and
can be measured by how tenaciously people hold onto the expecta-
tions that the institution engenders. For instance, a system of land title
registration succeeds to the extent that it leads parties to believe that
various documents represent rights to pieces of land. These beliefs and
expectations enable titling systems to facilitate market transactions
involving land. However, some of these same expectations can also
make it easier for parasitic agents to feed on institutions in ways that
undermine their overall efficacy and strength. In Brazil, for example,
con men exploited the trust of American and European environmen-
talists and sold the foreigners worthless “titles” to state-owned land
in the Amazon. One particularly successful con man was able to sell
“titles” to an area the size of Ireland.7
   The workings of a self-reinforcing institution can also create mate-
rial conditions whose exploitation by parasitic actors causes the insti-
tution to drift from its intended purpose. Institutions may, for example,
restrict the supply of a good or suppress competition for certain goods.
When this occurs, opportunities for parasitic activity may result. For
instance, by suppressing suppliers of alcohol, Prohibition in the United
States created highly profitable opportunities for bootleggers. Whereas
the bootleggers embraced Prohibition because of the high profit mar-
gins it gave them, their activities subverted the effort to prevent the
consumption of alcohol – the main point of Prohibition.8
   This perspective calls on us to move beyond the prevalent view that
institutional failure occurs only because some actors who are disad-
vantaged by or who detest particular institutions set out to destroy
them (Thelen 2000, 107; Schneiberg 2005, 120–121; Schneiberg and

7 “Brazil Hunts Amazon Land Thief,” BBC News, January 9, 2001, http://news.bbc
  .co.uk/2/hi/americas/1107272.stm (accessed June 12, 2007).
8 Yandle (1983) sheds light on these situations where “bootleggers” and “Baptists”

  coincide in their support for institutions even though their attitudes toward the ulti-
  mate goals of those institutions are opposed to each other.

[p. 70] [PDF page 88]

Clemens 2006, 218). For instance, in noting how institutions can con-
tribute to their own demise, Clemens (1993, 757) points to the way
in which self-reinforcing institutions with distributional consequences
create grievances through the same exclusionary features that attract
“winners” invested in perpetuating these institutions. But I make the
point here that change can also be unwittingly brought about by
symbionts of the parasitic variety. These are agents who harbor no
grievances toward the institutions they are involved with. In fact, they
depend on these institutions for their survival and so embrace them.
Yet despite their need for these institutions, their parasitic activities
can, over time and cumulatively, end up ruining the health of their
hosts. The efforts of some con men to prevent others from engaging in
similar con games can be understood in this light. Although themselves
engaged in rackets that exploit certain institutions, they seek to main-
tain the health of those institutions by keeping others from similarly
feeding on them.
   Recognizing the contradictory potential of institutions allows us to
explore ways in which such endogenous processes highlighted above
and exogenous factors collaborate to engender and shape institutional
change (Streeck and Thelen 2005, 22). While self-reinforcing institu-
tions may simultaneously foster parasitic groups that gradually under-
mine them, these groups may have only a limited capacity to inflict
damage. These agents may be only marginal actors innovating with
institutional forms and operational logics on the periphery. Exoge-
nous changes that impact the distribution of preferences and power in
favor of these agents, however, can aid in bringing formerly marginal
forms and logics from the periphery to the center (Streeck and Thelen
2005, 22). Such exogenous shocks could be shifts in the political envi-
ronment that encourage members of dominant groups to adjust their
preferences in ways that bring them in line with those of parasitic
groups. These more powerful actors can then bring their power to
bear against the institutional system.
   Alternatively, shocks such as defeats in major elections could erode
the power of dominant groups, allowing parasitic forces to take over
and fundamentally undermine institutions. As can happen in cases of
parasitic behavior, the very success of the parasitic agents can lead
to a total institutional collapse that eliminates the agents’ own host
institutions. For instance, where con men gain unhindered freedom to

[p. 71] [PDF page 89]

exploit land documentation, popular belief in the efficacy of land doc-
uments will drastically decline over time, eventually making it almost
impossible for the con men to profit from the fraudulent deployment
of these documents and resulting in a sort of “tragedy of the con men,”
as Dan Slater has termed it.9


The Establishment of Land Documentation in Kenya

By land documentation, I refer to a system by which information
about the locations, dimensions, and various rights to parcels of land
are noted in record systems in documents issued to relevant parties.
Land documents in Kenya encompass titles, letters of allotment, and
letters of offer issued by the Ministry of Lands (Kenya 2004, 13), as
well as share certificates issued by private land-buying companies.10
I adopt this broad definition, which goes beyond land title deeds, in
part because people employ many forms of documents as indicators of
their right to land (Kenya 2004, 12–13).
   In Kenya, land documentation started as a primary means through
which the British colonial administration sought to attract European
settlers to the country.11 To facilitate the subjugation of Kenya fol-
lowing the declaration of the Protectorate of East Africa in 1895,
the British East Africa Company and colonial administrators moved
aggressively to encourage European settlement and agriculture (Arnold
1974, 54; Hazlewood 1979, 1; Berman and Lonsdale 1992, 335). The
resulting expropriation of land from Africans caused massive landless-
ness and land hunger among Africans.
   The reasons given for documenting the land rights of Europeans
in Kenya resembled contemporary arguments supporting title regis-
tration and property rights security. European farmers had to have
secure property rights to persuade them to invest in agriculture and
to facilitate their use of their land rights as collateral for loans (Kenya
1941, 1–3). As a result, settlers’ organizations like the Settlement Com-
mittee, the Convention of Associations, and the Nairobi Chamber of

9  Comments by Dan Slater on an earlier draft of this paper at the Workshop on
   Historical Institutionalism at Northwestern University, October 26–27, 2007.
10 “Vanity Shares,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), June 20, 1980.
11 This was in addition to the subsidization of European settlers with heavy taxes levied

   on Africans. See Leys (1931).

[p. 72] [PDF page 90]

Commerce all lobbied the authorities for a land documentation system
(Kenya 1941, 1–13).
   Ultimately, the East African (Lands) Order in Council (1901), the
Crown Lands Ordinance (1902 and 1915), and the Land Titles Ordi-
nance (1908) were passed to provide for the registration of documents
for lands seized from Africans for exclusive European use (Kenya 2002,
21–23). In addition, the colonial administration created survey depart-
ments, registries, and assorted boards to govern land transactions. By
1919 the colonial government was recording land titles and granting
them to Europeans on a large scale (Meek 1949, 93–94).
   Africans were initially excluded from these efforts at documenta-
tion. However, at the height of the Mau Mau liberation war (1952–
1960), the Swynnerton Plan of 1954 extended land documentation
to the Native Reserves, where Africans were allowed to possess land
(Atieno-Odhiambo 2002, 238). An honest and perceptive colonial offi-
cial portrayed the Swynnerton Plan as a counterinsurgency weapon
aimed at creating a new Kenyan, who will “become the anchor of the
tribe, the solid yeoman farmer, the land owner who knows that he has
too much to lose if he flirts, however lightly, with the passions of his
nationalistic friends” (quoted in Branch 2006, 28).
   At independence in 1963, Jomo Kenyatta’s postcolonial govern-
ment (1963–1978) warmly embraced and promoted land documen-
tation (Kenya 1966). Laws such as the Land Adjudication Act (Cap
284), the Land Consolidation Act (Cap 283), the Land (Group Rep-
resentatives) Act (Cap 287), and the Registered Land Act (Cap 300)
ensured the continuation of documentation. The Land Adjudication
and Settlement Department continued to register titles for land parcels
in trust land areas.12 Records were strictly kept for plots in the state’s
settlement schemes, including the Million Acre, Z-Scheme, Shirika,
and Haraka schemes, which settled more than two hundred thousand
families on approximately three million acres by 2005.13 In many

12 Interview with an official of the Ministry of Lands and Settlement, Nairobi (Ken 5),
   February 18, 2005; and “Recent Land Reforms in Kenya” (paper given by the Kenya
   delegate at the Seminar on Land Law Reforms in East Africa, June 4, 1968, p. 10),
   Kenya National Archives (KNA), BN/81/87.
13 Interview with an official of the Ministry of Lands and Housing, Nairobi, (Ken 29),

   March 15, 2005.

[p. 73] [PDF page 91]

districts, land registries were created to facilitate the registration of
land rights.
    By the late 1960s, land documents had become a common part of
Kenyan life (Kenya 1966). A total of 3.1 million titles had been issued
by 1999,14 and the use of land documents in financial transactions was
pervasive (Kenya 2004, 65). Banks that granted loans for the acqui-
sition and operation of agricultural, real estate, and tourism concerns
accepted titles to properties as collateral (Wanjohi 1985, 13; Kenya
2004, 65).15

The Positive-Feedback Effects of Land Documentation
Land documentation systems often have positive-feedback effects by
virtue of their ability to distribute land in certain ways and make cer-
tain modes of using land easier and more profitable (de Soto 2000, 6–7;
World Bank 2002, 4–8; Ngugi 2004, 477). Beneficiaries can transform
some of their economic benefits into political instruments to reinforce
the structure and integrity of land documentation. Land documenta-
tion within the context of land hunger and landlessness in Kenya had
such positive-feedback effects. It gained the support of many Kenyans
with large landholdings by reducing threats to their new holdings posed
by rival claimants (Ngugi 2004, 502). This protection was critical.

14 “How To Get Out of the Quagmire,” East African Standard (Nairobi), March 11,
   2002.
15 This urge to use titles to get loans from the Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC)

   and other financial institutions was a big part of what motivated many community
   leaders to ask the state to carry out land documentation in their area. See letter from
   Chief Zephaniah Malit of East Karachuonyo to the assistant land adjudication offi-
   cer of South Nyanza, September 8, 1968. The chief was asking for adjudication and
   documentation in the area to allow people to use their title deeds to get AFC loans.
   See KNA BV/156/2. Also, interview with a farmer and member of a group ranch
   in Taita Taveta, (Ken 62), May 12, 2005; and “Back to Square 1,” Weekly Review
   (Nairobi), May 20, 1981. Also see “‘Kenyan Ministers’” Row Over ‘Grabbed’ Forest
   Land Deepens Divisions in Narc,” The East African (Nairobi), April 4, 2005; and
   “Kenya Starts Process To Cancel 12,000 Title Deeds,” The East African (Nairobi),
   February 28, 2005. These stories reported the concern of the Kenya Bankers’ Asso-
   ciation over threats by the government to cancel titles because of the monies they
   had lent out on titles. Also see comments by Joseph Wanyela, chairperson of the
   Kenya Bankers’ Association, in “How Should the Ndung’u Report Recommenda-
   tions Be Implemented? What Kenyans Say,” Land Update 3(4) October–December
   2004. Nakuru: Kenya Land Alliance. http://www.oxfam.org.uk/resources/learning/
   landrights/downloads/kla_land_update3_4.pdf (accessed May 8, 2009).

[p. 74] [PDF page 92]

Many large estates, such as the Taveta Sisal Estate of Basil Criticos
and the Ziwani Estate of the Kenyatta family, existed side by side with
large populations of squatters. As they sought to keep out squatters,
who often had strong historical claims to the land parcels (Ngugi 2004,
502), the owners of these estates quickly adopted the “sanctity of land
titles” language first used by European settlers.
    Land registration in Kenya, like that in many other places, also
acted as a cover beneath which the well-connected and knowledgeable
could redistribute land in their own favor. Their education and their
positions within the state machinery gave them a deep understand-
ing of land administration procedures, as well as the ability to take
advantage of these procedures.16 Many bureaucrats and politicians
registered titles to pieces of land that the state had procured for set-
tling poor Kenyans, using the guarantee of the security offered by the
titles to shield themselves from challenges.17 They also exploited land
documentation to acquire huge commercial concerns. The family of
Kenya’s first president, Jomo Kenyatta, acquired, among other prop-
erties, the Gicheha Farms in Kiambu District18 and the Ziwani Estate
in Taita Taveta District,19 properties that covered tens of thousands
of acres. Kenya’s second president, Daniel arap Moi, acquired, among
others, Kabarak Farm in Nakuru District20 and Ziwa Farm in Uasin
Gishu District.21
    The ease with which land titles could be procured throughout the
country meant that many Kenyans could use their land as collateral for
loans from the Agricultural Finance Corporation (AFC), the Settlement

16 “Moi Suspends Land Allocations, Raises Hopes About Land Reform,” Weekly
   Review (Nairobi), September 22, 1978.
17 “No Cheer,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), August 7, 1981; and letter from J. H.

   Angaine, minister for lands and settlement, to the director of settlement, January
   7, 1975, KNA BN/81/135.
18 “Land: Who Owns Kenya?” East African Standard (Nairobi), October 1, 2004.
19 “Land: Who Owns Kenya?” East African Standard (Nairobi), October 1, 2004; and

   interview with an official of one of the land administration agencies in Taita-Taveta
   District (Ken 63), May 13, 2005.
20 “Land: Who Owns Kenya?” East African Standard (Nairobi), October 1, 2004; “A

   Choice of Seven Grand Homes: Which Will Moi Opt For?” Daily Nation (Nairobi),
   January 28, 2002; and “Six Cows Stolen from Moi’s Farm,” East African Standard
   (Nairobi), June 4, 2005.
21 Interview with a divisional officer in Uasin Gishu District (Ken 35), April 21, 2005;

   and “A Choice of Seven Grand Homes: Which Will Moi Opt For?” Daily Nation
   (Nairobi), January 28, 2002.

[p. 75] [PDF page 93]

Fund Trustees (SFT), and various private institutions (Wanjohi 1985,
13).22 The banks and financial institutions involved in such borrowing
also became big supporters of land documentation.23
    Land documentation produced and empowered significant con-
stituencies that were dedicated to its continuance (Ngugi 2004, 502).
Defending the sanctity of land titles spread from its initial base within
the European settler community to the black Kenyan community
(Kenya 2004, 16; Ngugi 2004, 502; Branch 2006, 28). The African del-
egates to the Lancaster House Conferences, where independence was
negotiated, accepted the “sanctity of private property,” and Kenyatta
himself went to the European redoubt of Nakuru to assure the settlers
there that the state would respect land titles and would not expropriate
property (Arnold 1974, 65). These moves were unsurprising. Repre-
sentatives from the crucial Central Province who had been elected
in 1957 and 1958 had depended on electoral support from African
yeomen advocates of private property who had just received “newly
issued land titles” (Branch 2006, 43). Over time, these supporters
would try to stamp “an imprimatur of legal invincibility” on land
title deeds (Kenya 2004, 16). Yet the development of this dominant
constituency of black and white elites and commoners in support of
efficacious land documentation went hand in hand with the develop-
ment of a marginal constituency that thrived on the subversion of land
documentation.

The Parasitic Exploitation of Land Documentation:
Peripheral Innovators
Land documentation, while displaying positive-feedback effects, also
created opportunities for its own subversion by parasitic elements.
Kenya’s colonial and postcolonial governments succeeded in creating
exploitable expectations through their introduction and promotion
of land documentation. Parasitic elements whose activities ultimately

22 “Fifteen Years of Land Settlement,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), October 20, 1978;
   and “No Hanging On, Moi Tells Land Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), April
   4, 1985. In fact, this urge to use titles to get loans from the AFC and other financial
   institutions was a big part of what motivated many community leaders to ask the
   state to carry out land documentation in their area. See note 15.
23 “How Should the Ndung’u Report Recommendations Be Implemented? What

   Kenyans Say,” Land Update, Nakuru (Kenya): Kenya Land Alliance. October–
   December 2004 (p. 13). Also see (Kenya 2004, 66).

[p. 76] [PDF page 94]

undermined the system of land documentation embraced these oppor-
tunities with zest and inventiveness.24 As often occurs with innovation
in the face of dominant institutions (see Leblebici et al. 1991, 345),25
marginal actors operating at the periphery took the lead in introducing
an alternative logic into the structure of land documentation. Already
by 1968, we find state authorities in communication about the activi-
ties of petty fraudsters who, taking advantage of widespread belief in
the efficacy of land titles, were selling worthless pieces of paper to land-
hungry Kenyans.26 These minor con men, lacking political clout, were
bent on accessing some of the benefits of the dynamic land market of
the 1960s and 1970s. In one example, in 1970, a con man fooled a cer-
tain Kariuki into buying “title” to two hundred acres of land in Lunga
Lunga Location; the land, however, turned out to be Crown Land
to which the seller had had no right.27 The District Commissioner of
Kwale was to tell Kinuthia later that “the legality of the written agree-
ment between you and the seller is very questionable.”28 In another
example, three men sold some Kamba people land that turned out to be
Trust Land belonging to Shimba North Location.29 The proliferation
of fraudulent sales in Kwale led the district commissioner to request
assistance from local chiefs in combatting the practice.30


24 Ngugi (2004, 472) also argues that land registration in Kenya faced significant oppo-
   sition. But his argument concerns how various social actors sought to blunt some of
   the implications of land registration that posed major challenges to existing social
   arrangements. As he points out, “These social sectors refused to accept all the impli-
   cations of registration, such as near-absolute powers of the individually registered
   owner. They organized, invented and mobilized customary norms to frustrate com-
   plete operation of the new formal regime of tenure arrangements.”
25 See the interesting work of Leblebici et al. (1991, 345) on how alternative logics and

   structures are first innovated at the periphery and gradually seep into the center.
26 Letter from the chief of Chimba North Location to the district commissioner of

   Kwale discussing the illegal sale of state land by con men in Msulwa, October 18,
   1968, p. 277, KNA CC/12/47; letter from J. C. Kariuki to the district commissioner
   of Kwale concerning 200 acres of land, May 29, 1970, KNA CC/12/47; and letter
   from the district commissioner of Kwale to the district officer of the Coast Division,
   Kwale, April 4, 1968, KNA CC/12/47.
27 Letter from J. C. Kariuki to the Ministry of Lands and Settlement, May 15, 1970,

   KNA CC/12/47.
28 Letter from the Disctict Commissioner of Kwale to Mr. Kariuki if Mariakani, May

   29, 1970, KNA CC/12/47.
29 “Msulwa Report,” by the Shimba North Location chief to the district commissioner,

   Kwale, October 18, 1968, KNA CC/12/47.
30 Letter from the district commissioner, Kwale, to the district officer of the Coast

   Division, Kwale, April 4, 1968, KNA CC/12/47.

[p. 77] [PDF page 95]

Eventually, these institutional entrepreneurs began to invent more
complex schemes to exploit the credulity created by land documenta-
tion. The “company” that called itself the Kenya Express Land and
Estate Agent was a sophisticated example of this trend. With an eye-
catching name and a postal address in Nairobi it set about its business
of harvesting the fruits of Kenyans’ belief in the validity of land doc-
uments. It placed at least two advertisements in the influential Taifa
Leo newspaper (March 23 and April 5, 1968) offering to sell fifty-acre
parcels of land in Kwale District.31 The ads invited people to bring
or send in the 1,170 shillings for the land, a 20-shilling registration
fee, a 2-shilling stamp fee, and a 200-shilling agent fee “in one lump
sum – no installment.”32 Their letter of April 5, 1968, to one customer
prominently noted that buyers will be issued with “Title-deed[s].”33
When a would-be buyer in Garissa inquired about visiting Kwale to
see the plots he was informed that “owing to unforeseen circumstances
the land in question is not yet available and therefore it will be a waste
of time for you to come to Nairobi. We will inform you in the future
if it will be necessary for you to come.”34 At other times company
employees passed themselves off as the agents of the “Local govern-
ment of Kwale.”35 At least a few victims and would-be victims wrote to
officials, including the district commissioner of Kwale and the Kenyan
minister of lands and settlement, inquiring or complaining about this
company. In response to all inquiries, the district commissioner’s rep-
resentative wrote: “There are no 50 acre plots being sold in Kwale at
all. Watch out for rogues who go around deceiving people that they
have lands to sell.”36
    These subversive institutional innovations by shady “land mer-
chants” on the periphery would gradually move closer to the


31 Letter from J. M. Masesi of Garissa to the minister for lands and settlement, June
   25, 1968, KNA CC/12/47.
32 Letter from J. M. Masesi of Garissa to the minister for lands and settlement, June

   25, 1968, KNA CC/12/47.
33 Letter from the managing director of the Kenya Express Land and Estate Agent to

   Mr. James Crispus, April 5, 1968, KNA CC/12/47.
34 Letter from J. M. Masesi of Garissa to the minister for lands and settlement, June

   25, 1968, KNA CC/12/47.
35 Letter from Kinuthia Njoroge to the district commissioner of Kwale, May 4, 1968,

   KNA CC/12/47.
36 Letter from the district commissioner of Kwale to J. K. Ithagu, May 4, 1968, KNA

   CC/12/47.

[p. 78] [PDF page 96]

mainstream of institutional practice after they were adopted by wily
and politically ambitious land-buying company executives in the
1970s.

Refining and Exporting Technologies
Institutional innovations by marginal actors do not necessarily become
dominant. How did the institutional logics and forms invented by unin-
fluential crooks move from the margins, where they were deliberately
hidden from the glare of the law, to the mainstream of Kenya’s political
economy? An important step in the migration of institutional innova-
tions from the periphery to the mainstream is often the adaptation of
these institutional forms by actors with more clout who are trying to
solve new problems. These actors, who have the power to avoid pun-
ishment by state authorities, can shield new institutional logics and
forms from attack in a way that marginal actors cannot. The aura of
impunity that surrounds the behavior of these influential actors then
encourages imitation by others. In the 1970s in Kenya, powerful, polit-
ically ambitious land-buying company (LBC) executives in Central and
Rift Valley provinces played this critical role.
   The leading LBC executives had little to do with small-time crooks
even as they adapted the crooks’ fraudulent logics. Because of the
executives’ political ambitions they found the economic exploitation
of land documents useful, but they needed to maximize its political
effectiveness. To this end, once they had gotten Kenyans to purchase
land documents, they impressed on the buyers that the documents’
worth depended on the new owners’ “correct” political behavior. In
effect, the LBC executives removed the guarantee of rights inherent in
various land documents and the administrative institutions that sup-
ported them, and transferred it to themselves. This gave the executives
the benefit of monies and support that people had already tendered for
the papers. It also had the advantage for politicians of transforming
people who held land documents into captive populations who had to
obey the politicians over the long term so that the rights promised by
the land documents could be actualized and protected.
   The evolution of LBCs in Kenya represents an interesting case of
what Hacker (2005) and Streeck and Thelen (2005) have called insti-
tutional “drift.” LBCs are registered under the Companies Act (Cap
486). Departing white settlers often sought to sell their farms in large

[p. 79] [PDF page 97]

chunks, and poor peasants, many of whom had been rendered landless
by massive seizures of land for exclusive European use, could not afford
to enter the land market as individuals. Land-buying companies were
devised as a way for people to pool their resources by buying shares in
a company. Revenues from the sale of shares could then be used by the
company to purchase farms that would be subdivided among share-
holders according to the number of shares they held (Wanjohi 1985,
13; Kenya 2002, 38). LBCs had tremendous success in enabling many
poor Kenyans to pool their money and acquire land in the 1960s.37 It
is this success that explains why people were subsequently willing to
buy into the schemes of crooked executives.
    This institutional structure of the land-buying company was in the
1970s taken over by fraudsters and politicians and used for politi-
cal ends through the systematic subversion of land documentation. In
Kenya, many parliamentarians and aspiring parliamentarians formed
LBCs. Thus, Ngengi Muigai, MP for Gatundu, formed the Gatundu
Development Company38 John Michuki, who wished to be the MP
for Kangema, formed the Kangema Farlands Company.39 George
Mwicigi, the assistant minister for agriculture and livestock develop-
ment, formed the Kandara Investment Company.40 Waruru Kanja,
Nyeri MP and assistant minister for local government and urban
development, formed Burguret Arimi Limited.41 Kihika Kimani, who
aspired to be MP for Nakuru, formed the notorious Ngwataniro Land
Buying Company. There were some 320 and 700 LBCs in the provinces
of the Central Valley and the Rift Valley, respectively, by the late
1970s.42 Kihika Kimani’s Ngwataniro LBC alone was estimated to
have as many as 30,000 members in 1979;43 the Uiguano wa Mumbi


37 “Bogus Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 23, 1980, and “Ultimatum:
   Directors Told To End Land Problems,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), August 29, 1980.
38 “Land Issue,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 9, 1980, and “Opting Out,” Weekly

   Review (Nairobi), March 26, 1980.
39 “Michuki Takes the Plunge,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 4, 1979.
40 “Mwicigi Resigns,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), January 25, 1985.
41 “Bogus Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 23, 1980.
42 “No Hanging On, Moi Tells Land Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), April

   4, 1986; “Act Two: Nyeri Land Squabbles Continue,” Weekly Review (Nairobi),
   September 5, 1980; “Bogus Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 23, 1980.
43 “Shocking Revelations: Company Allegedly Lost Millions Of Shillings,” Weekly

   Review (Nairobi), March 30, 1979.

[p. 80] [PDF page 98]

Company was thought to have 3,604 members;44 and Ngengi Muigai’s
Gatundu Development Company had around 23,000 members.45
   Land-buying company executives sold “vanity shares” to amass
money for political campaigns.46 They used the money to influence
attendance at political rallies and how and where people voted.47
“Vanity shares” were share certificates that were supposed to but
that did not actually give people access to land. Shareholders some-
times found that their access to land depended not on their owning
share certificates, but on their performance of services, such as ren-
dering political support to LBC executives. The existence of “vanity
shares” led to widespread doubts about the legitimacy of LBC share
certificates. In 1980, 30,032 people registered with the district com-
missioner of Nyeri alone, claiming that they had been defrauded by
LBC executives.48 Of seventy-three known LBCs in Nyeri District in
1980, the directors of forty-one were under investigation for fraudulent
activities. The heads of the other thirty-two had simply disappeared,
leaving little evidence of their companies’ activities beyond the irate
peasants they had defrauded.49
   LBCs were transformed into excellent instruments for raising money
for political action. Share certificates were issued for which there
were no corresponding land parcels, providing company executives
with money for their political activities but leaving purchasers with
worthless documents. In 1980, 1,370 shareholders in Burguret Arimi,
the LBC headed by Waruru Kanja, complained to the Nyeri district
commissioner. They had purchased shares in the company but had
received no lands for their shares.50 The mammoth Gatarakwa Farm-
ing Company, headed by the powerful Ndungu Gicheru, a freedom


44 “Land Ultimatum: Directors Told To End Land Problems,” Weekly Review
   (Nairobi), August 29, 1980.
45 “Land Issue: Shareholders’ Patience Running Out,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May

   9, 1980.
46 “Vanity Shares” was the title of a story in the Weekly Review (Nairobi), June 20,

   1980.
47 “Campaign Against JM Rumors,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 5, 1975, and

   “Bogus Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 23, 1980.
48 “Vanity Shares,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), June 20, 1980.
49 “Act Two: Nyeri Land Squabbles Continue,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), September

   5, 1980.
50 “Bogus Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 23, 1980.

[p. 81] [PDF page 99]

fighter during the Mau Mau liberation war, produced even more land-
less shareholders. Only a third of the company’s 6,000 members had
received their plots by May 1980. The rest crowded the office of the
Nyeri district commissioner to complain about their worthless share
certificates. More than a thousand shareholders in Weru-ini Land Lim-
ited, a company headed by the governor of the Central Bank of Kenya,
Duncan Ndegwa, similarly trooped to the district commissioner’s office
to complain about not receiving the land presumably guaranteed by
their share certificates.51 Some LBC executives put the same plot num-
ber on multiple ballots, which led to more than one person’s draw-
ing “rights” to the same piece of land.52 About 300 members of the
Githunguri Constituency Ranching Company actually got land title
deeds from their executives but found no corresponding lands. Another
3,250 company members received neither titles nor land parcels.53
Most shareholders in LBCs in the 1970s eventually came to the same
painful conclusion pithily expressed by Mzee Mathenge, a victim of
the Ngwataniro LBC: “The land just was not there.”54
   The fortunate few shareholders and titleholders who actually got
land often soon realized that their troubles were not over. In many
cases, avaricious company directors, eager to profit one more time
before they relinquished actual land, used the titles to shareholders’
land as collateral for massive loans that they made no efforts to repay.
As a result, the few lucky people who had gotten those parcels dis-
covered that they had to repay those loans to avoid foreclosure by the
bank. In essence, they had to pay for the land twice to avoid losing it.
Members of the Ngwataniro LBC, however, did not lose their newly
acquired plots to the banks that held the titles as collateral, thanks to
President Moi’s intervention on their behalf.55
   Allegations that some of the proceeds from these fraudulent activi-
ties had been used “in the last two parliamentary and civic elections”


51 “Bogus Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 23, 1980.
52 Interview with three land control board members and former shareholders in LBCs
   in Nyeri District (Ken 26), March 9, 2005.
53 “No Hanging On, Moi Tells Land Buying Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi),

   April 4, 1986.
54 “Vanity Shares,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), June 20, 1980.
55 “No Hanging On, Moi Tells Land Buying Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi),

   April 4, 1986.

[p. 82] [PDF page 100]

were widespread.56 Given the involvement of many LBC executives in
local and national politics these allegations were not surprising. LBCs
had become cash cows for politicians seeking to acquire or maintain
positions in the ruling Kenya African National Union’s (KANU) com-
petitive one-party system.
    But the political uses of LBCs went beyond the companies’ serv-
ing as a reliable source of cash for aspiring politicians. LBCs became
instruments for holding shareholders as political captives who could
be manipulated in various ways. The idea was to collect payment from
shareholders but delay the distribution of share certificates or titles
or both, as well as the land parcels that were supposedly guaran-
teed by these documents. Politicians could then use the undistributed
certificates, titles, and parcels as bait to get people to attend rallies
and to vote in certain ways. The case of John Michuki is particularly
instructive here. When the former head of the Kenya Commercial Bank
decided to contest the Kangema parliamentary seat in 1979, he called
a meeting of his Kangema Farlands Company to discuss share cer-
tificates. But when members of the six thousand-member-strong LBC
gathered at Michuki’s home, they had to endure a well-choreographed
performance at which share certificates never came up for discussion.
Instead, after refreshments were served, a series of speakers mounted
the podium to beseech Michuki to run for the parliamentary seat.
Michuki finally agreed to do so and announced his intention to unseat
the incumbent MP, J. J. Kamotho.57
    The use of LBCs to gerrymander electoral constituencies was one of
the contributions of the man who would become the poster child for
the ills of LBCs in the 1970s. Kihika Kimani was the founder and chief
executive of what the Weekly Review called the “all-pervading busi-
ness cum political organization” Ngwataniro LBC.58 Kimani manip-
ulated the character of voting constituencies in Nakuru District by
moving members of his LBC around the company’s vast properties
during revision of the voters’ roll in 1977. Promising land to those
who cooperated and threatening the rights of those who refused,
Kimani allegedly transported voters from other constituencies to his


56 “Bogus Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 23, 1980.
57 “Michuki Takes the Plunge,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 4, 1979.
58 “Kihika Kimani To Face Uphill Battle,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), April 27, 1979.

[p. 83] [PDF page 101]

own in Nakuru North, where they registered to vote and boosted his
support.59
   Kihika Kimani used his LBC to rise from obscurity to the heights
of Nakuruan and national politics. He created the Ngwataniro LBC
after losing his initial bid to unseat the influential Nakuru East MP Fred
Kubai in the 1969 parliamentary elections. To raise money for his polit-
ical activities, he oversubscribed his company’s shares, leaving many
members with no land. He also threatened to evict company mem-
bers who opposed his political ambitions and gave company land to
many people who were not shareholders but who supported him polit-
ically. Using these techniques he expertly executed his plan to replace
three of the four incumbent Nakuru District MPs with Ngwataniro
members in the 1974 parliamentary elections.60 By the middle of the
1970s he was the most influential politician in Nakuru and had set
his sights on national politics. He was elected organizing secretary of
the powerful Gikuyu, Embu and Meru Association (GEMA), which
was very influential during the reign of President Kenyatta. Formed
in 1971 to further the social welfare of the Gikuyu, Embu and Meru
ethnic groups, GEMA became a powerful and feared political asso-
ciation with an active investment arm, GEMA Holdings.61 When the
prominent Nyandarua North MP J. M. Kariuki was murdered, Kimani
launched a series of meetings in the Rift Valley to quell widespread
rumors that senior state officials were involved in his assassination.
Ngwataniro funds and vehicles were thought to have been used in
organizing those meetings.62 Kihika Kimani’s most significant foray
into national politics was his founding of the Change the Constitu-
tion Movement in 1977, which hoped to prevent Vice President Moi
from automatically succeeding President Kenyatta in the event of the
president’s death.63

59 “Ngwataniro at Crossroads as Internal Problems Surface,” Weekly Review (Nairobi),
   December 12, 1977.
60 “Campaign Against JM Rumors,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 5, 1975, and “Mr.

   100 per cent,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), January 12, 1979.
61 “GEMA speaks out on politics,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 19, 1975; “What

   Went Wrong at GEMA Holdings,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), February 2, 1979.
62 “Ngwataniro at Crossroads as Internal Problems Surface,” Weekly Review (Nairobi),

   December 12, 1977.
63 “1977 Limping to the Finish in Kenya,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), December 26,

   1977.

[p. 84] [PDF page 102]

Moi was well aware of the political significance of these LBCs and
of their fraudulent manipulation of land documentation and property
rights in the struggle for control of the Kenyan state. One of his first
actions on succeeding Kenyatta as president was to launch a sustained
attack on the LBCs that had enabled his opponents to form the Change
the Constitution Movement. Moi knew that the power of these LBC
executives came from their frauds involving share certificates, titles,
and land parcels. By going after the manipulators he set out to liberate
the captive shareholders on whose backs the LBC executives stood
(Wanjohi 1985, 14). He thus worked diligently on property institutions
in areas influenced by LBC executives, seeking to hinder their efforts
to exploit land to garner political support.
    Moi repeatedly criticized LBCs and their fraudulent activities, going
so far as to compare the LBC executives to Kenya’s former colo-
nial masters.64 He compelled the companies to register everyone who
bought shares from them as shareholders, not just the executives. In
its 1977 returns, for instance, GEMA had listed only seven sharehold-
ers, all of whom were executive members. The 6,980 others who also
held shares were left off the list. By not registering the vast major-
ity of their shareholders, LBC executives kept these “sleeping part-
ners” in legal limbo, denying them the legal standing to challenge
the executives.65 Moi also forced LBC executives to issue titles to
their members and immediately parcel out farms to the rightful share-
holders (Wanjohi 1985, 14).66 He even deployed state officials to aid
the subdivision of parcels and registration of titles wherever execu-
tives seemed unwilling or unable to undertake these tasks. Such was
the case with the Gatarakwa Farming Company in Nyeri District.
Moi went there himself in 1986 to distribute titles to members but
refrained from doing so because of problems with the documentation.
He then sent state officials to give out land to shareholders and register


64 “Beware Conmen,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), October 5, 1979.
65 “Company Rules Tightened: Sleeping Partners To Get Protection,” Weekly Review
   (Nairobi), February 23, 1979.
66 “Company Rules Tightened: Sleeping Partners To Get Protection,” Weekly Review

   (Nairobi), February 23, 1970; “Beware Conmen! President Warns Kenyans,” Weekly
   Review (Nairobi), October 5, 1979; “Ultimatum: Directors Told To End Land Prob-
   lems,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), August 29, 1980; and “Progress,” Weekly Review
   (Nairobi), April 22, 1983.

[p. 85] [PDF page 103]

their rights.67 Earlier, in April 1983, Moi had traveled to Bahati in
Nakuru to distribute share certificates to members of the Ngwataniro
LBC.68 In addition, he ordered the deregistration and dissolution
of LBCs once they had completed issuing land and titles to their
shareholders.69 Moi thus tried to free tens of thousands of people
from the control of LBC executives. However, given his own similar
ruthless manipulation of property rights in the years to come, one can
only assume that his effort to save LBC shareholders was motivated
more by an interest in undermining his LBC opponents than by any
genuine interest in empowering land-hungry Kenyans.
    Moi’s efforts paid off for him handsomely. As some of the most
notable LBC executives lost their ability to manipulate shares and
titles, they experienced a rapid decline in their political fortunes. Kihika
Kimani’s dramatic downfall exemplifies this. On April 21, 1979, his
long reign as director of Ngwataniro LBC ended when he refrained
from contesting the directorship under pressure from his opponents.70
In addition, after Moi had nullified KANU Nakuru Branch elections
in 1979, Kimani declined to contest his long-held seat, thus allowing
Moi’s favored candidate, Kariuki Chotora, to run unopposed.71 That
same year, Kimani lost his Nakuru North parliamentary seat to Koigi
wa Wamwere, who received thrice as many votes as he had.72 Finally,
in 1985, Kimani was convicted of mismanaging Ngwataniro funds and
imprisoned.73
    It is important to note that state-issued land title deeds did not
escape the disrepute into which land documents had fallen. The coun-
try’s High Court nullified hundreds of title deeds issued after an adju-
dication exercise in Mosiro, Kajiado District, in 1991 because Ministry


67 Interview with an official of a land control board in Nyeri District, (Ken 26), March
   9, 2005; “Action for Gatarakwa,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), June 13, 1986; and
   “Progress,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), April 22, 1983.
68 “Progress: Ngwataniro Members Finally Get Share Certificates,” Weekly Review

   (Nairobi), April 22, 1983.
69 “No Hanging On, Moi Tells Land Companies,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), April 4,

   1986.
70 “Kihika Kimani To Face Uphill Battle,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), April 27, 1979.
71 “Kihika Steps Down,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), June 8, 1979.
72 “Dixon Kihika Kimani Bids for Come-back,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), November

   19, 1982.
73 “Kihika Appeals,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), January 31, 1985.

[p. 86] [PDF page 104]

of Lands officials had handed out titles to relatives and friends with no
right to land in the area.74 The cancellations prompted the reputable
Weekly Review magazine to ponder the validity of the popular expec-
tation that “a title deed gives the holder irrevocable ownership of a
piece of land.”75
   This parasitic exploitation brought land documentation in Kenya
under tremendous stress by 1992, following redemocratization. Wide-
spread belief in the efficacy of land documents had played a significant
role in facilitating this subversion.

Arriving at the Heart of the Mainstream
The exogenous shock of redemocratization in 1991 did not suddenly
cause the subversion of land documentation in Kenya, as some have
argued (Klopp 2000, 8–9).76 It contributed to an ongoing process by
giving even more senior KANU leaders an incentive to embrace, as they
struggled to shore up their political dominance, practices similar to
those of LBC executives (Klopp 2000, 8). This similarity supports the
significance that some scholars give to imitation as an explanation for
how peripheral institutional forms and logics move to the mainstream.
   The 1992 and 1997 elections pitted KANU politicians against oppo-
nents from new parties like the Democratic Party (DP) and the Forum
for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD). KANU officials at the high-
est levels of government resorted to issuing worthless or encumbered
land titles and letters of allotment in exchange for money and political
support, threatening and evicting title-bearing opponents, and using
land documents to influence voting patterns in various constituen-
cies (Kenya 2004, 37–40, 75).77 They filled their campaign chests and

74 “Land Questions,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 24, 1991.
75 “What Value a Title Deed?” Weekly Review (Nairobi), May 31, 1991.
76 Internal Displacement Monitoring Center (IDMC), “‘I Am a Refugee in My Own

   Country’: Conflict-induced Internal Displacement in Kenya” (Geneva Switzerland,
   December 19, 2006), http://www.internal-displacement.org/8025708F004BE3B1/
   (httpInfoFiles)/AF919E45D789BD0BC125724900350687/$file/Kenya%20Special%
   20Report%20Dec06.pdf (accessed June 4, 2007), pp. 13–20. There is also a popular
   discourse ascribing the subversion of land documents and other forms of corruption
   in the land market to redemocratization in the 1990s. Various interviewees held this
   view. These included a staff member of an NGO involved in advocacy on land issues
   (Kenya 2), February 15, 2005; and an official of the Department of Lands (Kenya
   1), February 14, 2005.
77 IDMC, “‘I Am a Refugee in My Own Country,’” pp. 13–20.

[p. 87] [PDF page 105]

sought political support by issuing more than one title or allocation
note for the same piece of land (Kenya 2004, 9–14, 80).78 To facilitate
this fraud, the Ministry of Lands included a disclaimer in letters of
allotment in 1993 absolving itself of its responsibility to give people
alternative plots of land when the parcels indicated in the allotment
letters were already occupied.79 Officials also took to changing entries
in title registers to benefit their supporters (Kenya 2004, 37–40, 75).
    To better tie people to KANU, leading party officials let it be known
that the efficacy of a holder’s land documents depended on his or her
political leanings. In this vein, the minister of local government and
influential KANU Narok MP William ole Ntimama threatened many
of the title-bearing Gikuyu residents of Narok who were seen as anti-
KANU with eviction when he told them to “lie low like an envelop
or face grave consequences.”80 Lying low meant “proper” political
behavior. As Ntimama pointed out, “These people are doing lucrative
business in all sectors, but recently they have being wanting to control
the politics of the area.”81 To those who harbored the vain hope
that a title would protect them from victimization if they supported
opposition candidates or parties, Ntimama boldly proclaimed that land
titles were “mere pieces of paper” in 1993.82 This public belittling of
supposedly indefeasible titles provoked panic and led the opposition
Masai politician John Keen to comment that devaluing land title deeds
was “like opening a Pandora’s box and ultimately means that no one
has a right to own anything in Kenya.”83 Ntimama, however, was
not trying to deny the existence of property in Kenya. In line with
methods first invented by LBC executives like Kihika Kimani, he was
attempting to influence title bearers by sapping their documents of
the guarantee of security and making such guarantees dependent on
“proper” (pro-KANU) political behavior.

78 Interestingly, the state simultaneously bought lands at highly inflated prices from
   allies of leading politicians who had acquired these parcels from the state at very low
   prices.
79 Interview with an official of the Department of Lands (Ken 1), February, 14, 2005.
80 “The Narok Saga and Its Implications for Land Policy,” Weekly Review (Nairobi),

   March 1, 1991.
81 “Narok: Background to Ethnic Conflict,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), March 1, 1991.
82 “The Indigenous and the Natives,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), July 9, 1993, and “The

   End of Tribal Talks,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), July 9, 1993.
83 “The Indigenous and the Natives,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), July 9, 1993.

[p. 88] [PDF page 106]

Title-bearing Gikuyu who refused to heed Ntimama’s calls for com-
pliance were violently evicted from Enoosupukia in Narok District.84
Similar evictions and clashes preceded the 1992 and 1997 elections and
spread across the country, driving home the point that only titles held
by those involved in pro-KANU political activities would be respected
(Ajulu 2002, 264–265; Klopp 2002, 274–275).85 By 1993 clashes in
areas such as Nakuru, Turkana, Nandi, Kericho, Uasin Gishu, and
Taita Taveta are thought to have led to fifteen hundred deaths and
three hundred thousand displacements.86 The deliberate depreciation
of the worth of land titles was further revealed when KANU elites,
including Ntimama and Kipkalya Kones, vowed not to allow title-
bearing Gikuyu clash victims to return to their farms until political
questions between the communities were settled.87
   The land clashes that punctuated the elections of 1992 and 1997 led
to massive displacement and violence but did not mark the beginning
of the subversion of land titles and other land documents. They merely
continued a process that had been long underway, one that had pro-
ceeded hand in hand with, and had been facilitated by, the promotion
and development of land documentation in Kenya.


Conclusion

This chapter builds on an understanding of the contradictory potential
of institutions to demonstrate how the success of land documentation
in Kenya contributed to its own gradual demise. I argue that the institu-
tion of land documentation in Kenya produced and sustained dominant
agricultural, real estate, and tourism interests that were dedicated to
the “sanctity of land titles” in Kenya. But the success of land documen-
tation created a belief in the efficacy of land documents that was easily
exploited by fraudsters and politicians intent on exchanging worthless
or encumbered land documents for economic and political gain. The
abuse of land documentation by these groups was only exacerbated by
the reintroduction of democratization.

84 “Resettlement for Victims,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), November 19, 1993.
85 IDMC, “‘I Am a Refugee in My Own Country,’” pp. 13–20.
86 IDMC, “‘I Am a Refugee in My Own Country,’” p. 13.
87 “End of Tribal Talks,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), September 15, 1995, and “New

   Fears and Suspicions,” Weekly Review (Nairobi), September 1, 1995.

[p. 89] [PDF page 107]

This reflection on the contradictory potential of institutional struc-
tures gives us a good way to reflect on the endogenous contributions
to change in institutions with positive-feedback effects. It allows us to
understand how institutions demonstrating strong positive-feedback
effects also contribute to their own downfall. This does not totally
rule out the impact of exogenous factors, but shows that, sometimes,
these exogenous factors speed along or exacerbate processes that are
underway because of endogenous causes.
    Recognition of the contradictory potential of institutions has both a
theoretical and a methodological implication. On the theoretical front,
it forces us to reexamine the conceptualization of critical junctures.
Critical junctures are defined as moments of great historical signifi-
cance during which change occurs and actors chose between various
alternatives, unlike normal periods that are marked by the structural
reproduction of paths (Mahoney 2000, 513; Thelen 2004, 30). The
contradictory potential of institutions reduces the historical signifi-
cance of “critical” junctures. It infuses the periods of supposed sta-
bility with greater significance by showing that agency often operates
outside of critical junctures in instances where the process of change
unfolds gradually (see also Thelen 2004, 32; Streeck and Thelen 2005,
4; Mahoney and Thelen, this volume). On the methodological front,
the story told here about the contradictory potential of institutions
forces us to rethink the historical periods in which we concentrate
research on institutional change. If change is an ever-present possibil-
ity because of the very nature of institutions, and can occur gradually
over time, then concentrating research on critical junctures marked
by big exogenous shocks and obvious drastic changes might produce
misleading conclusions about the sources of change.
    Focusing on periods outside of those thought of as critical junctures
is important because institutions that display contradictory potential
inherently contain the germs of conflict that generates change. By
simultaneously fostering parasitic agents and those dedicated to the
proper functioning of institutions, institutions create the constant pos-
sibility of conflict and contestation. This view of institutions opens
up opportunities for conflict and change in even more ways than do
accounts that portray institutions as unambiguous structures and that
influence behavior in uniform ways. Here the contradictory forces nur-
tured by institutions do constant battle, and the stable persistence of

[p. 90] [PDF page 108]

institutions even at the height of their acceptance by societal actors is
not a foregone conclusion. As shown with Kenya’s LBC executives,
where such “friends” of institutions happen to be subversive parasites,
their warm embrace and exploitation of prevailing institutions may
well contribute to drift and gradual institutional decline.
   At the heart of the examination in this chapter of the abuse of prop-
erty rights institutions by con men and LBC executives is recognition
of some of the ends to which actors may put the subversion of titles
and other forms of land documents. The literature on property rights
is replete with works emphasizing the beneficial effects of property
institutions like titles. They portray titles as instruments that facilitate
productive activities and allow the transformation of real property into
capital through its use as collateral (de Soto 2000; World Bank 2002;
Joireman 2007). Little attention has been paid to the question of how
these same institutions can be manipulated to serve ends that system-
atically disempower and rob people, undermine markets, and create
social disorder. A key dividend of recognizing the contradictory poten-
tial of institutions is that we can understand how these institutional
structures may be used for different purposes with diverse practical
effects and dissimilar ethical valences.


References
Ajulu, Rok. 2002. “Politicised Ethnicity, Competitive Politics and Conflict
  in Kenya: A Historical Perspective.” African Studies 61 (December): 251–
  268.
Arnold, Guy. 1974. Kenyatta and the Politics of Kenya. London: Dent.
Arthur, Brian. 1994. Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Econ-
  omy. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Atieno-Odhiambo, Elisha. 2002. “Hegemonic Enterprises and Instrumental-
  ities of Survival: Ethnicity and Democracy in Kenya.” African Studies 61
  (November): 223–249.
Barley, Stephen, and Gideon Kunda. 1992. “Design and Devotion: Surges of
  Rational and Normative Ideologies of Control in Managerial Discourse.”
  Administrative Science Quarterly 37 (September): 363–399.
Berman, Bruce, and John Lonsdale. 1992. Unhappy Valley: Conflict in Kenya
  and Africa. Eastern African Studies. London: J. Currey.
Branch, Daniel. 2006. “Loyalists, Mau Mau, and Elections in Kenya: The
  First Triumph of the System, 1957–1958.” Africa Today 53 (Winter):
  27–50.

[p. 91] [PDF page 109]

Clemens, Elisabeth. 1993. “Organizational Repertoires and Institutional
  Change: Women’s Groups and the Transformation of U.S. Politics, 1890–
  1920.” American Journal of Sociology 98 (January): 755–798.
Comaroff, John.1980. “Class and Culture in a Peasant Economy: The Trans-
  formation of Land Tenure in Barolong.” Journal of African Law 1 (Spring):
  85–113.
de Soto, Hernando. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs
  in the West and Fails Everywhere Else. London: Bantam.
DiMaggio, Paul. 1988. “Interest and Agency in Institutional Theory.” In Insti-
  tutional Patterns and Organizations: Culture and Environment, ed. Lynne
  Zucker, 3–21. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Company.
Greif, Avner, and David Laitin. 2004. “A Theory of Endogenous Institu-
  tional Change.” American Political Science Review 98 (November): 633–
  652.
Hacker, Jacob. 2005. “Policy Drift: The Hidden Politics of US Welfare State
  Retrenchment.” In Beyond Continuity: Institutional Change in Advanced
  Political Economies, ed. Wolfgang Streeck and Kathleen Thelen, 40–82.
  Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hayanga, C. A. 1975. “Loans to Agriculture in Kenya.” Journal of African
  Law 19 (Spring-Autumn): 105–111.
Hazlewood, Arthur. 1979. The Economy of Kenya: The Kenyatta Era. Oxford:
  Oxford University Press.
Jackson, Gregory. 2005. “Contested Boundaries: Ambiguity and Creativity in
  the Evolution of German Codetermination,” in Beyond Continuity: Institu-
  tional Change in Advanced Political Economies, ed. Wolfgang Streeck and
  Kathleen Thelen, 226–254. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Joireman, Sandra. 2007. “Enforcing New Property Rights in Sub-Saharan
  Africa: The Ugandan Constitution and the 1998 Land Act.” Comparative
  Politics 39 (July): 463–480.
Katznelson, Ira. 2003. “Periodization and Preferences: Reflections on Pur-
  posive Action in Comparative Historical Social Science.” In Comparative
  Historical Analysis in the Social Sciences, ed. James Mahoney and Dietrich
  Rueschemeyer, 270–301. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kenya. 1941. Land Tenure Committee Report. Nairobi: Government Printer.
Kenya. 1966. Report of the Mission on Land Consolidation in Kenya, 1965–
  1966. Nairobi: Printing and Packaging Corporation.
Kenya. 2002. Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Land Law Sys-
  tem of Kenya on Principles of a National Land Policy Framework, Con-
  stitutional Position on Land and New Institutional Framework for Land
  Administration. Nairobi: Government Printer.
Kenya. 2004. Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Illegal/Irregular
  Allocation of Public Land. Nairobi: Government Printer.
Klopp, Jacqueline. 2000. “Pilfering the Public: The Problem of Land Grabbing
  in Contemporary Kenya.” Africa Today 47 (Winter): 7–26.

[p. 92] [PDF page 110]

Klopp, Jacqueline. 2002. “Can Moral Ethnicity Trump Political Tribalism?
  The Struggle for Land and Nation in Kenya.” African Studies 61 (Decem-
  ber): 269–294.
Leblebici, Huseyin, et al. 1991. “Institutional Change and the Transformation
  of Interorganizational Fields: An Organizational History of the US Radio
  Broadcasting Industry.” Administrative Science Quarterly 36 (September):
  333–363.
Leys, Norman. 1931. A Last Chance in Kenya. London: L. and Virginia Woolf
  at the Hogarth Press.
Mahoney, James. 2000. “Path Dependence in Historical Sociology.” Theory
  and Society 29 (August): 507–548.
Maybury-Lewis, David. 1989. “The Quest for Harmony.” In The Attraction of
  Opposites: Thought and Society in the Dualistic Mode, ed. David Maybury-
  Lewis and Uri Almagor, 1–17. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Meek, Charles. 1949. Land, Law and Custom in the Colonies. London:
  Oxford University Press, 1949.
Ngugi, Joel. 2004. “Reexamining the Role of Private Property in Market
  Democracies: Problematic Ideological Issues Raised by Land Registration.”
  Michigan Journal of International Law 25 (Winter): 467–527.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic
  Performance: The Political Economy of Institutions and Decisions. Cam-
  bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pierson, Paul. 2000. “Not Just What, but When: Timing and Sequence in
  Political Processes.” Studies in American Political Development 14 (Spring):
  72–92.
Pierson, Paul. 2004. Politics in Time: History, Institutions, and Political Anal-
  ysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Schneiberg, Marc. 2005. “Combining New Institutionalisms: Explaining Insti-
  tutional Change in American Property Insurance.” Sociological Forum 20
  (March): 93–137.
Schneiberg, Marc, and Elisabeth Clemens. 2006. “The Typical Tools for the
  Job: Research Strategies in Institutional Analysis.” Sociological Theory 24
  (September): 195–227.
Scott, James. 1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the
  Human Condition Have Failed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Streeck, Wolfgang, and Kathleen Thelen. 2005. “Introduction: Institutional
  Change in Advanced Political Economies.” In Beyond Continuity: Institu-
  tional Change in Advanced Political Economies, ed. Wolfgang Streeck and
  Kathleen Thelen, 1–39. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thelen, Kathleen. 1999. “Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Politics.”
  Annual Review of Political Science 2 (June): 369–404.
Thelen, Kathleen. 2000. “Timing and Temporality in the Analysis of Institu-
  tional Evolution and Change.” Studies in American Political Development
  14 (Spring): 101–108.

[p. 93] [PDF page 111]

Thelen, Kathleen. 2004. How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy
  of Skills in Germany, Britain, the United States, and Japan. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Wanjohi, Nick Gatheru. 1985. The Politics of Land, Elections, and Demo-
  cratic Performance in Kenya: A Case Study of Nakuru District. Vol. 412,
  Working Paper. Nairobi: Institute for Development Studies, University of
  Nairobi.
World Bank. 2002. Building Institutions for Markets: World Development
  Report, 2002. New York: Oxford University Press.
Yandle, Bruce. 1983. “Bootleggers and Baptists – the Education of a Regula-
  tory Economist.” Regulation (May/June): 12–20.
