Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power
Edited by James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen
First published in print: 2009 | Copyright: 2010 | Cambridge University Press

Chapter 4: Policymaking as Political Constraint: Institutional Development in the U.S. Social Security Program
Alan M. Jacobs
Original print pages 94–131; PDF pages 112–149

[English original. Chapter footnotes and references are retained in their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks and fixed-width table layout are retained; verify diagrams and exact typography against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, footnotes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 94] [PDF page 112]

4

Policymaking as Political Constraint

Institutional Development in the U.S.
Social Security Program

        Alan M. Jacobs




Today, few features of the American policy landscape are as promi-
nent and popular, or have proven as resilient over time, as the Social
Security program. The largest single item of federal expenditure, Social
Security routinely ranks among the state activities most valued by ordi-
nary citizens (United States Office of Management and Budget 2008).1
Over the last thirty years, the retirement program has survived largely
intact against assault by a highly mobilized and politically ascendant
conservative movement, most recently withstanding President George
W. Bush’s 2005 push for partial privatization.
   Such political success, however, could hardly have been predicted
at the moment of Social Security’s establishment. Two features of
the scheme’s original financial architecture suggested a particularly
troubled political future. First, the program was to be financed solely
via payroll contributions from insured workers and their employers.

1   Data from the General Social Survey (GSS) show that between 2000 and 2006, about
    95% of the U.S. public thought that spending on Social Security should either increase
    or stay the same. Support for Social Security spending was therefore comparable to
    support for education and health, two valence issues, and much higher than support
    for other government programs. Data from Davis et al. (2007).
The author would like to thank Nico Dragojlovic and Steven Klein for able research
assistance and is grateful to James Mahoney, Kathleen Thelen, Peter Hall and the other
members of the Workshop on Institutional Change at Northwestern University for
helpful comments on earlier drafts. This research received generous financial support
from the Center for American Political Studies at Harvard University and the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (Grant #410-2006-1174).

[p. 95] [PDF page 113]

Among its consequences, reliance on payroll taxes made the program’s
financing highly regressive, concentrating the visible tax burden on
those constituents who could least afford to pay (Leuchtenburg 1963;
Leff 1983). Second, the program was established on a “funded” actu-
arial basis, much like a private insurance plan. As a funded scheme,
Social Security would not use current payroll contributions to finance
current social expenditures but save them to cover the cost of future
outlays. While “funding” would result in lower long-term contribu-
tion rates, it required imposing a far higher payroll tax and paying far
lower benefits for the scheme’s first decades. With such high net costs
in the near term, actuarial funding would be a remarkable choice for
any elected government to make; it was, however, an especially strik-
ing decision amidst the economic crisis and soaring rates of old-age
poverty of the 1930s.
   Why did the creators of the Social Security program choose a design
that would impose such heavy short-run costs and generate so few
short-run social benefits for the most vulnerable social groups? As
I will contend, the choices of Social Security’s architects make sense
only if we take into account their institutional aims – the ways in which
they sought to employ policy rules and structures as constraints on the
long-run politics of public pensions. In particular, Franklin Roosevelt
and his closest advisers wanted to expand public social protection but
worried about how their successors might exploit the programs that
they were now creating. If future incumbents sought to use pension
payouts to court constituents and win votes, Social Security might
generate a politics of endless expansion that would threaten the fiscal
capacities of the state. Roosevelt and his advisers chose pure contrib-
utory and funded financing, in large measure, to restrain this future
political dynamic: that is, to make it more difficult for their successors
to raise benefits and to insulate the Treasury against future claims on
federal resources.
   These programmatic institutional choices left Social Security highly
vulnerable to challenge, however. Designed to manage long-term polit-
ical risks, these rules had real costs in the near term and did little to
generate a constituency for the program’s maintenance in the short run.
In fact, in the years following the program’s enactment, Social Security
faced assault from actors across the political spectrum, as forces on the
left and the right condemned the scheme’s high contribution rates, the

[p. 96] [PDF page 114]

regressivity of its taxes, the long delay in its payment of benefits, and
its accumulation of a massive fund. Yet the program not only survived
but flourished, maintaining to the present its institutional character
as a purely contributory financial arrangement, weathering along the
way repeated demands for radical change by both liberals and con-
servatives. How can we explain the persistence of a program saddled
with such costly and unpopular rules?
    Historical institutionalists have commonly explained institutional
stability by pointing to path-dependent processes, especially positive-
feedback mechanisms through which rules generate consequences that,
over time, enhance the power resources of their advocates and broaden
supporting coalitions. The literature on comparative welfare-state pol-
itics would strongly suggest a path-dependent account of Social Secu-
rity’s apparent stability over time, and indeed, welfare-state scholars
have pointed to contributory pension programs – and Social Security,
in particular – as quintessential sites of institutional self-reinforcement
(Pierson 1994; Myles and Pierson 2001).
    By contrast, and consistent with arguments advanced throughout
this volume, this essay will contend that there was nothing automatic
or mechanical about the survival and flourishing of contributory old-
age insurance in the United States. Institutional change has commonly
been theorized as a rare and dramatic reconfiguration, arising from
a large-scale shift in exogenous conditions. As Mahoney and Thelen
(introduction) emphasize, however, processes endogenous to institu-
tions may generate incremental change on a more frequent basis, as
agents disadvantaged by current practices routinely seek to revise, sup-
plement, or reinterpret the rules, sometimes by exploiting resources
and ambiguities embedded in the institutions themselves. In the face
of both exogenous dislocations and internal challenge, institutional
defenders must in turn engage in ongoing efforts to mobilize and
maintain political support, at times by strategically modifying the very
structures they seek to preserve. Rather than extended stasis punctu-
ated by abrupt transformation, the resulting pattern may be a series of
subtle institutional shifts that cumulate into major change over time.
Underscoring and illustrating these dynamics, this chapter’s explana-
tion of Social Security’s developmental trajectory rests on two principal
arguments, each of which departs in important ways from a standard
path-dependent logic of institutional entrenchment.

[p. 97] [PDF page 115]

First, the apparent continuity of Social Security’s broad outlines
masks considerable, recurring instability in its underlying rules. Over
the last seven decades, central elements of the original scheme have
witnessed substantial revision: contributory insurance was overtaken
and nearly displaced by noncontributory welfare spending, actuarial
funding was abandoned and then partially restored, and the meaning
of the contributory principle has been thoroughly reworked. While
Social Security has not seen abrupt and sweeping transformation, the
cumulative effect of seventy years of institutional contestation is a
program that departs in fiscally and socially consequential ways from
Roosevelt’s original blueprint.
   The chapter’s second major claim, again echoing a major theme of
this volume, is that the most important changes in Social Security’s
financing institutions have resulted not from exogenous shocks but
from endogenous sources – as consequences of the rules themselves and
of the conflict that they generated. Far from reaping steeply increas-
ing returns, the New Dealers’ institutional arrangements yielded three
kinds of negative-feedback effects. First, as rules with major distribu-
tive consequences, Social Security’s underlying institutions generated
their own opposition, provoking immediate challenges from groups
who were disadvantaged by them. Second, the program’s structure
provided its opponents with crucial strategic opportunities. Designed
to limit the options of future majorities, Social Security’s institutional
logic ultimately proved contingent and malleable, open to redeploy-
ment by actors with competing goals. The program’s rules created
latent resources – material, procedural, and moral – that rivals were
able to convert into tools of institutional challenge. Third, under condi-
tions of intense institutional contestation, change did not emerge solely
from the choices and strategies of institutional opponents. Indeed,
defenders of the New Deal vision were among the most important
change agents in the program’s historical development. As Social Secu-
rity faced assault from both left and right, fiscally conservative cham-
pions of the social-insurance principle chose to revise and reinterpret
programmatic rules in order to shore up the scheme’s political founda-
tions and to close off future opportunities for challenge. Institutional
survival, in short, has been predicated on gradual institutional change.
   In examining the strategies of both opponents and guardians of
programmatic rules, the chapter demonstrates the ways in which

[p. 98] [PDF page 116]

continuity and change in institutional arrangements may be intimately
linked: how rules intended to generate stability may provoke and
enable processes of transformation, and how institutional persistence
may depend critically on timely strategic innovation. The account here
also illustrates why the analysis of institutional development cannot be
separated from the study of institutional origins, as the initial choices
and compromises made by designers will generate many of the most
important pressures and opportunities for downstream change.
   From here the chapter proceeds in four steps. The next section elab-
orates the concept of a programmatic institution and unpacks its logic
of political constraint. The chapter then considers why such institu-
tions may not be subject to some of the stabilizing mechanisms most
commonly thought to hold institutions in place – why, that is, program-
matic institutions may be relatively susceptible to change. Returning
to the empirical case, the essay turns next to the historical analysis
of the development of key programmatic institutions governing Social
Security’s finances, from the mid-1930s to the mid-1980s. The chapter
concludes by identifying the broad developmental patterns at work in
this account and drawing out the larger implications of the argument
for institutional analysis.


The Logic of Programmatic Institutions

Policies as Programmatic Institutions
Public policies frequently do more than generate distributions of re-
sources and collective social consequences in the near term. By attach-
ing rewards and penalties to specific activities and establishing binding
rules, elements of public policy can also exert durable structuring and
constraining effects on social interaction – effects that are best con-
sidered institutional (Streeck and Thelen 2005). As Pierson points out
(2004), “For the individuals and social organizations that make up civil
society, public policies are clearly very central rules governing their
interactions” (165).
   Beyond these structuring effects on social actors outside the state,
two prominent lines of analysis suggest that public policies can also
serve as institutions in a second, more political sense – structuring and
constraining future decision making by political actors themselves. On
the one hand, arguments about policy feedback have outlined how

[p. 99] [PDF page 117]

specific features of program design can shape the menu of feasible
options available to the future officeholders who inherit them, and can
affect the political costs and benefits associated with future policy alter-
natives (Skocpol 1992; Pierson 1993; Hacker 2002). Yet, at the same
time, scholars analyzing problems of political uncertainty and delega-
tion have illuminated actors’ intentional and strategic use of program
design to constrain their rivals and successors over time (e.g., Moe
1990; McNollgast 1999; Patashnik 2000; Huber and Shipan 2002).
Public programs can be deliberately crafted, for instance, in ways that
will make them more difficult for future legislators to dismantle, will
inhibit their future expansion, or will tie the hands of the bureaucratic
agents charged with implementing them.
    The concept of a programmatic institution refers to the constrain-
ing effect of existing policies on the future politics of policy choice.
More specifically, I define a programmatic institution as a structural
feature of an existing public program that influences the menu of policy
options from which officeholders choose or the political costs and ben-
efits associated with those options. Consistent with our understanding
of institutions more broadly, programmatic institutions need not be
an object of intentional choice: their constraining effects may be an
unforeseen consequence of policy choices made for other reasons. In
the analysis that follows, however, I focus specifically on dynamics
that involve intentional efforts of programmatic institutional design.

The Constraining Effects of Programmatic Institutions
Why might actors seek to use public policy as a tool of institutional
constraint? In well-institutionalized democracies, macro-level political
institutions, such as constitutional provisions, are usually designed to
reduce uncertainty about processes of allocating political authority
and to provide decision rules for policymaking. Political actors devise
programmatic institutions, in contrast, with a much more finely tuned
objective in mind: reducing uncertainty about specific policy outcomes.
When voters and organized groups value a policy objective (low taxes,
light regulation, a clean environment), they often care not just about
winning a near-term gain but about creating an enduring stream of
policy benefits. Politicians, too, have reasons to seek to entrench policy
victories over time and to avoid future policy defeats: not only might
they have their own long-term preferences over policy outcomes, but

[p. 100] [PDF page 118]

they also have incentives to act to protect the long-term welfare of
organized interests and other attentive constituencies (Moe 1990).
    Actors in democratic contexts turn to programmatic institutions
because macro-level institutional structures seldom resolve political
uncertainty about today’s policy achievements. To the contrary, the
rules of political competition are usually designed to raise the likeli-
hood that today’s policymaking coalition will see its power wane at
some future point in time. Actors in power today thus search for alter-
native tools for binding the hands of those who will wield influence
tomorrow. While constitutions themselves are exceedingly difficult to
change, policy structures can usually be manipulated by a much nar-
rower coalition, and they can often be designed in ways that will shape
the options, barriers, and incentives confronting the future officehold-
ers who will inherit them. In this sense, programmatic constraints are a
logical institutional countermaneuver for actors prevented by higher-
order rules from remaining in power forever.
    Programmatic institutions typically operate by bequeathing to to-
morrow’s incumbents a policy structure that makes certain courses of
action more politically appealing than others. Designers of program-
matic institutions can choose from a wide range of constraining strate-
gies, but for the purposes of illustration I will briefly identify three
common strategies of constraint here:
    Manipulating information. As students of policy feedback have
argued, the ease with which voters can attribute credit or blame often
depends on the structure of the public programs with which gov-
ernments are tinkering (Arnold 1990; Pierson 1994; Pal and Weaver
2003). To invert this insight, those governing today can often design
policy in ways that will shape the visibility to future voters of particular
kinds of policy moves by those governing tomorrow.
    One informational strategy seeks to limit future changes in the dis-
tribution of resources by compartmentalizing resource flows, creating
a separate accounting of the funds raised for and spent on a specific
policy goal. A common form of compartmentalization is the financing
of a program out of a trust fund that is fed only by its own dedicated
sources of revenue, often a hypothecated tax levied on program bene-
ficiaries (Patashnik 2000). By restricting a program to a single source
of revenue, compartmentalization can be used to raise the visibility
of attempts to expand a program. Rather than having to frame an

[p. 101] [PDF page 119]

argument against the program’s benefits, opponents of expansion can
point to the financial constraints of the trust fund or to the specific tax
hike that any spending increase would require. At the same time, com-
partmentalization can also make it easier to detect when resources are
being diverted from the original policy goal since this would require
their removal from a dedicated account.
   Another informational strategy institutes routine reporting mech-
anisms structured to highlight particular consequences. Legislators
can require administrative agencies to measure and describe at reg-
ular intervals their activities and the consequences or projected conse-
quences of those activities. By carefully selecting the quantities to be
measured and the time horizon of forecasting, today’s policymakers
can clarify and dramatize for voters the implications of any future
policy changes.
   Shaping capacities. Governments can also shape their successors’
decisions by augmenting or exhausting state fiscal or administrative
capacities. By designing policy to expand state capacities – for instance,
by arranging secure long-term financing for programmatic goals –
today’s incumbents can enhance the sustainability of current programs
by making it less politically costly or more administratively feasible for
future governments to maintain them. Conversely, by eliminating fis-
cal slack or dismantling bureaucratic structures, today’s policymakers
can narrow the options of future governments by forcing them to take
painful measures if they wish to pursue new spending or new regula-
tory or enforcement activities.2
   Inducing investment. Tomorrow’s incumbents may have little incen-
tive to keep commitments made by their predecessors. The current gov-
ernment can, however, make it harder for future coalitions to change
course by, in effect, making its own promises costly to constituents,
that is, by requiring or encouraging constituents to pay specific costs
now in return for benefits later. Probably the most commonly cited
example of this strategy derives from the field of pensions: those
designing state retirement schemes can choose to finance them via
contributions from workers, who thereby earn entitlements to future
payouts. Tomorrow’s incumbents, whatever their own pension policy
goals, will find it politically perilous to revoke benefits for which their

2   Eliminating capacities resembles what Pierson (1994) terms “systemic retrenchment.”

[p. 102] [PDF page 120]

constituents have paid in advance (Pierson 1994; Myles and Pierson
2001; Weaver 2003).


Susceptibility to Change

The designers of programmatic institutions seek to lend their policy
achievements enhanced stability over time. We might well ask, how-
ever, what holds policy rules themselves in place. In fact, programmatic
institutions may be more susceptible to change than other types of
political structure. Three mechanisms commonly theorized to hold
institutions in place – mutual gains, restrictive amendment rules, and
positive feedback – will tend to operate in diminished form in the case
of programmatic rules.
    First, programmatic institutions are likely to be objects of intense
political contention rather than broad consensus. Arguments derived
from the new institutional economics typically emphasize the collective
benefits of institutions in reducing transaction costs and facilitating cer-
tain kinds of cooperation and exchange (Weingast and Marshall 1988;
North 1990). In most cases, however, programmatic institutions will
have large distributive implications (Knight 1992). They are intended
by their designers to tilt the playing field for future policy conflict,
shaping the relative capacities of contending coalitions to achieve their
goals. We should thus expect programmatic institutions to be a fre-
quent focus of political conflict among rival interests and officeholders,
rather than the object of broadly based agreement.
    Second, the exceptionally restrictive amendment rules attached to
most constitutional provisions will rarely be available to those design-
ing programmatic constraints. Like most elements of public policy,
programmatic institutions will be the product of ordinary acts of leg-
islation, and in most democratic contexts, today’s legislative majority
is unable to use common statute to formally bind tomorrow’s. Thus, a
programmatic institution can usually be changed by ordinary legisla-
tive coalitions. While there may still be significant hurdles to legislative
change – especially in polities that disperse veto power widely – such
obstacles are unlikely to compare to the amendment procedures that
hold most constitutional provisions in place.
    Third, we should not routinely expect to see processes of positive
feedback reinforcing programmatic institutions over time. According

[p. 103] [PDF page 121]

to one common understanding of the path dependence of institutions,
institutions reap increasing returns to the extent that they establish
expectations that then encourage actors to invest in specific assets,
the value of which depends on the continuation of current arrange-
ments. In this dynamic, institutions generate their own expanding
support coalitions the longer they remain in place (Pierson 2004).
For instance, policies that subsidize employer-provided health cover-
age encourage firms, workers, and insurance companies to invest in
long-term arrangements that presuppose the maintenance of the sub-
sidies (Hacker 1998). Similarly, the politics of contributory pensions
itself offers an elegant illustration of positive feedback at work. Every
year that a contributory pension program is in place, members of the
workforce amass longer contribution records and larger earned enti-
tlements to benefits; each successive cohort of workers may also save
less in expectation of higher levels of state support. With the passage of
time, contributory programs thus become more politically and fiscally
costly for governments to dismantle (Pierson 1994; Myles and Pierson
2001). In these increasing-returns dynamics, stability derives from the
fact that rules lead private actors to pay substantial costs to establish
arrangements that will continue to have value only if the rules are
maintained.
   Many programmatic institutional structures, however, will exert
only a modest influence on long-term choices made by social actors
outside the state. Where program structures do not significantly set
expectations or incentives for individuals or organizations, they are
unlikely to induce investments or to generate strong social interde-
pendencies that would make change costly. Consider, for instance,
program rules that require administrators to report on specific pro-
gram outputs and outcomes. Reporting rules may exert a constraining
effect on future officeholders, who might wish to transfer resources
out of the program by making the consequences of such changes more
visible. But the existence of the reporting rule is in itself unlikely to be
the basis of costly specific investments by individuals or organizations.
   Even contributory pension programs will be path dependent in only
a limited sense. By creating a sense of earned entitlement among ben-
eficiaries, contributory financing may make it risky for future office-
holders to cut benefits. However, the feedback mechanism that pro-
tects benefit levels does not similarly constrain attempts to change the

[p. 104] [PDF page 122]

programmatic institution – the financing method – itself. Few con-
stituents will have made choices or investments, based on the expec-
tation of pure contributory financing, that would lose value if the
program started to receive additional resources from general revenues.
To frame this point more generally, we should not confuse the feed-
back effects of a policy structure with self-reinforcement: to observe
that policy structure A makes it hard to change policy structure B tells
us nothing about what holds structure A itself in place.
    The aim of the preceding discussion is not to suggest that legisla-
tive change is routine or easy. Indeed, many statutory arrangements
display substantial longevity, especially in macroinstitutional contexts
that diffuse policymaking authority. Rather, my claim is that, in study-
ing programmatic institutions, we cannot assume the operation of the
same stabilizing mechanisms that help hold many other institutions in
place. Nor can we assume that the primary sources of change will be
rare and dramatic exogenous shocks that momentarily disturb deeply
settled arrangements, as in models of punctuated equilibrium (Krasner
1984). Instead, we should normally expect the evolution of program-
matic institutions to exhibit the kind of frequent, incremental, and
endogenously driven change that are the focus of this volume. As
emphasized in the introductory chapter, our efforts to explain these
institutions’ developmental trajectories should pay careful attention to
coalitional dynamics – that is, to the conditions that shape the capac-
ities of contending actors to forge and maintain coalitions capable of
challenging or defending prior structural choices.


The Historical Development of Programmatic Institutions
in Social Security

How can we explain Social Security’s original fiscal rules, especially its
strict reliance on contributions and on actuarial funding? And given
the stark political liabilities of these provisions, how can we account
for the survival of the program on a purely contributory basis?
   Returning now to these empirical puzzles, I will argue that the
flourishing of contributory social insurance in the United States derived
as much from processes of institutional change as from mechanisms
of positive feedback. In tracing the program’s institutional trajectory,
the account that follows focuses on the strategic interactions among

[p. 105] [PDF page 123]

three sets of actors with rival motives: activist fiscal conservatives, who
supported a state role in providing social protection but sought to
protect the Treasury from rising expenditure demands; expansionists
on the left, who sought far more rapid and more generous spending
on the aged; and orthodox conservatives on the right, who sought to
maximally limit the possibilities for state intervention. Each group of
actors favored those policy rules that it thought most likely to shape
the scheme’s future politics to its own advantage.
    Together with other contributions in this volume, this analysis
will illustrate ways in which institutional change and stability are
tightly linked. Social Security’s rules were initially crafted to anchor
the scheme’s finances and to constrain its expansion, yet those same
rules later served as important endogenous drivers of change. Social
Security’s initial institutional structure provoked challenge through its
distributive effects – by diminishing the program’s short-term benefits,
raising its costs, and disadvantaging specific political interests. At the
same time, the New Dealers’ institutional design also enabled future
challenge: while constraining opponents in certain respects, the Social
Security Act also harbored latent strategic resources – material, proce-
dural, and moral – that rivals could mobilize and redeploy for their own
institutional purposes. Meanwhile, activist fiscal conservatives sought
to preserve Roosevelt’s institutional arrangements, especially strict
contributory financing, as they came under assault. Yet the ability of
fiscal guardians to secure the contributory model hinged on their will-
ingness to change it – to reinterpret its principles, to abandon its most
vulnerable components, and to layer new fiscal defenses atop old.3
    To be clear, the analysis that follows focuses on programmatic insti-
tutions related to the financing of the Social Security scheme, leaving


3   Readers with a particular interest in Social Security politics will note that Derthick
    (1979), in her magisterial study of the program, also understands its politics as shaped
    by strategic attempts to limit future options. Derthick describes a dynamic dominated
    by the institutionalizing efforts of one group – liberal advocates – who sought aggres-
    sively to maintain and expand the program. Her liberal advocates, however, seem to
    have possessed a nearly unilateral capacity to manipulate the terms of political con-
    flict, blessed by conservative opponents who were “uncertain of their stakes, internally
    divided, reluctant to appear self-interested or to risk a high level of political involve-
    ment” (156). In contrast, I argue that the program’s history is better described as a
    product of dueling efforts to employ program design to both constrain and to elude
    constraint on program growth.

[p. 106] [PDF page 124]

aside rules governing the payout of benefits except insofar as bene-
fit provisions derived from financing principles. Readers can find an
overview of the historical account in Table 4.1, which summarizes
the key programmatic institutional developments in Social Security
financing from 1935 to 1983. For each development, the table identi-
fies the outcome; the set of agents that engineered the design, change,
or preservation of the relevant rule; and the programmatic institutional
logic behind the rule or rule change.

Designing Compromised Constraints
In June 1934, President Franklin Roosevelt appointed the cabinet-
level Committee on Economic Security (CES), headed by Secretary
of Labor Frances Perkins, to design a public system of “cradle-to-
grave” insurance against risks such as unemployment and old age.
Among the few directives that Roosevelt issued to the committee was
an insistence that the old-age annuity scheme be a “self-supporting”
program, financed out of contributions from the insured rather than
general tax revenues. Roosevelt and his fiscally orthodox Treasury
secretary, Henry Morgenthau, favored contributory financing partly to
avoid further strain on the federal budget at a time of mounting deficits.
Roosevelt also saw contributory insurance as morally preferable to
“the dole,” which he considered to be “a narcotic, a subtle destroyer
of the human spirit.”4
    Aside from these immediate fiscal and moral concerns, however,
Roosevelt and his advisers were also worried about the long-run
political dynamic that their project might unleash. Roosevelt, central
figures in his administration, and staffers on the CES had emerged from
a Progressive political tradition that viewed government intervention
as both a powerful instrument of social progress and a potential threat
to sound fiscal management and democratic accountability. As activist
fiscal conservatives, they sought to mobilize state capacities to pro-
tect individuals against market and life-cycle risks, but were concerned
about how their successors might deploy any new policy tools that
they inherited. The early politics of American social policy suggested
reason for caution, as party politicians had exploited prior benefit
schemes such as Civil War pensions as easy sources of patronage and

4   Quoted in Berkowitz (1991).

[p. 107] [PDF page 125]

table 4.1. Key Institutional Developments in Social Security Financing,
1935–1983

                                      Key Agent of         Agent’s Programmatic
            Programmatic              Institutional Change Institutional Strategy
Period      Institutional Development or Maintenance       or Aim
1935        Establishment of strict      Activist fiscal     Compartmentalization
            contributory financing       conservatives
            Establishment of full                            Expand state
            funding                                          capacities

1939–1949 Gradual dismantling of         Orthodox            Constrain state
          funding                        conservatives, in   capacities
                                         coalition with
                                         expansionists

Late 1930s Near displacement of     Expansionists            Circumvent fiscal
and 1940s contributory insurance by                          compartmentalization
           noncontributory,
           means-tested OAA

1950        Contributory financing       Activist fiscal     Reinstate
            expanded, displacement       conservatives       compartmentalization
            by OAA reversed
            Funding rules explicitly                         Expand coalition for
            replaced by PAYGO rules                          compartmentalized
                                                             insurance
            Contributory principle                           Expand coalition for
            reinterpreted                                    compartmentalized
                                                             insurance
            75-year forecasting rule                         Reinforce
            added to contributory rule                       compartmentalization,
                                                             close off paths to
                                                             circumvention

1950–early Contributory logic            Expansionsists      Circumvent
1970s      converted to tool of                              compartmentalization
           expansion

1977 and    Contributory rule            Activist fiscal     Maintain
1983        preserved; PAYGO rule        conservatives       compartmentalization
            displaced by partial                             against pressures for
            funding                                          change

[p. 108] [PDF page 126]

constituency handouts (Ikenberry and Skocpol 1987; Skocpol 1992;
Orloff 1993). The New Dealers worried that future incumbents would
also seek to manipulate new spending programs for electoral bene-
fit, generating an unrestrained expansionary dynamic (Ikenberry and
Skocpol 1987; Orloff 1988). In the 1930s, growing populist move-
ments peddling radically redistributive proposals suggested further
cause for concern. Under pressure from the Townsendites5 and other
expansionist forces, nineteen states had already adopted means-tested
old-age assistance laws between 1929 and 1933 (Schlesinger 1958;
Leuchtenburg 1963; Graebner 1980; Orloff 1993). With the Republi-
can Party reduced nearly to a rump faction in Congress, administration
officials saw it as entirely possible that their successors might emerge
from their left rather than their right. As FDR fretted to an adviser
in 1934, “You know, [Louisiana senator and populist radical] Huey
Long may be the next President of the United States.”6
    Roosevelt and his aides believed that the design of a public pro-
gram – particularly its method of financing – could have an important
effect on the program’s future politics. Earlier social programs, in their
view, had been left vulnerable by the fact that they were paid for out of
the government’s general budget (Ikenberry and Skocpol 1987). With
the costs of program expansion spread thinly across all taxpayers but
benefits targeted at key constituencies, the electoral calculus always
favored increasing largesse. Administration officials saw contributory
financing, in contrast, as promising far preferable political feedback
effects. By tying expenditures to a dedicated tax, contributory social
insurance would force future officeholders to impose visible costs on
constituents every time they made benefits more generous. One of Roo-
sevelt’s business allies later framed this logic of compartmentalization
crisply:

Of course one thing that we had in mind all along with the contributory system
was that the [House of Representatives] Ways and Means Committee and the
Senate Finance Committee would keep a very careful watch on it to keep it


5 Comprising more than one million members by 1935, the Townsend movement called
  for noncontributory pensions of $200 per month for every person over age sixty
  (Amenta and Poulson 1996).
6 Thomas H. Eliot, New York Times Oral History Program, Columbia University Oral

  History Collection, Part III, No. 154, Social Security Administration Project, p. 11.

[p. 109] [PDF page 127]

from getting out of line because they know if they raise benefits, they’ve got to
raise taxes. They know there’s a certain limit to what the taxes are going to be.7

Moreover, by linking the receipt and level of benefits tightly to an indi-
vidual’s record of premium payments, contributory financing would
limit politicians’ discretion in allocating benefits across individuals,
foreclosing opportunities to convert the program to patronage pur-
poses (Ikenberry and Skocpol 1987; Orloff 1988; Berkowitz 1991;
Orloff 1993; Rodgers 1998; Kennedy 1999).8
   In thinking about the long-term political effects of their policy
choices, Roosevelt and Morgenthau sought not only to limit future
expansion but also to shape the conditions under which future politi-
cians would meet benefit expenses. Specifically, they wanted to ensure
that Congress would never face financial pressure to dip into general
revenues or to raise ordinary taxes to pay promised pensions. Their
institutional strategy was to align the program’s financing rules with
the principle of long-term financial responsibility that governed private
insurance plans: actuarial funding. To understand actuarial funding,

7 Marion Folsom, New York Times Oral History Program, Columbia University Oral
  History Collection, Part III, No. 158, Social Security Administration Project, p. 77.
8 Some analysts have proposed an alternative institutional objective of contributory

  financing: that Roosevelt sought to prevent future officeholders from reducing bene-
  fits (e.g. Derthick 1979; Schlesinger 1958). This interpretation relies on a remark that
  the president reportedly made in 1941 to a Treasury aide who had questioned the eco-
  nomic wisdom of payroll taxation: “I guess you’re right on the economics. They are
  politics all the way through. We put those pay roll contributions there so as to give the
  contributors a legal, moral, and political right to collect their pensions and their unem-
  ployment benefits. With those taxes in there, no damn politician can ever scrap my
  social security program. Those taxes aren’t a matter of economics, they’re straight
  politics” (Luther Gulick, “Memorandum on Conference with FDR Concerning
  Social Security Taxation, Summer, 1941,” http://www.ssa.gov/history/Gulick.html,
  last accessed September 25, 2007. Original document in Franklin D. Roosevelt Presi-
  dential Library, Hyde Park, NY).
       While such an interpretation is logically plausible, it is useful to note that the
  documentary record provides no indication that Roosevelt or his advisers worried
  about the threat of future cutbacks as they were designing the program in 1934 and
  1935. This silence compares to a wealth of evidence that the program’s founders were
  concerned about the fiscal implications of their choices and the political threat from
  the left. One possible explanation is that the antiretrenchment benefits of contribu-
  tory financing only became salient to Roosevelt over time. As conservative forces in
  Congress gathered strength in the wake of the 1938 and 1940 elections, the political
  conditions for progressive reform evaporated and the administration engaged in a
  more defensive politics of program maintenance.

[p. 110] [PDF page 128]

it is helpful to consider its opposite: pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) financ-
ing. A PAYGO scheme essentially operates hand-to-mouth, each year
collecting in tax revenues little more than what it needs to pay that
year’s benefits. Establishing the scheme on a funded basis, in contrast,
would mean that the Social Security program would collect today the
contributions that it needed to discharge tomorrow’s benefit promises.
In doing so, the scheme would amass enormous capital reserves, pro-
jected to reach $280 billion by 1980.9 Because a funded plan would
always have sufficient assets on hand to cover all of its outstanding
liabilities, future incumbents would never be forced to look elsewhere
for revenues to cover pension payouts (Perkins 1946).
    Funding the plan had adverse material implications in the short
term, however, including far higher payroll tax rates than a PAYGO
scheme would require. The president’s bill would start out with a
2 percent tax in 1937 that would rise to 6 percent over the next twelve
years. Funding would also require maintaining a close relation between
benefit payouts and contribution records: rather than grandfathering
in existing seniors, only those who contributed would receive benefits;
no pensions would be paid until 1942; and payouts would start out
low, reflecting the limited contribution records of the first beneficiaries.
While imposing a high regressive tax on workers and employers in a
stagnant economy, the program would do nothing for elderly citizens
presently in need.
    When the administration’s proposal reached Congress, these short-
term effects drew widespread criticism, and the insurance plan was of
little interest to most legislators. Roosevelt thus realized that he faced
substantial obstacles to forging a winning coalition for his preferred
institutional design. His strategy of coalition building relied on careful
manipulation of the legislative agenda – tying old-age insurance to ini-
tiatives that would deliver far greater short-run benefits to constituents,
especially the aged poor (Witte 1962; Quadagno 1988). In addition to a
popular unemployment insurance scheme, the CES included in the bill


9   Figure in 1980 dollars. “Statement of the Secretary of the Treasury on the Eco-
    nomic Security Bill,” File 011.01, “Legislative History and Analysis.” Chairman’s
    File, 1935–1942, Records of the Social Security Board/Records of the Office of the
    Commissioner, RG 47, NACP. Calculation of 1980 value employs GDP deflator from
    Louis D. Johnston and Samuel H. Williamson, “The Annual Real and Nominal GDP
    for the United States, 1790–Present,” http://www.measuringworth.com (last accessed
    February 27, 2008).

[p. 111] [PDF page 129]

a separate, quick-acting program, Old Age Assistance (OAA). Financed
out of general revenues rather than contributions, OAA would provide
immediate federal grants to the states covering half the cost of their
own needs-based pension programs. The administration thus hoped
to achieve its long-term institutional goals by directing near-term side
payments to key constituencies.
    Opponents of public old-age insurance sought to counter this leg-
islative strategy directly. Members of both the House and the Senate
proposed amendments that would have stripped the old-age insurance
provision from the bill, allowing Congress to enact only the more pop-
ular measures for immediate aid without Roosevelt’s insurance scheme
(Hacker 2002). The president was nonetheless able to muster enact-
ing majorities for his preferred rules thanks to the unusual electoral
conditions of the mid-1930s. Not only did Roosevelt enjoy a mas-
sive Democratic majority in Congress, but he also commanded a rare
degree of loyalty from legislators of his own party, many of whom
owed their seats to his coattails. Roosevelt was thus able to persuade
the congressional leadership and the chairmen of the tax-writing com-
mittees to keep old-age insurance attached to the larger bill. In doing
so, the president and his allies effectively forced members of Congress
to choose between just two options: his omnibus bill, with old-age
insurance included, or the status quo. If legislators wanted pensions
for the poor and benefits for the unemployed, then they had to accept
the administration’s costly and regressive Social Security taxes as well
(Schlesinger 1958; Witte 1962; Berkowitz 1991).

Converting and Displacing Constraint
As political conditions shifted, however, the structures chosen in
1935 – together with the macroinstitutional context – would lend crit-
ical resources and opportunites to actors both to Roosevelt’s right and
to his left who sought to challenge his programmatic aims. Against a
backdrop of renewed economic misery, the 1938 midterm elections
brought major gains for Republicans and anti-Roosevelt Southern
Democrats, substantially enlarging and emboldening the conservative
coalition in Congress.10 If Roosevelt represented an activist form of
fiscal conservatism – one that paired a belief in collective solutions with

10   Roosevelt’s much-derided 1937 Court-packing scheme had also emboldened conser-
     vative Democrats who had, until then, hesitated to rebel against a popular president.

[p. 112] [PDF page 130]

a preference for “sound financing” – business and Southern conserva-
tives subscribed to a more orthodox conservatism, deeply suspicious of
federal public authority (Vogel 1981; Quadagno 1988). Viewing the
Social Security program as insufficiently constrained, orthodox con-
servatives in Congress sought ways of further tying the hands of future
majorities. At the same time, on Roosevelt’s left, the Townsendites
and other populist, expansionist actors continued to gather support
well after Social Security’s enactment, sustaining their push for more
generous and immediate help for the aged.
   Even before the law’s enactment, what had most concerned business
groups and conservatives about the program was the large fund that
actuarial financing methods would generate. Rather than shielding the
Treasury against future demands, in their view, actuarial funding might
encourage fiscal profligacy. As the Commerce Department’s Business
Advisory Council had argued in 1935, massive surpluses would simply
provide a painless opportunity for vote-seeking politicians to enrich
pension benefits:

It is very doubtful whether under our form of government we could actually
accumulate this large reserve fund. . . . There would be a strong tendency either
to increase the benefits or to reduce the tax rate, with the former being the
probable course. If this were done a tremendous burden would be placed upon
future generations.11

Capitalists also worried that Congress would raid the pension fund
for unrelated purposes, generating “practically unlimited possibilities
of reckless public financing” and “uncontrolled Government spend-
ing.”12
   Orthodox conservatives thus sought to dismantle Roosevelt’s pro-
grammatic institution of funding and replace it with a different kind
of constraint: PAYGO financing. Conservatives’ institutional strategy
was to exhaust state capacities: if the program collected in payroll
taxes each year only what it needed to pay benefits, then significant

11 Business Advisory Council, “Report of the Committee on Social Legislation regarding
   Old Age Security Sections of the Bill H.R. 7260,” April 30, 1935, CES – Reports,
   Drawer #2: CES Materials, Lateral File #3, SSAHA, p. 3.
12 See testimony to Senate Finance (1935), Economic Security Act. See also Henry

   Harriman’s (Chamber of Commerce) argument before the committee about the dan-
   gers of government investment of such a large fund (719).

[p. 113] [PDF page 131]

asset accumulation would be avoided, and future Congresses would
have no easy path to raising benefits or financing other government
activities.
    Of course, amending Roosevelt’s financing rules would require
crafting a new coalition for legislative change. Yet the tools for con-
structing that coalition lay, in an important sense, within the existing
institutions. By definition, a shift to PAYGO financing would require
liquidating the existing and projected reserves dictated by actuarial
funding. The process of draining those funds in turn would free up
resources that could be used for other purposes. Thus, a switch to
PAYGO financing had the rare quality of a fiscal “free lunch,” allow-
ing – indeed, requiring – the dissemination of large short-term benefits
at no short-run cost. Crucially, orthodox conservatives’ goal of dis-
mantling funding thus dovetailed perfectly with demands by groups at
the other end of the political spectrum – especially, calls by expansion-
ists and left-wing opponents of regressive financing to speed up the
payment of Social Security benefits, broaden the program’s reach, and
ease the payroll-tax burden.
    By 1938 broad legislative majorities had coalesced around a pack-
age of measures that would partly reverse actuarial funding via the
distribution of widespread gains to beneficiaries and payroll-tax pay-
ers. As the program faced assault from both right and left, even the
administration saw institutional adjustment as necessary to preserve
the core concept of contributory social insurance. In the wake of con-
servative gains in the 1938 elections, the president no longer enjoyed
the kind of agenda-setting influence within Congress that might have
allowed him to preempt the formation of a coalition for defunding.
Moreover, he and top Social Security administrators came to believe
that the payment of quicker benefits would be necessary to build pub-
lic support for the besieged program (Schlabach 1969; Derthick 1979;
Achenbaum 1986; Brinkley 1995; Tynes 1996; Kennedy 1999).
    In 1939, Congress passed and Roosevelt signed amendments to the
Social Security Act that added survivors’ and dependents’ benefits,
moved the payout of the first pensions up to 1940, and postponed
scheduled increases in the contribution rate. What made funding such a
vulnerable structure was – precisely as conservatives had pointed out –
that the new fiscal capacities that it created were, ultimately, highly
convertible: opponents of funding had, in effect, turned Roosevelt’s

[p. 114] [PDF page 132]

tool of “sound” actuarial financing into an instrument of coalition
building for the dismantling of the institution itself. In fact, seven times
in the course of the 1940s, Congress acted to postpone scheduled
increases in the payroll tax, effectively emptying the trust fund of
assets. Each time, defunding enjoyed a broad coalition of support as it
allowed elected officials to take action that would avoid the imposition
of broadly based costs on constituents.
   Meanwhile, expansionists advocating vastly increased pension
spending found additional, latent institutional opportunities in the
1935 act’s provision for Old Age Assistance (OAA). Intended as a
short-term measure while the contributory insurance program ma-
tured, this initially small program furnished vital tools for the elab-
oration and expansion of an alternative model that would ultimately
come close to displacing Social Security. Under the auspices of OAA,
individual states were free to set pension benefits at any level and to
recover half the cost, up to thirty dollars per month per recipient,
from Washington. States were also permitted wide latitude in writing
eligibility rules, as long as recipients were sixty-five or older.
   In ways surely unintended by administration officials, these struc-
tures furnished three kinds of strategic opportunities for the expansion
of general-revenue-financed social provision. First, by leaving the size
and scope of benefits in the hands of state legislatures, the act greatly
enhanced the policy relevance of an alternative set of decision-making
venues. The empowerment of subnational policymaking arenas mat-
tered because the largest pro-welfare political forces – including the
Townsendites, labor movements, and left-wing third parties – were far
better organized in some parts of the country than in others. With their
presence unevenly distributed across the states, advocates for the poor,
aged, and needy saw their influence diluted at the national level and
their initiatives blocked by conservative (especially, Southern) forces
in Congress. However, in states in the West and North, where pro-
welfare parties and movements enjoyed concentrated strength, they
were well positioned to press state legislatures for generous social
provision (Amenta and Zylan 1991; Amenta and Poulsen 1996). Sec-
ond, even outside these centers of left-party and populist-movement
strength, the OAA program’s financing formula created clear incentives
for state politicians to design their own programs on liberal terms: for
every dollar spent locally, an additional dollar would flow in from

[p. 115] [PDF page 133]

Washington (Quadagno 1988; Amenta 1998). Third, by opening a
channel for spending on the aged out of general Treasury funds, OAA
enhanced the prospect of an expansionary dynamic at the federal level,
offering members of Congress a relatively painless method of enhanc-
ing social provision for the elderly.
   Throughout the late 1930s and the 1940s, expansionist forces thus
opportunistically exploited openings at the state level in order to cir-
cumvent the more tightly constrained national old-age insurance pro-
gram. While OAA’s flexible terms allowed Southern states to keep aver-
age benefits low (Quadagno 1988), the program’s overall expenditures
grew dramatically over its first fifteen years. As insurance entitlements
mounted slowly and failed to keep pace with inflation, average OAA
benefits across the country rose 57 percent in real terms, to forty dol-
lars per month, during the 1940s. In the middle of the decade, even
Congress took expansionary action, raising the federal matching grant
from 50 to 80 percent on the first twenty-five dollars of an individual’s
monthly benefits. By the end of the 1940s, the mean OAA payout was
60 percent higher than the average contributory pension and reached
a greater number of beneficiaries (Gratton 1988; Quadagno 1988).
   Carefully binding his insurance scheme within a complex of con-
straining rules, Roosevelt had intended OAA to be a mere stopgap and
legislative sweetener. Over the next fifteen years, however, this welfare
plan was gradually converted to a starkly different purpose, coming
to be regarded in some states as a virtually universal entitlement for
the aged (on conversion, see Mahoney and Thelen this volume). With
federal OAA expenditures three times as great as those for old-age
insurance, this programmatic alternative seriously threatened to dis-
place the contributory scheme as the primary form of public retirement
provision (Zelizer 1998).


Defensive Adjustment and Dynamic Stability

By the end of the 1940s, fiscal conservatives within Congress had
become alarmed at the long-term implications of these developments.
As the wartime economy boomed and tax revenues exceeded expecta-
tions, the House Ways and Means and the Senate Finance committees
had collaborated in the defunding of the insurance program, approving
successive Social Security tax freezes. Now, Congress’s fiscal guardians

[p. 116] [PDF page 134]

perceived an impending danger that general-revenue-financed welfare
would supplant social insurance as the central pillar of public social
protection for the aged. Moreover, with payroll tax rates frozen at
an impossibly low long-term rate, Social Security’s own contributory
structure might buckle as its outlays grew. If payroll collections proved
insufficient to cover expenditures, Congress might have to turn to the
Treasury for a general-revenue bailout of the program.
    By 1950, Congress’s tax-writing committees were dominated by
activist fiscal conservatives – cautious budget makers who were
nonetheless reconciled to the continued existence of a large federal
state. Powerful chairmen such as Robert Doughton, Wilbur Mills,
and Russell Long largely sought to sustain the New Deal institutional
project. Attentive to the political and social importance of welfare
spending on the aged, they also – like Roosevelt – aimed to curb finan-
cial burdens on the public sector. To the tax committees, pure con-
tributory financing was a doubly useful rule. Like the New Dealers,
the committee chairmen hoped that compartmentalization of pension
financing would help to contain any expansionary dynamic by tying
benefits to visible costs. At the same time, they also perceived in con-
tributory social insurance a second logic that, in some sense, was the
mirror image of the first. If the insurance principle tied benefits to costs,
it also implied the inverse relation, linking the burden of payroll taxes
to a highly popular benefit. If they had to boost future revenues to
finance rising spending on the elderly, the tax writers much preferred
to raise dedicated insurance contributions than general income taxes
(Zelizer 1998).
    To protect contributory social insurance from displacement, how-
ever, Congress’s fiscal guardians realized that they had to change it. In
a set of landmark amendments to the Social Security Act in 1950, they
undertook four key institutional countermaneuvers. First, if insurance
outlays were not to be outpaced by means-tested assistance, then Social
Security benefits would have to be quickly and substantially increased
and extended in scope. The amendments brought insurance coverage
to an additional ten million workers in previously uncovered sectors
and roughly doubled benefit levels. Most strikingly, the tax committees
offered substantial benefits to newly eligible retirees with no contribu-
tory record. While this move did not affect the compartmentalization
of the program’s finances – benefits were still to be paid strictly out
of payroll contributions – it bent the contributory rule as a principle

[p. 117] [PDF page 135]

for allocating benefits, weakening the link between an individual’s
contribution record and his or her pension entitlement. In the race
against old-age assistance, activist fiscal conservatives saw that they
had to reinterpret the contributory principle in order to preserve it.13
   Second, ensuring the program’s solvency on purely contributory
terms would require a new schedule of increasing payroll-tax rates,
beginning with an immediate percentage point increase in the com-
bined employer-employee rate. Third, Ways and Means leaders added
an additional constraining structure atop the contributory principle:
a long-term planning horizon. As the tax writers observed, the prin-
ciple by itself was an incomplete limit on heedless spending because
benefit increases could always be scheduled to take effect at a future
date. Thus, Congress could too easily grant today’s workers generous
pension increases without making provision for their future financing.
Under the new law, the program’s actuaries would now have to fore-
cast the program’s financial condition over a seventy-five-year period,
and Congress would be required to adjust the tax schedule as needed
to maintain the system’s solvency over that extended time horizon
(Derthick 1979; Zelizer 1998).
   Fourth, financing this package of changes required the fiscal
guardians of the 1950s to abandon a central element of Roosevelt’s
institutional blueprint. Rather than returning the system to actuarial
fund accumulation, the 1950 amendments explicitly placed the pro-
gram on a PAYGO basis. Whatever its merits as a financing structure,
a return to funding would have been wholly incompatible with the
committees’ efforts to expand the support coalition for contributory
insurance. This is because the political opportunities for transform-
ing actuarial rules were asymmetrical: while funding expanded state
capacities, generating resources that its opponents could later con-
vert to their own purposes, the drained reserve fund of 1950 severely
limited politicians’ fiscal room for maneuver. Those seeking to move
from funding to PAYGO during the 1930s and 1940s could distribute
short-term rewards as they dissipated the fund, but anyone seeking to
revert to funding in 1950 would have had to impose large short-term

13   Activist fiscal conservatives in the 1950s thus approximated mutualist symbionts in
     Mahoney and Thelen’s typology (this volume). Although they had not been involved
     in the institution’s design, they developed an interest in its survival. And in order to
     preserve the spirit of contributory insurance, they found it necessary to both amend
     and reinterpret the letter of the original rules.

[p. 118] [PDF page 136]

costs in order to get there. The only way to accumulate a new fund
while maintaining the program’s compartmentalized character would
have been to enact an even steeper and politically insupportable hike
in payroll taxes or to scale back benefits. Instead, the tax committees
chose to formally break with the principle of funding and to adopt
a PAYGO rule that would allow the program to continue operating
with minimal reserves.
   Like the initial establishment of Roosevelt’s programmatic insti-
tutions, this shoring-up operation depended on the unusual leverage
of a small group of actors wielding powerful gatekeeping preroga-
tives in the legislative process. To build a coalition for enactment of
their revised rules, it was necessary that the tax-writing committees
be able to weld the immediate and future increases in the payroll tax
to popular increases in benefits – while ensuring that the latter could
not be adopted without the former. What allowed them to craft a
favorable menu of options was a set of higher-order institutions that
structured the legislative process, the most important being the consti-
tutional requirement that all tax measures originate in the House, and
the power of the Rules Committee to grant the Ways and Means bill a
closed rule, forbidding any amendments on the floor (Cohen 1951).14
   In 1935, Roosevelt had chosen to sacrifice the program’s short-
run popularity in order to entrench his long-run fiscal preferences.
Although the tax writers of 1950 shared many of Roosevelt’s pol-
icy goals, they were confronted by an altered calculus of institutional
conflict as Social Security now faced the prospect of imminent dis-
placement by an alternative arrangement. The survival of contributory
insurance now depended more on how quickly it won broad political
backing than on how strictly it adhered to actuarial principles. Thus,
in order to expand the program’s support base among the mass public
and in Congress, the finance committees chose to amend or abandon
central elements of the original insurance model.

Institutional Friction and the Return to Funding
The compartmentalization of Social Security’s finances remained a
contested institutional feature of the program. While forces on the


14   The Senate Finance Committee did not receive a closed rule but enjoyed sufficient
     prestige within the chamber that only one amendment not approved by the panel
     was adopted on the floor (Cohen 1951).

[p. 119] [PDF page 137]

political left had accepted regressive payroll-tax financing for strate-
gic reasons in the program’s early years, organized labor began to
push for a general-revenue supplement in the late 1960s (Derthick
1979). Yet activist fiscal conservatives on Congress’s tax committees,
especially Ways and Means, continued to exercise their formidable
agenda-setting authority to hold contributory financing and its seventy-
five-year solvency rule in place (Zelizer 1998). At multiple points
throughout the 1960s (1961, 1965, and 1967), these rules forced
Congress to increase payroll taxes in the near term and to adopt a
higher long-term schedule of rates than it otherwise would have. As
a result, the payroll-tax rate more than doubled, from 4.5 percent in
1958 to 9.9 percent in 1977 (Board of Trustees 2007).15
   At the same time, expansionists discovered an important set of
informational and moral resources in the program’s contributory and
forecasting institutions. While the explicit linkage of payroll taxes to
visible and popular benefits made it relatively easy for elected officials
to increase program revenues, the compartmentalization of the pro-
gram’s finances and the imprimatur of long-term “actuarial solvency”
also made benefit increases far less vulnerable to conservative attack.
It was precisely because program spending was so credibly constrained
that it could be safely, if incrementally, expanded. When unprojected
surpluses emerged – which, in the context of rapid economic growth,
they often did – the actuarial rule licensed, rather than limited, grad-
ual benefit growth (Derthick 1979; Zelizer 1998).16 Between 1952 and
1972, Congress enacted eight benefit increases, all certified by the actu-
aries as fiscally sustainable, that cumulatively amounted to a 150 per-
cent rise in nominal pension values (Social Security Administration
2005).
   Layered atop one another over time, however, Social Security’s
core fiscal institutions – payroll-tax financing, the seventy-five-year
solvency rule, and PAYGO – enjoyed a tenuous coexistence. Their
smooth joint operation depended on the particular configuration of
exogenous conditions prevalent in the 1950s and 1960s, particularly a
steadily growing economy and high fertility rates. Purely contributory

15   Rates refer only to Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance.
16   Aside from real economic growth, these surpluses were also partly a consequence of
     the conservative “level earnings” assumption made by Social Security’s chief actuary.
     Since the forecasting models assumed that wages would remain constant, any rise in
     average earnings generated surpluses.

[p. 120] [PDF page 138]

PAYGO financing worked well when revenues and outlays grew grad-
ually, predictably, and in step with one another. But a program with
minimal reserves and no access to general revenues had little capac-
ity to weather an abrupt and unexpected economic downturn. More-
over, under the seventy-five-year forecasting rule, a drop in fertility
rates or an increase in life expectancy would upset the program’s
long-range financial balance and generate projections of future insol-
vency. By the mid-1970s, economic and demographic conditions had
shifted in ways that brought these program structures into sharp ten-
sion with one another. Amidst historically high unemployment and
a drop in birth rates, the actuaries’ reports began forecasting both
short- and long-run deficits within the program (Board of Trustees
1976).17
   For liberals, crisis offered a potential opportunity to revise the pro-
gram’s fiscal rules in their favor. In 1977, President Jimmy Carter and
the majority Democratic leadership in Congress proposed solutions to
Social Security’s financial troubles that included a hefty and recurring
infusion of general revenues into the system (Cowan 1977). Such a
solution had important political virtues for Democratic politicians: it
would have diffused the costs of the bailout across the general budget,
increased the financing burden on more affluent income taxpayers,
and achieved an institutional change long sought by organized labor.
Among voters, an infusion of general revenues was also the most pop-
ular solution to Social Security’s financial woes.18
   Again, however, fiscal guardians on Congress’s tax-writing commit-
tees – who would have to initiate any rescue legislation – flatly rejected
a break with the institution of compartmentalized financing. Business
groups lobbied aggressively against the general-revenue proposal as a
threat to future fiscal constraint – as, in the words of one executive,
“a precedent that would be too easy for future Administrations to
follow” (Jensen 1977). Fiscally conservative Democrats and Republi-
cans on the finance committees echoed employers’ concerns. As Ways

17 An easily fixed error in the formula for automatic inflation-indexation, adopted in
   1972, also contributed to the program’s financial troubles.
18 A CBS News/New York Times poll, for instance, found 42% in favor and only 23%

   against such a switch: April 11, 1978 (conducted 4/3–4/7/78), Accession Number:
   0015988, Question ID USCBSNYT.041178, R19B, Roper Center for Public Opinion
   Research, LexisNexisTM Academic, http://www.lexis-nexis.com.

[p. 121] [PDF page 139]

and Means chairman Al Ullman contended, the notion of drawing on
Treasury resources “violates the general principle of having a contrib-
utory system and makes it easy to move into a broad welfare concept”
(Russell and Chapman 1977).
    With their strong agenda-setting capacities, the tax writers were able
to shepherd legislation through Congress that preserved the program’s
contributory structure. Yet in saving the contributory principle, they
were forced to dismantle another, now long-established programmatic
institution: PAYGO financing. In the absence of a Treasury bailout,
payroll taxes would have to be increased immediately to cover outlays
during the current period of economic hardship; this was in fact the
largest single peacetime tax increase in the country’s history. Once the
economy rebounded, however, the new contribution schedule would
then generate more revenues than the system required, leading once
again to the accumulation of a fund. Indeed, in the absence of help
from the general Treasury, the program would need this fund to keep
its benefit promises and maintain long-term actuarial solvency. With
the ranks of beneficiaries projected to grow faster than the workforce,
the fund and its earnings would plug a substantial gap between contri-
bution revenues and benefit commitments for the first decades of the
twenty-first century (Board of Trustees 1978; Congressional Quarterly
1978).
    When back-to-back recessions and renewed high inflation again
pushed the program to the brink of bankruptcy in the early 1980s,
a parallel dynamic played out. Yet orthodox conservatives, a minor
force in Social Security politics since the 1950s, now had a champion
in the White House intent on rolling back the state. In response to
soaring budget deficits and the program’s actuarial imbalance, Presi-
dent Ronald Reagan proposed reductions in benefits. In this new con-
text of conservative ascendancy, however, the contributory principle
now offered liberals yet another distinct moral resource. Specifically,
it allowed them to argue that any reduction in payouts to today’s
seniors – contributors throughout their working lives – would be tan-
tamount to breaking a promise, the withdrawal of an earned entitle-
ment (Pierson 1994). Originally imposed to constrain expansion, con-
tributory financing was now mobilized to entrench benefit promises.
It is in this specific but important sense that the program became
subject to a path-dependent dynamic: the longer the contributory

[p. 122] [PDF page 140]

principle remained in place, the more difficult it was to scale back
benefits.
    At the same time, liberals called once again for a break with pure
contributory financing, proposing an infusion of general revenues. Fis-
cal conservatives were still institutionally well positioned to resist such
demands, but the reform package they crafted would reinforce the
contributory rule at further cost to the PAYGO principle. To get the
program through the 1980s without Treasury assistance, program ben-
efits would have to be trimmed and payroll taxes raised once more. As
in 1977, these measures not only resolved the immediate cash crunch
but – together with a gradual increase in the retirement age – would
also eliminate the system’s long-term deficit by accumulating addi-
tional enormous surpluses in the trust fund (Board of Trustees 1984;
Light 1995).
    Combined, the reforms of 1977 and 1983 would return the Social
Security program to a partially funded basis for the next several
decades, with trust fund assets currently projected to exceed $4 tril-
lion by 2016 (Board of Trustees 2007). As discussed earlier, PAYGO
financing was a relatively robust programmatic institution because
departure from it carried high start-up costs. Abrupt economic decline,
however, confronted fiscal gatekeepers in Congress with an institu-
tional dilemma: either impose large short-term costs on constituents
today or abandon the long-run constraint of contributory financing.
Because they cared as much about long-run political consequences as
about short-term material effects, they were willing to impose visible,
near-term losses on voters in order to preserve the compartmentalized
structure of the program. At the same time, the logic of contributory
financing provided a crucial informational resource allowing them to
justify this painful solution. It was, after all, the insulated structure of
the program that made it possible for the scheme to become “insol-
vent” in the first place and, thus, for elected officials to claim that the
tax hikes were fiscally necessary. The program’s compartmentaliza-
tion, moreover, allowed legislators to credibly link short-term pain to
a highly popular public program. With the trust fund separated from
the rest of the federal budget, officials could persuasively argue that
every penny in new taxes extracted in the present would remain within
the program, helping to pay future benefits (Pierson 1994; Patashnik
2000).

[p. 123] [PDF page 141]

As is clear in hindsight, however, these most recent rounds of insti-
tutional adjustment were themselves structurally vulnerable. In par-
ticular, policymakers in 1977 and 1983 paid little attention to the
mechanics of future fund accumulation and did little to ensure that
future reserves would remain safe from political manipulation.19 While
nominally separated from the unified federal budget in 1983, trust fund
assets would continue to be lent to the Treasury, and future official
statements of the federal budget would continue to report a bottom-
line figure that included the program’s activities.20 As critics would
note only years later, Social Security surpluses were potentially facil-
itating higher spending or lower taxes elsewhere in the budget. Over
the last fifteen years, this vulnerability in the trust fund’s commitment
mechanisms has lent weight to arguments that the program’s reserves
are an accounting fiction, fueling diverse calls for further structural
transformation, ranging from the privatization of the system to a return
to PAYGO financing (Schieber and Shoven 1999; Patashnik 2000).


Conclusion

Social Security has ultimately proved a remarkably successful politi-
cal arrangement, but the path from its New Deal origins to current
outcomes has been far from linear or continuous. A principal source
of structural instability in the Social Security program has been the
repeated contestation of policy rules. While broad consensus ultimately
crystallized around important features of the program, much of the
scheme’s history has been marked by intense conflict. As a powerful
engine of resource allocation, the scheme has naturally provoked bat-
tles over the size and incidence of its costs and the apportionment and
generosity of its benefits. Beyond these immediate distributive con-
cerns, however, stakeholders in the sphere of old-age pensions have

19 For the 1977 episode, this claim relies on author interviews with Lawrence Thompson
   (staff economist at the Department of Health, Education and Welfare when the 1977
   reform was developing), Washington, DC, October 16, 2001; David Koitz (at the
   Planning and Evaluation Office at the Department of Health, Education and Welfare
   during development of the 1977 reform), Washington, DC, May 1, 2002; and Bert
   Seidman (Social Security specialist at the AFL-CIO), Washington, DC, May 2, 2002.
   On the 1983 reform, see Ball (1990); Patashnik (2000); and Koitz (2001).
20 The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction package of 1985, for instance,

   included Social Security in the size of the deficit.

[p. 124] [PDF page 142]

also been keenly sensitive to the ways in which the program’s fiscal
structure might bias its future politics. Since the earliest days of CES
planning, competing coalitions have repeatedly sought to use Social
Security’s financing rules to limit their rivals’ future political opportu-
nities and to expand their own.
    Conflict has generated institutional change via two distinct, though
interrelated, causal pathways. Most directly, institutional challengers
on the left and right managed at times to forge winning legislative
coalitions that dismantled, evaded, reinterpreted, or (nearly) displaced
important programmatic constraints. Central to their ability to craft
such coalitions were fungible resources – financial, procedural, and
moral – latent in the very institutions that they sought to revise. Actuar-
ial funding involved the accumulation of capital to cover the scheme’s
long-term obligations and protect the Treasury from future demands;
those same monies, however, were easily redeployed by entrepreneurial
actors as a source of inducements to dismantle funding itself. A strict
contributory rule forced the Social Security program to live within its
means. In limiting the payment of benefits in the early years, however,
the contributory principle combined with funding to help mobilize
support for alternative modes of provision for the aged. And in tightly
linking contributions to outlays, the rule made it far easier for program
advocates to justify both increases in the payroll tax and enhancements
in benefits. Old Age Assistance was intended as a small and tempo-
rary measure to ease the passage of contributory insurance, yet the
scheme was quickly converted by opportunistic expansionists into a
means of escape from contributory constraints. The tools of chal-
lenge were, again, written into the Social Security Act itself: OAA’s
cost-sharing provisions shifted decision making over federal pension
spending to state-level venues more favorable to populist movements
while general-revenue financing of the scheme set weak limits on its
growth.
    A second mechanism of institutional change, however, sprang from
the calculations of institutional defenders – of those who sought to pre-
serve Roosevelt’s contributory model. In the face of powerful political
and financial challenges, fiscal conservatives realized that they could
save contributory insurance only by amending it. Repeatedly, leaders
of Congress’s finance committees pushed through major rule changes
intended to expand the program’s base of support or to obstruct

[p. 125] [PDF page 143]

further expansionist tactics. These acts of creative entrepreneurship
were made possible by the macroinstitutional context in which they
unfolded. In particular, congressional rules granted the tax committees
formidable agenda-setting authority, allowing them to link popular
benefit increases to new programmatic constraints.
   Among its broader implications, this developmental process sug-
gests that claims about the path dependence of institutional structures
need to be carefully bounded. In Social Security’s history, positive-
feedback mechanisms played a specific but limited role in stabiliz-
ing the program. In particular, beginning in the early 1980s, when
a newly aggressive and empowered conservative movement sought
to scale back public social programs, the contributory nature of the
Social Security scheme posed a formidable obstacle to retrenchment by
allowing beneficiary groups to portray cutbacks as the withdrawal of a
moral entitlement (Pierson 1994). In this self-reinforcing dynamic, the
program’s financing method helped to entrench the program’s benefit
promises.
   The logic of positive feedback, however, is less useful in explain-
ing the fate of the program’s financial structure itself. Fiscal institu-
tions such as funding and pure contributory financing had few self-
entrenching consequences – consequences that would progressively
raise the economic or political costs of revision over time. Generally
speaking, these rules did not encourage actors, either inside or outside
the state, to make specific investments pegged to the maintenance of
those rules. Those disadvantaged by Social Security’s programmatic
institutions, then, did not simply disappear or adapt to these arrange-
ments over time. Strict payroll-tax financing of benefits, for instance,
encountered largely the same kinds of opposition in 1983 as it had in
1937. If contributory financing anchored benefits via a path-dependent
logic, contributory financing itself generated strong negative-feedback
effects, and its survival required ongoing coalition building and strate-
gic adjustment by its defenders.
   This case thus highlights the central role of endogenous processes in
generating institutional change – processes that derive from the logic of
the rules themselves. Indeed, one of the most striking features of Social
Security’s institutional politics is how imperfectly its rules constrained
and how readily they could be redeployed as instruments of change. It
is worth pausing for a moment to reflect on why this was so – why,

[p. 126] [PDF page 144]

that is, program architects and guardians were not more effective at
binding the hands of their successors. The program’s rules were not vul-
nerable and convertible because their authors were particularly poorly
informed or myopic. Rather, U.S. pension policymakers faced chal-
lenges that are likely to bedevil efforts of institutional constraint in
general and to generate important openings for change once rules are
in place. Two such challenges in particular are worth noting.
   First, designers may be forward-looking and strategic, but they are
boundedly rational and confront vast causal complexity. As Mahoney
and Thelen point out in the introduction to this volume, rules usu-
ally have multiple consequences, and their effects often depend on
complex interactions with changing political and social conditions.
With limited cognitive resources and imperfect information, institu-
tional designers will rarely be able to predict and optimize across the
full range of strategic possibilities latent in their structural blueprints
(Pierson 2004). Instead, they will need to simplify the choice problem
and attend selectively to relevant considerations (Simon 1971; Arthur
1992; Jones 2001). In crafting his old-age insurance program, Roo-
sevelt made strategic choices in light of potential consequences decades
into the future. In assessing those consequences, however, he would
have been unable to forecast or take into account the full range of uses
to which his rivals and successors might put contributory financing or
funding.
   Second, even where designers can envision the optimal institutional
design, the need to forge an enacting coalition for these rules will often
force compromise. Compromise in the writing of rules, in turn, will
often generate structures that depart from an optimally constraining
logic and will, inadvertently but unavoidably, provide opponents with
future opportunities for challenge (Mahoney and Thelen, this volume).
If Roosevelt foresaw the vulnerability of OAA to rapid expansion, he
had little choice but to accept this calculated risk if he wanted to
win enactment of his insurance scheme. To frame these two points
more generally: many of the most important sources of institutional
change will lie in the conditions of their emergence. Thinking about
endogenous sources of change thus provides an analytic opportunity
to integrate explanations of institutional development with theories of
institutional design.

[p. 127] [PDF page 145]

Finally, the developmental account here points to the utility of a
genuinely historical approach to institutional development. As histori-
cally minded scholars have argued, there are many reasons – from the
multiplicity of institutional effects to the limited foresight of design-
ers – why we cannot reliably infer the causes of institutional emergence
from an institution’s current functions (Schickler 2001; Pierson 2004).
From the vantage point of the present, contributory financing seems
to bear the imprint of a mutually constraining pact between liberals
and conservatives – with rights pegged to obligations – and is cur-
rently an object of broad consensus. As a developmental perspective
reveals, however, institutions in Social Security politics largely emerged
as attempts by one coalition to constrain another, not as a bargain
between rival interests. The mutually limiting character of contribu-
tory financing only developed over time, as liberals learned to exploit
an alternative moral logic latent in an institution that had originally
been designed to constrain them. Rather than equating functions with
causes, we need to go back and analyze moments of institutional emer-
gence or choice.
    Equally important, however, is careful analysis of the developmen-
tal processes that lie between origins and outcomes. As the present
case suggests, the degree of fit between current arrangements and
original design does not itself tell us much about the causal mecha-
nisms connecting the two. Where outcomes strongly echo origins, it
is reasonable to suspect that powerful processes of institutional iner-
tia – whether grounded in consensus, positive feedback, or restrictive
amendment rules – may be at work. In the case of Social Security’s
financing rules, however, elements of institutional continuity emerged
from processes that were far less linear and far more contingent on
actors’ downstream opportunities and choices. The survival of con-
tributory pension insurance in the United States was not built into its
origins. To the contrary, the program’s initial structure had powerful
negative-feedback effects and, after fifteen years in operation, nearly
lost out to a far more popular competitor. Even decades after its adop-
tion, the maintenance of the contributory principle hinged critically
on the willingness of its defenders to engage in strategies of institu-
tional redesign and reinterpretation. The stability of Social Security’s
contributory structure was, in this sense, highly dynamic; it had to

[p. 128] [PDF page 146]

be repeatedly and actively reinforced and was dependent on processes
of institutional change. Only through historical analysis can we dis-
tinguish among alternative causal routes from origins to outcomes
and trace out the complex – often mutually reinforcing – relationship
between continuity and change.


References
Achenbaum, W. Andrew. 1986. Social Security: Visions and Revisions. New
  York: Cambridge University Press.
Amenta, Edwin. 1998. Bold Relief: Institutional Politics and the Origins of
  Modern American Social Policy. Princeton Studies in American Politics.
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Amenta, Edwin, and Jane D. Poulsen. 1996. “Social Politics in Context: The
  Institutional Politics Theory and Social Spending at the End of the New
  Deal.” Social Forces 75 (1): 33–60.
Amenta, Edwin, and Yvonne Zylan. 1991. “It Happened Here: Political
  Opportunity, the New Institutionalism, and the Townsend Movement.”
  American Sociological Review 56 (2): 250–265.
Arnold, R. Douglas. 1990. The Logic of Congressional Action. New Haven:
  Yale University Press.
Arthur, W. Brian. 1992. On Learning and Adaptation in the Economy. Santa
  Fe: Santa Fe Institute.
Ball, Robert M. 1990. “Panel on Formulating a Deficit Reduction Package:
  What Is the Role of Social Security?” In Social Security and the Budget,
  ed. H. J. Aaron, 123–128. Washington, DC: National Academy of Social
  Insurance.
Berkowitz, Edward. 1991. America’s Welfare State: From Roosevelt to Rea-
  gan. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Board of Trustees. 1976. Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the
  Federal Old-age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust
  Funds. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Board of Trustees. 1978. Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the
  Federal Old-age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust
  Funds. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Board of Trustees. 1984. Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the
  Federal Old-age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust
  Funds. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Board of Trustees. 2007. Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the
  Federal Old-age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust
  Funds. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Brinkley, Alan. 1995. The End of Reform: New Deal Liberalism in Recession
  and War. New York: Knopf.

[p. 129] [PDF page 147]

Cohen, Wilbur J. 1951. “Aspects of Legislative History of the Social Security
  Act Amendments of 1950.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 4 (2):
  187–199.
Congressional Quarterly. 1978. Congressional Quarterly Almanac, 95th
  Congress, 1st Session, 1977. Vol. 33. Washington, DC: Congressional Quar-
  terly.
Cowan, Edward. 1977. “Carter Asks Tax Rises, Funding Shift to Ease Social
  Security Drain.” New York Times, May 10, 1, 55.
Davis, James A., Tom W. Smith, and Peter V. Marsden. 2007. GENERAL
  SOCIAL SURVEYS, 1972–2006: [CUMULATIVE FILE] [Computer file].
  Chicago, IL: National Opinion Research Center [producer], 2007. Storrs,
  CT: Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut /
  Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
  Research / Berkeley, CA: Computer-assisted Survey Methods Program
  (http://sda.berkeley.edu), University of California [distributors].
Derthick, Martha. 1979. Policymaking for Social Security. Washington, DC:
  The Brookings Institution.
Graebner, William. 1980. A History of Retirement: The Meaning and Function
  of an American Institution, 1885–1978. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Gratton, Brian. 1988. “The New Welfare State: Social Security and Retirement
  in 1950.” Social Science History 12 (2): 171–196.
Hacker, Jacob S. 1998. “The Historical Logic of National Health Insurance:
  Structure and Sequence in the Development of British, Canadian, and U.S.
  Medical Policy.” Studies in American Political Development 12 (1): 57–130.
Hacker, Jacob S. 2002. The Divided Welfare State: The Battle over Public
  and Private Social Benefits in the United States. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.
Huber, John D., and Charles R. Shipan. 2002. Deliberate Discretion? The
  Institutional Foundations of Bureaucratic Autonomy. Cambridge Studies in
  Comparative Politics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ikenberry, G. J., and T. Skocpol. 1987. “Expanding Social Benefits: The Role
  of Social Security.” Political Science Quarterly 102 (3): 389–416.
Jensen, Michael C. 1977. “Carter Payroll Tax Plan Is Opposed by Business.”
  New York Times, May 11, D1 and D7.
Jones, Bryan D. 2001. Politics and the Architecture of Choice: Bounded Ratio-
  nality and Governance. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kennedy, David M. 1999. Freedom from Fear: The American People in
  Depression and War, 1929–1945. New York: Oxford University Press.
Knight, Jack. 1992. Institutions and Social Conflict: Political Economy of
  Institutions and Decisions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Koitz, David. 2001. Seeking Middle Ground on Social Security Reform. Stan-
  ford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.
Krasner, Stephen D. 1984. “Approaches to the State: Alternative Conceptions
  and Historical Dynamics.” Comparative Politics 16 (2): 223–246.

[p. 130] [PDF page 148]

Leff, Mark H. 1983. “Taxing the ‘Forgotten Man’: The Politics of Social
  Security Finance in the New Deal.” Journal of American History 7 (2):
  359–381.
Leuchtenburg, William Edward. 1963. Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New
  Deal, 1932–1940. New York: Harper & Row.
Light, Paul. 1995. Still Artful Work: The Continuing Politics of Social Security
  Reform. New York: McGraw-Hill.
McNollgast. 1999. “The Political Origins of the Administrative Procedure
  Act.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15 (1): 180–217.
Moe, Terry. 1990. “The Politics of Structural Choice: Toward a Theory of
  Public Bureaucracy.” In Organization Theory: From Chester Barnard to
  the Present and Beyond, ed. O. Williamson, 116–153. New York: Oxford
  University Press.
Myles, John, and Paul Pierson. 2001. “The Comparative Political Economy of
  Pension Reform.” In The New Politics of the Welfare State, ed. P. Pierson,
  305–333. New York: Oxford University Press.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic
  Performance: The Political Economy of Institutions and Decisions. Cam-
  bridge: Cambridge University Press.
OECD. 2007. Pensions at a Glance: Public Policies across OECD Countries.
  Paris: OECD.
Orloff, Ann Shola. 1988. “The Political Origins of America’s Belated Welfare
  State.” In The Politics of Social Policy in the United States, ed. M. Weir,
  A. S. Orloff, and T. Skocpol, 37–80. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Orloff, Ann Shola. 1993. The Politics of Pensions: A Comparative Analysis of
  Britain, Canada, and the United States, 1880–1940. Madison: University of
  Wisconsin Press.
Pal, Leslie A., and R. Kent Weaver. 2003. “The Politics of Pain.” In The
  Government Taketh Away: The Politics of Pain in the United States and
  Canada, ed. L. A. Pal and R. K. Weaver, 1–40. Washington, DC: George-
  town University Press.
Patashnik, Eric. 2000. Putting Trust in the U.S. Budget: Federal Trust Funds
  and the Politics of Commitment. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Perkins, Frances. 1946. The Roosevelt I Knew. New York: Viking Press.
Pierson, Paul. 1993. “When Effect Becomes Cause: Policy Feedback and Polit-
  ical Change.” World Politics 45 (4): 595–628.
Pierson, Paul. 1994. Dismantling the Welfare State? Reagan, Thatcher, and
  the Politics of Retrenchment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pierson, Paul. 2004. Politics in Time: History, Institutions, and Social Analysis.
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Quadagno, Jill S. 1988. The Transformation of Old Age Security: Class and
  Politics in the American Welfare State. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rodgers, Daniel T. 1998. Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics in a Progressive
  Age. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

[p. 131] [PDF page 149]

Russell, Mary, and William Chapman. 1977. “Carter’s Bailout Plan for Social
  Security Is Opposed on Hill.” Washington Post, May 10, A2.
Schickler, Eric. 2001. Disjointed Pluralism: Institutional Innovation and the
  Development of the U.S. Congress. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Schieber, Sylvester J., and John B. Shoven. 1999. The Real Deal: The History
  and Future of Social Security. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Schlabach, Theron F. 1969. Edwin E. Witte: Cautious Reformer. Madison:
  State Historical Society of Wisconsin.
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. 1958. The Coming of the New Deal. Boston:
  Houghton Mifflin Company.
Simon, Herbert A. 1971. “Designing Organizations for an Information-rich
  World.” In Computers, Communication, and the Public Interest, ed. M.
  Greenberger, 37–72. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Skocpol, Theda. 1992. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins
  of Social Policy in the United States. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of
  Harvard University Press.
Social Security Administration. 2005. Social Security: A Brief History. Wash-
  ington, DC: Social Security Administration.
Streeck, Wolfgang, and Kathleen Ann Thelen. 2005. “Introduction: Institu-
  tional Change in Advanced Political Economies.” In Beyond Continuity:
  Institutional Change in Advanced Political Economies, ed. Wolfgang Streeck
  and Kathleen Thelen, 1–39. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tynes, Sheryl. 1996. Turning Points in Social Security: From “Cruel Hoax”
  to “Sacred Entitlement”. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
United States Office of Management and Budget. 2008. Budget of the United
  States Government, Fiscal Year 2009. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
  Printing Office.
Vogel, David. 1981. “Why Businessmen Distrust Their State: The Political
  Consciousness of American Corporate Executives.” British Journal of Polit-
  ical Science 8 (1): 45–78.
Weaver, R. Kent. 2003. “Cutting Old-Age Pensions.” In The Government
  Taketh Away: The Politics of Pain in the United States and Canada, ed.
  L. A. Pal and R. K. Weaver. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Weingast, Barry R., and William J. Marshall. 1988. “The Industrial Organi-
  zation of Congress; or, Why Legislatures, Like Firms, Are Not Organized
  as Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 96 (1): 132–163.
Witte, Edwin E. 1962. The Development of the Social Security Act: A Memo-
  randum on the History of the Committee on Economic Security and Drafting
  and Legislative History of the Social Security Act. Madison: University of
  Wisconsin Press.
Zelizer, Julian E. 1998. Taxing America: Wilbur D. Mills, Congress, and the
  State, 1945–1975. New York: Cambridge University Press.
