Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power
Edited by James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen
First published in print: 2009 | Copyright: 2010 | Cambridge University Press

Chapter 5: Altering Authoritarianism: Institutional Complexity and Autocratic Agency in Indonesia
Dan Slater
Original print pages 132–167; PDF pages 150–185

[English original. Chapter footnotes and references are retained in their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks and fixed-width table layout are retained; verify diagrams and exact typography against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, footnotes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 132] [PDF page 150]

5

Altering Authoritarianism

Institutional Complexity and Autocratic
Agency in Indonesia

        Dan Slater




How Authoritarian Institutions Change

Authoritarianism is rapidly moving from political science’s margins
to its mainstream. Lisa Wedeen’s (1999, 26) observation that there
were, “oddly, few recent writings on authoritarianism in compara-
tive politics” rang true a decade ago – but no longer.1 A growing
literature has established that dictatorships are as diverse as democra-
cies, and that this diversity largely rests in these regimes’ institutional
differences. Contrary to popular images of dictatorships as regimes in
which political arrangements and practices constantly shift at the whim
of arbitrary autocrats, authoritarian regimes organize politics in ways
that can prove surprisingly enduring. No less than in democracies, the
orderliness of politics in authoritarian settings is best explained by the
robustness of political institutions.


1   There was significant coverage of authoritarianism within the “political development”
    literature of the 1960s and 1970s, but the 1980s and 1990s witnessed a precipitous
    decline.
My thanks to Theda Skocpol, Sven Steinmo, and Kurt Jacobsen for their insightful
feedback as workshop discussants for earlier versions of this manuscript; to James
Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen for their ongoing guidance on the paper’s broad outlines
and specific arguments; and to Jacques Bertrand, Tulia Falleti, Anna Grzymala-Busse,
Peter Hall, Alan Jacobs, John Kelly, Desmond King, Ato Kwamena Onoma, Paul Pierson,
Danilyn Rutherford, Steven Scott, Adam Sheingate, and participants in the author’s
graduate seminars on Comparative Historical Analysis and Authoritarian Regimes for
their helpful comments.

[p. 133] [PDF page 151]

Yet we still know very little about how institutions evolve within
durable authoritarian regimes over time.2 Through a theoretically
motivated analysis of Indonesia’s authoritarian New Order (1966–
1998), this chapter develops a framework for apprehending and
explaining incremental institutional shifts under dictatorship. Osten-
sibly a model of long-term stability, the Suharto regime in fact experi-
enced a gradual but significant transformation of its core institutional
features. What started as a system of oligarchic military rule evolved
into a highly personalized regime, backed in nearly equal measure by
military and civilian organizations.
   Explaining why Indonesian authoritarianism underwent such a con-
siderable transformation, while so many authoritarian regimes do not,
demands attention to the causal role of institutional complexity in
foiling path dependence and expanding opportunities for agentive
action. A product of historical inheritance as much as of strategic
choice, Indonesia’s complex institutional constellation gave Suharto
raw material not only for suppressing insurrectionary outsiders but
also for dividing and conquering ambitious opportunists and prospec-
tive subversives within the regime itself.3 Yet institutional complexity
ultimately fostered Suharto’s vulnerability as well as his ingenuity. The
growing civilianization and personalization of political power sapped
the military’s will to rule and multiplied the channels through which
opportunistic allies and subversive rivals could challenge and loosen
Suharto’s remarkable grip on power.
   Gradual change in authoritarian institutions must be apprehended
before it can be explained. This demands a workable institutional
typology of authoritarian regimes. The agenda-setting work in this
regard has been that of Barbara Geddes (1999a, 1999b), who builds
on insights dating back to Samuel Huntington (1968, 1991) to divide
authoritarian regimes into three subtypes: military, single party, and
personalist. Since it is a tool for explaining regime breakdown and


2 An important and informative recent exception is Tsai (2006), but she tackles a very
  different type of institutional change than the kind covered here, as I will discuss.
3 To review Mahoney and Thelen’s definitions of these change agents from the intro-

  duction (this volume): insurrectionaries openly mobilize against existing institutions
  from the outside; subversives work within the system to effect institutional change;
  and opportunists operate more ambivalently within existing institutions, supporting
  change when it advances their interests.

[p. 134] [PDF page 152]

persistence, Geddes’ typology is not explicitly geared for apprehending
institutional evolution within enduring authoritarian regimes.
    A typology that I developed in earlier work may prove useful for this
analytical purpose (Slater, 2003). My guiding logic was that author-
itarian institutions serve to organize two distinct types of power: the
power to make decisions, and the power to enforce them. This mir-
rors Michael Mann’s (1988) distinction between the despotic power
and infrastructural power of the modern state. Echoing Mann, I define
an authoritarian regime’s decision-making procedures as its “despotic
institutions,” while its organizational apparatus for executing those
decisions represents its “infrastructural institutions.” Since the gap
between formulation and enforcement is a major source of gradual
institutional change, as James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen argue in
the introduction to this volume, distinguishing despotic from infras-
tructural institutions provides a promising start to theorizing incre-
mental shifts in authoritarian settings.
    This distinction yields a four-part typology in which despotic insti-
tutions range from autocratic (personalistic) to oligarchic (collectivis-
tic), and either a party or military serves as a regime’s primary source
of infrastructural power. The four resultant ideal-typical regimes are
listed in the corners of Figure 5.1: Strongman, Junta, Bossism, and
Machine. Note that not all authoritarian regimes are autocracies,
although the terms have regrettably become synonyms in much recent
literature.4 Autocracy implies personalization, which is a variable, not
a constant in authoritarian settings. Note also that personal rule is
not a distinct regime type in this typology, but a trait that ranges
in importance from regime to regime (see also Hadenius and Teorell
2007).
    Why does this distinction between despotic and infrastructural insti-
tutions enhance our understanding of authoritarianism, and not merely
complexify it? In terms of descriptive realism, it is vital to maintain
a focus on the enforcement infrastructure of authoritarian regimes.
Whereas democratic institutions ostensibly exist to facilitate the shar-
ing of policy influence, authoritarian institutions’ primary task is to


4   This terminological conflation is especially regrettable in Magaloni (2006). Her expla-
    nation for the durability of Mexico’s “autocracy” largely rests on the ruling party’s
    consistent rotation of the presidency, i.e., its avoidance of autocracy.

[p. 135] [PDF page 153]

Party
        Machine                                                           Bossism

                                              Infrastructural
                                                Dimension
                                             (Who Executes?)


                        Despotic
Oligarchic             Dimension                                              Autocratic
                     (Who Decides?)




          Junta                                                         Strongman
                                        Military
figure 5.1. A Dynamic Typology of Authoritarian Institutions.


ensure not societal access, but acquiescence (Kasza 1995).5 Dicta-
tors use institutions first and foremost to craft collective compliance,
and only secondarily to solicit policy advice or to offer influence in
exchange for support. Hence we must remain attentive to how author-
itarian institutions wield power, not simply how they allocate it. Civil-
ian institutions such as parties, elections, and legislatures may present
an image of decision-making inclusion in authoritarian settings, while
denying tangible policy authority and squelching independent political
activity in practice (Migdal 2001).6
   Enforcement is more obviously vital when considering the political
role of military institutions. To define a military regime strictly by its
decision-making procedures – that is, as a regime in which “a group of
officers decides who will rule and exercises some influence on policy”
(Geddes 1999b, 121) – is to imply that militaries derive their political
importance from how they wield authority instead of violence. The

5 Acquiescence may or may not be generated with policy concessions. It can also be
  gained through a mix of rents and raw intimidation, or simply through the absence of
  viable political alternatives. Authoritarian regimes rest on coalitions, not necessarily
  coalition partners.
6 Kasza (1995, 59) uses the term “pseudopolitics” to describe authoritarian practices

  that “do not affect policymaking or the composition of the ruling elite.”

[p. 136] [PDF page 154]

need to disentangle the despotic and infrastructural roles of military
institutions will become evident in Indonesia, where the military lost
active policymaking authority but remained an essential weapon for
social control during the political crises of the mid to late 1990s. As
the reformasi protest movement gained strength, its fate rested on
two analytically distinct yet equally momentous questions: whether
Suharto would decide to crack down, and whether soldiers would
collectively enact any such command.7
   My typology also facilitates the systematic analysis of institutional
change by calling attention to two discrete dimensions along which
change can take place. Change along the horizontal, despotic dimen-
sion can often transpire incrementally and imperceptibly, as aspiring
autocrats use techniques of personalization such as “packing, rigging,
and circumventing” to subtly siphon decision-making power from pre-
existing oligarchies (Slater 2003). Shifts along the vertical, infrastruc-
tural dimension, by contrast, tend to be more overt and conflictual –
and therefore rarer. Whether a regime’s social control rests on military
or party institutions is typically path dependent, since neither type of
organization is keen to relinquish its dominant position to the other.
Military displacement of a ruling party typically requires a coup d’etat.
A party’s effort to out-organize a territorially entrenched military often
inspires one.
   Recent quantitative research suggests that authoritarian institu-
tional change is far from an everyday occurrence, yet commonplace
enough to warrant a general explanation.8 An authoritarian regime’s
defining institutions are “sticky,” not entirely stuck. Like institution-
alist literature more generally, new research on authoritarian institu-
tions handles their rigidity more successfully than their malleability.


7 Studying authoritarian institutions thus requires that we maintain a sensitivity to the
  organizational aspects of political power – contrary to the growing consensus that
  institutions should strictly refer to “the rules of the game” (e.g., North, 1990), and
  not to the organizations that persistently dominate the playing field.
8 In Geddes’ (1999a) dataset of twentieth-century authoritarian regimes, 61 of 92 coun-

  tries (or 66.3%) experienced no intra-authoritarian regime shift, 28 (or 30.4%) expe-
  rienced one, and only 3 (or 3.3%) experienced more than one. Hadenius and Teorell
  find more flux among their five institutional types, which subtract personalism but
  add monarchies, no-party, and limited multiparty regimes to Geddes’ typology. “In
  fact, from 1972 to 2003, 77 percent of transitions from authoritarian government
  resulted in another authoritarian regime” (Hadenius and Teorell 2007, 152).

[p. 137] [PDF page 155]

Historical institutionalists have recently shown how regimes’ long-
term strength can derive in a highly path-dependent way from the cir-
cumstances of their origins (e.g., Brownlee 2007; Smith 2007),9 while
new rationalist accounts have borne analytical fruit by conceiving of
durable authoritarian regimes as those in which institutions provide a
kind of stabilizing political equilibrium (e.g., Magaloni, 2006; Gandhi
and Przeworksi, 2007).
   Authoritarian institutions are too historically sticky and politi-
cally stabilizing for such path-dependent and equilibrium effects to
be doubted. Yet a fundamental shortcoming of both types of analysis
is that path dependence and equilibrium are features characterizing
a particular institution. Under conditions of institutional complex-
ity, one institution’s persistence might undermine another’s, and one
institution’s equilibrium logic might contradict another’s. Under such
complex institutional conditions, authoritarian regimes can exhibit a
more dynamic sort of stability, which neither comparative statics nor
path-dependent approaches are well-suited to apprehend or explain.
   Indonesia’s New Order was very much this type of regime. President
Suharto had less freedom to maneuver during his regime’s founding
period than analyses of path dependence and authoritarian institu-
tional choice typically emphasize.10 The institutional weight of history
and the coalitional contingencies of his violent rise to power denied

 9 As Brownlee argues in his comparative-historical study of party dominance and debil-
   ity: “The institutional legacy of the regime formation period subsequently ensures
   further stability for those leaders with ruling parties or unmediated elite factionalism
   for those with weak parties” (2007, 37; emphasis added). Similarly, Smith’s expert
   comparison of state building and party formation in authoritarian Indonesia and
   Iran “draw[s] heavily on historical institutionalist conceptions of path-dependent
   change.” Political agents build institutions, but “[o]nce decisions take institutional
   form, the role of agency changes.” Agency dissipates over the life of a regime as “the
   very institutions that state leaders have much freedom to construct during initial
   periods powerfully shape their later options for dealing with economic and political
   crises” (Smith 2007, 9–10).
10 Gandhi and Przeworski (2007) admirably acknowledge that institutional inheritance

   can shape authoritarian architecture. Yet they do not seem to fully appreciate the
   significance of this historicist point for their (or any) choice-theoretic account. They
   treat the number of parties preceding authoritarianism as a proxy for opposition
   strength and convert the number of parties accompanying authoritarian rule into a
   proxy for policy concessions. What appears to be empirical confirmation of their
   argument that strong opposition breeds generous concessions may in fact amount to
   a confirmation of a more straightforward, historicist finding: the number of parties
   before dictatorship influences the number of parties during dictatorship.

[p. 138] [PDF page 156]

Suharto anything resembling a blank slate on which to design regime
institutions. The preexistence of a powerful and politicized military
put clear initial limits on any party-building initiatives. The military
would stand at the center of the new regime whether Suharto liked it
or not. Yet the active support for military intervention among Islamic
groups, intellectuals, and civil servants presented Suharto with a large
pool of civilian allies expecting political inclusion. The advent of a
regime with considerable institutional complexity was structured by
the multiplicity of highly organized social forces in Indonesian politics
and by their common connivance in Suharto’s ascent.
   Contrary to the assumptions of path dependence, this institutional
complexity allowed Suharto’s range of options to expand rather than
decline over time. With territorially encompassing military and quasi-
party apparatuses as well as a parliament of supine supplicants at
his disposal, Suharto could strategically favor one institution over
another as political circumstances shifted. Emergent subversives could
be sidelined while more acquiescent opportunists could be privileged,
and then marginalized anew if they began to exhibit any subver-
sive tendencies. The upshot was the gradual transformation of a col-
lectivistic military-dominated regime (or “junta”) into a highly per-
sonalized regime (Figure 5.2), perched atop a mixed party-military
infrastructure (or a “strongman” regime with pronounced elements of
“bossism”).
   Existing conceptual frameworks struggle to apprehend such grad-
ual institutional change. Geddes (1999a) classifies Indonesia under
Suharto as a hybrid “personal/military/single-party” regime from cra-
dle to grave. Axel Hadenius and Jan Teorell (2007) commence their
coding only in 1971, but they portray Indonesia as a “military multi-
party” regime throughout. These static classifications obviously neglect
the New Order’s significant evolution. Yet they usefully convey its
complexity. Hadenius and Teorell’s categorization captures the exis-
tence of multiple political parties under the New Order, while Geddes’
classification captures the regime’s party-military infrastructural com-
bination.
   We must turn to the literature on institutional complexity and
change, however, to understand why complex regimes might allow
more room for autocratic agency over time than regimes in which a

[p. 139] [PDF page 157]

Party
       Machine                                                            Bossism

                                               Infrastructural
                                                 Dimension
                                              (Who Executes?)


                        Despotic
                       Dimension
Oligarchic                                                                      Autocratic
                     (Who Decides?)                                      1998




             1966
         Junta                                                          Strongman
                                        Military


                 Rough institutional trajectory of Indonesia’s New Order, 1966–1998
figure 5.2. Dynamics of Authoritarian Institutions in Indonesia.


party or military is more solidly hegemonic. As Adam Sheingate (2003,
191, 192) puts it, “institutional complexity creates the conditions that
make entrepreneurship possible,” since it “provides the raw mate-
rial for innovative combinations.” This nicely captures how institu-
tional complexity facilitated Suharto’s perseverance in power through
presidential “robust action” and “flexible opportunism” (Padgett and
Ansell 1993). Rather than taking the near-suicidal risk of openly
displacing the powerful military from his foundling regime’s politi-
cal center, Suharto gradually and increasingly layered civilian insti-
tutions atop military ones, crafting a complex institutional balance
in which presidential favor could shift between civilian and military
allies without advance notice. Far from a dominant-party equilibrium
in which a single institutional hierarchy stabilizes politics by mak-
ing the rules of access to power highly predictable, Suharto pitted
civilian hierarchy against military hierarchy, strategically deploying
unpredictability and ambiguity as weapons for cementing his per-
sonal dominion. It was thus through institutional layering that Suharto
accomplished his desired institutional conversion – incrementally

[p. 140] [PDF page 158]

shifting a collectivist military regime into a system of unbridled auto-
cratic rule.11
   Yet complexity can empower challengers as well as incumbents.
The political skills necessary to manipulate institutional complexity
inhere not just in agentive autocrats pursuing dynamic strategies of
divide-and-conquer from above. They are shared by the insurrectionar-
ies who can exploit institutional schisms from below as well as by
the opportunists and subversives who can manipulate institutional
complexity from within. This is why “institutional multiplicity should
undermine reliable reproduction” by denying hegemony to any par-
ticular institution (Clemens and Cook 1999, 461). Mounting a polit-
ical challenge to a dictatorship is a different matter than subverting
institutions in a democratic setting, however. Authoritarianism sys-
tematically denies most actors the agency and access necessary to alter
political institutions.12 So while the specific arrangements that define a
given authoritarian regime may evolve gradually over time, challenges
to authoritarianism tend to be punctuated, and to erupt suddenly if
they are to arise at all.
   This helps explain why the Suharto regime’s collapse was as sudden
as its evolution had been gradual. Impervious to collective tinker-
ing, the Suharto regime could only be altered through its collective
overthrow. Having balanced among multiple institutions for so long,
Suharto had denied any single political grouping an unambiguously
privileged stake in his continued personal rule. Having used those
multiple institutions to incorporate the ambitious as well as the acqui-
escent, Suharto had invited opportunists and subversives into the inner


11 To review Mahoney and Thelen’s types of institutional transformation: displacement
   entails full-blown institutional change, layering involves introducing new institutions
   alongside existing ones, and conversion is the redeployment of existing institutions
   to new political purposes. To be clear, my argument is that Suharto’s civilianization
   of power can be conceived as a process of institutional layering, while his personal-
   ization of power amounted to institutional conversion.
12 Marginal and oppositional actors can sometimes undermine and transform authori-

   tarian institutions with creative acts of noncompliance and innovation, as Kerkvliet
   (2005) and Tsai (2006) have shown; but such acts cannot explain changes of the
   magnitude that I discuss here. While uncovering fascinating political dynamics in the
   ostensibly “stable” Vietnamese and Chinese regimes, these shifts within persistent
   party-dominant regimes fall short of the kind of infrastructural institutional shift
   from military domination witnessed in Indonesia.

[p. 141] [PDF page 159]

sanctum of his regime, permitting them to gain resources and find
routes through which to bring his reign crashing to an end.


Authoritarian Institutions in Indonesia: Inheritance,
Complexity, and Evolution

Thanks in part to its rock-solid moniker, Indonesia’s New Order is
commonly perceived as a stable governing apparatus under which “not
much happened” between its violent inception in 1966 and its dramatic
collapse in 1998. In fact, the regime experienced significant institu-
tional evolution along both its despotic and infrastructural dimen-
sions. In terms of despotic power, Suharto deployed the tactics of
“packing, rigging, and circumvention” (Slater 2003) to transform a
collectivist military leadership during its first decade into a more per-
sonalized, “sultanistic” regime by its final decade (Chehabi and Linz
1998; Aspinall 2005). In infrastructural terms, Suharto’s gradual and
partial civilianization of power lessened but could not eliminate his
dependence on the military as his primary weapon for social control.
Long before the Asian financial crisis seemingly “destabilized” the
Suharto regime, its core institutions had come to look quite different
than they had at its inception.

Lineages of the New Order: Institutional Complexity in Sukarno’s
“Old Order,” 1949–1965
Diverse social structures tend to spawn complex institutional constel-
lations (Lipset and Rokkan 1990 [1967]), and Indonesia is among the
most socially diverse countries on earth. Unlike India, a comparably
diverse country that emerged from its decolonization struggle with a
highly organized national ruling party, Indonesia’s contentious path
to independence in 1949 produced no peak institution binding the
nation’s politics together. Instead, there were five major political and
social organizations emerging from Dutch rule that will prove essen-
tial in the analysis of authoritarian institutions to follow. The prewar
period witnessed the birth of two important mass political parties –
the Indonesian Nationalist Party (PNI) and the Indonesian Communist
Party (PKI) – and two Islamic organizations with memberships in the
millions: the Nahdlatul Ulama (NU) and the Muhammadiyah. Japan’s
wartime occupation and the subsequent war for independence against

[p. 142] [PDF page 160]

the Dutch brought a fifth critical player onto the scene: the Indonesian
national military, or ABRI.13
   At the center of this constellation was Sukarno, a founding member
of the PNI and the leading charismatic figure in the national revolution.
To provide some sort of glue to bind Indonesia’s diverse political orga-
nizations together, Sukarno introduced the ideology of Pancasila in
1945 as an alternative to an outright Islamic state. A vague statement of
five principles encompassing religiosity, nationalism, humanism, con-
sensus, and social justice, Pancasila was ambiguous enough to paper
over ideological disagreements during the anti-Dutch conflict. When its
position as a peak national ideology became increasingly institution-
alized under Suharto’s New Order, Pancasila’s manifest ambiguities
would make it a double-edged ideological weapon, justifying both the
repression and resistance of political subversives.
   Since Sukarno’s PNI could not ultimately reign supreme over
Indonesia’s diverse and highly mobilized social forces, independence
gave rise to a parliamentary democracy with four main parties: the
PNI, the PKI, the NU, and Masyumi, an Islamic party largely draw-
ing on the mass membership of Muhammadiyah. Postindependence
parties thus mirrored preindependence organizations. Elections dur-
ing the parliamentary era (1949–1957) saw these four parties gain
relatively equal support, yielding a string of shaky coalition govern-
ments. Hovering impatiently above this rather unstable arrangement
was figurehead president Sukarno and Indonesia’s fifth main political
institution, ABRI.
   Yet ABRI was still too fragmented to enter politics as a coher-
ent actor. Factionalism erupted into violence in 1957 with a series of
territorial rebellions led by regional military commanders. This gave
Sukarno a pretext for dispensing with the deliberative niceties of par-
liamentary politics and declaring martial law. ABRI leaders thus gained
a golden opportunity to purge rebellious rivals and assert their polit-
ical interests. With the elimination of electoral politics, the parties’
grassroots positions began to be usurped by a strengthened territorial
military command and a new set of corporatist, government-linked
“functional groups” (golongan karya), or golkar. In 1959, Sukarno

13   Nahdlatul Ulama can be translated as the Council of Islamic Scholars. ABRI stands
     for Angkatan Bersenjata Republik Indonesia, or Indonesian Armed Forces.

[p. 143] [PDF page 161]

seized stronger executive power by returning Indonesia to its presiden-
tialist 1945 constitution, declaring the birth of “Guided Democracy.”
    At its inception, Guided Democracy was a straightforward example
of personal rule backed by military force: a “strongman” regime. But
Sukarno did not remain wholly reliant on ABRI’s infrastructural power
for long. In 1960, Sukarno invited the PKI back into government as
a counterweight to the military, commencing a precarious period of
political balancing. While Sukarno’s appropriation of despotic power
did not cause evident strain, his effort to shift the locus of infrastruc-
tural power created ominous sociopolitical tensions. ABRI resented
and resisted the PKI’s revitalized efforts to mobilize supporters in the
cities and countryside, as well as Sukarno’s efforts to promote PKI
sympathizers within the military itself. Since the PKI’s bid for support
involved creating and capturing corporatist golkar of social forces such
as workers, peasants, and women, ABRI responded by mobilizing func-
tional groups of its own. In 1964, ABRI Commander A. H. Nasution
brokered the formation of a new Golkar secretariat, an alliance of
promilitary, anti-PKI corporatist groups, as an infrastructural coun-
terweight to the PKI.
    By the end of Sukarno’s “Old Order,” then, the military’s infras-
tructural power over Indonesian society was substantial. ABRI had
“developed a network of territorial units concerned with internal
security and watching over civilian activities generally” and “sought
to ‘integrate itself with the people’ through its territorial organiza-
tion,” which “act[ed] as guardians of security at the local level”
(Crouch 1978, 222). This infrastructural power would be put to
genocidal ends in the wake of a failed leftist coup on the night of
September 30, 1965. The PKI was blamed for the putsch, which com-
menced with the massacre of seven top generals. One of the postwar
world’s worst bloodbaths ensued. Under the leadership of Suharto –
the highest-ranking general in Jakarta neither killed nor wounded
in the coup – ABRI joined forces with NU militias to unleash a
pogrom that claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands of commu-
nists and suspected PKI sympathizers. By the time Suharto pressured
Sukarno to hand over emergency executive powers, in March 1966,
his ascent to power represented his scaling of “a mountain of skele-
tons” (Anderson 1999, 7). As Suharto tried to consolidate the New
Order with authoritarian institutions, the momentum of the past would

[p. 144] [PDF page 162]

prevent him from simply inventing advantageous arrangements from
scratch.

Societal Acquiescence and Institutional Inheritance: Military
Dominance and Institutional Complexity, 1966–1973
The origins of the Suharto regime did not take place in anything resem-
bling a coalitional or institutional vacuum. Rather than needing to seek
out new coalition partners to help consolidate his rule, Suharto was
immediately tasked with managing an eclectic collection of political
allies. As Benjamin Smith (2007, 84) depicts the initial New Order
coalition: “In addition to the bureaucracy and the army, which served
as the primary institutional bases of the regime, the major student orga-
nizations, religious parties and organizations, and rural elites on Java
all coalesced around the exigencies of order and development.” These
willing allies strengthened Suharto’s hand as he confronted Sukarno
supporters within the military, the bureaucracy, and society at large.
But they also came with expectations of institutional access that were
not easily compatible, thus tying Suharto’s hands as well.
    In short, the initial New Order coalition was bound together by
a “common enemy” in the PKI, not a common agenda.14 Military
and bureaucratic elites were generally eager for Suharto to replace
Sukarno’s Guided Democracy with something entirely guided and not
remotely democratic. Yet students, Islamic groups, and anticommunist
party politicians often backed the New Order in the “hopeful expec-
tation” that it would prove less authoritarian than its immediate pre-
decessor. Suharto reportedly disliked needing “to depend upon” such
a broad and unwieldy coalition of opportunists. His personal posi-
tion atop the military was initially quite precarious, however, making
his wide-ranging support among anticommunist and anti-Sukarnoist
civilians too valuable a political resource to be squandered lightly.
    Helping Suharto manage this diverse coalition was the complex
array of political institutions that he had inherited. With the excep-
tion of the insurrectionary PKI and Masyumi (which had been banned
since the regional rebellions of the 1950s), civilian parties continued to


14   All quotes in this paragraph are from an interview with Burhan Magenda, an editor of
     the influential student paper Harian KAMI from 1966 to 1974, as well as a Cornell-
     trained political scientist and current member of Indonesia’s parliament (July 16,
     2004).

[p. 145] [PDF page 163]

exist and retained their seats in the appointive parliament, which con-
tinued to convene. These inherited civilian institutions would quickly
be bled dry of whatever limited decision-making power they had still
enjoyed under Guided Democracy. “Having gained control of the gov-
ernment for themselves, the army leaders had no intention of handing
power over to the political parties in the name of ‘democracy,’” writes
Harold Crouch. Suharto and his inner circle did not even feel pressed to
share policy influence with civilians in exchange for acquiescence, since
“[t]he emergence of the army to a position of unchallenged domina-
tion of the government had been welcomed enthusiastically by a small
section of civilian political opinion and accepted as an unavoidable
reality by most of the rest” (Crouch 1978, 245).
    In Migdal’s terms (2001), the image of an ongoing civilian role
in political decision making was thus not reflected in actual politi-
cal practice. Civilian institutions were present, but military institu-
tions were predominant. ABRI’s newfound despotic domination was
backstopped by the revamping of its already impressive infrastructural
reach. It strengthened its primacy in social control with the forma-
tion of the Operational Command for the Restoration of Security
and Control (Kopkamtib), under Suharto’s direct command, in the
aftermath of the coup. “With this ‘military within the military’ as
the core of ABRI’s repressive apparatus, everyday politico-ideological
surveillance was institutionalized in the social life of Indonesia,” writes
Jun Honna. “Kopkamtib’s activities were backed by the military area
commands which controlled political life in each geographic territory”
(Honna 2003, 9). Meanwhile, the “greening” (penghijauan) of the
bureaucracy witnessed the placement of military men in administra-
tive positions throughout the archipelago. The editor in chief of the
influential Islamic student paper Harian KAMI noted that by the late
1960s, ABRI had effectively seized “most of the positions which con-
trol people” (Suryadinata 1989, 34).
    In the New Order’s first decade, then, the military “massively pen-
etrated all hierarchies of the state apparatus and most aspects of soci-
ety’s life” (Anderson 1983, 490). ABRI also retained a collective grip
on despotic power, as “the New Order regime had been established
by the military as an institution in which Suharto was initially merely
first among equals” (Aspinall 2005, 242). Specifically, Suharto sur-
rounded himself with a personal staff (staf pribadi, or SPRI) com-
prising twelve military advisers, each of whom gained authority over a

[p. 146] [PDF page 164]

distinct decision-making domain such as economic development, social
welfare, and domestic intelligence. Nine of these twelve advisers held
the rank of brigadier general, underscoring the fact that Suharto was
constructing a military junta, not merely a personal clique. Even after
Suharto disbanded the SPRI in the face of growing criticism in June
1968, these generals still “exercised great influence over the patronage
system. They played a major role in determining appointments in both
the military hierarchy and the government administration” (Crouch
1978, 308). Despotic institutions were thus more oligarchic than auto-
cratic at the New Order’s onset, with a consortium of generals making
all the political decisions that counted.
    Where would civilians fit in this political arrangement? While so-
called New Order militants urged a thoroughgoing militarization of
the polity, Suharto’s many bureaucratic and societal allies sought an
active stake in the regime they had helped to forge. To marginalize the
militants and incorporate civilian supporters, Suharto and his closest
allies revived and revised Indonesia’s system of elections, parties, and
parliaments in a way that would consolidate rather than complicate
military domination. “Soeharto was not of a mind – and probably
unable – to ban all civilian political activity,” Adam Schwarz (1994,
30) argues. “The forms of government would stay, but those outside
the executive branch would be steadily drained of influence.”
    In other words, Suharto’s inner circle saw civilianization as a way
to develop stronger infrastructural institutions. They had no intention
of sharing decision-making authority with civilians, with the exception
of a few select technocrats as helmsmen of the macroeconomy. They
had every intention of enlisting the help of civilian allies in establishing
centralized political and social control. What emerged was a complex
structure in which elites would compete both within and across civilian
and military institutions for political advancement.
    The most important institutional innovation involved the “conver-
sion” of Golkar from a loose confederation of corporatist groupings
into the New Order’s electoral vehicle.15 Working closely with fel-
low generals Ali Murtopo and Amir Machmud, Suharto compelled


15   The organization was called Sekber Golkar, or the Golkar secretariat, until after the
     1971 elections, but I use the term Golkar throughout to avoid confusion. See the
     volume introduction on the concept of institutional conversion.

[p. 147] [PDF page 165]

the consolidation of more than two hundred Golkar affiliates into just
seven, in preparation to contest the 1971 elections. Rather than build-
ing an autonomous ruling party or working through an existing party
that might rival the military and mobilize politically unreliable social
forces, the Suharto-led junta deployed an organization long dominated
by the military itself. Although clearly a creature of state more than
society, Golkar provided a useful political outlet for the New Order’s
many nonmilitary supporters, especially in the bureaucracy. Civil ser-
vants were forbidden from maintaining party memberships and forced
to declare “monoloyalty” to Golkar.
    Such moves allowed the Suharto regime to bleed existing parties of
support and influence, without taking the potentially explosive step of
banning well-established institutions outright. To invoke Mahoney
and Thelen’s terms, parties were not displaced entirely, but were
stripped of subversive and insurrectionary elements. In a maneuver
that foreshadowed manipulations to come, authorities merged several
small Muslim groups into a new party called Parmusi in 1968. A pliant
party chairman was appointed, and Parmusi was granted eighteen seats
in the national parliament. While this created an illusion of sharing pol-
icymaking authority, it would soon be evident that parliament would
only be entrusted to serve a rubber-stamp role. Parliament’s lack of
independent authority was signaled in the elections law of 1969, which
set aside about 20 percent of all seats for appointed members, usually
military men (Suryadinata 1989, 74). Indonesians would deride their
parliamentarians’ lack of policymaking authority, sarcastically sum-
marizing their daily routine as the “four Ds”: datang, duduk, diam,
duit (show up, sit down, stay silent, get paid).
    In sum, civilian institutions may have appeared to be handcuffs
constraining the regime’s despotic power; but they were more like
brass knuckles enhancing its infrastructural power. This was made
obvious in the 1971 national elections, when ABRI’s territorial appa-
ratus helped deliver a landslide victory for Golkar. Civilian-style poli-
tics proved perfectly compatible with continued military domination.
Suharto and his military allies then tightened their grip over the New
Order’s civilian institutions even further. Given the regime’s earlier suc-
cess at infiltrating Parmusi and streamlining Golkar, it confidently com-
pelled all remaining parties to coalesce into two sanctioned semioppo-
sition groupings in 1973: the Islam-oriented United Development Party

[p. 148] [PDF page 166]

(PPP) and the more secular nationalist-leaning Indonesian Democratic
Party (PDI).
   It thus appeared by 1973 that Suharto’s inner circle had consoli-
dated military hegemony, thanks in part to their deployment of sub-
servient civilian institutions, especially Golkar. It is critical to recog-
nize, however, that such institutions were often inherited, not invented.
And while parties and a parliament remained present, ABRI was
predominant. Yet the mere presence of nonmilitary institutions, dis-
empowered though they were, would have significant consequences
for the New Order’s evolution. Institutional complexity would give
Suharto tools for wrong-footing rivals and concentrating despotic
power in an ever-strengthening presidency.

A Turn to Autocracy: Military Factionalism, Protest,
and the Junta’s Demise, 1974–1977
It is not unusual for collectivist authoritarian regimes to become more
personalistic over time.16 As I have argued elsewhere (Slater 2003,
87–91), there are at least three techniques through which an aspir-
ing autocrat can incrementally siphon decision-making power from
fellow elites: (1) “packing,” or the appointment of loyalists and purg-
ing of rivals atop political institutions; (2) “rigging,” or the modifi-
cation of rules to forestall competition for leadership posts; and (3)
“circumvention,” or the diversion of influence and resources from
rivals in “unpacked” institutions to loyalists in packed ones. After
1974, these techniques became increasingly important drivers of insti-
tutional change in Indonesian politics. Once the New Order’s com-
bined military-party infrastructure had been established, this multi-
plicity could be manipulated by Suharto in his bid to monopolize
despotic power.
    This is not to say that personalizing power requires institutional
complexity. Autocracy can displace oligarchy in regimes where either
a ruling party or the military is utterly dominant.17 Why then did

16 Echoing Chehabi and Linz (1998), Aspinall (2005, 204) notes that “‘sultanization’
   is especially likely toward the end of a ruler’s term in office.”
17 Examples of party “machines” giving way to “bossism” include Malaysia under

   Mahathir Mohamad (Slater, 2003) and Zimbabwe under Robert Mugabe. Military
   “juntas” that increasingly resembled “strongman” regimes include Burma under Ne
   Win and Chile under Augusto Pinochet.

[p. 149] [PDF page 167]

Suharto choose to personalize power by pursuing an infrastructural
balance between ABRI and Golkar, rather than trying to dominate
politics through the infrastructural hegemony of ABRI alone? As we
have seen, ABRI enjoyed such a commanding position in Indonesian
politics at the onset of the New Order that such a strategy appeared
quite plausible. In fact, Suharto’s initial consolidation of control bore
clearer marks of power balancing within ABRI than across the ABRI-
Golkar divide. As one leading scholar of military politics observed:

Although the members of [Suharto’s personal staff] enjoyed a warmer rela-
tionship with the president than did their rivals, he was careful not to favor
them to the point where the military professionals felt alienated. A careful
balance was maintained, in which both groups were rewarded in the present
and had grounds for optimism about the future. Presiding over a system of bal-
ancing vested interests, Suharto seemed in the early 1970s to be in a position
to maintain his regime indefinitely. (Crouch 1978, 309–310)

   In other words, one could envision the consolidation of a straight-
forward “strongman” regime in which Suharto personally dominated
a hegemonic ruling military. Yet the violent confluence of military fac-
tionalism, Islamic protest, and student-led unrest in late 1973 and early
1974 would alter Suharto’s coalitional and institutional calculations.
Troubles began with “rising protests by PPP (the then newly formed
Islamic party) and other leading Muslim organizations and individuals
against the government’s promotion of a new marriage law” (Sidel
2006, 107). The fact that NU and Islamic student groups stormed par-
liament spoke volumes about their lack of influence in that “decision-
making” chamber. Anger over proposed family reforms reflected grow-
ing sentiments that the New Order was becoming less attentive to the
array of Islamic allies who had helped usher the regime to power.
   The major lightning rod was General Ali Murtopo. “Suharto’s right-
hand man” served both as interior minister and as commander of
Opsus (short for Operasi Khusus, Special Operations), a secretive mil-
itary unit founded by Suharto in 1968 as a counterweight to ABRI’s
powerful Kopkamtib group. Not only did Murtopo have stronger ties
to Christian than to Muslim constituencies. He had also shown signs of
“want[ing] to use Golkar as his own power base,” proposing to trans-
form it into a full-fledged cadre party independent of military control
(Suryadinata 1989, 145). This raised the ire of General Soemitro, who

[p. 150] [PDF page 168]

commanded Kopkamtib and had strong ties to Islamic groups dat-
ing back to their collaboration in the annihilation of the PKI. When
Soemitro intervened to broker a compromise between the regime and
Islamic protesters over the proposed family law, Suharto seemingly
chafed at his rival’s continued political relevance. In Suharto’s view,
Kopkamtib existed to enforce policy, not to negotiate and formu-
late it.
   Factional tensions erupted into student protests and urban riots in
January 1974. The so-called Malari disaster deeply shook Suharto’s
confidence in his support among student and Islamic groups,18 as well
as their perceived military patrons. “Implicated in the student protests
and, by association, the Malari riots, Soemitro was forced to resign
his post” (Sidel 2006, 109). Suharto also cracked down hard on the
student media, especially those of an Islamic bent, further sacrificing
his coalitional support in Islamic circles. As John Sidel has argued, the
Malari disaster was very much a violent expression of worsening coali-
tional and institutional friction. “This series of events reflected – and in
considerable measure exacerbated – a set of growing tensions between
rival factions, and between conflicting institutional, social, and reli-
gious elements, within the New Order regime” (Sidel 2006, 108).
   These coalitional tensions wrought institutional change along both
the despotic and infrastructural dimensions. The purging of an inde-
pendently powerful “junta” member, Soemitro, was accompanied by
the packing of his Kopkamtib post with a Suharto loyalist lack-
ing either revolutionary credentials or an autonomous political base:
Benny Moerdani, a Christian general. This represented a deepening of
earlier, subtler practices of personalization within ABRI, rather than
a completely novel approach. Suharto had commenced his consol-
idation of military power in 1966 by shuffling the only remaining
general surpassing his own stature, A.H. Nasution, “into a prominent
but relatively powerless civilian position” as chairman of the national
parliament (Crouch 1978, 228). Similar packing maneuvers were com-
plemented in 1967 by practices of circumvention, with the placement
of a general who was “personally and professionally close to Suharto”
(Robison 1986, 229) and another who was effectively “the president’s
political financier” (Winters 1996, 84) in charge of Indonesia’s two

18   “Malari” is short for Malapetaka Lima Belas Januari, or the January 15th Disaster.

[p. 151] [PDF page 169]

greatest sources of discretionary revenue: the state logistics board
(Bulog) and national oil company (Pertamina), respectively. And in
a foreshadowing of the kind of communal divide-and-conquer poli-
tics to come, Suharto had by 1969 “steepened and streamlined mili-
tary hierarchies under Deputy Minister of Defense General Maradaen
Panggabean. General Panggabean was not only personally loyal to
Suharto. As a Protestant and member of the Batak ethnic minority, he
could not become an independent center of power” (Anderson 1978,
6). The Soemitro-Moerdani shuffle in 1974 thus represented the cul-
mination of a series of personalizing blows leveled against collective
military leadership.
   Suharto’s falling out with Soemitro also helped Golkar make mod-
est gains vis-à-vis ABRI in infrastructural terms – if mostly through
the growing clout and following of a single loyalist, Ali Murtopo.
Golkar’s total number of field secretaries, who served as “the links
between Golkar and the grassroots,” expanded from five to eleven
after 1973. Seven of those eleven “were Ali Murtopo’s men” (Suryad-
inata 1989, 59, n. 30). Murtopo tried to leverage his enhanced power
over Golkar with calls in 1974 for a “dynamic balance between the
civilians and ABRI” (Suryadinata 1989, 39) rather than the kind of
military hegemony that had characterized the New Order to date.
   Golkar nevertheless remained a weak infrastructural rival to ABRI,
largely because ABRI elites utterly dominated Golkar’s upper reaches.
“The military was the dominant political force within Golkar” between
the 1971 and 1977 elections, argues Leo Suryadinata (1989, 84).
Although approximately half of the delegates at Golkar’s 1973
congress were nonmilitary men, only two of the twenty-nine invited
speakers could say the same (Suryadinata 1989, 53). Such patterns
reflected Golkar’s lack of despotic power as well as infrastructural
power vis-à-vis ABRI. Even Golkar’s top representative in parliament,
Sarwono Kusumaatmadja, admitted that:

Golkar had not played a major role in the decision-making process. . . .
Although he [Sarwono] did not mention directly that it was ABRI which was
the real decision maker, he did indicate that the relationship between Golkar
and ABRI was similar to that of an uncle and a nephew. In other words, it was
an unequal partnership. After all, he said, Golkar was still young and it still
was unrealistic to expect it to be independent from ABRI. (Suryadinata 1989,
84–85)

[p. 152] [PDF page 170]

As a window on institutional power and change, Sarwono’s com-
mentary is intriguing in several respects. First, Sarwono does not
claim that ABRI’s dominance over Golkar was expressed in terms
of decision-making power. Authoritative decisions were increasingly
emanating from Suharto’s narrowing clique rather than the military
as an institution. Yet ABRI’s infrastructural advantage over Golkar
nevertheless made it the “uncle” rather than the “nephew” in the
relationship. Sarwono’s familial metaphor is also illuminating in its
implications for endogenous institutional change. A nephew may be
subservient to an uncle as a child, but the power balance tends to
equalize as the nephew grows up.
    In the Indonesian case, the nephew (Golkar) had more than time on
its side. It also gained increasing personal backing from the metaphor-
ical father (Suharto), who saw it as a weaker and more malleable
ally than the uncle (ABRI). Organized support from an increas-
ingly strengthened and civilianized Golkar could help protect Suharto
against the kind of military factionalism that had erupted with Malari.
Not unlike his ideological archenemy Sukarno, then, Suharto calcu-
lated that a balanced regime infrastructure would be more conducive
to the consolidation of autocracy than dependence on ABRI alone.
Given the initial predominance of military over civilian forces in the
New Order, however, a true ABRI-Golkar power balance had to be
creatively crafted. If institutional complexity was inherited, institu-
tional balance would need to be invented.
    This would prove to be an agential enterprise akin to what John
Padgett and Christopher Ansell (1993) call “robust action” and “flex-
ible opportunism,” and what Adam Sheingate (2003) calls “political
entrepreneurship.” It involved creative and shifting combinations of
presidential packing, rigging, and circumvention in response to the
changing contours of acquiescence and dissent within Suharto’s ruling
coalition. The discussion to follow cannot possibly do justice to the
many maneuvers Suharto deployed to sustain his regime as he cast
aside “junta”-style politics and constructed more of a “strongman”
regime with pronounced elements of “bossism.” But it should serve to
illustrate processes of infrastructural balancing and despotic person-
alization, and to show how these dynamics were at once analytically
distinct yet strategically intertwined.

[p. 153] [PDF page 171]

Expanding Agency in Institutional Reproduction: Despotic
Personalization and Infrastructural Balancing, 1977–1995
Suharto’s decision to seek a third presidential term in the 1977 elec-
tions would usher in a new era in regime personalization. Public crit-
icism of Suharto’s leadership began to increase from within ABRI,
even as voices in Golkar and the wider society increasingly denounced
ABRI’s domination of the state apparatus. Prominent Suharto critic Ali
Sadikin, the popular governor of Jakarta, was replaced with Suharto’s
“own military secretary” (Smith 2007, 152). While Golkar romped to
its usual landslide victory in the 1977 vote, growing social discontent
at Suharto’s narrowing base produced rising support for the Islamic
PPP, which scored outright victories in the province of Aceh and in
Jakarta itself. Electoral opposition was followed by contentious oppo-
sition, as the early months of 1978 preceding Suharto’s reinauguration
witnessed a more organized upsurge of urban protest than the rather
riotous unrest of the Malari period.
    As his coalition constricted, Suharto tightened his personal grip on
key authoritarian institutions. Initially this took the form of a strength-
ened alliance with Ali Murtopo and other key associates within ABRI,
as Benedict Anderson (1978, 16) relates:

Shortly after his re-election, Suharto announced a new Cabinet. Far from
representing an attempt to widen his shrunken political base, it bore all the
characteristics of a regime under siege. It contained far more generals than
its predecessor, and these generals were all members of the old palace clique.
What new faces emerged were mainly creatures of General Ali Murtopo’s
intelligence apparatus. . . . For the first time in Indonesia’s history the ministry
of religion (an old Muslim bailiwick) was given to a general.

   Yet Suharto was not trying to restabilize his regime through pure
military hegemony. Even as he favored ABRI with prime political
appointments, Suharto simultaneously started shaping Golkar into a
sharper infrastructural instrument for rule and reducing its dependence
on the military. At its 1978 congress following Suharto’s reelection:

The Golkar leadership introduced a policy which stated that the military offi-
cers on active duty would not be permitted to hold office in Golkar. . . . It was
also stated by the Golkar leadership that in the future, the chairmanship of
Golkar supervisors’ councils at the provincial and district levels would not

[p. 154] [PDF page 172]

be held automatically by local military commanders. Some Golkar leaders
interpreted this as a sign of the “civilianization” process. Interestingly, this
civilianization process was accompanied by the greater role played by Presi-
dent Suharto in Golkar. (Suryadinata 1989, 99–100)

    Civilianization was not merely “accompanied,” but driven by
Suharto’s autocratic turn. Golkar was not gaining decision-making
influence, but gaining positions through which it could complement
ABRI as a (well-compensated) weapon for social and political con-
trol. The quasi-party was trading subservience to the military for sub-
servience to Suharto.
    To that end, the 1978 Golkar congress saw Suharto “rig” inter-
nal procedures to his personal advantage. Within Golkar’s supervi-
sors’ council, or “actual decision-making body,” Suharto pushed for
the abolition of the post of deputy supervisor, which had previously
been held by Indonesia’s vice presidents. When the forty-five-member
supervisory council was introduced in late 1978, “most of these people
were loyal supporters of President Suharto. The Murtopo group was
still rather heavily represented.” In Golkar’s other main body, its exec-
utive board, Suharto “was also given the right to appoint members of
the central executive board as well as to suspend the board.” In sum,
as the daily Kompas editorialized, these strategic rule changes “made
it very explicit that Suharto was now the actual leader of Golkar”
(Suryadinata 1989, 58, 100, 101).
    The political shocks of 1977 and 1978 were also followed by
Suharto’s invigorated efforts to steer the national economic product
toward his own hands and those of his very closest allies, in a com-
bination of packing and circumvention maneuvers. We have already
seen how in the late 1960s Suharto placed loyalists atop the national
oil company (Pertamina) and agricultural logistics board (Bulog), per-
haps Indonesia’s two most lucrative cash cows. Pertamina in particular
had grown more flush in discretionary revenues with the first OPEC
oil boom. Now Suharto aimed to consolidate his personal control
over centralized patronage networks even further. All state banks were
mandated in 1978 to give 8 percent of their profits to new presidential
foundations (yayasan) that would provide Suharto with bounteous
additional sources of discretionary finance in the decades to come
(Robison and Hadiz 2004, 55). By 1980, Suharto had diverted
all procurement decisions from mainline economic ministries to the

[p. 155] [PDF page 173]

new “Team 10” within the executive offices of the State Secretariat
(Sekneg), in a spectacularly lucrative circumvention maneuver. “Over
the next five years the team’s power would be extended vertically
through the state apparatus and horizontally across the archipelago,”
writes Jeffrey Winters. “The resources that passed through Team 10’s
approval process are mind boggling” (Winters 1996, 130, 134).
    The institutional rise of Sekneg and Team 10 in the early to mid
1980s crystallized Suharto’s personal domination of Indonesian pol-
itics. “Far from being a creature of the military high command, the
Presidency in Indonesia became a center of power with its own momen-
tum,” note Richard Robison and Vedi Hadiz. “In administrative terms,
the rise of the State Secretariat (Sekneg) provided the President with a
discrete capacity to prepare and plan legislation and to deal with [the]
Cabinet, the Ministries and with parliament” (Robison and Hadiz
2004, 48). In this context, “deal with” suggests “handle” rather than
“negotiate.” Suharto’s despotic gains were ABRI’s loss, as the presi-
dential office grew into “a formidable institution of state power . . .
vis-à-vis those competing power centers in the military that had pre-
viously gravitated around Ali Murtopo and the Ministry of Defense
under General Benny Moerdani” (Robison and Hadiz 2004, 59).
    It would be from the presidential office that Suharto’s new right-
hand man would arise. If Murtopo was Suharto’s main sidekick of the
1970s, he would be displaced by Sudharmono in the 1980s. Crucially,
Sudharmono lacked Murtopo’s autonomous base in ABRI, having
risen to power under Suharto’s thumb as head of Sekneg. “Although
Sudharmono was a retired general, he had not been accepted by the
military establishment as a full member,” Leo Suryadinata (1989, 138)
explains. “Unlike most of the military leaders who were field gener-
als, Sudharmono was a staff general without battle experience. His
power base had been in the bureaucracy rather than in the military
per se.” This made him a more pliable figure than Murtopo, as well
as a useful balance against Moerdani, the Christian general who had
accrued something approximating “complete control of the country’s
fire power” (Sidel 1998, 163). The old Soemitro-Murtopo rivalry was
being replaced with a Moerdani-Sudharmono power struggle, with
Suharto standing once again as the prime beneficiary.
    Indonesian politics after 1978 would be characterized by increasing
ambiguity as to whether Golkar or ABRI enjoyed the upper hand

[p. 156] [PDF page 174]

as Suharto’s primary political vehicle, alongside decreasing uncer-
tainty regarding the fact that Suharto was indeed the driver of pol-
itics. Suharto attempted to deploy ideological ambiguity in his own
favor as well. In the wake of the PPP’s electoral gains and subsequent
mass protests, Suharto began to accuse any and all critical groups
of defying Pancasila, the vague, consensual national ideology intro-
duced by Sukarno to bridle ideological conflict. During a speech to
military commanders in May 1980, Suharto condemned the PPP as
“anti-Pancasila” and declared that “because of the presence of anti-
Pancasila forces, ABRI would be forced to choose a partner and a
friend who fully supported Pancasila. It was clear that he was referring
to Golkar” (Suryadinata 1989, 109). A dissident group led by retired
generals called the Petition of Fifty emerged in response to Suharto’s
misuse of Pancasila and apparent intention to convert ABRI into more
of a bodyguard for Golkar and himself. While the petitioners failed
to gain political traction, their public dissent exemplified the growing
alienation between the professional military and the Suharto clique.
It also illustrated how Suharto’s strategic stress on the importance of
Pancasila could unintentionally provide his opponents with a discourse
for dissent that would be difficult to keep in check.
    Rather than yielding to military concerns about Golkar’s growing
independence – as he had in 1979 by rejecting Murtopo’s effort to con-
vert it into a more autonomous cadre party (Suryadinata 1989, 63) –
Suharto now moved the New Order ever closer to an infrastructural
party-military balance. After Suharto’s ally Sudharmono captured the
chairmanship of Golkar unopposed, the 1983 Golkar congress saw
even more vigorous efforts at packing and rigging the party in Suharto’s
favor than had been witnessed in 1978. During Sudharmono’s tenure
as Golkar’s general chairman from 1983 to 1988, “the Suharto gov-
ernment . . . succeeded in reorganizing Golkar and transforming it into
a kind of ‘cadre party.’ This was aimed at making the organization a
more effective political movement under Suharto’s personal control.”
Suharto and his wife fittingly became Golkar’s first individual cadres
in 1984. By 1987, after a nationwide recruitment campaign spanning
urban and rural areas, “Sudharmono was quoted as saying that Golkar
had twenty-eight million members, of whom approximately nine mil-
lion were cadres” (Suryadinata 1989, 123, 128).

[p. 157] [PDF page 175]

Golkar’s growing territorial strength and social base worsened ten-
sions with ABRI in the run-up to the 1987 elections. Suharto added
fuel to the fire, not only by picking a Golkar figure rather than an ABRI
man as vice president for the first time, but by selecting Sudharmono,
his own point man in Golkar’s infrastructural expansion. Meanwhile,
Moerdani’s star as ABRI commander was on the decline. For his sins
of opposing Suharto’s appointment of Sudharmono as vice president
and “complaining about the unrestrained greed of [Suharto’s] chil-
dren,” Moerdani “was shunted upstairs to the less powerful post of
defense minister” and eventually “removed from the cabinet entirely”
(Schwarz 1994, 146). His main institutional power base, Kopkamtib,
was disbanded. William Liddle (1999, 105) has called Suharto’s sack-
ing of Moerdani “a defining moment, because from that time on he
never delegated a significant amount of power to any senior armed
forces officer.”
   Yet Moerdani’s fall within ABRI would not be Sudharmono’s gain
in Golkar – just as Soemitro’s fall within ABRI had not allowed Mur-
topo to use Golkar as a vehicle for enhancing his personal power
vis-à-vis Suharto. Infrastructural balance and despotic personalization
remained of the essence. Hence Sudharmono would crash to earth,
Icarus-like, when he came too close to the political pinnacle. Soon
after choosing him as vice president over military objections, Suharto
derailed Sudharmono’s reelection campaign as Golkar chairman when
the president “showed his preference for Wahono, an obscure figure
who was the ex-governor of East Java,” writes Suryadinata. “Many
observers argued that Wahono was elected because of his close links
with Suharto and his reputation as a man without political ambitions.
Once proposed, the sixty-three year old retired general was accepted
by the delegates of the congress unanimously, indicating the president’s
power over Golkar” (Suryadinata 1989, 139). Sudharmono’s fall indi-
cated that even longtime Suharto loyalists would not be entrusted with
too much concentrated authority near the highest heights of Indone-
sian politics.
   Endemic ABRI-Golkar friction in the 1990s gave Suharto leeway to
channel support and resources to a rapidly shrinking circle of allies.
What was once a vast coalition degenerated into a narrow clique.
Suharto famously circumvented Indonesia’s economic institutions to

[p. 158] [PDF page 176]

help his children amass untold personal fortunes. By the mid-1990s,
the Suharto family comprised “by far the most powerful economic
dynasty in the country” (Schwarz 1994, 141). In terms of political
institutions, Suharto’s main shift came with the founding in 1990 of a
new organization of Islamic elites, ICMI,19 as a counterweight to the
increasingly unreliable military. As with Golkar under Murtopo and
Sudharmono, Suharto only favored ICMI through the leadership of
one of his closest allies, lifetime family friend B. J. Habibie. Yet again,
the image of civilianization was personalization in practice. Suharto
was manipulating nonmilitary institutions in an attempt to engineer a
balanced regime infrastructure under his personal command, not build
a broad coalition of collective decision makers.
   ICMI was not designed to gain the despotic power that ABRI had
lost. Its purpose was to provide Suharto with institutional balance and
control, not advice and consent. Ascendant ICMI elites hoped to score
big in the new cabinet introduced in 1993 – even the self-styled “real
ICMI” members who had been relatively critical of the New Order
before their incorporation into Suharto’s fold. “But there was no mis-
taking the disappointment the ICMI modernists felt that the ICMI
members elevated to cabinet rank were all bureaucrats close to Habi-
bie. The group that calls itself the ‘real ICMI’ was shut out” (Schwarz
1994, 183). When wags joked that the “CM” in ICMI stood not for
Cendekiawan Muslim (Muslim Intellectuals) but Calon Menteri (Min-
isterial Candidates), they likely realized that ICMI members mostly
remained candidates and rarely became ministers (Aspinall 2005, 59).
   Rather than creating ICMI as a partylike device to expand civilian
access to political influence, Suharto was “bringing the most criti-
cal ICMI members into the establishment fold with the promise of
more influence in government decision-making” (Schwarz 1994, 176,
emphasis added). ICMI member Umar Juoro recognized just how hol-
low that promise was in a March 1993 interview: “The ‘real ICMI’
members understand that they can’t become real decision-makers
in this country until Suharto goes.” In sum, neither Suharto nor
even Habibie were “at all interested in seeing ICMI evolve into an

19   Ikatan Cendekiawan Muslim Indonesia, or Indonesian Association of Muslim Intel-
     lectuals.

[p. 159] [PDF page 177]

independent political power.” Adam Schwarz situated ICMI’s political
role in historical perspective: “Much like Sukarno once looked to the
communists to counteract unhappy army officers, Soeharto now looks
to Muslims to play the same balancing role” (1994, 184, 183, 176).
   At a deeper level, this had always been Golkar’s political plight as
well. Even in the 1990s, when the old “nephew” of Indonesian political
institutions had fully grown, Golkar’s station was more to balance the
ABRI “uncle” than to enjoy influence over the “father,” Suharto. The
political potentialities of institutional balance were displayed when
ABRI impudently nominated General Try Sutrisno to replace Golkar’s
Sudharmono as vice president for Suharto’s sixth term, from 1993 to
1998. Suharto shrewdly accepted the suggestion, even though most
analysts believed he preferred his main loyalist, Habibie. But he made
ABRI pay in other ways. “When Suharto announced his cabinet in
March 1993, only a few ministers had senior military backgrounds,”
as it “included more Suharto loyalists and associates of Habibie”
(Aspinall 2005, 44). The most important ABRI figure left in the cabi-
net was Edi Sudradjat as minister for defense and security. Yet he too
would subsequently be sacrificed on Golkar’s institutional altar:

In the approach to the Golkar congress in October 1993, Edi Sudradjat openly
stated that the organization’s next leader should come from the “big ABRI
family.” Presumably partly as a result, Suharto sacked Edi as ABRI comman-
der, after only three months in the position. His replacement, Feisal Tanjung,
dutifully insisted that the military had no candidate for the Golkar leader-
ship. . . . Other Golkar leaders seen as sympathetic to military interests were
also sidelined. The new board contained two of Suharto’s own children and
several individuals linked to Habibie and ICMI. (Aspinall 2005, 44–45)

   By the mid-1990s, Suharto finally seemed to succeed in packing
ABRI as thoroughly as he had packed Golkar. The replacement of Edi
Sudradjat with Feisal Tanjung as ABRI commander effectively purged
an old Moerdani ally and promoted a Habibie favorite. “Edi’s sud-
den replacement was only the most dramatic incident in a broad and
accelerating change in the ABRI leadership that through 1993–94 saw
many important ‘discontented’ ABRI officers being moved from senior
posts.” When Suharto’s own son-in-law Prabowo Subianto secured
a major strategic posting in 1995 immediately after “becoming the

[p. 160] [PDF page 178]

youngest officer to attain the rank of major general” (Aspinall 2005,
46), Suharto’s personalization of power was essentially complete. As
one Indonesian brigadier general summed up ABRI’s complete loss of
despotic power by late 1995:

ABRI is no longer dominant; it is no longer even involved in decision making.
It is only Suharto who makes the decisions. ABRI is simply the implementer
of what the government decides. . . . ABRI should be able to correct the gov-
ernment. Now it can do nothing, and ABRI recognizes it is no more than the
fire brigade.20


Complex Institutions and Contentious Politics: Crisis, Subversion,
and Opportunism in Regime Collapse, 1996–1998
Against this backdrop of ABRI and Golkar irrelevance in political
decision making, one of Indonesia’s most seasoned political observers
concluded that, after thirty long years of rule, the New Order regime
“faces no serious inside or outside threat, so long as Suharto remains
in power” (Liddle 1996, 59). This was at once an astute character-
ization of the regime’s stability and a foreshadowing of its impend-
ing instability. Through his very success at sidelining any and all
potential rivals, Suharto had squandered the New Order’s image as
a collectivist expression of either ABRI or Golkar interests. Autocracy
had conquered oligarchy, and everybody recognized it. This made it
increasingly unclear whether ABRI or Golkar leaders would continue
to perceive Suharto’s regime as worth defending with coercion and
violence.
   The big question thus became whether any organized challenge to
Suharto could emerge and put his increasingly factionalized and politi-
cized ruling apparatus to the repressive test. Throughout the 1990s,
Indonesia’s complex institutions gradually began to serve as avenues
for political contention from below, and not just as building blocks
for regime balance from above. In response to Suharto’s founding of
ICMI and decision to seek a fifth term as elected president, Nahdlatul
Ulama (NU) leader Abdurrahman Wahid organized “the largest non-
governmental mass rally held for twenty-five years” in March 1992 –
a gathering of at least one hundred fifty thousand NU members and


20   Roekmini Koesomo Astoeti, quoted in Aspinall (2005, 54).

[p. 161] [PDF page 179]

supporters at Jakarta’s largest sports stadium.21 The rally was held
ostensibly “to celebrate the organization’s anniversary by publicly reit-
erating NU loyalty to Pancasila,” as first pronounced in its acceptance
of Pancasila over Islam as its ideological basis in 1983. Coming less
than a year after his formation of the elite-level Forum for Democ-
racy, Wahid clearly meant the rally as a direct challenge to Suharto.
Making the rally a massive endorsement of Suharto’s own favored
Pancasila ideology was a masterstroke in multiple respects. Not only
did it give Wahid breathing space to avoid having NU endorse Suharto
in the 1992 elections; it also curried favor with anti-Islamist ABRI offi-
cers, while implying that Suharto’s cultivation of ICMI was itself an
embrace of Islamist and a betrayal of Pancasila principles.
   Further uses of New Order institutions against the New Order’s
founding father were soon to follow. Sukarno’s daughter, Megawati
Sukarnoputri, captured control of the state-created PDI in 1993 and
gradually converted the party from Suharto’s major weapon for demo-
bilizing Sukarno-style populism into Indonesia’s most credible vehi-
cle for oppositional mass politics. Much as Wahid’s Pancasila gam-
bit marked the political comeback of NU, Megawati’s rise signaled a
revival of the social forces that underpinned her father’s old PNI. A
third creative marriage of pre-Suharto and New Order institutions for
oppositional purposes emerged with Amien Rais’s meteoric rise within
both Muhammadiyah and ICMI. As the first leading figure to raise the
issue of a presidential succession publicly, in 1993, Amien was an espe-
cially sharp thorn in Suharto’s side. Before being pressured to resign
from ICMI in 1997, Amien used his protected position in Suharto’s pet
Islamic institution to give modernist Muslims an independent politi-
cal voice they had largely lacked since the banning of Masyumi four
decades before.22
   These three institutionally ensconced figures would serve as power-
ful elite focal points for growing mass opposition to Suharto after the
Asian financial crisis rocked Indonesia in late 1997 and early 1998.
While analysts typically portray the economic crisis as the major cause
of the political crisis, it is only by understanding the severity of the


21   All quotes and insights in this paragraph are drawn from Ramage (1995, 58).
22   The predominantly rural constituency of NU is typically described as “traditionalist,”
     while Muhammadiyah’s more urban base has long been depicted as “modernist.”

[p. 162] [PDF page 180]

Suharto regime’s “political involution” that one can comprehend the
scale of the economic collapse itself (Sidel 1998, 178). The complete
absence of any veto players able to check and calibrate the day-to-day
recalculations of “an unconstrained presidency” produced “severe pol-
icy volatility” and snowballing investor panic (MacIntyre 2001, 116).
Far from responding to the crisis with political magnanimity, Suharto
revealed more brazenly than ever that when it came to sharing despotic
power, his sultanistic regime had no clothes. After securing another
manipulated electoral victory in late 1997, Suharto selected Habibie
as his vice president, despite Habibie’s long-standing unpopularity in
ABRI and in much of Golkar. In March 1998, Suharto unveiled a
cabinet that “had the narrowest representation of elite opinion yet
under the New Order” (Aspinall 2005, 221), with even his widely
despised eldest daughter attaining ministerial rank. Each tightening
of the despotic screws worsened the market panic. As his coalition
withered, Suharto reassigned his son-in-law Prabowo to the main mil-
itary command in Jakarta, banking on family loyalty to keep the most
important working part in his regime infrastructure operational.
    Having divided ABRI to conquer it, Suharto possessed only a
divided coercive apparatus to conquer his opponents. Despotic manip-
ulations finally produced devastating infrastructural decay. When units
loyal to Prabowo rather than ABRI commander Wiranto opened fire
on demonstrating university students in Jakarta, peaceful protests and
violent riots mushroomed in scale and scope. The regime’s institu-
tional complexity had long incubated and now suddenly revealed mul-
tiple sites of internal opportunism and subversion, as even Golkar’s
chairman publicly called on Suharto to resign to restore social peace.
And in a final institutional irony, tens of thousands of university stu-
dents occupied parliament to demand Suharto’s resignation. Unlike the
handpicked New Order inhabitants of that “decision-making” insti-
tution, the students had not come to parliament to sit down, stay
silent, and get paid. They had come to return decision-making power
to the Indonesian people and their freely elected representatives. By
occupying a legitimate institutional site for New Order politics, the
students signaled to ABRI that they were subversives, not insurrec-
tionaries, seeking to play by the rules to change them.23 Having lost

23   One might reasonably argue – in line with Mahoney and Thelen’s Table 1.4 – that
     Suharto’s overthrow by opportunists and subversives rather than by insurrectionaries

[p. 163] [PDF page 181]

all of its despotic power to Suharto, the military would have little to
gain by using its infrastructural power against the students to prevent
his sultanistic regime’s collapse.

Conclusion

Historical legacies and agentive strategies both loomed large in the
institutional evolution of Indonesia’s New Order. Yet from the per-
spective of our leading theories of institutional origins and change,
these factors did not play their starring roles entirely at the expected
times. Purely deductive theories of authoritarian institutions resting on
comparative statics fail to capture the extent to which such institutions
are inherited as well as chosen; the path-dependent model of institu-
tional development often fails to capture how little choice and agency
may matter during the critical juncture of a regime’s founding moment;
and neither of these types of institutionalist analysis is especially effec-
tive at apprehending situations in which multiple institutions coexist
and exhibit considerable ongoing friction.
   Agency ironically appears to have become more important as the
New Order’s institutions ostensibly solidified. At moments of rising
coalitional strain, Suharto faced the choice of ruling through collective
military hegemony, or through the balancing of military and civilian
institutions in pursuit of autocratic political domination. He chose
the latter approach. Instead of displacing parties entirely or privileging
them in a manner that would have converted military into civilian rule,
Suharto attempted to strip existing parties of all subversive elements
while bringing military and civilian institutions into an ambiguous
balance over which he was the solitary master. It is impossible to
say with confidence whether this made the New Order endure longer
than it would have lasted had Suharto chosen to continue prioritizing
the military over Golkar. What is clear is that institutional complex-
ity facilitated gradual institutional change, even as the regime as a
whole remained remarkably stable for over three decades. In the final
analysis, however, the same complexity that Suharto had exploited to
outmaneuver would-be challengers had also empowered subversives

  meant that democratic transition would amount to a partial conversion or the adding
  of a new layer to New Order institutions, and not to their complete displacement.
  See Robison and Hadiz (2004) and Slater (2004) for more on authoritarian legacies
  in post-Suharto Indonesia.

[p. 164] [PDF page 182]

and opportunists whose actions – or inaction – amid rising protests
contributed decisively to Suharto’s downfall.
   At a conceptual level, the dynamics of authoritarian institutions
have, I hope, been illuminated by this chapter’s distinction between
despotic and infrastructural institutions. Personalization deprives
party and military institutions of despotic power by definition.
Whether it affects a regime’s infrastructural power – a more press-
ing matter for regime stability – remains a distinct empirical question.
The contrast between an institutionally complex authoritarian regime
such as Indonesia and regimes in which either party hegemony (as in
Malaysia) or military hegemony (as in Burma) is unambiguous sug-
gests that personalization will not induce regime brittleness unless it
compromises the cohesion of party and military institutions or exac-
erbates tensions between them.24 Unless we include infrastructural
arrangements in our institutional typology of authoritarian regimes,
such important research questions will be hidden from view.
   Perhaps above all else, the analysis here has provided an explana-
tion for institutional change that continues to take institutional sta-
bility seriously. It has consistently treated “institutional stability as a
political problem and a dynamic political outcome.”25 Like democratic
institutions, authoritarian institutions are stable enough to matter, but
not so stable that path dependence can carry the entire explanatory
load. Whether studying democratic or authoritarian politics, politi-
cal scientists should take note of the importance of historical legacies
in structuring institutional choice;26 of infrastructural institutions in
shaping political performance and stability;27 and of institutional com-
plexity in facilitating creative institutional change, both from above
and from below. Especially when institutions are multiple and exhibit
considerable friction, agency can escape history’s “bookends” and
help write the ongoing saga of institutional evolution itself (Thelen
2004, 37).


24 Slater (2003, 2005). See also Snyder (1992).
25 Mahoney and Thelen (this volume).
26 Slater and Simmons (Forthcoming).
27 One landmark study of democratic institutions distinguishes formulation and imple-

   mentation in much the same terms as this essay does: “Institutions are devices for
   achieving purposes, not just for achieving agreement. We want government to do
   things, not just decide things” (Putnam 1993, 8; emphasis in original).

[p. 165] [PDF page 183]

References
Anderson, Benedict. 1978. “Last Days of Indonesia’s Suharto?” Southeast
  Asia Chronicle 63 (July-August): 2–17.
Anderson, Benedict R. O’G. 1983. “Old State, New Society: Indonesia’s New
  Order in Comparative Historical Perspective.” Journal of Asian Studies 42
  (3) (May): 477–496.
Anderson, Benedict R. O’G. 1999. “Indonesian Nationalism Today and in the
  Future.” Indonesia 67 (April), pp. 1–11.
Aspinall, Edward. 2005. Opposing Suharto: Compromise, Resistance, and
  Regime Change in Indonesia. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Brownlee, Jason. 2007. Authoritarianism in an Age of Democratization. New
  York: Cambridge University Press.
Chehabi, H. E., and Juan J. Linz, eds. 1998. Sultanistic Regimes. Baltimore:
  Johns Hopkins University Press.
Clemens, Elisabeth S., and James M. Cook. 1999. “Politics and Institution-
  alism: Explaining Durability and Change.” Annual Review of Sociology
  25:441–466.
Crouch, Harold. 1978. The Army and Politics in Indonesia. Ithaca, NY:
  Cornell University Press.
Gandhi, Jennifer, and Adam Przeworski. 2007. “Authoritarian Institutions
  and the Survival of Autocrats.” Comparative Political Studies 40 (11)
  (November): 1279–1301.
Geddes, Barbara. 1999a. “Authoritarian Breakdown: Empirical Test of a
  Game Theoretic Argument.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of
  the American Political Science Association, Atlanta.
Geddes, Barbara. 1999b. “What Do We Know About Democratization After
  Twenty Years?” Annual Review of Political Science 2:115–144.
Hadenius, Axel, and Jan Teorell. 2007. “Pathways from Authoritarianism.”
  Journal of Democracy 18 (1) (January): 143–156.
Honna, Jun. 2003. Military Politics and Democratization in Indonesia. New
  York: Routledge Curzon.
Huntington, Samuel P. 1968. Political Order in Changing Societies. New
  Haven: Yale University Press.
Huntington, Samuel P. 1991. The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late
  Twentieth Century. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Kasza, Gregory J. 1995. The Conscription Society: Administered Mass Orga-
  nizations. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kerkvliet, Benedict J. Tria. 2005. The Power of Everyday Politics: How Viet-
  namese Peasants Transformed National Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer-
  sity Press.
Liddle, R. William. 1996. “Indonesia: Suharto’s Tightening Grip.” Journal of
  Democracy 7 (4) (October): 58–72.
Liddle, R. William. 1999. “Indonesia’s Democratic Opening.” Government
  and Opposition 34 (1) (January): 94–116.

[p. 166] [PDF page 184]

Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Stein Rokkan. 1990 [1967]. “Cleavage Struc-
  tures, Party Systems, and Voter Alignments.” In The West European Party
  System, ed. Peter Mair, 91–138. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MacIntyre, Andrew. 2001. “Institutions and Investors: The Politics of the Eco-
  nomic Crisis in Southeast Asia.” International Organization 55 (1) (Winter):
  81–122.
Magaloni. Beatriz. 2006. Voting for Autocracy: Hegemonic Party Survival and
  its Demise in Mexico. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mann, Michael. 1988. States, War and Capitalism: Studies in Political Sociol-
  ogy. Cambridge: Basil Blackwell.
Migdal, Joel S. 2001. State in Society: Studying How States and Societies
  Transform and Constitute One Another. New York: Cambridge University
  Press.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic
  Performance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Padgett, John F., and Christopher K. Ansell. 1993. “Robust Action and the
  Rise of the Medici, 1400–1434.” American Journal of Sociology 98 (6)
  (May): 1259–1319.
Putnam, Robert. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern
  Italy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ramage, Douglas E. 1995. Politics in Indonesia: Democracy, Islam and the
  Ideology of Tolerance. New York: Routledge.
Robison, Richard. 1986. Indonesia: The Rise of Capital. Sydney: Allen &
  Unwin.
Robison, Richard, and Vedi R.Hadiz. 2004. Reorganizing Power in Indonesia:
  The Politics of Oligarchy in an Age of Markets. London: Routledge Curzon.
Schwarz, Adam. 1994. A Nation in Waiting: Indonesia in the 1990s. Boulder,
  CO: Westview.
Sheingate, Adam D. 2003. “Political Entrepreneurship, Institutional Change,
  and American Political Development.” Studies in American Political Devel-
  opment 17 (Fall): 185–203.
Sidel, John T. 1998. “Macet Total: Logics of Circulation and Accumulation in
  the Demise of Indonesia’s New Order.” Indonesia 66 (October): 159–194.
Sidel, John T. 2006. Riots, Pogroms, and Jihad: Religious Violence in
  Indonesia. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Slater, Dan. 2003. “Iron Cage in an Iron Fist: Authoritarian Institutions and
  the Personalization of Power in Malaysia.” Comparative Politics 36 (1)
  (October): 81–101.
Slater, Dan. 2004. “Indonesia’s Accountability Trap: Party Cartels and Presi-
  dential Power after Democratic Transition.” Indonesia 78 (October): 61–92.
Slater, Dan. 2005. “Ordering Power: Contentious Politics, State-Building, and
  Authoritarian Durability in Southeast Asia.” PhD diss., Emory University.
Slater, Dan, and Erica Simmons. Forthcoming. “Informative Regress: Critical
  Antecedents in Comparative Politics.” Comparative Political Studies.

[p. 167] [PDF page 185]

Smith, Benjamin. 2007. Hard Times in the Lands of Plenty: Oil Politics in
  Iran and Indonesia. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Snyder, Richard. 1992. “Explaining Transitions from Neopatrimonial Dicta-
  torships.” Comparative Politics 24 (4) (July): 379–399.
Suryadinata, Leo. 1989. Military Ascendancy and Political Culture: A Study of
  Indonesia’s Golkar. Southeast Asia Series, No. 85. Athens: Ohio University
  Monographs in International Studies.
Thelen, Kathleen. 2004. How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy
  of Skills in Germany, Britain, the United States, and Japan. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Tsai, Kellee S. 2006. “Adaptive Informal Institutions and Institutional Change
  in China.” World Politics 59 (October): 116–141.
Wedeen, Lisa. 1999. Ambiguities of Domination: Politics, Rhetoric, and Sym-
  bols in Contemporary Syria. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Winters, Jeffrey A. 1996. Power in Motion: Capital Mobility and the Indone-
  sian State. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
