Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power
Edited by James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen
First published in print: 2009 | Copyright: 2010 | Cambridge University Press

Chapter 6: Rethinking Rules: Creativity and Constraint in the U.S. House of Representatives
Adam Sheingate
Original print pages 168–203; PDF pages 186–221

[English original. Chapter footnotes and references are retained in their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks and fixed-width table layout are retained; verify diagrams and exact typography against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, footnotes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 168] [PDF page 186]

6

Rethinking Rules

Creativity and Constraint in the U.S. House
of Representatives

      Adam Sheingate




Rules are a characteristic feature of political institutions. They govern
the order and conduct of business within institutions and the dis-
tribution of power and authority among them. Rules also structure
the behavior of goal-oriented actors, for example, by establishing the
parameters for strategic interaction. Rules, in other words, define the
scope of permissible actions. As a source of constraint, rules are a part
of the regulative, normative, and cognitive structures that shape the
alternatives actors confront (Clemens and Cook 1999).
   But rules have a double-edged quality; they do more than limit
alternatives or set the parameters for strategic interaction. Rules also
provide actors with creative leeway. In this way, rules are at once con-
straining and empowering. Consider, for example, how rules operate
as a component of a game. According to the game designers Frank
Lantz and Eric Zimmerman (1999), the rules of a game engender play.
Whereas the rules, “the laws that determine what can and cannot hap-
pen,” may be fixed and rigid, play, the human experience of a game “set
into motion by the players’ choices and actions,” is creative and impro-
visational (Lantz and Zimmerman 1999). As they describe the process:

Within the strictly demarcated confines of the rules, play emerges and ripples
outwards, bubbling up through the fixed and rigid rule-structure in unexpected


For comments on earlier versions, the author would like to thank Jim Mahoney
and Kathleen Thelen, the participants at the Northwestern Workshop on Institutional
Change, Joseph Cooper, and Randall Strahan.

[p. 169] [PDF page 187]

patterns. During play, relationships between parts becomes [sic] a complex
system, capable of producing intricate patterns. . . . Uncertainty, produced by
randomness or by a rich palette of strategic choice is a necessary ingredient
of successful gameplay. Just try to imagine a game without the pleasurable
suspense of an uncertain ending. (Lantz and Zimmerman 1999)

    Lantz and Zimmerman highlight the creative component of human
action that occurs within the context of a tightly specified rule struc-
ture. One of the best examples of this creativity is in the game of
chess, where a fixed and clearly delineated set of rules gives rise to an
ever-evolving array of opening moves, attacks, defenses, gambits, and
endgames. It is the multiplication of rules governing the movement of
different pieces that gives chess its dynamic character when compared
with a simple game like checkers. In other words, the complexity of the
rule structure itself provides the scope for individual skill or creativity
as the game unfolds.
    The example of chess is suggestive for theories of political institu-
tions, and for our understanding of how actors operate within them.
Just as the rules of chess can give rise to dynamic play, the complex
array of rules within political institutions and the manifold connections
among them can provide actors with creative leeway. However, there
is an important distinction to be drawn between politics and chess:
the formal rules of political “games” are far more ambiguous. In
chess, the rules are clearly defined and known to the players. But
in politics, the rules are often vague and subject to multiple interpre-
tations. Employing insights drawn from Wittgenstein, J. David Green-
stone (1986, 48) writes, “Because the rules are never complete and
definitive, there is also an indispensable role for the individual. Verbal
formulas can never state the rules unambiguously.”
    It is precisely this ambiguity that provides a critical opening for the
creative interpretation of rules – and the potential for fresh insights
into how actors animate the process of institutional development. As
Mahoney and Thelen point out in the introduction to this volume,
ambiguity invites conflict and contestation as actors struggle over the
meaning, application, and enforcement of formal institutional rules. It
is through these conflicts over rules and their meaning that actors can
transform the way institutions allocate power and authority. Political
institutions, in this view, “are the object of ongoing skirmishes as actors
try to achieve advantage by interpreting or redirecting institutions in

[p. 170] [PDF page 188]

pursuit of their goals, or by subverting or circumventing rules that
clash with their interests” (Streeck and Thelen 2005, 19). When suc-
cessful, these skirmishes establish precedents that become codified in
new rules, changing the complexion of an institution in the process. In
other words, the characteristics of institutions themselves, especially
the ambiguity of their rule structure and the attendant struggles over
the meaning of rules, help explain how institutions evolve (Thelen
2004; Tsai 2006).
   At the same time, this focus on the creative element in politics car-
ries certain dangers if it leads to an overly muscular account of agency.
By conceiving some actors as heroic change agents operating outside
of institutional constraints, we risk losing sight of institutions them-
selves. As Powell and Colyvas (2008, 277) caution, “[I]nstitutional the-
ory gains little by making unleashed actors the drivers of institutional
change.” The goal, then, is to understand how rule ambiguity provides
opportunities for creative leeway at the same time that actors remain
tethered to the institutions they inhabit. The solution, therefore, is to
begin with the characteristics of institutions and then consider how
actors work to transform them, or, as the editors of this volume put it,
to “link particular modes of incremental change to those properties of
institutions that permit or invite specific kinds of change strategies.”
Following Mahoney and Thelen, institutional variations create oppor-
tunities for various kinds of actors to interpret, elaborate, bend, or
break the rules in the pursuit of individual and collective goals.
   Central to any understanding of institutions is understanding the
way that they confer power and authority on individuals and groups
to make or break the rules. Whereas some actors operate from struc-
tural positions of authority that confer power over the creation and
interpretation of rules, others may lack such power, seeking instead to
challenge the rules or subvert them. However, as noted earlier, rules
are often ambiguous in their meaning and effect; power and authority
are frequently contested and far from secure. This is particularly the
case in complex institutions where the multiplication of rules gener-
ates manifold contradictions and conflicts. Although one rule might
authorize a majority to change the character of an institution, another
rule may empower minorities to effectively block such a change. Simi-
larly, although a majority may secure formal changes in the rules that
establish new instruments of institutional authority, minorities may

[p. 171] [PDF page 189]

still subvert the effects of rules in practice. Confronted by such obsta-
cles, individuals or groups must pursue new avenues to change and
promote novel interpretations of rules that help them control insti-
tutions. As these maneuvers within and around the rules establish
precedents for action, they open new paths while foreclosing others,
adding further to the complexity of the institution and opening new
fronts in the struggle for institutional control. In this way, institutional
politics is animated by both the creativity and the constraint inherent
in rules and rule making.
    In this chapter, I attempt to capture this creativity and constraint by
discussing three well-known vignettes in the history of the U.S. House
of Representatives: (1) the emergence of the Rules Committee as an
instrument of majority party agenda control under Thomas Brackett
Reed in the early 1880s; (2) the elimination of the “disappearing quo-
rum,” another innovation by Reed, and the consolidation of a pow-
erful partisan Speaker through “Reed’s Rules” in 1890; and (3) the
introduction by George Norris of a resolution stripping the Speaker’s
power over the Rules Committee during the “Cannon Revolt” in 1910.
These events contributed to the development of the House, and each
one illustrates how creativity and constraint operate in the process of
institutional change. In each case, efforts to transform the rules of the
House, even when ostensibly favored by a majority of members, con-
fronted a formidable obstacle because the rules themselves conferred
extraordinary power on those most opposed to change. To overcome
these obstacles, Reed and Norris exploited the ambiguity of the rules
and the complex institutional features of the House either to create
new rules or to put forward creative interpretations of existing rules
that would allow them to pursue their goals of institutional change.
    Because these are extraordinary moments in the history of the U.S.
House, some may question how much can be learned from them. Yet
their choice is intended to underscore the important role that creativity
and constraint play in the evolution of institutions. For many congres-
sional scholars the years between 1880 and 1910 mark a critical period
in the institutional development of the House. The era begins with the
increasing centralization of party control in the hands of the Speaker
in the 1880s, continues through the consolidation and growth of the
Speaker’s power under “Reed’s Rules” in the 1890s, and ends with
the 1910 revolt against the partisan Speaker that ushered in a new

[p. 172] [PDF page 190]

period of decentralized party control that would hold sway for the
next fifty years. In some ways, the events described here were (perhaps
the) defining moments in the rise and fall of the nineteenth-century
partisan House.
   The goal in using these vignettes is to illustrate how actors working
within a complex institution such as the U.S. House of Representatives
pursue their goals, individually and collectively, through an almost
never-ending process of rule creation, elaboration, and interpretation.
Indeed, it would be a mistake to conclude that instances of rule cre-
ativity are rare or exceptional. In fact, they happen quite regularly.
As I describe in the next section, the U.S. House steadily accumulates
precedents in its procedures that bear witness to this ongoing creativity.
At the same time, the House is an evolving rule complex that is itself
embedded within a larger context of American politics and partisan
competition. This context is important, for it shapes the preferences
of members and the goals that members pursue within the chamber.
But individual members of Congress are not completely subordinate to
contextual factors, nor are they free-floating agents operating outside
of institutional constraints. By understanding how actors navigate a
complex rule structure amidst a changing external environment, it is
possible to grasp both creativity and constraint in the operation of
institutions. As in the other cases examined in this volume, the U.S.
House of Representatives illustrates how the strategies that actors pur-
sue to achieve their goals reflect (and exploit) the particular features
of the institutions in which they operate.


The U.S. House of Representatives as an Evolving Rule Complex

The U.S. House of Representatives provides an interesting case for a
study of this kind because of its complicated mixture of rules, prece-
dents, and practices that have accumulated over time. On the one hand,
these rules guide the strategic interactions of individual members. The
pursuit of electoral, partisan, or policy goals occurs within a set of
rules that govern the structure and process of legislation. According to
rationalist approaches to the study of institutions, these rules reflect the
broad distribution of member preferences within the chamber; changes
in the underlying distribution of preferences will generate pressures
for changes in the rules. On the other hand, scholars have shown that

[p. 173] [PDF page 191]

the complex array of rules and procedures of the U.S. House defy easy
categorization according to a single set of member goals or motives
(Schickler 2001). This is because House rules distribute power and
authority among multiple and overlapping groups within the chamber:
majority and minority parties, party leaders and the rank and file,
junior and senior members, and all manner of policy coalitions.
The manifold character of member motives and the distributional
consequences of congressional decisions invite various kinds of cre-
ative rule making by different alignments of goal-directed members.
The structural features of complex institutions like the House of
Representatives are more than simply rules of the game; they are very
often the game itself.
    This becomes evident when we trace the evolution of rules, prece-
dents, and conventions that govern the conduct of business and guide
the behavior of members in the House of Representatives. Unlike many
other institutions, the House maintains detailed records that provide
a great deal of information about its rules and the practices associ-
ated with them, making it possible to trace the development of the
House as an evolving rule complex. This section offers an overview
of this development before turning to a discussion of how struggles
over House rules illustrate creativity and constraint in the process of
institutional change.
    Article I, Section 5 of the U.S. Constitution states that “each house
may determine the rules of its proceedings.” Consequently, when the
first session of the 1st Congress opened in New York in 1789, the
House appointed a select committee “to prepare and report such stand-
ing rules and orders of proceedings as may be proper to be observed in
the House.”1 Five days later, the House adopted a set of four rules gov-
erning the duty of the Speaker, decorum and debate in the House, the
introduction and consideration of bills, and the role of the Committee
of the Whole House (United States Congress 1983, 36–37).2
    As the size and workload of the U.S. House grew over the next
several decades, the chamber’s rules expanded in piecemeal fashion. In


1 Journal of the United States House of Representatives (hereafter House Journal),
  April 2, 1789, p. 6. Available at http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/amlaw/lwhj.html.
2 The Committee of the Whole House of Representatives is a parliamentary device for

  debating and deciding legislation.

[p. 174] [PDF page 192]

some years, the House made only minor revisions; in others, the cham-
ber simply adopted the rules of the previous Congress. Periodically,
however, the House formalized certain elements of procedure, regu-
lated the behavior of members during debate, and developed instru-
ments to better control the order of business (United States Congress
1983, 38–39). An important revision of the rules in 1822, for example,
established that a two-thirds majority would be required to suspend
the rules, as when the House was considering legislation outside the
normal order of business. Rules changes in the 25th Congress (1837–
1839) streamlined the procedure for bill introduction, making it easier
for individual members to participate in the legislative process (Cooper
and Young 1989). A major revision in 1860 (36th Congress) included
thirty-six amendments to the rules that “corrected contradictory pro-
visions, combined several rules into one, and made others conform to
established practice” (Alexander 1970 [1916], 192). However, such
efforts to streamline and update House rules soon became outdated
themselves. As the size and workload of the chamber further increased
after the Civil War, the conduct of business had again become diffi-
cult. In an attempt to address the problems of an increasingly chaotic
House, a general revision of the rules in 1880 condensed and reorga-
nized the 166 rules into forty-four general categories, subdivided into
clauses, and arranged logically according to subject. Of particular note,
the 1880 revision created a standing Committee on Rules with juris-
diction over “all proposed action touching on the rules” (Alexander
1970 [1916], 194–196). Until then, Rules had been a select committee –
one that had to be called into existence at the start of each Congress.
Its status as a standing committee suggests that rules about rules had
grown in importance as the business of the House increased.
   Table 6.1 attempts to capture these developments by comparing the
size, workload, and rules of the House during the 1st Congress with
those during subsequent Congresses following rule revisions in 1794,
1811, 1822, 1836, 1860, and 1880. Not surprisingly, House rules –
measured here as the number of House Journal pages and length in
words – grew along with increases in the number of members, the
emergence of a standing committee system to handle legislation, and
the growing workload of bills under consideration (Cooper 1988
[1960]). In this way, the development of an elaborate rule struc-
ture was part of the broader institutionalization of the House of

[p. 175] [PDF page 193]

table 6.1. Size, Workload, and Rules in the U.S. House of
Representatives, 1st–46th Congresses

                      House   Standing   Bills      Rules   Rules
Congress (years)      Members Committees Introduced (pages) (words)
1st (1789–1791)        65             0            245          3        1,869
3rd (1793–1795)       105             2            244          4        2,782
12th (1811–1813)      141             9            277          5        3,843
17th (1821–1823)      187            25            317         11        5,619
25th (1837–1839)      242            33          1,176         13        7,333
36th (1859–1861)      237            34          1,020         20       10,183
46th (1879–1881)      293            45          7,257         17       10,500∗
∗ Estimated for the 46th Congress.

Source: House Journal, various years.


Representatives during the nineteenth century (Polsby 1968). But it
is also true that as the House grew in size, developed its internal struc-
ture, and absorbed increasing work demands, the institution became
more complex. Despite efforts to periodically streamline the process,
House rules contributed to this complexity by establishing a compli-
cated web of procedures that in some instances were simply outdated
or internally inconsistent. Prior to the 1880 revisions, for example,
House rules were enumerated 1 through 166 with newer rules simply
added on by succeeding Congresses. Even with the 1880 revisions, the
rules contained nearly 150 separate clauses, and these would steadily
increase in number. In the 110th Congress (2007–2008), for example,
the rules contained 484 distinct clauses.3
    However, attention to the formal rules of the House captures only
part of this development. Rules, by necessity, must have a partial,
open-ended quality. “There will always be some cases that the rules
have not anticipated; on other matters, the rules are simply silent”
(Greenstone 1986, 48). It is amidst these silences that precedent and
convention normally govern, and it is here that interpretation and elab-
oration take place in myriad ways. For example, House rules estab-
lished during the 1st Congress gave the Speaker the power to decide
who would address the chamber if several members sought the floor

3   United States Congress, House Rules and Manual, 109th Congress, 2nd Session
    (House Document No. 109–157), pp. 335–984. Available at http://www.gpoaccess.
    gov/hrm/browse_110.html.

[p. 176] [PDF page 194]

at once. Originally understood as simply a way to order parliamentary
procedure, the Speaker’s power of recognition would take on greater
significance as the House grew larger. In 1874, the Republican Speaker
James Blaine established the principle that recognition would be based
on the Speaker’s judgment of the relative importance of the motions
being offered. This power of recognition became a critical instrument
for Speakers, who could use it to reward or punish individual mem-
bers, or to advance or block the movement of legislation for partisan
or personal reasons (Alexander 1970 [1916], 58–61; Strahan 2007,
84–85).
   This power of recognition points to another key element of rule
ambiguity: conflicts that arise over the authoritative interpretation and
elaboration of rules. The original rules from 1789 also granted the
Speaker authority to “decide all questions of order” (Hinds 1907, II
872). Again, as the size of the House has grown, and the complexity
of its rules has increased, the Speaker’s rulings on points of order
have become more important. Whereas members can appeal most of
these rulings, in matters of recognition the Speaker’s word is final. This
precedent dates to 1874, when the Democratic Speaker Samuel Randall
ruled that “the right of recognition is just as absolute in the chair [of
the Speaker] as the judgment of the Supreme Court is absolute in the
interpretation of the law.” Randall’s edict actually overturned earlier
practices of the House in which members could appeal a decision
from the Speaker on a question of recognition (Hinds 1907, II 918,
920). Today, the Speaker’s power of recognition is still guided by this
precedent, rather than by the formal rules of the House.4
   So much House business is governed by past practice and conven-
tion, in fact, that the compilation of precedents has long been critical
to the operation of the chamber. Beginning in the 1840s, the House
regarded precedent as a guiding principle in the rulings of Speakers. As
Virginia Representative George Hopkins put it during debate in 1842,
“A chairman does not sit here to expound rules according to his own
arbitrary views. A just deference for the opinions of his fellows should
constrain him to give precedent its proper influence” (Hinds 1907, II
873). As precedent took on greater significance, the clerk residing at

4   United States Congress, House Rules and Manual, 109th Congress, 2nd Session,
    p. 736.

[p. 177] [PDF page 195]

the Speaker’s table became an increasingly valuable resource in matters
of parliamentary procedure. Asher Hinds, who served as a clerk from
1895 until 1910, compiled the first comprehensive collection of prece-
dents on all matters of House practice. First published in 1907, Hinds’
Precedents of the House of Representatives eventually ran more than
five thousand pages. Hinds’s successor, Clarence Cannon, followed
the practice of comprehensively updating and publishing House prece-
dents, issuing five additional volumes in 1936. In 1927, the House
established the position of House parliamentarian. The office operates
as a kind of institutional guardian; parliamentarian Lewis Deschler
served from 1928 to 1974 during which time he published nine more
volumes of precedent (seven more have been published by Deschler’s
successor, William Holmes Brown).5 In fact, because of their reputa-
tion as neutral arbiters, the parliamentarians themselves carry a size-
able degree of authority in the interpretation of rules. Consequently,
their decisions on allowable practice are critical to the operation of the
House even as they add to the institutional complexity in which rule
creation and elaboration takes place. David King (1997), for exam-
ple, shows how members use the parliamentarian’s decisions on bill
referrals to expand the boundaries of their committee jurisdiction in
ways that transform the distribution of policy authority within the
chamber.
   The history of the U.S. House is filled with the accumulation of
precedents that have added to the complexity of the institution and
the strategic environment in which members operate. Figure 6.1 illus-
trates this complexity by reproducing a page from the rules of the 110th
Congress (2007–2008). Rule I, clause 5 governs the Speaker’s power
to decide questions of order. The discussion that follows describes the
origin and evolution of the rule, as well as its various uses or the excep-
tions made during previous Congresses (the complete note extends for
several more pages). This illustrates how House precedents attempt
to establish the conditions under which a particular rule holds. Yet
in doing so, precedents also give sanction to multiple interpretations,
thereby expanding rather than constraining the possible range of action
under a given rule. And although precedents operate with the force of

5   “Rules and Precedents that Govern the U.S. House of Representatives.” Available at
    http://www.gpoaccess.gov/precedents/index.html.

[p. 178] [PDF page 196]

figure 6.1. Rules and Precedents in the U.S. House of Representatives.

[p. 179] [PDF page 197]

figure 6.1 (cont.)

[p. 180] [PDF page 198]

a rule, they may in fact place fewer constraints on actors seeking to
institute new practices. In the House, a precedent can be established
by a ruling from the Speaker. Such a ruling can be appealed on the
floor, but setting a precedent does not require an affirmative vote of the
chamber as in the case of amending the standing rules of the House. In
other words, precedents change practices while leaving the underlying
rule structure unchanged. However, the very practices authorized by
a precedent are themselves vulnerable to new interpretations in the
future. As Thomas Brackett Reed (quoted in King 1997, 94) put it,
“If we have broken the precedents of a hundred years, we have set the
precedents of another hundred years nobler than the last.”
   This quotation raises the key question: how are we to understand
the behavior of actors within a rule complex such as the House of
Representatives? Are actors constrained by rules and past practice, as
George Hopkins insisted; or are rules (and precedents) meant to be
broken, as Reed presumed? The answer, as we will see, is that both are
true. However, approaches to the study of Congress, and institutional
analysis more generally, differ precisely on this question.


Rethinking Rules: Creativity and Constraint

Rationalist approaches to the study of Congress examine rules as
instruments for the collective pursuit of individual member goals.
Rules, in this view, reflect the underlying distribution of member pref-
erences. The conditional party government model, for example, argues
that when member preferences are homogeneous within parties and
divergent across parties, rules will centralize power within the major-
ity leadership. Conversely, when member preferences are heteroge-
neous within parties and similar across parties, rules will decentralize
power in the House (Cooper and Brady 1981; Aldrich and Rohde
2000). Orthodox variants of this approach adopt a highly determinis-
tic view in which House leaders are agents of their party whose scope
of action depends solely on whether rank-and-file members of the
majority are like-minded enough to delegate authority to the Speaker
(Sinclair 1999). In other words, there is very little leeway in the behav-
ior of House leaders; their actions are largely dictated by the broader
partisan context and institutional character of the rules preferred by a
procedural majority in the House.

[p. 181] [PDF page 199]

In contrast to this contextual view, other scholars have emphasized
how individual leaders have shaped the development of the House. In
this view, entrepreneurial leaders can promote rule changes that appeal
to an array of member preferences, creatively assembling coalitions of
members whose support reflects a mixture of electoral, partisan, or
policy goals (Schickler 2001). As Robert Dahl (1961, 6) noted in a
different context, such a leader is “not so much the agent of others
as others are his agents.” Notable Speakers of the House, such as
Henry Clay, Thomas Brackett Reed, or Newt Gingrich can have an
independent and influential effect on the institutions of the House.
Their leadership capacities do not emerge fully formed from a unified
rank and file; rather, their leadership skills reside in their capacity to
articulate inchoate preferences and unify them into a powerful force
within the House (Strahan 2007).
    Neither of these approaches offers a wholly satisfying account of
actors or institutions. In the contextual view, for example, rules emerge
from a micropolitics of structural choice that views party leaders as lit-
tle more than institutional “dopes” acting out the preferences of rank-
and-file members. The alternative, however, may go too far the other
way by conceiving of some actors as heroic change agents who oper-
ate outside of institutional constraints. This overly muscular account
of agency begs the question why some individuals are constrained by
rules and institutions while others are able to act upon them (Powell
and Colyvas 2008).
    How, then, are we to square creativity with constraint? The problem
arises from the dual character of rules noted earlier. On the one hand,
rules are ambiguous in their meaning and effect. This presents actors
with a degree of leeway owing to the fact that “applying a general
rule to a specific situation is a creative act that must take into account,
not just the rule itself, but also the unique circumstances to which it
is to be applied” (Streeck and Thelen 2005, 14). In other words, rules
provide the medium for creative action. Or, as the editors put it in the
introduction to this volume, actors animate a process of incremental
change by exploiting the “gaps” and “soft spots” between the rule and
its interpretation.
    Yet even where they are ambiguous, rules still set parameters on
the permissible range of action; they establish what can and cannot
happen. Indeed, without rules, action becomes impossible, especially

[p. 182] [PDF page 200]

within a complex institution like the U.S. House. Consequently, in
many instances, actors will seek to preserve the legitimacy of an
institution, comply with broadly accepted norms, and generally work
“within the rules” even as they promote novel interpretations of those
rules. Moreover, where the legitimacy of rules hinges on a mech-
anism of third-party enforcement (e.g., the House parliamentarian)
actors may face further limitations on what they can accomplish in the
(re)interpretation of rules. Finally, power asymmetries and time lags
may confer authority over rules upon some actors despite the fact that
the structural basis of their power has changed or no longer exists.
    Thus actors face a quandary: even as they engage in a steady probing
for creative ways to turn the rules to their advantage, actors are con-
strained to a greater or lesser extent by the very same rules they wish
to change. Therefore, contra many rationalist approaches to the study
of legislatures, a change in the preference of a procedural majority,
even when precipitated by a broader shift in political context or par-
tisan competition, does not necessarily produce a change in the rules.
Following Strahan (2007, 110), partisan context is better understood
as a necessary but not a sufficient condition for change. At the same
time, actors, even creative ones, are never wholly unleashed from the
institutions they inhabit.
    Consequently, we can better grasp the nature of institutional change
by focusing on how actors negotiate the dual nature of rules, both their
constraining and their creative features. In the vignettes that follow, I
identify several strategies actors employ as they work within a complex
rule structure like the U.S. House. These strategies are broadly consis-
tent with the modes of institutional change (conversion, displacement,
layering, and drift), and some of the corresponding types of actors
(opportunists, insurrectionaries, subversives, and symbionts), identi-
fied by Mahoney and Thelen (this volume). However, I do not offer a
one-to-one correspondence between particular strategies and specific
modes of change or kinds of change agents. Rather, my goal in this
chapter is to suggest how institutions create opportunities for actors
to pursue their goals while working within a complex set of rules. It is
far from an exhaustive list.
    First, actors may take a rule established for one purpose and employ
it for another. For example, nineteenth-century House minorities took
the rules of procedure designed to facilitate the business of the chamber

[p. 183] [PDF page 201]

and transformed them into instruments of obstruction. Through an
endless stream of procedural motions, members of the minority party
could slow down legislative business to a crawl. Such behavior resem-
bles what Mahoney and Thelen describe as rule conversion, and it
illustrates the point made by Ato Onoma in this volume about how
actors can violate the spirit of a rule even as they follow it to the
letter.
    Second, actors can engage in forms of rule breaking, minor but unen-
forceable violations of procedure. Over time, such practices can them-
selves become “rules,” durable features of an institution that actors
are reluctant to flout.6 The disappearing quorum, a practice whereby
members could halt the business of the House by withholding their
vote, was in fact a violation of House rules. As such, it illustrates
another point made in the editors’ introduction: that actors can take
advantage of the gap between rules and their enforcement.
    Third, actors can exploit points of conflict and contradiction among
overlapping or nested sets of rules. In such instances of rule conflict,
actors may try to overturn rules or circumvent them by appealing to a
higher authority in which an institution is embedded. For instance, the
U.S. House of Representatives operates within a larger constitutional
arrangement; the power of the chamber to make rules is itself a mat-
ter of constitutional authority. Consequently, we see various efforts
to justify new rules or challenge existing ones through constitutional
appeals. This strategy illustrates an important feature of complex insti-
tutions. The multiple connections among system components mean
that changes in one set of rules can affect other parts of the system.
Actors may innovate through “robust action,” a strategy Padgett and
Ansell (1993, 1263) describe as one in which “single actions can be
moves in many games at once.”
    Finally, actors may combine rules by exploiting the linkages within
a rule complex to establish new procedures that help them achieve their
goals. Rules in the House, for example, establish a sequence of moves
that govern the passage of legislation. Although governed by rules,
these sequences might take various forms, and the creative combination
of rules can establish a novel sequence that eases the passage of a bill.
For example, Thomas Reed combined several existing rules to create

6   On the importance of rule breaking more generally, see Herrigel (2007).

[p. 184] [PDF page 202]

a new element of legislative procedure, the “special rule,” that greatly
enhanced the majority party’s control over the legislative agenda.
   These strategies illustrate how actors often work through rules
and not just on rules. Rules are constraining insofar as they estab-
lish parameters for action, but they also allow for creativity in their
application and interpretation. This rule creativity leads to novel prac-
tices and precedents that transform institutions. In sum, we can better
understand institutional change by examining actors “at work” as they
interpret, elaborate, bend, or even break the rules of the U.S. House in
the pursuit of individual and collective goals.


Rules About Rules: Thomas Brackett Reed
and the Rules Committee

Although the U.S. House of Representatives today is a majoritarian
institution, for most of the nineteenth century the rules of the House
empowered minorities and frustrated majorities. In part, this reflected
a belief that rules of procedure were one of the few protections for
minority parties against majority tyranny. As Thomas Jefferson noted
in his Manual of Parliamentary Practice, “As it is always in the power
of the majority, by their numbers, to stop any improper measures pro-
posed on the part of their opponents, the only weapons by which the
minority can defend themselves against similar attempts from those in
power are the forms and rules of proceeding.”7 In theory, parliamen-
tary rules protected minority rights.
   In practice, however, the rules of the House empowered even small
groups of members who wished to block the passage of legislation.
For example, the rules that governed the order and privilege of parlia-
mentary motions allowed members to introduce motions to adjourn,
request a call of the yeas and nays, or engage in other time-consuming
practices that could slow House business to a crawl. And because
the consideration of legislation outside the normal order of business
required a two-thirds majority to suspend the rules, these dilatory
motions could make passage of the majority party’s legislative agenda
exceptionally difficult (Binder 1997).


7   United States Congress, House Rules and Manual, p. 125.

[p. 185] [PDF page 203]

These features of the nineteenth-century House were much more
than quaint parliamentary curiosities. Minority obstruction was a par-
ticularly important feature of American politics during the nineteenth
century, especially in struggles over slavery and during post–Civil War
efforts to secure civil rights for African Americans. Dilatory motions
were a key weapon used by Southern Democrats during the House
debates on the organization of the Kansas and Nebraska territories
in 1854, over a resolution endorsing the Lecompton Constitution of
Kansas in 1858, on Reconstruction legislation in 1866, on passage of
the 1875 civil rights bill, during debate on the Force Bill that same
year, and in contested election cases throughout the 1870s and 1880s
(Hinds 1907, IV 70, 72, V 354).
   The development of these tactics illustrates how actors can convert
the effects of a rule, even subverting its purpose, while still following it
to the letter. Dilatory motions employed the rules of adjournment and
other parliamentary procedures designed to facilitate the conduct of
business in the House and used them to frustrate the conduct of busi-
ness through inaction and delay. Such instances of rule conversion were
not easily suppressed. As even Thomas Brackett Reed, who succeeded
in eliminating many of these practices, acknowledged, “There are no
words which can be framed which will limit Members to the proper use
of proper motions. Any motion the most conducive to progress in the
public business . . . may be used for purposes of unjust and oppressive
delay.” Reed’s frustration with “simple motions proper in themselves,
but which are improperly used,” illustrates the many opportunities
available for the creative manipulation of rules, and the challenge for
those who sought to diminish their effects (quoted in Hinds 1907,
V 352).
   Nevertheless, ending such abuse of the rules is precisely what Reed
accomplished as a member of the House Rules Committee during
the 47th Congress (1881–1883). As mentioned previously, the 1880
reforms granted the Rules Committee status as a standing commit-
tee with sole jurisdiction over the consideration of rule changes. In
addition, House precedent granted the Rules Committee the privi-
lege of reporting to the chamber at any time, freeing the committee
from the constraints of the normal order of business (Hinds 1907,
V 967). When the Republicans took control of the House in 1881,
Reed became a member of Rules and employed the augmented powers

[p. 186] [PDF page 204]

of the committee to challenge the use of dilatory motions as a tool
for minority-party obstruction in the House. In 1882, as Democrats
filibustered a contested election case by making endless motions to
adjourn, Reed secured recognition from the Speaker to submit a priv-
ileged report from the Rules Committee. In it, Reed proposed an
amendment to the rules that would allow no more than one motion
to adjourn during consideration of a contested election, thereby elim-
inating obstructive tactics in such cases (Robinson 1930, 86). Pre-
dictably, the Democrats responded to Reed’s proposal with more dila-
tory motions. In turn, Reed raised the point of order that “upon a
proposition that the House change its rules dilatory motions cannot
be entertained by the Chair.”8
    Reed argued that dilatory motions could not be used to prevent
the consideration of contested elections because such matters touch on
the constitutional privilege that “each House shall be the judge of the
election, returns, and qualifications of its own members.”9 This was
the justification behind Reed’s proposed rule change. If this is the case,
Reed continued, then it also holds that dilatory motions should not
prevent changes in the rules because this too touches on constitutional
privilege, in this instance, the one that “each House may determine the
rules of its proceedings.” To allow otherwise would prevent the House
from fulfilling its constitutional duties. Consequently, Reed argued, it
is necessary to “brush away all unlawful combinations to misuse the
rules.”10 Dilatory motions, Reed added, are also self-defeating. “The
House has a right to change its rules at anytime; no member or set
of members have any rights to use the rules which are to be changed
to prevent the change which the House desires to make.” The institu-
tion’s rules, in other words, cannot be used to defeat the rules. “The
very power which the House is exercising cannot be used to destroy
that power. There is no such thing as suicide in any provision of
the Constitution of the United States.”11 Reed’s logic was a creative
stroke that cut at the heart of dilatory motions as a device of minority


8  Congressional Record, 47th Congress, 1st Session, p. 4305.
9  U.S. Constitution, Article I, Section 5.
10 Congressional Record, 47th Congress, 1st Session, p. 4306.
11 Congressional Record, 47th Congress, 1st Session, p. 4307.

[p. 187] [PDF page 205]

obstruction. Indeed, “precedent did not fully cover the conditions
under which Reed’s proposal was made” (Robinson 1930, 88). After
several hours of debate on the floor, Republican Speaker J. Warren
Kiefer ruled in favor of Reed’s point of order, and the Republican
majority sustained the Speaker’s ruling.
   Reed’s gambit nicely illustrates the dilemma faced by actors seeking
a reinterpretation of rules. Facing minority obstruction of a contested
election case, Reed proposed an amendment to the rules that would
limit dilatory motions. Yet Reed’s proposal, itself, nearly foundered
on endless delay. As one Reed biographer put it, Reed “proposed to
remedy the situation by changing the rules. Now these same rules,
which the House admittedly had the right to change, were being used
to prevent the change” (Robinson 1930, 87). Reed’s proposal to limit
motions on election cases and his argument that dilatory tactics were
out of order during consideration of a rule change demonstrate how
conflicts and contradictions among nested sets of rules allow actors
to appeal to a higher authority as a strategy to circumvent or strike
down an obstacle. In essence, Reed argued that a practice of the House,
dilatory motions, conflicted with the U.S. Constitution and the Article
I powers of Congress to certify elections and to determine its own
rules.
   The ramifications of Reed’s victory for majority-party control in the
House were far-reaching. Not only did his success mean that dilatory
motions would no longer be admitted in election cases, but the deci-
sion also affirmed the power of the Rules Committee in procedural
matters and provided a mechanism to have the committee’s reports
promptly adopted by the majority (Alexander 1970 [1916], 202). This
outcome proved critical the following year when Reed again sought
House recognition for a privileged report from the Rules Committee.
With the House deadlocked over a tariff bill whose passage was a
major legislative goal of the Republican Party, Reed proposed a res-
olution that would allow the House to suspend the rules at any time
and vote to send a bill to a conference committee with the Senate. The
resolution was a “special order,” a species of parliamentary proce-
dure that suspends the regular order of business for a defined purpose,
usually for the consideration of a bill. As a suspension of the rules, spe-
cial orders required approval by two-thirds of the House. Crucially,

[p. 188] [PDF page 206]

however, Reed’s proposal stipulated that the motion to suspend would
take effect if approved by a simple majority. Again, the implications for
the minority party were clear, and again the Democrats protested. As
in the debate over dilatory motions, the argument turned on rules
about rules – or, more precisely, on what constituted a rule. The
Democrats claimed that the resolution did not propose to change the
rules, but merely to suspend them. Reed and the Republicans argued
that this was a distinction without a difference; if the House could
change every standing rule by majority vote, then it could approve
by a majority a limited “rule” that applied only to a specific legisla-
tive item for the duration of a session (Hinds 1907, IV 195). Reed’s
innovation expanded the meaning of a rule and, in doing so, gave the
majority party in the House a powerful tool for agenda control by
allowing it to call up a bill at will in a form the majority preferred
and under circumstances conducive to its passage (Roberts and Smith
2007).12
   As a member of the Rules Committee, Reed augmented the power
of the committee in the legislative process and enhanced the majority
party’s control over the legislative agenda. The creation of a special
rule for bringing a bill to the House floor for consideration illustrates
how the creative combination of complex elements can yield impor-
tant innovations. In essence, Reed combined the privilege of the Rules
Committee to issue reports at any time (augmented by the elimination
of dilatory motions on rule changes) with the rules governing the order
of business, fashioning a new instrument of legislative procedure, the
special rule, that could suspend the regular order of business by a sim-
ple majority vote. In this way, Reed consolidated recent developments
in Rules Committee power and turned the committee into an instru-
ment of majority-party government. Reed was adept at elaborating
rules about rules: he prevented dilatory motions during consideration
of Rules Committee resolutions and made the suspension of the rules
possible with a simple majority vote. In sum, Reed showed how rules
are ambiguous in their meaning and coverage. Indeed, what constituted
a rule became a matter for debate.


12   Today, most of these special orders are called special rules. They stipulate precise
     conditions for the consideration of bills and amendments and are key instruments of
     the majority party’s control of the agenda in the House.

[p. 189] [PDF page 207]

Rule Breaking as Rule Making: Reed’s Rules
and the Disappearing Quorum

Although Reed had successfully neutralized the effects of dilatory
motions, House minorities retained another formidable method of
delay, the disappearing quorum. The Constitution requires that a
majority of members shall constitute a quorum to do business. How-
ever, the interpretation of this rule has varied over time, partly over
the question of which denominator was appropriate (seats, elected
members, living members, etc.), as well as the question of the appro-
priate numerator to use when calculating a quorum. In Reed’s time,
House practice held that a quorum was a majority of members voting,
rather than a majority of members actually present. Because a simple
refusal to vote could halt the business of the House, the “disappearing
quorum” became a powerful instrument of minority obstruction.
    The origin of the disappearing quorum illustrates how rule breaking
can be a form of rule making, that is, how rules and their associated
practices shape the operation and evolution of institutions. In 1832,
former president John Quincy Adams, then a member of the House,
refused to vote on a motion of censure of a fellow member. This vio-
lated House rule 28, which required that “every member who shall
be in the House when the question is put shall give his vote, unless
the House, for special reasons shall excuse him.”13 As debate ensued,
the implications of Adams’s not voting became immediately clear. One
member worried that if “the present example find imitations, the leg-
islative action of the House might be defeated.”14 Another member
offered a resolution to discipline Adams and force him to vote, but
others questioned the practicality of such a move. As a defender of
Adams noted, there were “innumerable breaches of the rules” during
the conduct of daily business in the House that went unnoticed or
unpunished, for example, minor infractions of parliamentary proce-
dure. More important, it was obvious that the rule requiring a mem-
ber to vote was unenforceable (Hinds 1907, V 497–499).15 With the


13 House Journal, 22nd Congress, 1st Session, p. 594.
14 United States Congress, Register of Debates, 22nd Congress, 1st Session, p. 3906.
15 United States Congress, Register of Debates, 22nd Congress, 1st Session, pp. 3906–

   3912.

[p. 190] [PDF page 208]

House powerless in the face of Adams’s reticence, “a new weapon of
obstruction had been created” (Robinson 1930, 205–206).
    Over time, the disappearing quorum became such a well-established
practice in the House that members viewed it as a durable feature of
the institution – even though refusing to vote remained a violation of
the written rules.16 In 1850, when a member asked that nonvoting
members be counted as present, the Speaker declined, stating that only
a vote could be used for counting a quorum. When asked to compel
members to vote in accordance with House rules, the Speaker replied
that “the enforcement of that rule has been considered in previous
Congresses entirely impracticable. There is no mode provided by which
that rule can be enforced.”17 The disappearing quorum had become
such a regular feature of the House that the very idea of permitting
a Speaker to count nonvoting members as present was revolutionary.
As Speaker James Blaine put it in 1875, during House consideration
of the Force Bill (an effort to protect African American voting rights),
“The moment you clothe your Speaker with power to go behind your
roll call and assume there is a quorum in the Hall, why, gentlemen, you
stand on the very brink of a volcano” (quoted in Hinds 1907, IV 70). In
1889, a Democratic House member praised the disappearing quorum
as the last bastion of minority rights in the House. Describing how the
recently elected Republican majority would try to pad its margins in the
House with contested election cases, Roger Mills (1889, 660) predicted
that “the great difficulty in the way is the quorum the Constitution
requires to do business. . . . This rule cannot be changed.”18 However,
the disappearing quorum was not a rule, but a practice that rested on
a precedent, and one that would prove vulnerable to reinterpretation.
    As the 51st Congress opened in 1889, the new Republican majority
elected Thomas Reed as Speaker. Just as Mills and the Democrats
expected, Reed and the Republican leadership brought up the
first of several contested election cases. The Democrats immediately

16 The 1880 revisions combined rules 28 and 31 into rule VIII, which required every
   member who was present to vote unless excused by a motion (Hinds 1907, V 497).
   Even this provision, however, became a source of obstruction as this sequence illus-
   trates: “Mr. Garnett moves to be excused from voting on the motion of Mr. Letcher,
   to be excused from voting on the motion of Mr. Cobb, to be excused from voting
   on the motion of Mr. Seward to lay on the table the appeal of Mr. Stanton from the
   decision of the Chair” (Hinds 1907, IV 72).
17 United States Congress, Congressional Globe, 31st Congress, 1st Session, p. 380.
18 Emphasis added.

[p. 191] [PDF page 209]

demanded a roll call, which was in order. Predictably, all but one
Democrat refused to vote, leaving the House short of a quorum. Rather
than calling for another vote, as was the normal practice, Reed began
calling the names of the Democrats who had not voted and instructed
the House clerk to record them as present. Bedlam ensued as Reed
continued to call out the names. In an oft-quoted exchange, Ken-
tucky Democrat James McCreary insisted that Speaker Reed was vio-
lating parliamentary law, stating, “I deny your right, Mr. Speaker to
count me as present.” Reed’s response was greeted with laughter and
applause: “The Chair is making a statement of fact that the gentleman
from Kentucky is present. Does he deny it?” (quoted in Strahan 2007,
106).
   As debate continued over the next several days, Reed pointed to
other parliamentary bodies, including legislatures in several U.S. states
and the British House of Commons, where the presiding officer deter-
mined a quorum by a count of present members. Reed argued further
that the practice sustaining the disappearing quorum, the count of
voting members, did not withstand constitutional scrutiny. “There is
a provision in the Constitution which declares that the House may
establish rules for compelling the attendance of its Members,” Reed
pointed out. This provision of the Constitution would be meaning-
less, Reed argued, if the House could compel members to be present,
yet not count them as present for the purposes of a quorum if they
withheld their vote. “Inasmuch as the Constitution provides for their
attendance only, that attendance is enough. If more was needed the
Constitution would have provided more” (quoted in Hinds 1907,
V 2895). Although supporters of the disappearing quorum invoked
the Constitution in defense of their practice, Reed turned this argu-
ment on its head. As in the case of dilatory motions, Reed used conflict
and contradiction between the practices of the House and provisions in
the U.S. Constitution in his attacks against minority obstruction. Sup-
ported by the Republican majority, Reed ultimately prevailed. Three
months later, he secured an expanded revision of House rules that
codified his procedural achievements: the elimination of the disap-
pearing quorum and the broad authority to rule dilatory motions out
of order.19 With the adoption of “Reed’s Rules” in 1890, the House

19   The 1890 revision also removed the clause from rule VIII that allowed a member to
     introduce a motion to be excused from voting (Hinds 1907, V 497).

[p. 192] [PDF page 210]

embraced a strong form of party government under the leadership of
a powerful partisan Speaker.
    The broader political and partisan context was clearly important for
Reed’s innovations both as a member of the Rules Committee and as
Speaker of the House. Reed’s novel interpretations of the rules lacked
force without the backing of a Republican majority in the chamber.
Similarly, the close partisan balance between the two parties in the
1880s gave the struggle over the disappearing quorum its significance –
the effects of nonvoting were diluted by lopsided majorities (Binder
1997).
    But Reed did more than simply carry out the will of a unified major-
ity. One of Reed’s talents was his opportunistic timing; for example,
he promoted novel rule interpretations during contested election cases
when partisan unity was at its highest. This was critical, as scholars
have shown, because the Republicans were divided on many issues in
the 1880s – Reed’s creativity arguably was more the cause of party
unity than it was its consequence (Schickler 2001, 38–43). Another
of Reed’s talents was recognizing that his position as Speaker allowed
him to orchestrate events in a way that increased his chances of success.
Reed did not have the authority to change the rules so much as he had
the authority to decide how such a change would be presented to the
House.20 Rather than seek majority support for a rule change on its
merits, a proposition that likely would have failed, Reed first secured
the backing of his Republican colleagues on a ruling from the Speaker’s
chair in the midst of a contested election case. In doing so, Reed was
able to assemble his supporting coalition before he proposed a formal
change that would codify the new rules. Even then, Reed’s success was
far from certain; prior to the 1890 quorum battle, Reed made plans to
resign from the House if his gambit failed (Strahan 2007, 110). A less
risk-accepting Speaker might have paused where Reed forged ahead.
    Yet, to focus solely on Reed’s political skills may overlook the role
of institutional context in rule creativity and innovation. As mentioned
earlier, the disappearing quorum was sustained by precedent; but, in
fact, it was a practice that violated the formal rules of the House.
Although it had become convention for Speakers to recognize its valid-
ity, the disappearing quorum was never codified in the rules. This left
it a matter of interpretation. Reed’s position as Speaker afforded him

20   I owe this point to Randall Strahan.

[p. 193] [PDF page 211]

the structural authority to overturn convention and count members
who were present. The chaos in the House that followed Reed’s move
possibly reflects the desperation among Democrats, who realized that
there was little to be done about it. Like the disappearing quorum
itself, Reed’s action was a form of rule breaking, albeit one that car-
ried the weight of the Speaker’s ruling and was ultimately codified in
the written rules.
    In sum, Reed’s various achievements show how the structural posi-
tion of actors within institutions influences their opportunities for rule
creativity. For example, Reed was able to accomplish certain things as
a member of the Rules Committee by exploiting the structural oppor-
tunities of the committee to issue privileged reports on proposed rule
changes and, in the case of special orders, to generate new kinds of
rules. As Speaker, Reed enjoyed a different set of structural opportu-
nities, namely, the power to rule on points of order that could break
with precedent and create new warrants for action. Indeed, one of
Reed’s skills was his capacity to match the vulnerabilities of particular
rules with his changing structural position within the House. Like a
chess master whose “superior play is due to a ‘sense of position,’ an
intuitive form of knowledge gained from experiencing a great vari-
ety of chess situations,” Reed demonstrated an impressive talent for
pattern recognition (Linhares 2005, 134). He perceived correctly how
various contextual factors opened possibilities or foreclosed others for
pursuing his innovations.
    For those who lack a privileged structural position within institu-
tions, however, opportunities for challenging rules are more limited.
Even so, rules often remain ambiguous in their meaning and effect. As
described in the next section, this ambiguity may permit even rank-and-
file members to creatively interpret rules in a manner that challenges
authority within the House.


Rule Ambiguity as a Challenge to Authority: George Norris
and the Cannon Revolt

Reed’s Rules were the capstone to a series of developments that gave
the majority party, through the power of the Speaker, near-absolute
control over the conduct of business in the House of Representa-
tives. At the turn of the twentieth century, Speakers “could appoint
committees – including the chairmen, determine the schedule of

[p. 194] [PDF page 212]

business, recognize members on the floor, appoint members to confer-
ence committees, [and] dispense favors of various kinds” (Jones 1968,
619). Speakers also served as chairmen of the Rules Committee, giving
them control over the form and manner in which all bills reached the
floor, as well as control over the rules of the House. These and other
prerogatives gave Speakers a great deal of power over outcomes in the
chamber (Cooper and Brady 1981, 411–412). The turn-of-the-century
House “placed the widest array of institutional resources in the hands
of the speaker of any period in congressional history before or since,
with the fewest institutional checks or controls” (Strahan 2007, 87). As
a result, Speakers during this time enjoyed considerable leverage over
the rank-and-file members of their party; the Speaker’s acquiescence
or assent was essential if a member wanted to get anything done.
    Yet it was precisely at the height of this system, under Illinois Repub-
lican Joseph Cannon, that a revolt by rank-and-file members stripped
the Speaker of a major source of power, his control over the Rules
Committee. Beginning in 1907, Cannon’s exercise of his prerogatives
as Speaker provoked mounting criticism, not only from the minor-
ity Democrats, but also among western and progressive members of
his own party, whose views diverged from his on a number of policy
issues (Hechler 1940, 32–33). These “insurgent” Republicans became
increasingly frustrated as Cannon denied them meaningful committee
assignments, removed them from committees, or prevented their leg-
islative proposals from reaching the floor (Jones 1968, 621–622). The
insurgents knew that only a change in the rules of the House could
limit the Speaker’s power. But since proposals to change the rules
had to be referred to the Rules Committee, which Cannon controlled,
any attempt to curb the Speaker’s power with a formal rule change
would be easily quashed (Norris 1945, 111). It is a vivid example of
the reform dilemma – of how rules can be used to defeat attempts to
change them. That Cannon eventually lost control of the Rules Com-
mittee illustrates that even as they erect obstacles and confer power,
rules can also be used to challenge authority.
    By the beginning of the 61st Congress, in March 1909, dissatisfac-
tion with Cannon had reached the point of open rebellion as a coalition
of Democrats and insurgent Republicans prepared to challenge Can-
non’s position as Speaker. When the Republican leadership proposed
a set of rules at the opening of the new Congress, this cross-party

[p. 195] [PDF page 213]

coalition defeated the measure.21 Following the victory, the Demo-
cratic minority leader offered an alternative package of rules that, if
passed, would strip Cannon of his control over the Rules Committee.
Cannon had anticipated such a challenge, and he had negotiated a deal
with a group of dissident Democrats that would preserve his power
in exchange for concessions that strengthened protections for commit-
tees to report bills (Calendar Wednesday) and made it easier to secure
floor consideration for noncontroversial bills without the Speaker’s
approval. Led by New York Democrat John Fitzgerald, twenty-two
members of the minority party joined the regular Republicans to pass
the compromise and sustain Cannon’s power. Shortly thereafter, Can-
non appointed Fitzgerald to the Rules Committee (Hechler 1940, 54–
58). Despite Cannon’s precarious control over a procedural majority in
the House, the insurgents still lacked a way to overcome the formidable
powers of the Speaker, especially his control over the Rules Committee.
   However, a year later, in March 1910, Cannon unwittingly pro-
vided an opening for his opponents that proved to be his undoing. On
the morning of March 16, a Cannon ally called up a resolution to con-
sider a census bill outside the normal order of business. This violated
the terms of the compromise Cannon had negotiated with Fitzgerald
the previous year: the time should have been reserved for committee
business under the new Calendar Wednesday. Democrats protested,
arguing that the census bill was out of order. Cannon replied that the
census bill was privileged by its status as a constitutional power of the
House. “A certain class of business, like election cases . . . or the taking
of the census as to the population, have invariably been admitted as
involving constitutional privilege, presenting a privilege higher than
any rule of the House would give. Therefore the Chair overrules the
point of order.”22
   On appeal, forty-two Republicans joined the Democrats and
together they voted to reverse the Speaker’s decision (Jones 1968, 627).
Although it was a significant rebuke, Cannon and the regular Repub-
licans remained steadfast. The following day, the Republicans again
called up the census bill as a matter of constitutional privilege. The


21 Unlike the Senate, the House of Representatives is not a continuing body. At the
   beginning of each Congress, the House must adopt a measure establishing its rules.
22 House Journal, 61st Congress, 2nd Session, p. 437.

[p. 196] [PDF page 214]

Democrats again raised a point of order, only this time Cannon put
the question to the House for a vote rather than issue a ruling from the
chair: “Is the bill called up . . . in order as a question of constitutional
privilege?” he asked. 23 Perhaps fearful that an affirmative vote would
establish a precedent for further incursions on Calendar Wednesday,
the House voted negatively on Cannon’s question. Then, in a puz-
zling turn, the House passed a Democratic substitute that read, simply,
“Is the joint resolution [on the census] . . . in order now?”24 The House
then proceeded to consider the census resolution.
   When debate on the census bill concluded, the insurgent Republi-
can George Norris (Nebraska) rose from his chair. Gaining recognition
from the Speaker, Norris announced, “Mr. Speaker, I present a reso-
lution made privileged by the Constitution.” Cannon replied, “If it is
a resolution made privileged by the Constitution, the gentleman will
present it.”25 The clerk then read Norris’s resolution, which proposed
to expand the size of the Rules Committee from five to fifteen mem-
bers, distribute Rules Committee seats geographically, and, critically,
exclude the Speaker from Rules Committee membership. The New
York Times reported that “the moment the reading clerk saw it he
smiled, for he recognized the fact that the great fight on the rules of
the House was on.”26 Using the same claim of constitutional privilege
Cannon had just argued on behalf of the census bill, Norris found a
way to circumvent the House Committee on Rules and Speaker Can-
non’s control over the floor in a single stroke. As Norris explained,

We have just decided by a vote of the House [that] a census bill . . . is a priv-
ileged question, and it is entitled to consideration, notwithstanding that it
conflicts with the rules of the House. Now . . . the Constitution reads as fol-
lows: “Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings.” I submit,
Mr. Speaker, if the action of the House . . . makes a census bill privileged
because of the Constitution, than any proposition to amend the rules must be
privileged by virtue of that same instrument.27

   Three days later, the House passed an amended version of the Nor-
ris resolution that increased the size of the Rules Committee to ten

23 House Journal, 61st Congress, 2nd Session, p. 445.
24 House Journal, 61st Congress, 2nd Session, p. 445; emphasis added.
25 Congressional Record, 61st Congress, 2nd Session, p. 3292.
26 “All-Night Fight to Oust Cannon,” New York Times, March 18, 1910, p. 1.
27 Congressional Record, 61st Congress, 2nd Session, p. 3292.

[p. 197] [PDF page 215]

members without considering geographic representation. Although
Cannon retained his position as Speaker, crucially, the Speaker lost
his seat on the Rules Committee. The 1910 revolt against Cannon
began a period of decentralization and decline in the power of the
House leadership that would last for fifty years.
    The challenge facing the insurgents in 1910 was a straightforward
but vexing one: how could a proposal to limit the Speaker’s power
ever come up for a vote if the Speaker controlled the Rules Commit-
tee, which in turn controlled access to the floor for all proposed rule
changes? As in the case of Reed’s Rules, the fact that a procedural
majority preferred a change in the rules was a necessary but not suf-
ficient condition for the change to occur. Norris, perhaps like Reed,
displayed an exquisite sense of timing and the patience to wait for
the right moment. As Norris later recalled, “I had in my pocket a
resolution to change the rules of the House. Unknown to anyone . . . I
had carried it for a long time, certain that in the flush of its power
the Cannon machine would overreach itself. The paper upon which
I had written my resolution had become so tattered it scarcely hung
together” (Norris 1945, 113).
    Beyond this opportunistic timing, Norris exploited the complex fea-
tures of House rules, especially the ambiguity surrounding their mean-
ing and their position within a broader constitutional framework. Can-
non had claimed that the census bill was a privileged matter; he used the
apparent conflict between the Constitution and the rules of the House
to circumvent the latter and control the chamber’s agenda. Norris
demonstrated that such a strategy was not limited to those in a position
of authority. Instead, he showed how rulings could be put to multiple
purposes. If the rules of the House could not prevent consideration of
the census, then the rules of the House could not prevent consideration
of the rules. This allowed Norris and his allies to move authority over
the rules out of the hands of Speaker Cannon and the Rules Com-
mittee and onto the House floor, where the power of a procedural
majority held sway. The example illustrates how the interpretation of
rules can have multiple, and in Cannon’s case, unforeseeable effects.28


28   Further illustrating the ambiguity and uncertainty of rules and their meaning is the
     fact that the House actually rejected the proposition that the census bill was privileged
     by the Constitution. The Democratic resolution passed by the House did not contain
     any reference to constitutional privilege (it simply stated the census resolution was

[p. 198] [PDF page 216]

It also illustrates how actors can exploit the conflicts among multi-
ple institutional orders – in this instance, between the evolving rules
of the House and the overarching framework of the Constitution –
to promote novel interpretations that challenge authority. The same
conflict that strengthened Cannon’s control over the agenda provided
Norris with an opportunity to weaken it.


Rethinking Rules: Implications for Understanding Institutions

The vignettes of congressional history described here illustrate how
rules, in their various forms, can provide considerable scope for actors
to create, interpret, and elaborate – in short, to act in ways that
have transformative effects on politics. A central theme of this volume
is that such creativity is made possible by the complex elements of rules
themselves. As the rules of an institution multiply, the opportunities
increase to convert the force and meaning of the rules, to creatively
combine the rules, to exploit the conflicts and contradictions of the
rules, or to even break the rules in ways that produce novel practices
and establish new precedents for action. By rethinking rules, the struc-
tural features of complex institutions appear to be more than rules
of the game – they become the game itself. This has implications for
understanding broad transformations of the American polity – the
study of American political development – as well as for the study of
institutions more generally.
    Through the creative interpretation of rules, actors animate the
struggles that form the arc of American political development. Rule
creativity is central to this process. Partly, this is because the overlap-
ping nature of political authority in the United States creates numerous
points of contact between institutions, and multiple conflicts among
the rules governing their operation. Note, for example, the consistent
appeals to constitutional authority and the conflicts this engendered
with congressional rules in the preceding vignettes. Reed and Norris
used the tensions between the Constitution and the rules of the House
to promote a particular distribution of power within the chamber. In
other words, overlapping structures of authority generate ambiguities


  in order now), yet Norris and the rest of the House operated as if it had. See Jones
  (1968, 627).

[p. 199] [PDF page 217]

in the scope and meaning of rules, ambiguities that actors can exploit
in creative and very different ways.
   Attention to the struggle over rules also provides a way to link
particular institutional histories with the broader contextual features
of American politics. Recent critiques have noted the tendency to
study Congress in isolation from larger political struggles, such as
those over race and citizenship, or, conversely, to study American
political development without paying due attention to Congress (King
and Smith 2005; Katznelson and Lapinski 2006). Paying attention to
both the creative and constraining elements of rules may help address
these concerns. For instance, one cannot fully understand the tactics
of minority obstruction or the efforts to overcome them apart from
the nineteenth-century conflicts over slavery and civil rights. At the
same time, the coherence of partisan majorities under Reed in the late
nineteenth century or their fragmentation under Cannon in the twen-
tieth reflect broader changes taking place in American politics (Brady
and Epstein 1997). But these contextual factors are not sufficient to
produce institutional change. They also require a steady probing for
political advantage by actors working through the rules in order to
overcome the formidable constraints the rules themselves impose on
change.
   More generally, the creativity evident in the nineteenth-century
House of Representatives has implications for the study of institu-
tions and politics beyond the United States. The U.S. House provides
a particularly useful window because of the rich historical detail avail-
able about its rules and their use, but as the other essays in this volume
document, these patterns can be observed in many different institu-
tional contexts. Consequently, we can see how rules are a dynamic
rather than a static feature of institutions. Rules enable individuals
to develop innovations in practice and establish precedents for action
that guide future behavior through convention or, when codified, as
new rules of procedure. “Snapshot” approaches to the study of insti-
tutions will miss this feature of rules (Pierson 2004). Such approaches
will conclude, mistakenly, that rules faithfully reflect a set of collective
interests, or that the rules as written are faithful guides for institutional
practice.29 As the example of dilatory motions shows, rules designed

29   For an exploration of this phenomenon in the Senate, see Binder (2007).

[p. 200] [PDF page 218]

for one purpose can be converted to quite another. Similarly in the case
of the disappearing quorum, conventions may emerge from the break-
ing of rules that over time become durable features of the institution
to the detriment of its functioning and performance.
    Rules, as these examples illustrate, are about power and author-
ity. More precisely, they are about the power and authority to make
or break the rules. During the nineteenth century, the position of the
Speaker became a source of authoritative decisions about the rules of
the House. Similarly, the power of the Rules Committee grew as a
source of rule creation, especially through special orders or rules that
governed the consideration of bills. Yet, as the Cannon revolt attests,
complex rules also create opportunities to challenge authority. It may
seem contradictory that increasingly complex rules generate and accen-
tuate hierarchies within institutions at the same time that they open
possibilities for challenging them. It also may seem counterintuitive
that increasing rule complexity gives rise to more opportunities for
creativity. The multiplication of rules would seem to provide less free-
dom of action, not more. One answer to this puzzle has to do with the
nature of complexity itself. As already noted, complexity multiplies
the opportunities to combine rules in myriad ways, exploit their con-
flicts and contradictions, convert rules to new purposes, or even break
rules without undermining the entire institutional edifice built upon
them.
    However, there is another answer to this puzzle to consider if we
are to broaden the implications of this study beyond Congress. Rules
generate inequalities, not only because rules govern the distribution of
resources but also because the capacity to negotiate complex rules is
itself a valuable resource. In other words, rule complexity does provide
greater freedom of action – for some. Those who possess authority over
rules, have particular skills in using rules, or have the resources to hire
someone who has those skills and employ rules advantageously. Cor-
porations, for example, can monitor all of the various rules potentially
touching on their interests, and they can hire individuals whose expe-
rience and contacts enable them to negotiate the variety of legislative,
administrative, and judicial procedures that make the rules. For many
others, rules impose constraints. This certainly describes the United
States, where gaping inequalities are so pronounced and the rules are
so complex. It is considerably easier for the affluent to “work” the

[p. 201] [PDF page 219]

rules, for example, when navigating the minutia of their health plan,
hiring an accountant to do their taxes, or finding a well-trained lawyer
to get them out of jail. It is not surprising that those lacking resources,
especially the poor, are at a considerable disadvantage when dealing
with the health care or criminal justice systems. For these Americans,
rules provide very little freedom.


References
Aldrich, John H., and David W. Rohde. 2000. “The Consequences of Party
  Organization in the House: The Roles of the Majority and Minority Parties
  in Conditional Party Government.” In Polarized Politics: Congress and the
  President in a Partisan Era, ed. John R. Bond and Richard Fleisher, ch. 3.
  Washington, DC: CQ Press.
Alexander, De Alva Stanwood. 1970 [1916]. History and Procedure of the
  House of Representatives. New York: Burt Franklin.
Binder, Sarah. 1997. Minority Rights, Majority Rule: Partisanship and the
  Development of Congress. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Binder, Sarah. 2007. “Where Do Institutions Come From? Exploring the Ori-
  gins of the Senate Blue Slip.” Studies in American Political Development 21
  (March): 1–15.
Brady, David, and David Epstein. 1997. “Intraparty Preferences, Heterogene-
  ity, and the Origins of the Modern Congress: Progressive Reformers in the
  House and Senate, 1890–1920.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organi-
  zation 13 (April): 26–49.
Clemens, Elisabeth S., and James M. Cook. 1999. “Politics and Institution-
  alism: Explaining Durability and Change.” Annual Review of Sociology
  25:441–466.
Cooper, Joseph. 1988 [1960]. Congress and Its Committees. New York:
  Garland.
Cooper, Joseph, and David Brady. 1981. “Institutional Context and Leader-
  ship Style: The House from Cannon to Rayburn.” American Political Science
  Review 75 (June): 411–425.
Cooper, Joseph, and Cheryl D. Young. 1989. “Bill Introduction in the Nine-
  teenth Century: A Study of Institutional Change.” Legislative Studies Quar-
  terly 14 (February): 67–105.
Dahl, Robert. 1961. Who Governs? Democracy and Power in an American
  City. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Greenstone, J. David. 1986. “Political Culture and American Political Devel-
  opment: Liberty, Union, and the Liberal Bipolarity.” Studies in American
  Political Development 1:1–49.
Hechler, Kenneth W. 1940. Insurgency: Personalities and Politics of the Taft
  Era. New York: Columbia University Press.

[p. 202] [PDF page 220]

Herrigel, Gary. 2007. “Roles and Rules: Ambiguity, Experimentation and
  New Forms of Stakeholderism in Germany.” Paper presented at the 2007
  Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Chicago.
Hinds, Asher C. 1907. Hinds’ Precedents of the House of Representatives
  of the United States. Vols. 1–5. Washington, DC: Government Printing
  Office.
Jones, Charles O. 1968. “Joseph G. Cannon and Howard W. Smith: An Essay
  on the Limits of Leadership in the House of Representatives.” Journal of
  Politics 30 (August): 617–646.
Katznelson, Ira, and John S. Lapinksi. 2006. “At the Crossroads: Congress
  and American Political Development.” Perspectives on Politics 4 (June):
  243–260.
King, David C. 1997. Turf Wars: How Congressional Committees Claim Juris-
  diction. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
King, Desmond S., and Rogers M. Smith. 2005. “Racial Orders in American
  Political Development.” American Political Science Review 99 (February):
  75–92.
Lantz, Frank, and Eric Zimmerman. 1999. “Rules, Play and Culture: Towards
  an Aesthetic of Games. ”Available at http://www.ericzimmerman.com/texts/
  RulesPlayCulture.htm.
Linhares, Alexandre. 2005. “An Active Symbols Theory of Chess Intuition.”
  Minds and Machines 15 (May): 131–181.
Mills, Roger Q. 1889. “Republican Tactics in the House.” North American
  Review 149 (December): 665–672.
Norris, George W. 1945. Fighting Liberal: The Autobiography of George W.
  Norris. New York: MacMillan Company.
Padgett, John F., and Christopher K. Ansell. 1993. “Robust Action and the
  Rise of the Medici, 1400–1434.” American Journal of Sociology 98 (May):
  1259–1319.
Pierson, Paul. 2004. Politics in Time: History, Institutions, and Social Analysis.
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Polsby, Nelson W. 1968. “The Institutionalization of the U.S. House of Rep-
  resentatives.” American Political Science Review 63 (March): 787–807.
Powell, Walter W., and Jeannette A. Colyvas. 2008. “Microfoundations of
  Institutional Theory.” In The Sage Handbook of Organizational Institution-
  alism, ed. Kerstin Sahlin-Andersson, Roysten Greenwood, Christine Oliver,
  and Roy Suddaby, ch. 10. London: Sage Publications.
Roberts, Jason M., and Steven S. Smith. 2007. “The Evolution of Agenda-
  Setting Institutions in Congress: Path Dependency in House and Senate
  Institutional Development.” In Process, Party, and Policy Making: Further
  New Perspectives on the History of Congress, ed. David Brady and Matthew
  McCubbins, ch. 13. Palo Alto, CA: Sanford University Press.
Robinson, William A. 1930. Thomas B. Reed, Parliamentarian. New York:
  Dodd, Mead & Company.

[p. 203] [PDF page 221]

Schickler, Eric. 2001. Disjointed Pluralism: Institutional Innovation and the
  Development of the U.S. Congress. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sinclair, Barbara. 1999. “Transformational Leader or Faithful Agent?
  Principal-Agent Theory and House Majority Party Leadership.” Legislative
  Studies Quarterly 24 (August): 421–449.
Strahan, Randall. 2007. Leading Representatives: The Agency of Leaders in
  the Politics of the U.S. House. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Streeck, Wolfgang, and Kathleen Thelen. 2005. “Introduction: Institutional
  Change in Advanced Political Economies.” In Beyond Continuity: Institu-
  tional Change in Advanced Political Economies, ed. Wolfgang Streeck and
  Kathleen Thelen, ch. 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thelen, Kathleen. 2004. How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy
  of Skills in Germany, Britain, the United States, and Japan. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Tsai, Kellee S. 2006. “Adaptive Informal Institutions and Endogenous Institu-
  tional Change in China.” World Politics. 59 (October): 116–141.
United States Congress, House Committee on Rules. 1983. A History of the
  Committee on Rules: 1st to 97th Congress, 1789–1981. Washington, DC:
  Government Printing Office.
