Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power
Edited by James Mahoney and Kathleen Thelen
First published in print: 2009 | Copyright: 2010 | Cambridge University Press

Chapter 7: Historical Institutionalism in Rationalist and Sociological Perspective
Peter A. Hall
Original print pages 204–223; PDF pages 222–241

[English original. Chapter footnotes and references are retained in their original page positions. Print page markers and one-based PDF page numbers are provided. Original line breaks and fixed-width table layout are retained; verify diagrams and exact typography against the PDF.]


========================================================================
Chapter text, footnotes, and references
========================================================================

[p. 204] [PDF page 222]

7

Historical Institutionalism in Rationalist
and Sociological Perspective

       Peter A. Hall




Some of the most fruitful insights generated by social science in
recent decades flow from explorations of how institutions, under-
stood as sets of regularized practices with a rule-like quality, struc-
ture the behavior of political and economic actors.1 It is not surpris-
ing that attention has now turned to the second-order problem of
explaining when and how institutions change.2 In conceptual terms,
however, this task is intrinsically difficult. By their nature, analy-
ses designed to explain why institutions have a persistent impact on
behavior tend to overstate the solidity of institutions. Acknowledging
their plasticity raises questions about when institutions should be seen
as determinants of behavior and when as objects of strategic action
themselves.3
   This problem afflicts rational-choice approaches to institutions with
particular intensity because of the elegant solutions such analyses have
devised to explain the force and persistence of institutions. Typically,
they see institutions as patterns of regularized behavior that reflect
Pareto-optimal equilibria or subgame perfect solutions to collective

1 Representative works and reviews include Knight 1992, Steinmo et al. 1992, Hall and
  Taylor 1996, and Campbell 2004.
2 For influential recent works, see Swenson 2001, Greif and Laitin 2004, Thelen 2004,

  and Streeck and Thelen 2005.
3 For thoughtful analyses that have long been skeptical of institutional analysis on such

  grounds, see Sabel and Zeitlin 1997.

[p. 205] [PDF page 223]

actions dilemmas, stable because the actors cannot improve their
positions by defecting from the pattern of behavior (Shepsle 1989;
Koremenos et al. 2003; Greif and Laitin 2004). Therefore, institu-
tional change happens only when ceteris is no longer paribus, that is,
when shocks exogenous to the system of institutions alter the context.
Institutional change becomes a response to shocks. Such analyses posit
a radical separation between periods of institutional stability and peri-
ods of change (often labeled “critical junctures”) that rarely explain
well how institutions emerge from disequilibrium at such junctures
(see Thelen 2004; the introduction to this volume).4
    As the essays in this volume indicate, approaches associated with
historical institutionalism are more attentive to problems of institu-
tional change. They offer correctives to dualist views that separate
periods of institutional stability and change, noting that institutional
change can be continuous and institutional transformation the prod-
uct of incremental adjustment (Palier 2005; Streeck and Thelen 2005).
They are sensitive to the power relations associated with institutional
change and inclined to accord belief systems a role in such processes
(Immergut 1992, King 2005; see also McNamara 1998; Moe 2005).
For these reasons, analysts often draw a sharp distinction between
rational choice and historical institutionalism.
    This essay takes a different approach to the problem. Rather than
emphasize the differences between rational choice and historical insti-
tutionalism, I explore the common ground between them, asking how
the insights of the latter can be used to improve the former. The moti-
vation is straightforward. In my view, rational-choice approaches offer
some powerful insights into the operation of institutions. The prob-
lem is that they do not yet carry over into an effective analysis of
institutional change. My solution is to broaden the rationalist model
slightly and to build into it some of the key insights offered by histori-
cal institutionalism. In short, this is an attempt to show that historical
institutionalism has much to offer rationalist analysts of politics and to
suggest that models of institutional change that integrate propositions
from both research traditions are not only possible but promising. The
result is a research agenda well worth pursuing.

4   For notable efforts to address this problem from within a rational-choice perspective,
    see Knight 1992, Calvert 1995b, Gruber 2000, and Greif and Laitin 2004.

[p. 206] [PDF page 224]

In the first part of this chapter, I make that case by outlining the core
propositions of a model of institutional change that is recognizably
rationalist. I then identify some of the problems left unresolved by
that model and draw contentions from historical institutionalism that
offer potential solutions to these problems. The objective is to identify
a chain of variables affecting the pace and direction of institutional
change that are plausible targets for empirical research. I cannot test
the model here against empirical cases, but I reference research bearing
on some of its propositions.
    However, there are also clear limits to rationalist models of institu-
tional change. The world of institutions is more multifaceted than such
models allow, and one of the virtues of historical institutionalism is that
it sees this other world as well. In short, there is a second side to his-
torical institutionalism – at its interface with sociological approaches
to institutions – that reveals further dimensions of the institutional
world and alternative routes to institutional change. These too deserve
a place on contemporary research agendas. Accordingly, in the second
part of this chapter, I look briefly at the other side of historical insti-
tutionalism, with a view to highlighting its distinctive contributions to
analyses of institutional change.
    Scope conditions are an issue for all arguments about institutional
change (MacIntyre 1978). We do not yet know whether the relevant
processes in legislatures, firms, universities, electoral arenas, and polit-
ical economies are similar enough to be described by a common model
of institutional change. Accordingly, the propositions I advance are
designed to bear on the political economy, although many may apply
more generally.


I. A Rationalist Model of Institutional Change

With that prologue, I turn to the task of outlining some of the key
features of the process of institutional change when seen in rationalist
perspective.

Rules and Coalitions
The problem of explaining the timing, shape, and direction of institu-
tional change can usefully be treated, in the first instance, as a matter of
outlining the coalitions of actors, whether individuals or social groups,

[p. 207] [PDF page 225]

who line up in favor of (or against) a particular shift in rules or prac-
tices and of explaining why the actors take the positions they do. This is
a plausible starting point with wide resonance in political science. The
premise is that institutional change is best understood by integrating
coalitional with institutional analysis.5
   This coalitional approach has a nice affinity with rational-choice
analyses that see legislative rules, such as those governing agenda set-
ting and decision making, as the basis for a “structurally induced equi-
librium” that prevents the constant cycling of coalitions about policy
issues that Riker (1980) suggests we could otherwise anticipate, given
Arrow’s impossibility theorem (Shepsle 1989; Weingast and Marshall
1988). The key question, of course, is why there is not analogous
cycling over the institutional rules themselves. Why do legislative insti-
tutions remain relatively stable?6

Uncertainty and Instrumental Beliefs
Institutional stability is a foundational issue for analyses of institu-
tional change. In order to understand change, we must be able to
explain, in parallel terms, stability. For legislative institutions, Shep-
sle (1986) provides a crucial component of the answer in the form
of a “wedge of uncertainty.” The ultimate impact of adopting new
institutional rules is often, as he observes, hard to predict. Accord-
ingly, even if actors could enact a substantive measure that they favor
by changing those rules, they may hesitate to do so, lest the new
rules disadvantage them during the consideration of other issues that
are difficult to anticipate. This point is widely applicable to analy-
ses of institutional change. Uncertainty is a central feature of pol-
itics. Where it is high enough to interfere with the actors’ calcula-
tions of how they will fare under alternative institutional arrange-
ments in a range of possible futures, they may prefer the status quo to
change.
    However, this is also the initial point at which the insights of his-
torical institutionalism can be used to enrich the analysis. The level of
uncertainty about the impact of proposed institutional changes turns,


5   For an alternate perspective, see the second part of this chapter.
6   See the chapter by Adam Sheingate in this volume for an argument that this stability
    should not be overstated.

[p. 208] [PDF page 226]

at least in part, on the availability of what might be described as
“instrumental beliefs,” namely, means-ends schemas that describe in
this instance how the adoption of new institutions will affect the like-
lihood of achieving various types of goals, as well as on the level of
confidence with which such beliefs can be held. The character of pre-
vailing instrumental beliefs is a key ingredient in the processes of coali-
tion formation that underlie institutional reform (Hall 1989; Krehbiel
1991; Goldstein and Keohane 1993).
   Common sources for such beliefs include communities of rele-
vant experts and prior experience, whether domestic or foreign (Haas
1992; Linos 2007). Experience (as compared to theory) is especially
important to the level of confidence actors place in such beliefs. Alan
Jacobs’s study of the politics of pension reform (this volume and 2009)
shows that policymakers were drawn to reforms whose shape resem-
bled schemes with which they were familiar and with a track record
on which they could rely. Accordingly, explanations for institutional
change must take into account the availability and character of the
instrumental beliefs pertinent to the changes under consideration, as
well as a range of conditions that might affect the character of those
beliefs.

Collective Action Problems, Organization, and Power
Legislative rules are, of course, a special type of institution, whose
complexion can often be explained by analyses that assume a world of
contracting individuals. Once we move beyond such settings, however,
a second set of factors looms larger in processes of institutional change.
They are the collective action problems associated with mobilizing
actors to take the steps required to enact reform. The magnitude of
those problems is conditioned, in turn, by the organizational setting
within which those who seek or oppose change operate. It deserves to
be seen as a core element affecting the likelihood, timing, and direction
of institutional change.
   In the political economy, at least three types of organizational set-
tings have a direct bearing on institutional change. The organization
of the political system (and, in some instances, the internal organiza-
tion of the state) has a major impact on the types of coalitions that
can be assembled in support of institutional reform. Iversen and Sos-
kice (2006) suggest, for instance, that electoral rules condition the

[p. 209] [PDF page 227]

viability of coalitions seeking redistribution. The nature of producer
group organization affects the capacities of workers and employers to
mobilize on behalf of institutional change (Offe and Wiesenthal 1986).
Inside firms, the shape of the organizational hierarchy has well-known
effects on the ease with which coalitions can be assembled for various
types of institutional change (Teece 1996).
   In short, where institutional change depends on the formation of a
favorable coalition, analysts cannot neglect collective action dilemmas
and the organizational structures that facilitate or impede coalition
formation. This observation underlines the role of power relations in
institutional change (Moe 2005). Two dimensions of power bear on
the likelihood that change will be effected. The first, widely referenced
in rational-choice analyses, is the dimension of power reflected in the
relative opportunity costs facing actors contemplating an institutional
change. As Knight (1992) notes, actors for whom the opportunity costs
of foregoing change are lower will have more power in the accompa-
nying negotiations than actors who would suffer greater losses if the
change were not achieved. The second relevant dimension of power is
mobilizational, understood as the capacities of the actors to overcome
problems associated with the development of a collective strategy and
the mobilization of a constituency in support of that strategy. The lat-
ter depends on various types of social resources (McCarthy and Zald
1987).
   One implication of this point is that the likelihood of institutional
change in one direction or another, at any one point in time, is affected
by the outcomes of previous episodes of institutional change. These
outcomes leave in place particular organizational forms that intensify
or mitigate the collective action dilemmas facing actors interested in
institutional change at later points in time. While legislatures can some-
times be modeled as sets of actors contracting with each other on a
relatively equal basis, even in democratic polities capitalist economies
do not have this character (Bates 1988). Economies are structured by
organized relationships that confer more power to initiate or imple-
ment change on some actors than on others. Those at the top of the
hierarchies constitutive of firms enjoy greater leverage than those at
the bottom, and employers often face fewer collective action problems
than the workers with whom they are negotiating wages or working
conditions (Offe and Wiesenthal 1986).

[p. 210] [PDF page 228]

Distributive Issues and Normative Beliefs
One of the central, and most plausible, tenets of the rational-choice
approach holds that actors will agree to institutional reforms only
when those reforms make them better off. In several seminal contribu-
tions to the literature, Calvert (1995a, 1995b), therefore, models the
process of institutional reform as a coordination game, which offers
all the parties a better outcome provided they can agree on a new set
of institutions. This makes eminent sense. However, as Scharpf (1997)
notes, in many real-world settings, the actors face a choice between
outcomes that distribute the gains from cooperation differently, even
if they make all better off. A classic example is provided by firms
considering entering into collaborative arrangements for research and
development on a new line of products. All of the firms can anticipate
gaining from the enterprise, but they have to consider how to appor-
tion the risks associated with it and it may be difficult to do so equally,
given that each brings different capacities to the enterprise. Analogous
problems arise when firms are negotiating with employees over new
work arrangements.
   In such instances, in order to collaborate on new institutions, the
actors have to resolve the distributional issue of how to apportion the
costs, benefits, and risks associated with coordination. Issues of this
sort are far from simple. There is evidence, for instance, that actors can
be motivated by the relative, as well as the absolute, gains a new set
of arrangements offers (Powell 1999). Accordingly, analysts of insti-
tutional change need ways of understanding how such distributional
issues are resolved.
   Part of the answer lies in the dimensions of power that have been
described. Those for whom the opportunity costs of foregoing coor-
dination are highest are likely to emerge from the transaction with a
smaller share of the gains. Gruber (2000) shows that such considera-
tions played a role in the institutional design of European monetary
union.
   However, this is another issue area to which historical institution-
alism brings useful propositions. As Streeck (1997) and others have
noted, there is a sociological underlay to most discussions of institu-
tional reform in the political economy. The background against which
they are conducted is one in which conventional conceptions of fairness
are prominent. Labor organizations are more likely to agree to new

[p. 211] [PDF page 229]

institutional arrangements if it can be argued that the benefits flowing
from them conform to conventional norms of fairness. Even within
existing institutional arrangements, coordination becomes more diffi-
cult when the results no longer seem “fair” when judged by prevailing
standards.
   In short, even when processes of institutional change are seen pre-
dominantly as matters that engage the “hard-headed” interests of the
participants, what we might describe as “normative beliefs” enter into
them. The latter are a critical component of the shared understandings
that make “common knowledge” and coordination possible (Johnson
1990). In the absence of tacit agreement on such beliefs, the distribu-
tional issues associated with coordinating on a new set of institutions
are much more difficult to resolve.
   Where the establishment of new institutions requires the actors to
secure agreement among larger constituencies, such as political par-
ties or trade unions, as it often does, normative beliefs play an even
greater role. Normative beliefs can be central to the process whereby
the leaders of organizations mobilize consent among their followers.
The rank and file will be interested in what they gain from institutional
reform, but many will also be motivated by a sense of whether the dis-
tribution of those gains is just. Claims for social justice are not simply
an ideological patina washed over arrangements negotiated for other
reasons. They are an intrinsic element of the expectations actors bring
to decisions about institutional reform.

Multivariate Preference Functions and Identities
The effects of institutional change are usually multidimensional and
the interests of the actors assembled to support the change equally so.
A new social policy, for instance, may appeal to trade union leaders
because of the organizational resources it offers them, to the union
rank and file because of the material benefits it provides, and to firms
because of the ways it shifts their costs (Palier 2002). But the process
of coalition formation underpinning institutional change is further
complicated by the fact that each actor involved in the process typi-
cally brings to it a multivariate preference function of his own (Hall
2005).
   When forming a judgment about the desirability of a proposed
institutional reform, trade union leaders may consider, for instance,

[p. 212] [PDF page 230]

not only the material benefits it offers the union’s members but also
the impact of the reform on the union’s power vis-à-vis employers, the
potential it has for attracting new members, and the organizational
resources it provides the union leaders themselves. To reach a decision
about whether to support the reform, even when the decision turns
entirely on material considerations, the union leaders have to attach
implicit weights to each of these types of considerations, namely, to
variables intrinsic to their preference functions. The executives of firms
make equally complex calculations.
   Even individuals, whose support may be crucial to a political party’s
willingness to support or oppose institutional changes, bring multivari-
ate preference functions to such issues. Proposals to alter the institu-
tional practices associated with environmental issues, for instance, can
bear differently on the role of the voter as a consumer, worker, par-
ent, or citizen, and each voter must decide which of the corresponding
concerns to weigh more heavily when taking a position on the issue.
In this, as in many, cases, those roles are not far removed from the
multiple identities voters assume, and the weight a voter attaches to
each variable in his preference function engaged by the issue may be
influenced by which of his identities are engaged most intensely in
debates about the issue.
   In other words, even if the relevant outcome – understood as the
position taken by an actor or as the institutional result that follows
from aggregating those positions – is driven largely by considerations
of material interest, issues of identity can be important determinants of
the result. The presumption that identity politics has little to do with
the politics of material interest is generally false, and normative beliefs
figure prominently in identity politics (cf. Fraser and Honneth 2003).
When debates can be configured so as to engage some identities more
deeply than others, actors can be induced to join coalitions they might
not otherwise support. In this respect, the politics of ideas is intrinsic,
rather than epiphenomenal, to the processes of coalition formation
that underpin institutional change.

Network Externalities and Institutional Complementarities
The lively debates among historical institutionalists about “path
dependence” also generate propositions of real value to rationalist
accounts of institutional change. The core insight here, with which few

[p. 213] [PDF page 231]

rational-choice analysts would disagree, is that the impact of any new
institutional practice will be mediated by the operation of other insti-
tutions unaffected by the reform. When actors form judgments about
whether to support a new institutional practice based on calculations
about how it will affect them, they take such interaction effects into
account. As a result, the character of existing institutions conditions
the reception given proposals for institutional reform. The adoption of
one set of institutions establishes conditions that make the adoption of
others more or less likely, thereby pushing the relevant unit, whether
a nation, firm, or other organization, along some paths that gradually
foreclose others.
    Pierson (2000) provides many examples of how such processes of
path dependence work, emphasizing the role of increasing returns and
network externalities (see also Thelen 1999; Mahoney 2000). Once
citizens have adjusted their habits of saving and spending to the estab-
lishment of a particular pension regime, for instance, they will be
interested in reforms that enhance that regime and reluctant to endorse
reforms that render those habits unprofitable. If firms respond to the
structural inducements present in a national economy to establish spe-
cific kinds of production regimes, they will tend to favor reforms that
increase the returns from such regimes and to oppose reforms that
would require them to adopt entirely new production regimes (Hall
and Soskice 2001).
    Although an obvious reminder that institutional change does not
take place on a tabula rasa, this point offers analysts of institutional
change real leverage. It suggests, for instance, that the level of sup-
port available from various types of actors for institutional reform
in one sphere of the political economy will often be conditioned by
the character of existing institutions in other spheres. The explana-
tion Swenson (2001) offers for variation in the attitudes of employers
to proposals for universal pensions in the United States and Sweden
provides a masterful example of such processes at work. He argues
that the attitudes of employers to proposals for reform of social policy
were deeply conditioned by the character of existing institutions in the
sphere of wage bargaining. In Sweden, where the strategies of many
firms were built on institutional arrangements for industrial relations
that limited wage differentials across sectors, the efforts of some firms
to attract skilled labor by offering private pensions began to cause

[p. 214] [PDF page 232]

discontent among other firms. Universal public pensions provided an
attractive way to eliminate this practice. In contrast, by the 1950s,
American firms had adjusted their strategies to an industrial-relations
system that promoted segmentalist practices, whereby some firms oper-
ate highly efficient production regimes that depend on skilled workers
who are attracted by higher wages and benefits, while other firms use
less skilled workers to compete on cost. As a result, American employ-
ers found unappealing the prospect of universal pensions that would
undercut such practices on both sides of the divide. The extent of
employer support for generous universal pensions, therefore, diverged
sharply between the two countries as a result of the arrangements each
nation developed for regulating industrial relations.
   There would be real value in extending this type of analysis to other
issue areas, asking how institutional arrangements in one sphere of
the political economy influence proposals for reform in others. In an
insightful comparison of France and Germany, for instance, Goyer
(2006) finds that the reception given by firms to proposals for reform
in the sphere of corporate governance is influenced by the character of
institutional arrangements in the sphere of labor relations. But there is
room for more such inquiries.

A Rationalist Model Expanded
I have argued that we can deploy some of the core insights generated
by historical institutionalism to extend a rationalist model of institu-
tional change. The result is a set of extensions that are analytically
manageable and render such models more realistic. In summary, the
steps I have suggested are as follows:

  1. Begin with the assumption that the precondition for institutional
     change is often the assembly of a coalition, whether tacit or
     explicit, in favor of the changes.
  2. Acknowledge not only that uncertainty about the effects of insti-
     tutional reform is a pillar of institutional stability but that the
     character of prevailing instrumental beliefs about such effects is
     a key variable that makes change more or less likely and condi-
     tions its direction.
  3. Recognize that, even when institutional change can be secured by
     reaching agreement among a small set of individuals contracting

[p. 215] [PDF page 233]

with each other on a relatively equal basis, assembling coalitions
     of support for change entails collective action problems whose
     intensity is affected by the character of existing organizational
     practices. Beyond those settings, issues of power are inescapably
     bound up with the resolution of such dilemmas. In each of these
     contexts, the character of existing organizations conditions the
     relative power over change of various groups of actors, as well
     as the pace and direction of change.
  4. Observe that, even when the process of adopting new institu-
     tions can be modeled as a coordination game, distributive issues
     arise. How these issues are resolved then turns on the relative
     power of the actors (a function of both opportunity costs and
     mobilizational or strategic capacity) and on normative beliefs
     about fairness.
  5. Note that the effects of institutional reform and the preference
     functions actors bring to proposals for reform are multidimen-
     sional, such that the actors’ posture toward reform will depend
     on how each weighs the variable in that function. Factors that
     influence this weighing include those that engage the identities
     associated with the dimensions of these preference functions.
     Framing effects, whether born of deliberate or inadvertent pro-
     cesses, emerge as potentially important variables in the processes
     leading to institutional change.
  6. Observe that the effects of any new set of proposed institutional
     practices will be mediated by existing institutional practices not
     targeted for reform, so that the latter become variables condi-
     tioning the positions actors take on proposals for institutional
     reform.

   To be sure, this account presents the process whereby institutions
change as one that is more complex than some simple models allow.
However, one of the striking features of this analysis is that it remains
relatively simple and tractable to manageable empirical inquiry. His-
torical institutionalism is not a cry of despair about the complexity
of the world. Many of its most important insights can be reduced
to testable propositions that greatly enrich our models of institu-
tional change at limited cost in terms of the complexity they add to
them.

[p. 216] [PDF page 234]

Moreover, the terms of this account suggest many compatibilities
between rationalist and historical approaches to institutional change.
One need not abandon a rational-choice perspective in order to mobi-
lize many of these insights. That requires only a willingness to accord
beliefs, whether instrumental or normative, a role in the relevant pro-
cesses more precise and expansive than the one conveyed by the vague
concept of “common knowledge.”


II. Historical Institutionalism in Sociological Perspective

There is another side, of course, to the perspectives on institutions
developed by historical institutionalism. It is well-represented in the
chapters of this book, and the rationalist model I have just outlined
does not do it full justice. Although I think rationalist models can
explain a good deal of institutional change in many settings, it is impor-
tant to note what they miss in the world of institutions. I will do so by
outlining some core contentions on the sociological side of historical
institutionalism.7
   At the heart of this alternative approach is a view of institutions dif-
ferent from the one found in rationalist perspectives. The latter tend
to stress the rule-like quality of institutions and, by implication, the
extent to which institutions are understood in common terms by all
the relevant actors. By contrast, although they still see institutions as
regularized practices, analysts with a more sociological leaning tend
to stress the intrinsic ambiguity of institutions. Rather than conceptu-
alize institutions as relatively sharp rules, they see their underpinnings
in norms that are always subject to interpretation and frequently to
reinterpretation. In his chapter for this volume, Sheingate stresses the
extent to which even congressional rules are open to creative rein-
terpretation, and Onoma identifies a “contradictory potential” in the
laws governing land use in Kenya.
   This shift in perspective is important because it implies that institu-
tional change need not be contingent on agreement among a coali-
tion of actors or even the explicit object of coalition formation.
Instead, institutional change can occur through disaggregated pro-
cesses of “reinterpretation” whereby the meanings actors associate

7   For another account, complementary to this one, see the introduction to this volume.

[p. 217] [PDF page 235]

with a particular institution change over time, generating correspond-
ing shifts in patterns of action (Streeck and Thelen 2005; Thelen 2005).
Those shifts may be sudden, as some were during the French Revolu-
tion, or slow – pushed forward, step by step, by small groups of actors,
until one pattern of behavior is replaced by another. Reinterpretation
of the rules may be accompanied by overt contention over issues of
interpretation or it may take place in subtle and relatively uncontested
steps. When it takes the latter form, the process is difficult to model as
one of coalition formation, and more relevant templates for analysis
may lie in sociological studies of “meaning making.”
   Those operating from such a perspective also tend to posit a world
replete with multiple layers of institutions, each with more or less sway
over particular actors, many slightly contradictory in their implications
for behavior, that constitute a broad scaffolding providing footholds
for many courses of action. Seen in this light, institutions are instru-
ments the actors use to negotiate the complexity of the world. Far from
dictating particular actions, institutions are seen as enabling structures
within which actors exercise a robust agency. Dan Slater describes the
development of dictatorship in Indonesia in precisely these terms.
   This perspective diverges from the type of sociological institution-
alism that sees institutions as the embodiment of “logics of appropri-
ateness” and associates their influence with the extent to which the
institutions are taken for granted (cf. March and Olsen 1989; Dobbin
1994a). By contrast, historical institutionalists are more inclined to
view institutions as objects of active reinterpretation, and often of
overt contention, as actors seeking power or resources take advantage
of their contradictory potential. The persistence of institutions is not
a matter of unreflective adherence, but the outcome of exercises of
power and interpretation, whose result is at best a contested stability
(see the introduction to this volume).
   In common with many sociologists, however, historical institution-
alists accept that institutions are not simply “rules” but constituted as
well by accompanying rituals and symbol systems. Thus, the fate of an
institution can be closely tied to the significance attached to its ritu-
als, whether formal or informal, and conditioned by cultural shifts in
which new sets of symbols acquire authority as others fall into desue-
tude. The affinities with constructivist views prominent in the study of
international relations should be apparent (Wendt 2000).

[p. 218] [PDF page 236]

These views of institutions carry important implications for how we
should understand processes of institutional change. They lend them-
selves to images of institutional change quite different from those of
rationalist models focused on the formation of reform coalitions. Some
historical institutionalists stress that institutions can simply break
down. Skocpol (1979), for instance, proposes a structuralist view of
social revolutions, in which institutions gradually fail as the result of
a confluence of separately determined developments, marked by little
in the way of a voluntarist impulse.
   Others suggest that institutions can change as a consequence of pro-
cesses of “defection” in which actors gradually stop adhering to the
practices formerly constitutive of an institution, whether seriatim or in
groups, without any formal agreement to do so (Thelen 2004; see also
the introduction to this volume). Although it may be an exaggeration
to claim, as one participant in the workshop discussing this volume did,
that “shirkers are the motor of history,” there is little doubt that pro-
cesses such as these are important elements in many instances of insti-
tutional change. Thelen and Kume (1999) have shown, for example,
that gradual defections from employers’ associations transformed the
operations of the institutions governing wage bargaining in Germany.
   Drawing our attention to another dimension of institutional change,
Streeck (2005) emphasizes that efforts to construct new institutions are
often experimental, which is to say that they proceed in incremental
steps, marked by movements backward as well as forward, as new
institutions are tried out and then found to be ineffective. He is surely
right to draw our attention to the “experimental” character of many
reform processes, whereby institutional change emerges from ad hoc
adjustments to standard operating procedures without clear-cut efforts
to mobilize coalitions behind those changes, and to stress the role of
unintended consequences in such processes. Tulia Falleti’s chapter for
this volume traces that kind of process in the case of Brazilian health
care; and, based on a study of social security reform in France, Palier
(2005) argues that incremental steps of this sort, issuing from a series
of negotiations in which the participants rarely agreed even on how to
interpret the results of each stage, can usher in profound institutional
transformation.
   There is much to recommend these more sociological perspec-
tives on institutional change. They capture key dimensions of the

[p. 219] [PDF page 237]

institutional world, and, although I do not spell them out here, they
also supply new research agendas. In some cases, such formulations
may provide a better basis for explaining the pace or direction of
change than explanations from rationalist perspectives emphasizing
coalition formation. At the same time, we can see many points of com-
monality between the two sides of historical institutionalism. Both
accord importance to the role of ideas in politics. Both see institutions
as objects of continuous contention rather than as settled arrangements
that can be taken for granted; and, behind the operation of institutions,
both see the exercise of power.


Conclusion

Whether conducted from a rationalist or sociological perspective, the
research done by historical institutionalists in recent years has greatly
advanced our understanding of institutional change. Scholars work-
ing in this intellectual tradition have arguably done more than any
other group to develop realistic formulations about how economic
and political institutions change over time. As this account implies,
they encounter an inevitable tension between a requirement to develop
the relatively simple models that form the substance of social science
and a need to portray the world in realistic terms. But, on my reading,
they have managed this tension with considerable success. The result is
a set of formulations that provide the basis for research agendas with
great promise.
   There are many issues on those agendas still to be resolved. We
do not yet know how the process of institutional change varies across
issue domains or spheres of the polity. In some, change may be typi-
cally slow or incremental, and, in others, more frequent or abrupt. We
could benefit from more investigation into the sources of innovation.
In principle, agents facing processes of intense competitive selection,
as most democratic governments and firms do, may be more likely
to innovate than agents who are sheltered from such processes would
be. There is also more to be learned from comparing cases of institu-
tional stability with cases of change. Thelen (2004) has shown how
changes in some dimensions of the institutional setting make continu-
ity possible in other dimensions, but we need more general accounts
of such processes, built on further case studies and a more intensive

[p. 220] [PDF page 238]

dialogue with analysts of organizational change (cf. McCarthy and
Zald 1987).
    My bet is that the greatest advances will be made by those willing to
borrow concepts and formulations from multiple schools of thought.
That is why I have emphasized the points of tangency between rational
choice and historical institutionalism and have dwelt at length on the
insights available from more sociological perspectives. There is much
to be said for analyses that take the opposite tack and focus on the
differences among schools of thought. That kind of analysis tends to
throw the inadequacies of each theoretical approach into sharp relief,
thereby stimulating improvement. Without irritants, there would be
no pearls. However, if there is insight in all of these approaches, as I
believe there is, it seems short-sighted to cling to one at the expense
of benefiting from the others. I have argued that it is often possible
to construct synthetic models, whose component parts are eminently
testable. In many instances, substantial additional insight can be pur-
chased at a relatively small loss in terms of analytical parsimony. With
respect to issues of institutional change, fruitful synthesis is surely the
most promising way forward and, positioned as it is between rational-
ist and sociological views, historical institutionalism is ideally placed
to take those steps forward.

References
Bates, Robert. 1988. “Contra Contractarianism: Some Reflections on the New
  Institutionalism.” Politics and Society 16 (2): 387–401.
Calvert, Randall. 1995a. “Rational Actors, Equilibrium and Institutions.” In
  Explaining Social Institutions, ed. Jack Knight and Iai Sened, 57–94. Ann
  Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Calvert, Randall. 1995b. “The Rational Choice Theory of Social Institutions:
  Cooperation, Coordination, and Communication.” In Modern Political
  Economy: Old Topics, New Directions, ed. Jeffrey S. Banks and Eric A.
  Hanuschek, 216–268. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Campbell, John A. 2004. Institutional Change and Globalization. Princeton:
  Princeton University Press.
Dobbin, Frank. 1994a. Forging Industrial Policy: The United States, Britain,
  and France in the Railway Age. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Dobbin, Frank. 1994b. “Cultural Models of Organization: The Social Con-
  struction of Rational Organizing Principles.” In The Sociology of Culture,
  ed. Diana Crane, 117–191. Oxford: Blackwell.
Fraser, Nancy, and Axel Honneth. 2003. Recognition or Redistribution? A
  Political-Philosophical Exchange. London: Verso Books.

[p. 221] [PDF page 239]

Goldstein, Judith, and Robert Keohane, eds. 1993. Ideas and Foreign Policy.
  Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Goyer, Michel. 2006 “The Transformation of Corporate Governance in
  France.” In Changing France: The Politics that Markets Make, ed. Pepper
  Culpepper, Peter A. Hall, and Bruno Palier, 80–104. London: Palgrave-
  Macmillan.
Greif, Avner, and David Laitin. 2004. “A Theory of Endogenous Institutional
  Change,” American Political Science Review 98:633–652.
Gruber, Lloyd. 2000. Ruling the World: Power Politics and the Rise of Supra-
  national Institutions. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Haas, Peter. 1992. “Introduction: Epistemic Communities and Interna-
  tional Policy Coordination.” International Organization 46 (1) (Winter):
  1–35.
Hall, Peter A., ed. 1989. The Political Power of Economic Ideas: Keynesianism
  across Nations. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hall, Peter A. 2005. “Preference Formation as a Political Process: The Case
  of Monetary Union in Europe.” In Preferences and Situations, ed. Ira
  Katznelson and Barry Weingast, 129–160. New York: Russell Sage Found-
  ation.
Hall, Peter A., and David Soskice, eds. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism: The
  Institutional Foundations of Comparative Advantage. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
  versity Press.
Hall, Peter A., and Rosemary C. R. Taylor. 1996. “Political Science and the
  Three ‘New Institutionalisms,’” Political Studies 44 (December): 936–957.
Immergut, Ellen. 1992. Health Politics: Interests and Institutions in Western
  Europe. New York: Oxford University Press.
Iversen, Torben, and David Soskice. 2006. “Electoral Institutions and the Poli-
  tics of Coalitions: Why Some Democracies Redistribute More than Others,”
  American Political Science Review 100 (2): 165–181.
Jacobs, Alan. 2009. “How Do Ideas Matter? Mental Models and Attention in
  German Pension Politics.” Comparative Political Studies 42 (2): 252–279.
Johnson, James. 1990. “On the Cultural Dimensions of Rational Choice
  Theory.” Paper presented at the Mid-West Political Science Association.
  Chicago, IL.
King, Desmond. 2005. The Liberty of Strangers: Building the American
  Nation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Knight, Jack. 1992. Institutions and Social Conflict. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.
Knight, Jack. 1995. “Models, Interpretation and Theories: Constructing
  Explanations of Institutional Emergence and Change.” In Explaining Social
  Institutions, ed. Jack Knight and Iai Sened, 95–120. Ann Arbor: University
  of Michigan Press.
Koremenos, Barbara, Charles Lipson and Duncan Snidal, eds. 2003. The
  Rational Design of International Institutions. New York: Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press.

[p. 222] [PDF page 240]

Krehbiel, Keith. 1991. Information and Legislative Organization. Ann Arbor:
  University of Michigan Press.
Linos, Katerina. 2007. “Diffusion of Social Policies across OECD Countries.”
  PhD diss., Harvard University.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 1978. “Is a Science of Comparative Politics Possible?” In
  The Practice of Comparative Politics, ed. Paul Lewis et al., 266–284. New
  York: Longman.
Mahoney, James. 2000. “Path Dependence in Historical Sociology,” Theory
  and Society 29:507–548.
March, James G., and Johan P. Olsen. 1989. Rediscovering Institutions: The
  Organizational Basis of Politics. New York: Free Press.
McCarthy, John D., and Meyer N. Zald. 1987. Social Movements in an Orga-
  nizational Society: Collected Essays. New York: Transaction Publishers.
McNamara, Katherine. 1998. The Currency of Ideas. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
  University Press.
Moe, Terry. 2005. “Power and Political Institutions,” Perspectives on Politics
  3 (2) (June): 215–234.
Offe, Claus, and Helmut Wiesenthal. 1986. “Two Logics of Collective Action:
  Theoretical Notes on Social Class and Political Form.” In Disorganized
  Capitalism, ed. Claus Offe, 170–220. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Palier, Bruno. 2002. Gouverner la Sécurité Sociale. Paris: Presses Universitaires
  de France.
Palier, Bruno. 2005. “Ambiguous Agreement, Cumulative Change: French
  Social Policy in the 1990s.” In Beyond Continuity: Institutional Change in
  Advanced Political Economies, ed. Wolfgang Streeck and Kathleen Thelen,
  127–144. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pierson, Paul. 2000. “Increasing Returns, Path Dependence and the Study of
  Politics.” American Political Science Review 94 (2): 251–267.
Powell, Robert. 1999. In the Shadow of Power: States and Strategies in Inter-
  national Politics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Riker, William. 1980. “Implications from the Disequilibrium of Majority Rule
  for the Study of Institutions.” American Political Science Review 74 (2):
  432–446.
Sabel, Charles, and Jonathan Zeitlin. 1997. World of Possibilities: Flexibility
  and Mass Production in Western Industrialization. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.
Scharpf, Fritz. 1997. Games Real Actors Play. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Shepsle, Kenneth. 1986. “Institutional Equilibrium and Equilibrium Institu-
  tions.” In Political Science: The Science of Politics, ed. Herbert Weisberg,
  51–81. New York: Agathon.
Shepsle, Kenneth. 1989. “Studying Institutions: Some Lessons from the Ratio-
  nal Choice Approach.” Journal of Theoretical Politics, 1:131–149.
Skocpol, Theda. 1979. States and Social Revolutions. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.

[p. 223] [PDF page 241]

Steinmo, Sven, Kathleen Thelen, and Frank Longstreth, eds. 1992. Structuring
  Politics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Streeck, Wolfgang. 1997. “The German Economic Model: Does It Exist? Can
  It Survive?” In The Political Economy of Modern Capitalism, ed. Colin
  Crouch and Wolfgang Streeck, 33–54. London: Sage.
Streeck, Wolfgang. 2005. “Rejoinder: On Terminology, Functionalism, (His-
  torical) Institutionalism and Liberalism,” Socio-Economic Review 3:577–
  587.
Streeck, Wolfgang, and Kathleen Thelen, eds. 2005. Beyond Continuity: Insti-
  tutional Change in Advanced Political Economies. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
  sity Press.
Swenson, Peter. 2001. Capitalists Against Markets. New York: Oxford Uni-
  versity Press.
Teece, David J. 1996. “Firm Organization, Industrial Structure and Techno-
  logical Innovation.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 31
  (2) (November): 193–224.
Thelen, Kathleen. 1999. “Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Politics.”
  Annual Review of Political Science 2:369–404.
Thelen, Kathleen. 2004. How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy
  of Skills in Germany, Britain, the United States, and Japan. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Thelen, Kathleen, and Ikuo Kume. 1999. “The Effects of Globalization on
  Labor Revisited: Lessons from Germany and Japan.” Politics and Society
  27 (December): 477–505.
Weingast, Barry R. and Marshall, Willian J., 1988. “The Industrial Organi-
  zation of Congress, or Why Legislatures, Like Firms, Are Not Organized as
  Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 96 (1) (February): 132–163.
Wendt, Alexander. 2000. Social Theory of International Politics. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
