Chapter 3 The Use of Theory
===========================

Chapter 3 The Use of Theory

Learning Objectives

Identify the seven steps in locating and using theories for incorporation into a proposal or a study.

Identify the major distinctions between an inductive and deductive use of theory in a research study.

Define variables, their measurement, and a causal model for inclusion in quantitative research.

Distinguish between the deductive approach, a theoretical standpoint, and an end point as ways to incorporate theories into qualitative research.

Describe the difference between discipline-based theory and social justice use of theories in mixed methods research.

Introduction

One component of reviewing the literature is to determine what theories might be used to explore the questions in a scholarly study. In quantitative research, researchers often test hypotheses derived from theories. A quantitative dissertation often includes an entire section of a research proposal that might present the broader theory guiding the study. In qualitative research, the use of theory is much more varied. The inquirer may generate a theory as a study outcome and place it at the project’s end, such as in grounded theory. In other qualitative studies, it comes at the beginning and provides a lens that shapes the focus and questions asked, such as in ethnographies or in social justice research. In mixed methods research, researchers may both test theories and generate them. Moreover, in mixed methods research, theories inform different parts of the design, such as shaping the quantitative instruments or the qualitative interview questions.

Researchers use theories in quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods studies. We begin this chapter by focusing on theory use in a quantitative study. Then the discussion moves to the use of theory in a qualitative study. Finally, the chapter turns to the use of discipline-based theories and social justice theories in mixed methods research.

The Varied Use of Theory

The nature of a theory varies considerably in research. Its use varies depending on a quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods study. Theory can be a prediction of what the researcher expects to find or an inductive or deductive framework for a study. It may be presented as a model or diagram of the relationship among variables or constructs. It may exist as generalizations from findings, or a call for action, such as a change-oriented social agenda for a population or society. In these studies, theory goes by diverse names, such as theoretical orientation, theoretical rationale, theoretical model, or simply a theory. It may be called a “hook” (Sandelowski, 1996) for informing many phases of the research process.

By searching the literature (see Chapter 2), researchers can find examples of theories to use. A close inspection of these theories suggests they often have multiple authors, a date of origin, application in different types of studies, a visual model, and a distinct name.

The general procedures for locating and including theory are these:

Identify the theory (or theories) from the literature search.

Place the theory (model or conceptual framework) at the beginning of the article as an a priori framework to guide the questions or hypotheses in the study.

Write about the theory by first advancing the name of the theory to be used followed by a description how it informs the quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods study.

Discuss the studies using the theory, especially studies closely related to the present study.

Include a diagram of the theory indicating the probable links in the theory and the major concepts or variables in the theory.

Have the theory provide a framework for the study.

Return to the theory at the end of the study to review its role in informing findings and results. Compare the theory use with other studies.

Quantitative Theory Use

Understanding the use of theory in quantitative research requires defining theory, assessing the types of variables and their measurement, introducing the concept of causality, viewing forms of stating theories, placing a theory in a proposal or study, and writing a theory passage.

Definition of a Theory in Quantitative Research

We start with introducing the specific definition of a theory in quantitative research. Some historical precedent exists for viewing a theory as a scientific prediction or explanation for what the researcher expects to find (see Thomas, 1997, for different ways of conceptualizing theories). For example, Kerlinger’s (1979) definition of a theory seems still valid today. He said that a theory in quantitative research is “a set of interrelated constructs (variables), definitions, and propositions that presents a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among variables, with the purpose of explaining natural phenomena” (p. 64).

In this definition, a theory has a purpose (i.e., explains) and a procedure (i.e., the relationship among interrelated variables). These interrelations exist in the form of propositions or hypotheses. We would add to this definition that another purpose of a theory is to predict the expected relationship among variables. Labovitz and Hagedorn (1971) used the term theoretical rationale to describe a theory. They defined this rationale as “specifying how and why the variables and relational statements are interrelated” (p. 17). Why would an independent variable, X, influence or affect a dependent variable, Y? The theory provides an explanation for this expectation or prediction. A discussion about this theory would appear in a section of a proposal in the literature review or in a separate section called the theory base, the theoretical rationale, the theoretical perspective, or the conceptual framework. We prefer the term theoretical perspective because it has been popularly used as a required section for proposals for research when one applies to present a paper at the American Educational Research Association conference. A theory might appear in a research study as an argument, a discussion, a figure, a rationale, or a visual model. The metaphor of a rainbow can help visualize how a theory operates. Assume that the rainbow bridges the independent and dependent variables (or constructs). This rainbow ties together the variables and provides an overarching explanation for how and why one would expect the independent variables to explain or predict the dependent variables.

Theories develop when researchers test a prediction over and over. For example, here is how the process of developing a theory works. Investigators combine independent, mediating, and dependent variables into questions based on different forms of measures. These questions provide information about the type of relationship (positive, negative, or unknown) and its magnitude (e.g., high or low).

Forming this information into a predictive statement (hypothesis), a researcher might write, “The greater the centralization of power in leaders, the greater the disenfranchisement of the followers.” When researchers test hypotheses such as this over and over in different settings and with different populations (e.g., the Boy Scouts, a Presbyterian church, the Rotary Club, and a group of high school students), a theory emerges, and someone gives it a name (e.g., a theory of attribution). Thus, theory develops as an explanation to advance knowledge in fields (Thomas, 1997).

Another aspect of theories is that they vary in their breadth of coverage. Neuman (2009) reviewed theories at three levels: (a) micro level, (b) meso level, and (c) macro level. Micro-level theories provide explanations limited to small slices of time, space, or numbers of people, such as a theory of face work, which explains how people engage in rituals during face-to-face interactions. Meso-level theories link the micro and macro levels. These are theories of organizations, social movement, or communities, such as a theory of control in organizations. Macro-level theories explain larger aggregates, such as social institutions, cultural systems, and whole societies. A macro-level theory of social stratification, for example, explains how the amount of surplus a society produces increases with the development of the society.

Variables in Quantitative Research

Theories explain relationships among variables. A variable refers to a characteristic or attribute of an individual or an organization that researchers can measure or observe and varies among the individuals or organizations. Examples of variables are gender; age; socioeconomic status (SES); and attitudes or behaviors such as racism, social control, political power, or leadership.

Here are the types of variables in quantitative research:

Independent variables influence, or affect, outcomes in studies. They are “independent” because researchers manipulate them in experiments and are thus independent of all other influences. In an example, in an 8-week experimental study, the investigator asked some participants to drink one glass of red wine daily (red wine group). Other participants in a comparison group were instructed to maintain their normal consumption patterns (control group). In this case, the researcher systematically manipulated red wine consumption. Moderate red wine consumption is an independent variable in this study. Independent variables are also commonly referred to as treatment or manipulated variables in experimental studies.

Dependent variables are variables that depend on the independent variables. They are the outcomes or results influenced by the independent variables. We find multiple dependent measures in experimental studies, such as in the red wine example, measuring dependent variables, such as heart attack incidence, strokes, or the amount of plaque formations.

Predictor variables (also called antecedent variables) are variables that predict an outcome of interest in survey method studies. Predictor variables are like independent variables in that they are hypothesized to affect outcomes in a study. However, they are dissimilar because the researcher cannot systematically manipulate a predictor variable. It may not be possible or feasible to assign individuals to a red wine consumption or control group (as an independent variable), but it may be possible to measure naturally occurring red wine consumption in a community sample as a predictor variable.

Outcome variables (also called criterion or response variables) are considered outcomes or results of predictor variables in survey method studies. They share the same properties as dependent variables as described above.

Intervening or mediating variables stand between the independent and dependent variables, and they transmit the effect of an independent variable on a dependent variable (for a review, see MacKinnon et al., 2007). A mediating variable can be tested using different kinds of statistical mediation analyses (see MacKinnon et al., 2007, for some examples). It provides a quantitative assessment of how the independent variable is exerting its effects on the dependent variable. For example, in our wine study, polyphenol compounds in red wine influences the health benefits of moderate red wine consumption (e.g., Szmitko & Verma, 2005). The researcher needs to measure the amount of polyphenols occurring in this red wine consumption study as a mediating variable.

Moderating variables are predictor variables that affect the direction and/or the strength of the relationship between independent and dependent variables or between predictor and outcome variables (Thompson, 2006). These variables act on (or interact with) the independent variables and, in combination with them, influence the dependent variables. Moderating variables are powerful in that they can identify potential boundary conditions. Often these moderating variables are demographic information, such as age, education, or SES.

A confounding variable refers to a “third variable” that is both related to the independent (or predictor) variable and to the dependent (or outcome) variable. For example, a researcher may draw the conclusion that moderate red wine consumption reduces heart attack risk. But it might be possible that regular aerobic exercise is a confounding variable because regular exercise is both related to moderate wine consumption and to heart disease risk. Confounding variables can be especially problematic if they go unmeasured in a study.

In a quantitative research study, researchers describe the relationships among variables to build theories and to answer specific research questions. Specifically, we use our theories and specification of variables to generate hypotheses. A hypothesis is a prediction about a specific event or relationship between variables. Researchers gather responses from participants to questions about these variables. In other words, the researcher measures responses from participants to variables. Several texts provide detailed discussions about the scales of measurement for variables (e.g., Isaac & Michael, 1981; Keppel, 1991; Kerlinger, 1979; Thompson, 2006; Thorndike, 1997). A scale of measurement in quantitative research would be the response options available to participants on instruments or collected by the researcher observing participants. Variables are measured as either categorical or continuous (Creswell & Guetterman, 2018). Categorical scales have two types, nominal and ordinal. Continuous scales also have two types: interval and ratio. Nominal scales use categories that a participant would check, such as level of education. A researcher might ask: How much education do you have? The researcher provides the response options of none, bachelor’s, or graduate education. An ordinal scale represents categories for the participant to check but provides the categories in a rank order. For example, a researcher would ask the question: Has your adviser helped you select a major? The responses might be not at all, to some extent, or to a great extent. An interval or ratio scale, in contrast, contains a continuous scale. The scale of strongly agree to strongly disagree represents a common example of a type of continuous scale. A researcher would ask participants to respond to a question, such as, Do you agree the economy is in a recession? Answers would be on a 1–5 scale from strongly agree, agree, and undecided to disagree and strongly disagree.

Testing Causal Claims in Quantitative Research

With an understanding of variables, we will now discuss how the variables might be related to each other, especially in a time sequence. This introduces the concept of causality. A leading writer in this area has been Blalock (1991). Causality means that we would expect variable X to cause variable Y. An example illustrates the application of causality. Does drinking one glass of red wine daily cause a reduced risk for a heart attack? In this case, daily wine consumption is the X variable, and a heart attack event would be the Y variable. One critically important consideration in evaluating causal claims (like this red wine consumption example) is whether an unmeasured third variable Z may cause the outcome (see the definition of a confounding variable). For example, a confounding Z variable (such as daily exercise) may be positively associated with both moderate red wine consumption and a reduced possibility of a heart attack. In quantitative research this third variable can be a problem for establishing causality if unmeasured. We would not want to mistakenly infer that moderate red wine consumption promotes a healthy heart if it plays no causal role in reducing heart attacks. If you aim to test a causal claim about the relationship between two or more variables in your quantitative study, the best choice is to conduct a true experiment, which will provide more control over potential unmeasured variables (see Chapter 8). If you are less interested in testing a causal claim or if you cannot conduct an experiment, then survey methods can test claims about hypothesized associations between variables (see Chapter 8). For example, you may be interested in first establishing if a positive association exists between moderate daily red wine consumption and clinical markers of heart disease risk using correlation analysis. Indeed, epidemiological health science studies highlight a positive association between moderate daily red wine consumption (1–2 drinks per day) and a 20% reduction in risk for heart disease (e.g., Szmitko & Verma, 2005).

Variables influencing other variables introduces the concept of temporal order. Temporal order means that one variable precedes another in time. Because of this time ordering, one variable affects or predicts another variable. Temporal order also means that quantitative researchers think about variables in an order from left to right (Punch, 2014) and order the variables in purpose statements, research questions, and visual models in this way.

Stating Theories in Quantitative Research

How does the causal linking of variables appear in a research study? Researchers state their theories in research proposals in several ways, such as a series of hypotheses, if-then logic statements, or visual models. First, some researchers state theories in the form of interconnected hypotheses. For example, Hopkins (1964) conveyed his theory of influence processes as a series of 15 hypotheses. Some of the hypotheses are as follows (we have slightly altered several hypotheses to remove gender-specific pronouns):

The higher one’s rank, the greater one’s centrality.

The greater one’s centrality, the greater one’s observability.

The higher one’s rank, the greater one’s observability.

The greater one’s centrality, the greater one’s conformity.

The higher one’s rank, the greater one’s conformity.

The greater one’s observability, the greater one’s conformity.

The greater one’s conformity, the greater one’s observability. (p. 51)

A second way is to state a theory as a series of if-then statements that explain why one would expect the independent variables to influence or cause the dependent variables. For example, Homans (1950) explained a theory of interaction:

If the frequency of interaction between two or more persons increases, the degree of their liking for one another will increase, and vice versa. . . . Persons who feel sentiments of liking for one another will express those sentiments in activities over and above the activities of the external system, and these activities may further strengthen the sentiments of liking. The more frequently persons interact with one another, the more alike in some respects both their activities and their sentiments tend to become. (pp. 112, 118, 120)

Third, an author may present a theory as a visual model. It is helpful to translate variables into a visual picture. Blalock (1969, 1985, 1991) advocated for causal modeling and recasted verbal theories into causal models so that a reader could visualize the interconnections of variables. Two simplified examples are presented here. As shown in Figure 3.1, three independent variables influence a single dependent variable, mediated by the influence of two intervening variables. A diagram such as this shows the possible causal sequence among variables leading to modeling through path analysis and more advanced analyses using multiple measures of variables as found in structural equation modeling (see Kline, 1998). At an introductory level, Duncan (1985) provided useful suggestions about the notation for constructing these visual causal diagrams:

Position the dependent variables on the right in the diagram and the independent variables on the left.

Use one-way arrows leading from each determining variable to each variable dependent on it.

Indicate the strength of the relationship among variables by inserting valence signs on the paths. Use positive or negative valences to infer relationships.

Use two-headed arrows connected to show unanalyzed relationships between variables not dependent upon other relationships in the model.

With additional notation, researchers can construct more complicated causal diagrams. Figure 3.1 portrays a basic model of limited variables, such as typically found in a survey research study. A variation on this theme is to have independent variables in which control and experimental groups are compared between levels of one independent variable on an outcome (dependent variable). As shown in Figure 3.2, two groups on variable X are compared in terms of their influence on Y, the dependent variable. This design is a between-groups experimental design (see Chapter 8). The same rules of notation previously discussed apply.

[图片: images/008_Chapter 3 The Use of Theory/001_10.4135_9781071817988-fig3.jpg | An illustration of the influence of three predictor variables on a dependent variable through two intervening variables.]
Description
Figure 3.1 Three Predictor Variables Influence a Single Dependent Variable Mediated by Two Intervening Variables

[图片: images/008_Chapter 3 The Use of Theory/002_10.4135_9781071817988-fig4.jpg | An illustration of the influence of two groups on a variable. Arrows from variable uppercase X in experimental group and control group point toward uppercase Y subscript 1.]

Figure 3.2 Two Groups With Different Treatment on X Are Compared in Terms of Y

These two models are meant only to introduce possibilities for connecting independent and dependent variables to build theories. More complicated designs employ multiple independent and dependent variables in elaborate models of causation (Blalock, 1969, 1985, 1991). For example, Jungnickel (1990), in a doctoral dissertation proposal about research productivity among faculty in pharmacy schools, presented a complex visual model, as shown in Figure 3.3. Jungnickel asked what factors influence a faculty member’s scholarly research performance. After identifying these factors in the literature, he adapted a theoretical framework found in nursing research (Megel et al., 1987) and developed a visual model portraying the relationship among these factors, following the rules for constructing a model introduced earlier. He listed the independent variables on the far left, the intervening variables in the middle, and the dependent variables on the right. The direction of influence flowed from the left to the right, and he used plus and minus signs to indicate the hypothesized direction. In this figure, an endogenous variable means that variables influence other variables. In this example, tenure standards and type of faculty appointment influence workload and pressure to conduct research. Arrows in the diagram show this relationship. An exogeneous variable is one not caused by other variables in the causal model. In Figure 3.3, prior research training or type of appointment are exogenous variables, for example.

Placement of Quantitative Theories

Where are theories placed in a quantitative a research study? In quantitative studies, one uses theory deductively and places it toward the beginning of the proposed study. With the objective of testing or verifying a theory, the researcher advances a theory, collects data to test it, and reflects on its confirmation or disconfirmation. The theory becomes a framework for the entire study, an organizing model for the research questions or hypotheses and for the data collection procedure. The deductive model of thinking used in a quantitative study is shown in Figure 3.4. The researcher tests or verifies a theory by examining hypotheses or questions derived from it. These hypotheses or questions contain variables (or constructs) that the researcher needs to define.

Writing a Quantitative Theoretical Perspective

Using these ideas, the following presents a model for writing a quantitative theoretical perspective section into a research plan. Assume the researcher’s task is to identify a theory to explain the relationship between independent and dependent variables.

[图片: images/008_Chapter 3 The Use of Theory/003_10.4135_9781071817988-fig5.jpg | An illustration of the influence of exogenous variables on a dependent variable through independent or endogenous variables.]
Description
Figure 3.3 A Visual Model of a Theory of Faculty Scholarly Performance

Source: Jungnickel (1990). Reprinted with permission.

[图片: images/008_Chapter 3 The Use of Theory/004_10.4135_9781071817988-fig6.jpg | A flowchart of the four stages in the deductive approach.]
Description
Figure 3.4 The Deductive Approach Typically Used in Quantitative Research

Look in the scientific literature for existing theories explaining the phenomenon you aim to study and understand. If suitable existing theories are not available, develop your own theory.

Also examine prior studies addressing the topic or a closely related topic. What theories did the authors use? Limit the number of theories and identify one or two theories to explain the central hypothesis or major research question.

As mentioned earlier, ask the rainbow question bridging the independent and dependent variables: What explains why the independent variable(s) would influence the dependent variables? Under what contexts and for whom does this apply?

Script out the theory section. Follow these lead sentences: “The theory I will use is _____ (name the theory). It was developed by _____ (identify the origin, source, or developer of the theory), and it was used to study _____ (identify the studies applying the theory). This theory indicates _____ (identify the propositions or hypotheses in the theory). As applied to my study, this theory holds that I would expect my independent variable(s) _____ (state independent variables) to influence or explain the dependent variable(s) _____ (state dependent variables) because _____ (provide a rationale based on the logic of the theory).”

Thus, the topics to include in a quantitative theory discussion are the theory to be used, its central hypotheses or propositions, the information about past theory use and its application, and statements as to how it relates to a proposed study. Example 3.1, which contains a passage by Crutchfield (1986) from her dissertation, illustrates the use of this model.

Example 3.1 A Quantitative Theory Section

Crutchfield (1986) wrote a doctoral dissertation titled Locus of Control, Interpersonal Trust, and Scholarly Productivity. By surveying nursing educators, her intent was to determine if locus of control and interpersonal trust affected the levels of publications of the faculty. Her dissertation included a separate section in the introductory chapter titled “Theoretical Perspective,” which follows. It includes these points:

The theory she planned to use

The central hypotheses of the theory

Information about who has used the theory and its applicability

An adaptation of the theory to variables in her study using if-then logic

We have added annotations in italics to mark key passages that follow these steps in the Theoretical Perspective section of her dissertation.

Theoretical Perspective

In formulation of a theoretical perspective for studying the scholarly productivity of faculty, social learning theory provides a useful prototype. This conception of behavior attempts to achieve a balanced synthesis of cognitive psychology with the principles of behavior modification (Bower & Hilgard, 1981). Basically, this unified theoretical framework “approaches the explanation of human behavior in terms of a continuous (reciprocal) interaction between cognitive, behavioral, and environmental determinants” (Bandura, 1977, p. vii). [Author identifies the theory for the study.]

While social learning theory accepts the application of reinforcements such as shaping principles, it tends to see the role of rewards as both conveying information about the optimal response and providing incentive motivation for a given act because of the anticipated reward. In addition, the learning principles of this theory place special emphasis on the important roles played by vicarious, symbolic, and self-regulating processes (Bandura, 1971).

Social learning theory not only deals with learning, but also seeks to describe how a group of social and personal competencies (so called personality) could evolve out of social conditions within which the learning occurs. It also addresses techniques of personality assessment (Mischel, 1968), and behavior modification in clinical and educational settings (Bandura, 1977; Bower & Hilgard, 1981; Rotter, 1954). [Author describes social learning theory.]

Further, the principles of social learning theory have been applied to a wide range of social behavior such as competitiveness, aggressiveness, deviance, and pathological behavior (Bandura & Walters, 1963; Bandura, 1977; Mischel, 1968; Miller & Dollard, 1941; Rotter, 1954; Staats, 1975). [Author describes the use of the theory.]

Explaining social learning theory, Rotter (1954) indicated four classes of variables must be considered: behavior, expectancies, reinforcement, and psychological situations. A general formula for behavior was proposed which states: “the potential for a behavior to occur in any specific psychological situation is the function of the expectancy that the behavior will lead to a particular reinforcement in that situation and the value of that reinforcement” (Rotter, 1975, p. 57).

Expectancy within the formula refers to the perceived degree of certainty (or probability) of a causal relationship between behavior and rewards. This construct of generalized expectancy has been defined as internal locus of control when an individual believes reinforcements are a function of specific behavior, or as external locus of control when the effects are attributed to luck, fate, or powerful others. The perceptions of causal relationships need not be absolute positions, but rather tend to vary in degree along a continuum depending upon previous experiences and situational complexities (Rotter, 1966). [Author explains variables in the theory.]

In the application of social learning theory to this study of scholarly productivity, the four classes of variables identified by Rotter (1954) will be defined in the following manner.

Scholarly productivity is the desired behavior or activity.

Locus of control is the generalized expectancy whether rewards are or are not dependent upon specific behaviors.

Reinforcements are the rewards from scholarly work and the value attached to these rewards.

The educational institution is the psychological situation which furnishes many of the rewards for scholarly productivity.

With these specific variables, the formula for behavior which was developed by Rotter (1975) would be adapted to read: The potential for scholarly behavior to occur within an educational institution is a function of the expectancy this activity will lead to specific rewards and of the value the faculty member places on these rewards. In addition, the interaction of interpersonal trust with locus of control must be considered in relation to the expectancy of attaining rewards through behaviors (Rotter, 1967). Finally, certain characteristics, such as educational preparation, chronological age, post-doctoral fellowships, tenure, or full-time versus part-time employment may be associated with the scholarly productivity of nurse faculty in a manner like that seen within other disciplines. [Author applied the concepts to her study.]

The following statement represents the underlying logic for designing and conducting this study. If faculty believe: (a) their efforts and actions in producing scholarly works will lead to rewards (locus of control), (b) others can be relied upon to follow through on their promises (interpersonal trust), (c) the rewards for scholarly activity are worthwhile (reward values), and (d) the rewards are available within their discipline or institution (institutional setting), then they will attain high levels of scholarly productivity (pp. 12–16). [Author concluded with the if-then logic to relate the independent variables to the dependent variables.]

Qualitative Theory Use

The use of theory varies in qualitative research. It appears as a deductive explanation, as a theoretical standpoint, and as an end point for a study. Its location in a proposal or study also varies.

Variation in Theory Use in Qualitative Research

First, like in quantitative research, theory in qualitative research can be a broad, deductive explanation for behavior and attitudes and complete with variables, constructs, and hypotheses. For example, ethnographers employ cultural themes or aspects to study in their qualitative projects, such as social control, language, stability and change, or social organization, such as kinship or families (see Wolcott’s 2008 discussion about texts addressing cultural topics in anthropology). Themes in this context provide a ready-made series of hypotheses tested from the literature. Anthropologists use broad explanations to study the culture-sharing behavior and attitudes of people. This approach is popular in qualitative health science research. Investigators begin with a theoretical or conceptual model, such as the adoption of health practices or an assessment of the quality of life.

Second, researchers increasingly use a theoretical standpoint in qualitative research to provide an overall orienting lens for the study questions about gender, class, and race (or other issues of marginalized groups). This lens becomes a transformative perspective to bring about change, lift the voices of underrepresented groups, and uncover largely hidden assumptions of individuals. It shapes the questions asked, informs how data are collected and analyzed, and provides a call for action or change.

Qualitative research in the 1980s transformed by broadening its scope of inquiry and including theoretical lenses. The standpoint guides researchers about important issues to examine (e.g., marginalization, empowerment, oppression, power) and people studied (e.g., women, low economic social status, ethnic and racial groups, sexual orientation, disability). It also indicates how the researchers position themselves in the qualitative study (e.g., up front or biased from personal, cultural, and historical contexts) and in the final report (e.g., without further marginalizing individuals, by collaborating with participants) suggesting recommendations for changes to improve lives and society. In critical ethnography, for example, researchers begin with a theory informing their studies. This theory emphasizes the need for people’s emancipation or repression (Thomas, 1993).

Several qualitative theoretical standpoint perspectives available to the researcher include the following:

Feminist perspectives view women’s oppressive situations and the institutions framing those situations as problematic. Research topics include changing policy issues for women to realize social justice or eliminating oppressive situations for women (Olesen, 2000).

Racialized discourses raise important questions about who controls knowledge production, particularly for people and communities of color (Ladson-Billings, 2000).

Critical theory perspectives address empowering human beings to transcend the constraints placed on them by race, class, and gender (Fay, 1987).

Queer theory focuses on individual identity of lesbians, gays, bisexual people, straight people (i.e., LGBTQ2A+). The research using this approach restricts objectifying these individuals, seeks to improve their culture and politics, and highlights the voices and experiences of individuals (Gamson, 2000).

Disability inquiry addresses understanding this population’s sociocultural perspectives allowing them to take control over their lives rather than a biological understanding of disability (Mertens, 2009).

Rossman and Rallis (2012) captured the sense of theory as critical and postmodern perspectives in qualitative inquiry:

As the 20th century draws to a close, traditional social science has come under increasing scrutiny and attack as those espousing critical and postmodern perspectives challenge objectivist assumptions and traditional norms for the conduct of research. The critical tradition is alive and well in the social sciences. Postmodernists reject the notion that knowledge is definite and univocal. Central to this attack are four interrelated assertions: (a) Research fundamentally involves issues of power; (b) the research report is not transparent but rather it is authored by a raced, gendered, classed, and politically oriented individual; (c) race, class, and gender (the canonical triumvirate to which we would add sexual orientation, able-bodiedness, and first language, among others) are crucial for understanding experience; and (d) historically, traditional research has silenced members of oppressed and marginalized groups. (p. 91)

Third, distinct from the deductive use and theoretical standpoint orientation, qualitative studies apply theory as a theoretical end point for a study. This theoretical end point means that the qualitative study ends with a theoretical model, a theory, or a conceptual model. Qualitative research is an inductive process building from data, to broad themes, and to a generalized model or theory (see Punch, 2014). The logic of this inductive approach is shown in Figure 3.5.

The researcher begins by gathering detailed information from participants and then forms this information into categories or themes. These themes are developed into broad patterns, theories, or generalizations and compared with personal experiences or with existing literature on the topic.

The development of themes and categories into patterns, theories, or generalizations suggests varied end points for qualitative studies. For example, in case study research, Stake (1995) adds to a propositional generalization (the researcher’s summary of interpretations and claims) the researcher’s own personal experiences, called “naturalistic generalizations” (p. 86). As another example, grounded theory provides a different end point. Inquirers plan to discover and advance a theory grounded in information from participants (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). Lincoln and Guba (1985) referred to “pattern theories” as explanations developing during naturalistic or qualitative research. Rather than the deductive form found in quantitative studies, these pattern theories or generalizations represent interconnected thoughts or parts linked to a whole.

[图片: images/008_Chapter 3 The Use of Theory/005_10.4135_9781071817988-fig7.jpg | A flowchart of the five stages in the inductive logic of research.]
Description
Figure 3.5 The Inductive Logic of Research in a Qualitative Study

Fourth, some qualitative studies have no explicit theory. However, no qualitative study begins from pure observation, and prior conceptual structure composed of theory and method often provides the starting point for all observations (Schwandt, 2014). Still, in some qualitative studies one sees no explicit theoretical orientation, such as in phenomenology, in which inquirers attempt to build the essence of experience from participants (e.g., see Riemen, 1986). The inquirer constructs a rich, detailed description of a central phenomenon.

Our recommendations on theory use in a qualitative proposal are as follows:

Decide if theory is to be used in the qualitative proposal.

If used, then identify how the theory is applied in the study, such as an up-front explanation, the researcher’s standpoint, or as an end point.

Locate the theory in the proposal early in the study or at the end.

Locating the Theory in Qualitative Research

How theory use affects its placement in a qualitative study. In studies with a cultural theme or a theoretical lens, the theory occurs in the opening passages of the study (see Example 3.2). The theory may appear at a study’s beginning and be modified or adjusted based on participant views. Lather (1986) qualified the use of theory in grounded theory studies:

Building empirically grounded theory requires a reciprocal relationship between data and theory. Data must be allowed to generate propositions in a dialectical manner permitting a priori theoretical frameworks, but which keeps a framework from becoming the container into which the data must be poured. (p. 267)

Example 3.2 A Theory Early in a Qualitative Study

Murguia et al. (1991) studied the integration of 24 Hispanic and Native American students into a college social system. They were curious about how ethnicity influenced social integration, and they began by relating the participants’ experiences to a theoretical model, the Tinto model of social integration. They felt the model had been “incompletely conceptualized and, as a consequence, only imprecisely understood and measured” (p. 433).

Thus, the model was not tested, as one would find in a quantitative project, but modified. At the end of the study, the authors refined Tinto’s model and advanced their modification that described how ethnicity functions.

In contrast to this approach, in qualitative studies with an end point of a theory (e.g., a grounded theory), a pattern, or a generalization, the theory emerges at the study’s end. Researchers can present the theory as a diagram, a visual representation of relationships among concepts.

As Example 3.3 shows, we developed a visual model for interrelated variables. We derived this model inductively from participant comments and placed the model at the end of the study.

Example 3.3 A Theory at the End of a Qualitative Study

Using a national database of 33 interviews with academic department chairpersons, we developed a grounded theory interrelating variables (or categories) of chair influence on scholarly faculty performance (Creswell & Brown, 1992). Grounded theory meant that we grounded our theory in the views of participants. The theory section came into the article as the last section where we presented a visual model of the inductively-developed theory. In addition, we also advanced directional hypotheses logically following from the model. Moreover, in the section on the model and the hypotheses, we compared the participant results with results from other studies and the literature’s theoretical discussions. For example, we stated the following:

This proposition and its sub-propositions represent unusual, even contrary evidence, to our expectations. Contrary to proposition 2.1, we expected that the career stages would be similar not in type but in the range of issues. Instead we found the issues for post-tenure faculty covered almost all the possible problems on the list. Why were the tenured faculty’s needs more extensive than non-tenured faculty? The research productivity literature suggests one’s research performance does not decline with the award of tenure (Holley 1977). Perhaps diffuse career goals of post-tenure faculty expand the possibilities for issue “types.” In any case, this sub-proposition focuses on the understudied career group Furniss (1981) reminds us needs to be examined in more detail (p. 58).

Mixed Methods Theory Use

In contrast to the use of theory in qualitative research, theories are discipline-based or social justice theories in mixed methods research. It is important to use a theory in mixed methods research and distinguish between the use of a worldview and a theory.

Types of Mixed Methods Theory Use

There are two types of theory use in mixed methods studies: discipline-based and social justice. Both forms have emerged in the mixed methods literature (see Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018).

The theory can be considered a discipline-based theory drawn from the social, behavioral, or health science literature. Examples of discipline-based theories would be organizational theories, leadership theories, adoption theories, attribution theories, health promotion theories, and the like. These theories typically identify variables or constructs, interrelate them, and form and explain expected results for individuals and organizations.

An example of a discipline-based theory in health science is found in a mixed methods study about chronic pain and its management through learned resourcefulness by Kennett et al. (2008). These authors presented a mixed methods study to understand how learned resourcefulness empowers individuals. Specifically, the study examined the impact of a cognitive-behavioral chronic pain management program on self-management. They also explored how resourcefulness and a sense of self-directedness influenced self-management skills for chronic pain. They used Rosenbaum’s (1990) theory of self-control. They gathered quantitative measures on Rosenbaum’s Self-Control Schedule (SCS) and collected interviews with patients coping with chronic pain. In the opening paragraph of their study, they advanced the purpose:

Taking a critical realist perspective informed by Rosenbaum’s (1990, 2000) model of self-control, we combine a quantitative measure of learned resourcefulness with a qualitative text-based analysis to characterize the processes in the self-management of pain for high—and low—resourceful clients following a multimodel treatment-based pain program. (p. 318)

Following this passage, they advanced a model of learned resourcefulness to guide their study. They introduced the major components of Rosenbaum’s model. The research literature on resourcefulness followed this introduction as an important predictor of adopting healthy behavior and included a discussion of a Rosenbaum experiment relating resourcefulness to coping with pain. The authors then discussed the factors of the model leading to self-control, such as process-regulating cognitions (e.g., supporting family and friends), coping strategies (e.g., ability to cope with such pain), and staying in (or dropping out of) programs. The authors at this point might have drawn a diagram of the theory to be explicit about factors influencing self-control. However, they provided a series of questions drawn from Rosenbaum’s model and the literature to guide their study. Toward the end of the article, they revisited the factors leading to self-management and presented a diagram of the most salient factors.

The theory used in a mixed method study could also be a social justice theory, such as feminist research, racial or ethnic research, disability research, lifestyle research, and the like. These social justice theories help give voice to populations underrepresented and marginalized in our society.

A mixed method article by Hodgkin (2008) illustrates the use of a feminist emancipatory lens in a mixed methods study. Hodgkin examined if men and women have different social capital profiles and why women participated more in social and community activities than in civic activities in Australia. Her stated aim was to “demonstrate the use of mixed methods in feminist research” (p. 296). Toward the beginning of her article, she discussed the feminist perspective, such as drawing attention to the lack of gender focus in social capital studies, using qualitative and quantitative research giving voice to women’s experiences, and locating her study within the transformative paradigm (worldview). She found a difference in social capital between men and women in her results. She then explored in a second phase the viewpoints of women, noting women’s involvement in informal social participation and community participation. Participation in civic levels of involvement were low, and themes resulting from women were related to wanting to be a “good mother,” wanting to avoid social isolation, and wanting to be an active citizen.

A social justice theory perspective is incorporated into a mixed methods study in these ways:

Indicating a framework in the opening passages of a study (e.g., feminist, participatory)

Mentioning this framework early in a study as it relates to a marginalized or underrepresented community and specific issues faced by the community (e.g., oppression, power)

Lodging this framework within a theoretical body of literature, such as feminist literature or racial literature

Involving the community of interest in research (e.g., in the data collection)

Taking a stand with the research question—advocating in its orientation (e.g., inequality does exist and the research will set out to substantiate it)

Advancing in the design the collection, analysis, and integration of both quantitative and qualitative methods within the transformative framework

Talking about researchers’ experiences and how the experiences and background shapes understanding participants and issues under study

Ending the study by advocating for change to help the population under study and the issue

Importance of a Theory

A mixed methods researcher chooses one or more theories to use in their study. The use of theories in mixed methods research has been suggested by several mixed method authors, such as DeCuir-Gunby and Schutz (2018) and Evans et al. (2011). They maintain it is important to use in mixed methods research because theory:

provides a framework for organizing and reporting the quantitative and qualitative data;

brings together separate investigations or studies and reports common concepts or ideas;

develops a common understanding among research team members, stakeholders, and funder of research about the underlying framework for a study;

provides a prediction for what the researcher hopes to learn;

links concepts and ideas, often in a temporal order; and

provides a visual model for understanding the overall direction of a study.

(Adapted from Evans et al., 2011)

Distinctions Between a Theory and a Worldview

A theory or a theoretical orientation differs from a worldview. As shown in Figure 3.6 (adapted from Crotty, 1998), a worldview relates to the beliefs and values of the researcher and how these inform a study (see Chapter 1). In Crotty’s model, worldviews operate at an abstract level in the research process and may or may not be explicitly stated, as noted in Chapter 1. Theories, in contrast, are less abstract, drawn from the literature, and provide a guiding perspective for designing many research process aspects. From theories, methodological approaches to design follow, such as mixed methods research, and then data collection methods.

[图片: images/008_Chapter 3 The Use of Theory/006_10.4135_9781071817988-fig8.jpg | A flowchart of the four level for developing a research study.]
Description
Figure 3.6 Four Levels for Developing a Research Study (Adapted from Crotty, 1998)

A Theoretically Driven Mixed Methods Study

One theory issue is whether a mixed methods study should give theoretical priority to quantitative or qualitative research (see Creswell & Plano Clark, in press). Morse and Niehaus (2009) contended that mixed methods studies are all theoretically driven. This means that either quantitative or qualitative research holds a major emphasis in the study. Authors of mixed methods studies do mention their drive, such as the phenomenon of caregiving in Mexican American families (Evans et al., 2011). The authors admit to a theoretically driven inductive approach based on the life course perspective (their theoretical perspective). A study can feature either the quantitative or the qualitative use of theory. However, it is difficult for a reader of studies to determine the scope of the theory in a study. Also, the naming of a “driven” orientation to theory creates an unhealthy power imbalance between quantitative and qualitative research. Our stance is that both forms of research are valuable, and a key advantage of mixed methods research is giving both forms of research equal importance.

What Theory Informs

A theory can specifically inform many aspects of a mixed methods project. We return to the Evans et al. (2011) study in the field of nursing and the theory of a Life Course Perspective toward caregiving by Mexican Americans. This study provides a good illustration of incorporating the Life Course Perspective into many facets of the study. A summary of their theory use in the study follows:

The theory is visualized through a model in their article. This model shows the life course perspective trajectory on caregiving. This figure is helpful for stakeholders, team members, and funders.

They drew constructs (variables) from the theory and incorporated them in their study aims.

From the theory, they drew stories from the literature about this model to recruit participants to the study.

The theory constructs informed the qualitative questions addressed and the quantitative instruments and measures.

The theory also provided “starter codes and themes” for the qualitative data analysis and for hypothesized relationships for the quantitative data analysis.

The theory contributed to useful typologies of findings, led to working hypotheses, and illustrated the development of caregiving over time.

We would add to this list of ways to incorporate theory in a mixed methods study. Our approach would be to closely tie the theory to the research design. In the Evans et al. (2011) project, they looked for congruency between their quantitative and qualitative data. Later, in Chapter 10, we will view this approach as a mixed methods research “convergent design.” It would have been helpful if Evans et al. had related the use of theory to their convergent design. Their Life Course Perspective might have informed the quantitative component, the qualitative component, or both in a mixed methods study. Further, in presenting a diagram of the type of their mixed methods design (see Chapter 10), they might have identified the theory (and its name) explicitly in the diagram. Thus, the theory informs certain components of the mixed methods design and is made explicit in the design discussion.

Example 3.4 A Discipline-Based Theory in a Mixed Methods Study

Clark and Plano Clark (2019) illustrate the use of a discipline-based theory in psychology. This project used the theory of positive psychology (a discipline-based theory) as a guiding perspective. They augmented it with social cognitive theory, self-determination theory, and social cognitive career theory. The study examined the relationship between grit (individual passion and perseverance) and career success for working adults. Four hundred twenty-three adults completed four sets of scales and measures in the quantitative phase. The qualitative follow-up phase comprised face-to-face interviews with five individuals. Positive psychology guided the selection of the quantitative measures in the quantitative phase and the selection of participants in the qualitative phase. Positive psychology also informed the interview protocol for the qualitative data collection. Codes to emerge from the qualitative data collection were informed by the social cognitive, self-determination, and social cognitive career theories. The authors stated that positive psychology was used as a lens “through which to frame the research design, case selection, and interpretation of results and findings.” (p.104). Specific use of theory occurred in the data collection and data analysis procedures. In the end, the authors recommended using a theory to inform the design and methods of each project phase.

Summary

Theory use varies in quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods research. Researchers use theory in a quantitative study to provide an explanation or prediction about the relationships among variables in the study. A theory explains how and why the variables are related, acting as a bridge between or among the variables. Theory may be broad or narrow in scope, and researchers state their theories in several ways, such as a series of hypotheses, if-then logic statements, or visual models. Theories contain variables, and it is important to understand the different types of variables, especially independent, mediating, and dependent variables. Variables in quantitative research interrelate through models called causal models. Investigators advance the theory typically at the beginning of the study in the literature review. They also include them with the hypotheses or research questions or place them in a separate section. A script can help design the theory section for a research proposal.

In qualitative research, inquirers employ theory as a broad explanation, much like in quantitative research, such as in ethnographies. It may also be a standpoint lens or perspective related to gender, class, race, or some combination of these. Theory also appears as a qualitative study end point, a generated theory, a pattern, or a generalization emerging inductively from data collection and analysis. Grounded theorists, for example, generate a theory grounded from participant views and place it as the conclusion in the study. Some qualitative studies do not include an explicit theory and present descriptive research of the central phenomenon.

Mixed methods researchers use theory drawn from the literature or a perspective to advance the needs of special populations. Theory takes two forms: a discipline-based theory or a social justice theory. A discipline-based theory placed at the beginning of studies provides an explanation for the quantitative and (perhaps) qualitative components (e.g., data collection, analysis, interpretation) of a study and informs the findings and results. A social justice theory is used in mixed methods. It is a lens for looking at a problem recognizing the non-neutrality of knowledge, the pervasive influence of human interests, and issues such as power and social relationships. A social justice mixed methods study helps improve the lives of underrepresented groups. A useful guide in this chapter addresses the many phases of research that a theory can inform. Especially important is linking the theory to the type of design and specifying how the theory informs the quantitative, qualitative, or overall methods in a study.

Key Terms

Categorical scales 56

Causality 56

Confounding variable 55

Continuous scales 56

Dependent variables 54

Discipline-based theory 69

Hypothesis 56

Independent variables 54

Intervening or mediating variables 55

Moderating variables 55

Outcome variables 55

Predictor variables 55

Scale of measurement 56

Social justice theory 70

Temporal order 57

Theoretical end point 66

Theoretical standpoint 65

Theory in quantitative research 53

Variable 54

Writing Exercises

Search one of the computer databases mentioned in Chapter 2. Locate a journal article with a theory. Identify the variables mentioned in the theory, and discuss whether the authors of the article presented a causal model of the theory.

Again, search the literature for a qualitative study that uses theory as an end point for the study. This means that the author presents a theoretical model at the end of the study. What general process did the author use to develop this model?

This time, search the literature for a mixed methods study that uses a theory. Discuss how the author used the theory to inform the mixed methods design and its quantitative, qualitative, and overall methods.

Additional Readings

Bachman, R. D., & Schutt, R. K. (2017). Fundamentals of research in criminology and criminal justice (4th ed.). SAGE.

Causation represents a key component in understanding quantitative theory use. In their book, Ronet Bachman and Russell Schutt include an easy-to-understand chapter on causation and experimentation. They discuss the meaning of causation, the criteria for achieving it, and how to use information to form causal conclusions. Especially useful is their discussion about the conditions necessary for determining causality.

Blalock, H. (1991). Are there any constructive alternatives to causal modeling? Sociological Methodology, 21, 325–335.

For many years, Herbert Blalock’s ideas have provided an understanding of causal modeling in the social sciences. In this thoughtful essay, Blalock stated that correlational methods do not equate to causation. He talked about the potential of “lagged” effects in understanding causation, that is, variables that emerge over time and can be difficult to specify. He called for making assumptions explicit in causal mechanisms in experimental designs. With these points in mind, Blalock called for the use of more complex causal models to test important questions in social research.

Evans, B. C., Coon, D. W., & Ume, E. (2011). Use of theoretical frameworks as a pragmatic guide for mixed methods studies: A methodological necessity? Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 5(4), 276–292.

Researchers using theories in mixed methods research can profit from a guide that describes ways to incorporate theory throughout a project. Bronwynne Evans, David Coon, and Ebere Ume provide such a guide. This article advances theory frameworks useful in a mixed methods study, such as in the design, addressing temporal causality, examining constructs in the theory, using the theory to code and develop themes, and formulating propositions. They illustrate the use of these theory applications with an empirical study from nursing using the Life Course Perspective as a theory to examine caregiver burden among Mexican American caregivers.

Flinders, D. J., & Mills, G. E. (Eds.). (1993). Theory and concepts in qualitative research: Perspectives from the field. Columbia University, Teachers College Press.

Understanding how theories work in qualitative research needs further attention. David Flinders and Geoffrey Mills have edited a book about perspectives from the field—theory at work—as described by different qualitative researchers. The chapters illustrate little consensus about defining theory and whether it is a vice or virtue. Further, theory operates at many levels in research, such as formal theories, epistemological theories, methodological theories, and meta-theories. Given this diversity, it is best to see actual theory at work in qualitative studies, and this volume illustrates practice from critical, personal, formal, and educational criticism.

Mertens, D. M. (2003). Mixed methods and the politics of human research: The transformative-emancipatory perspective. In A. Tashakkori & C. Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research (pp. 135–164). SAGE.

Historically, research methods have not concerned themselves with the needs of marginalized groups and social justice. Merten’s chapter explores the transformative-emancipatory paradigm of research as a framework or lens for mixed methods research. It has emerged from scholars from diverse ethnic and racial groups, people with disabilities, and feminists. A unique aspect of her chapter is how she weaves together this paradigm of thinking and the steps in the process of conducting mixed methods research.

Thomas, G. (1997). What’s the use of theory? Harvard Educational Review, 67(1), 75–104.

Some individuals question whether a theory should be used in research. Gary Thomas presents a reasoned critique of the use of theory in educational inquiry. He notes the definitions of theory and maps out four broad uses: as (a) thinking and reflection, (b) tighter or looser hypotheses, (c) explanations for adding to knowledge in different fields, and (d) formally expressed statements in science. Having noted these uses, he then embraces the thesis that theory unnecessarily structures and constrains thought.

Descriptions of Images and Figures

Back to Figure

The three predictor variables are uppercase X subscript 1, uppercase X subscript 2, and uppercase X subscript 3. The two intervening variables are uppercase Y subscript 1 and uppercase Y subscript 2. The dependent variable is uppercase Z subscript 1. uppercase X subscript 2 is interconnected with uppercase X subscript 1 and uppercase X subscript 3. Arrows labeled with a positive sign point from uppercase X subscript 1 to uppercase Y subscript 1, and from uppercase X subscript 2 to uppercase Y subscript 1 and uppercase Y subscript 2. An arrow labeled with a negative sign points from uppercase X subscript 3 to uppercase Y subscript 2. Arrows labeled with a positive sign point from uppercase Y subscript 1 and uppercase Y subscript 2 to uppercase Z subscript 1.

Back to Figure

The exogenous variables are as follows:

Demographic variables

Institutional tenure standards

Tenure-track appointment

College in health sciences center

Self-perception as researcher

Prior research training

Type of appointment, chair versus faculty

The independent or endogenous variables are as follows:

Workload, non-research

Pressure to conduct research

Collaboration

Resources

Support from colleagues

Support from department chair

The dependent variable is scholarly performance and includes the following:

Presentations, non-research

Presentations, research

Journal articles, non-refereed

Refereed articles, research

Refereed articles, non-research

Book chapters

Books

Federal grants, approved

Federal grants, funded

Non-federal grants

Contracts

Arrows labeled with a positive sign are between the following variables:

From self-perception as researcher to institutional tenure standards, tenure-track appointment, college in health sciences center, and scholarly performance.

From prior research training to self-perception as researcher.

From tenure-track appointment to pressure to conduct research, collaboration, resources, and support from department chair.

From college in health sciences sector to collaboration and resources.

From pressure to conduct research, collaboration, resources, and support from department chair to scholarly performance.

Arrows labeled with a negative sign are between the following variables:

Tenure-track appointment to workload

Workload to scholarly performance

Arrows labeled with positive and negative signs are between the following variables:

Demographic variables and type of appointment to scholarly performance.

An arrow points from support from colleagues to scholarly performance.

Back to Figure

The stages from top to bottom are as follows:

Researcher tests or verifies a theory.

Researcher tests hypotheses or research questions from the theory.

Researcher defines and operationalizes variables derived from the theory.

Researcher measures variables using instruments to test hypotheses.

Back to Figure

The stages from bottom to top are as follows:

Researcher gathers information, for example, interviews, observations.

Researcher asks open-ended questions of participants or records fieldnotes.

Researcher analyzes data to form themes or categories.

Researcher looks for broad patterns, generalizations, or theories from themes or categories.

Researcher poses generalizations or theories from past experiences and literature.

Back to Figure

The levels (top to bottom) are as follows:

Paradigm worldview: Beliefs, values of the researcher

Theoretical lens: For example, feminist, racial, substantive content theories

Methodological approach: For example, ethnography, experiment, mixed methods

Methods of data collection: For example, interviews, checklists, instruments
