Chapter 4 Writing Strategies and Ethical Considerations
=======================================================

Chapter 4 Writing Strategies and Ethical Considerations

Learning Objectives

Identify the nine key topics to include in a proposal or a research study.

Compare the differences in the structure of proposals for quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods research studies.

Evaluate the quality of your writing for conciseness, coherence, and unnecessary words.

Identify ethical issues and strategies for addressing them before conducting a study and during and after a study.

Introduction

Before designing a proposal, plan the general structure or outline of the topics and their order. The structure differs depending on a quantitative, qualitative, or a mixed methods project. Another general consideration is to be aware of good writing practices that will help ensure a consistent and easily readable proposal or research project. Affecting all phases of the study will be attending to good ethical practices and anticipating issues. This chapter provides guidance for the overall structure of proposals or projects, writing practices that make projects easy to read, and ethical issues that need to be anticipated in research studies.

Writing the Proposal

Before writing a proposal for a research study, consider the topics and format for qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods studies.

Topics Presented in a Proposal

It is helpful to consider early in planning a study the major topics that need to be addressed in a proposal. These topics need to be interconnected to provide a cohesive picture of the entire project, and they span all research studies, whether qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods. A good place to start is examining Maxwell’s (2013) list of the core arguments that need to be advanced in any proposal. We summarize them in our own words:

What do readers need to better understand your topic?

What do readers know about your topic?

What do you propose to study?

What is the setting, and who are the people you will study?

What methods do you plan to use to collect data?

How will you analyze the data?

How will you validate your findings?

What ethical issues will your study present?

What do preliminary results show about the feasibility and value of the proposed study?

If addressed adequately with a section devoted to each question, these nine questions constitute the foundation of good research, and they provide the overall structure for a proposal. The inclusion of validation, ethical considerations, preliminary results, and early evidence of practical significance represents key elements often overlooked in discussions about proposed projects.

A Qualitative Proposal

Beyond these nine questions, it is also helpful to have an overall outline or general structure for topics included in a proposal for a study. Unquestionably, in qualitative research, no one structure prevails. However, guidance shown in several general outlines can help, especially for a student new to the process of writing a thesis or dissertation. Here we propose two alternative qualitative models. Example 4.1 draws on a constructivist or interpretivist worldview. Example 4.2 is based on participatory or social justice (see worldviews in Chapter 1).

Example 4.1 A Qualitative Constructivist or Interpretivist Format

Introduction

 Statement of the Problem (including existing literature, deficiencies in the literature, and relevance of study for audiences)

 Purpose of the Study

 The Research Questions

 Philosophical Assumptions or Worldview and Theory

Procedures

 Qualitative Design (e.g., descriptive, ethnography, case study)

 Role of the Researcher

 Data Collection Procedures

 Data Analysis Procedures

 Proposed Narrative Structure for Findings

 Strategies for Validation

 Anticipated Ethical Issues

Preliminary Pilot Findings (if available)

Expected Impact and Significance of Study

References

Appendixes: Interview Questions and Protocol, Observational Forms, Timeline for the Study, Proposed Budget, Summary of the Proposed Content of Each Chapter in the Final Study

In this example, the writer includes an introduction, procedures, ethical issues, preliminary findings, and the expected impact of the study. A separate section reviewing the literature may be included, but it is optional, as discussed in Chapter 2. Several appendixes may seem unusual. Developing a timeline for the study and presenting a proposed budget provide useful information to committees, although these sections are optional but highly recommended. Also, because the number and type of chapters in qualitative research is highly variable, a summary of each chapter’s content in the final study is helpful.

This format is like the constructivist or interpretivist format except that the inquirer identifies a specific participatory or social justice framework used in the study (e.g., oppression, discrimination, community involvement). Also, this format contains a collaborative form of data collection, and mentions the anticipated changes resulting from the research study.

A Quantitative Proposal

For a quantitative study, the format conforms to sections typically found in quantitative studies reported in journal articles. The form generally follows the model of an introduction and literature review, method, results, and discussion. In planning a quantitative study and designing a dissertation proposal, consider the following format as shown in Example 4.3.

Example 4.2 A Qualitative Participatory or Social Justice Format

Introduction

 Statement of the Problem (including existing literature, deficiencies in the literature, and relevance of study for audiences)

 The Social Justice Theory (its major elements, past use, applicability to present study)

 Purpose of the Study

 The Research Questions

 Philosophical Assumptions or Worldview and Theory

Procedures

 Qualitative Design (descriptive, case study, etc.)

 Role of the Researcher

 Data Collection Procedures (including the collaborative approaches used with participants)

 Data Analysis Procedures

 Strategies for Validation

 Proposed Narrative Structure for Findings

 Anticipated Ethical Issues

Preliminary Pilot Findings (if available)

Significance of the Study and Transformative Changes Likely to Occur

References

Appendixes: Interview Questions and Protocol, Observational Forms, Timeline, Proposed Budget, and a Summary of Proposed Chapters for the Final Study

Example 4.3 A Quantitative Format

Introduction and Literature Review

 Statement of the Problem (issue, theory, existing literature about problem, deficiencies in literature, relevance of study for audiences)

 Purpose of the Study

 Research Questions or Hypotheses

Method

 Population, Sample, Participants, Recruitment of Participants

 Type of Research Design (e.g., experimental, survey)

 Procedure (procedures and variables, instruments and materials, ethical considerations)

 Data Analysis Procedures

 Preliminary Studies or Pilot Tests

Appendixes: Instruments and Materials, Timeline, Proposed Budget, Outline of Proposed Chapters

Example 4.3 is a standard format for a social science study (see Miller & Salkind, 2002); however, the order of the sections, especially in the use of theory and the literature, may vary from study to study (see, e.g., Rudestam & Newton, 2014).

A Mixed Methods Proposal

In a mixed methods format, the researcher brings together the quantitative and qualitative research. An example of such a format appears in Example 4.4 (adapted from Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018). Similar elements are found in standards for publishing a mixed methods journal article being advanced by the American Psychological Association (Levitt et al., 2018).

Example 4.4 A Mixed Methods Format

Introduction

 The Research Problem (deficiencies in past research, the need for both quantitative and qualitative data, and the insight from combining, or integrating, the two data sets)

 The Purpose or Study Aim (the overall intent of collecting and combining quantitative and qualitative data)

 The Research Questions and Hypotheses (quantitative questions or hypotheses, qualitative questions, mixed methods integration questions)

 Philosophical Assumptions or Worldview and Theory

 Literature Review (typically review quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods studies and indicate the need for a mixed methods study)

Methods

 A Definition of Mixed Methods Research and Rationale for Using It

 The Type of Mixed Methods Design, Its Definition, and Example Studies Using It

 A Diagram of the Design

 Validity Challenges in the Design

 Quantitative Data Collection (ordered to fit the mixed methods design)

 Quantitative Data Analysis

 Qualitative Data Collection

 Qualitative Data Analysis

 An Integration Statement

 A Sample Joint Display Template

 Anticipated Insights or Metainferences

Researcher’s Resources and Skills to Conduct Mixed Methods Research

Potential Ethical Issues

References

Appendixes: Instruments, Data Collection Protocols, Diagram of the Design, Timeline, Budget, Summary of Major Content for Each Chapter

This format shows that the researcher poses research questions for quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods integration. Specify early in the proposal the reasons (rationale) for the mixed methods approach and identify key elements of the process, such as the type of mixed methods design, a visual diagram of the procedures, validity challenges in the design, and the quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis steps. This format could make the mixed methods proposal lengthier than the qualitative or quantitative proposal.

Designing the Sections of a Proposal

Here are several research tips that we give to students about designing the overall structure of a proposal:

Specify the sections early in the design of a proposal. Work on one section often prompts ideas for other sections. First develop an outline, and then write something for each section rapidly to get ideas down on paper. Then refine the sections as you consider the information that should go into each one in more detail.

Find proposals that other students have authored under your adviser, and study them closely. Ask your advisers for copies of proposals they especially liked and felt were scholarly products to take to committees. Examine the topics addressed, their order, and the level of detail used in composing the proposal.

Determine whether your program or institution offers a course on proposal development or some similar topic. Often such a class will be helpful as a support network for your project to have individuals react to your proposal ideas as they develop.

Sit with your adviser, and go over their preferred format for a proposal. Ask this adviser for a copy of a proposal that might serve as a guide and whether there are published scientific articles they recommend you study.

Consider the appropriate topics and the length of the proposal that will be acceptable to your adviser and committee members. We prefer a proposal that does not exceed 30 pages, but the length will differ by advisers, committees, and institutions. Some advisers and committee members will expect the first three chapters of the dissertation (introduction, literature review, and methods) as a proposal.

Writing Strategies

The Process

Early in the process of research, write ideas down rather than talk about them.

Bailey (1984) discusses how writing down ideas represents good thinking about a project. Zinsser (1983) discusses the need to get words out of our heads and onto paper. Advisers react better when they read the ideas on paper than when they hear and discuss a research topic with a student or colleague. When a researcher renders ideas on paper, this process helps visualize the final product, see how it looks, and begin to clarify ideas. The concept of working ideas out on paper has served many experienced writers well. Before designing a proposal, draft a one- to two-page overview of your project, and have your adviser approve the direction of your proposed study. This draft might contain the essential information: the research problem, the purpose of the study, the central questions, the sources of data, the project’s significance for different audiences, and how you are thinking about the practical issues around completing the project (e.g., a budget, a project timeline, anticipated problems, and how you will address them). It might also be useful to draft several one- to two-page statements on different topics and see which one your adviser likes best and feels would make the best contribution to your field.

Work through several drafts of a proposal rather than trying to polish the first draft.

It is illuminating to see how people think on paper. Zinsser (1983) has identified two types of writers: (a) the “bricklayer,” who makes every paragraph just right before going on to the next paragraph, and (b) the “let-it-all-hang-out-on-the-first-draft” writer, who writes an entire first draft not caring about sloppy or bad writing. In between these extremes comes a suggestion from Elbow (1973), who recommends the iterative process of writing, reviewing, and rewriting. He has advised this process: With only 1 hour to write a passage, write four drafts (one every 15 minutes) rather than one draft (typically written in the last 15 minutes) during the hour. Most experienced researchers write the first draft carefully but do not work for a polished draft; the polish comes relatively late in the writing process.

Do not edit your proposal at the early-draft stage. Instead, consider Franklin’s (1986) three-stage model, which we have found useful in developing proposals and in our scholarly writing:

First, develop an outline; it could be a sentence or word outline or a visual map.

Write out a draft and then shift and sort ideas, moving around entire paragraphs in the manuscript.

Finally, edit and polish each sentence.

The Habit of Writing

Establish the discipline or habit of writing regularly and continuously. Write some sections of a proposal or study, and then set them aside. A researcher gains perspective when returning to the study after a short break. Further, a start-and-stop process of writing often disrupts the flow of work. It may turn a well-meaning researcher into a “weekend writer.” This individual works on research on weekends after finishing the other important work of the week. Continual work on the proposal means writing something each day or at least being engaged daily in the processes of thinking, collecting information, and reviewing.

Select a suitable time of day to work, and then discipline yourself to write at this time each day. Choose a place free of distractions. We adapted Boice’s (1990, pp. 77–78) ideas about establishing good writing habits:

Set a priority on writing, and make it a daily activity, regardless of mood or readiness to write.

If you feel you do not have time for regular writing, begin with reflection on daily activities for a week or two in half-hour blocks. This reflection will likely lead to time to write.

Write while you are fresh during the day or night.

Avoid writing in binges.

Write in small, regular amounts.

Schedule writing tasks so that you plan to work on specific, manageable units of writing in each session.

Keep daily charts. Graph at least three things: (a) time spent writing, (b) page equivalents finished, and (c) percentage of planned task completed.

Plan beyond daily goals.

Share your writing with supportive, constructive friends until you feel ready to go public.

Consider also the writing implements and the physical location aiding the process of disciplined writing. The implements—an online dictionary and a thesaurus, a tablet for jotting down thoughts, a cup of coffee, and a handful of crackers (Wolcott, 2009). A favorite fountain pen offers the writer options and comfortable ways to write. Consider adding a grammar-checking computer application to assist in cleaning up the writing. The physical setting can also help. Annie Dillard (1989), the Pulitzer Prize–winning novelist, avoided appealing workplaces:

One wants a room with no view, so imagination can meet memory in the dark. When I furnished this study seven years ago, I pushed the long desk against a blank wall, so I could not see from either window. Once, fifteen years ago, I wrote in a cinder-block cell over a parking lot. It overlooked a tar-and-gravel roof. This pine shed under trees is not quite so good as the cinder-block study was, but it will do. (pp. 26–27)

Clear and Concise Writing

Before beginning the writing, consider enhancing the readability of the manuscript. The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (American Psychological Association, 2020) discusses an orderly presentation by showing the relationships between ideas and the use of transitional words. In addition, it is important to use consistent terms, a staging and foreshadowing of ideas, and coherence built into the plan.

Use consistent terms throughout the proposal. In a quantitative study, use a consistent name for mentioning variables. In qualitative research, state the same name for the central phenomena each time. Refrain from using synonyms for these names, a problem that causes the reader to misunderstand ideas and monitor subtle shifts in meaning. When terms shift, even slightly, it throws the reader off and causes them to question the research.

Consider how narrative thoughts of different types guide a reader. Tarshis (1982) advanced the idea that writers should have in mind the purpose of different-sized narrative thoughts and purposes for segments of text. He said there were four types:

Umbrella thoughts: the general or core ideas one is trying to get across

Big thoughts in writing: specific ideas or images that fall within the realm of umbrella thoughts and serve to reinforce, clarify, or elaborate upon the umbrella thoughts

Little thoughts: ideas or images whose chief function is to reinforce big thoughts

Attention or interest thoughts: ideas whose purposes are to keep the reader on track, organize ideas, and keep an individual’s attention

Beginning researchers often struggle most with umbrella and attention thoughts. A proposal may include too many umbrella ideas with content not sufficiently detailed to support large ideas. This might occur in a literature review in which the researcher needs to provide fewer small sections and more larger sections to tie together large bodies of literature. A clear mark of this problem is a continual shift of ideas from one major topic to another in a manuscript. Often, one sees short, unconnected paragraphs in introductions to proposals, like those written by journalists in newspaper articles. Thinking in terms of a detailed narrative to support umbrella ideas may help this problem.

Attention thoughts that provide organizational statements to guide the reader are also needed. Readers can use road signs to guide them from one major idea to the next (Chapters 6 and 7 of this book discuss major road signs in research, such as purpose statements and research questions and hypotheses). An organizing paragraph is often useful at the beginning and end of literature reviews. Readers need to see the overall organization of the ideas through introductory paragraphs that helps them understand the most salient points they should remember in a summary. The example of a good proposal or application for federal funding comes to mind. In these applications, researchers pause the narrative from time to time to provide attention thoughts that organize a reader to see material to come next.

Coherence

Use coherence to add to the readability of the manuscript. Coherence in writing means that ideas tie together, logically flow from one sentence to another, and connect from one paragraph to another. For example, the repetition of the same variable names in the title, the purpose statement, the research questions, and the review of the literature headings in a quantitative project add to coherence. Likewise, emphasizing a consistent order for presenting independent and dependent variables contributes to a coherent research proposal.

On a more detailed level, coherence builds through connecting sentences and paragraphs in the manuscript. Zinsser (1983) has suggested that every sentence should be a logical sequel to the one that preceded it. The hook-and-eye exercise (Wilkinson, 1991) is useful for connecting thoughts from sentence to sentence and paragraph to paragraph. The researcher examines their writing, circles key ideas in each sentence, and then connects the sentences (or paragraphs) with a line. A good connection indicates coherence; a difficult connection shows a lack of coherence. Specific words provide this linkage.

The passage in Figure 4.1 from a draft of a student’s proposal shows a high level of coherence. It comes from the introductory section of a qualitative dissertation project about at-risk students. In this passage, we draw hooks and eyes to connect the words from sentence to sentence and from paragraph to paragraph. In this example, we were able to identify key ideas (“eyes”) and “hook” the ideas within sentences and paragraphs. If we had found little coherence, the researcher would need to add transitional words, phrases, or sentences to establish clear connections. This connection pertains to connected chapters as well as sentences and paragraphs. Examine McPherson’s (1988) book about the Civil War, The Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era. He does a masterful job of ending a chapter with ideas that naturally lead into the next chapter.

[图片: images/009_Chapter 4 Writing Strategies and Ethical Considerations/001_10.4135_9781071817988-fig9.jpg | A text for illustrating the hook and eye technique. Continuation of the text for illustrating the hook and eye technique.]
Description
Figure 4.1 An Illustration of the Hook and Eye Technique

It is important for a reader to find coherence in a proposal starting with the first page. In John’s proposal development classes, he provided students with a coherence exercise on applying the “hook and eye” activity. He first gave students a proposal introduction and asked them to analyze the passage using the “hook and eye.” After they completed the activity, he then provided a marked-up passage. He also pointed out where the manuscript needed transition words and phrases.

Voice, Tense, and “Fat”

From working with broad thoughts and paragraphs, we recommend moving to the level of writing sentences and words. Similar grammar and sentence construction issues are addressed in the APA Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020), but we include this section to highlight some common grammar issues that we have seen in student proposals and in our writing.

We direct our discussion now toward the “polish” level of writing, to use Franklin’s (1986) term. It is a stage addressed late in the writing process. One can find many writing books about research writing and literary writing with rules and principles following good sentence construction and word choice. Wolcott (2009), a qualitative ethnographer, for example, talks about honing editorial skills to eliminate unnecessary words (keeping the essential words), deleting the passive voice (using the active voice), and scaling down qualifiers (keeping only one qualifier at best). He also recommends eliminating overused phrases (completely striking these out) and reducing excessive quotations, italics, and parenthetical comments. The following additional ideas about active voice, verb tense, and reduced fat can strengthen and invigorate scholarly writing for dissertation and thesis proposals and projects.

Use the active voice as much as possible in scholarly writing (American Psychological Association, 2020). According to the literary writer Ross-Larson (1982), “If the subject acts, the voice is active. If the subject is acted on, the voice is passive” (p. 29). In addition, a sign of passive construction is some variation of an auxiliary verb, such as was, will be, have been, and is being. Writers can use passive construction when the person acting can logically be left out of the sentence and when what is acted on is the subject of the rest of the paragraph (Ross-Larson, 1982).

Use strong active verbs appropriate for the passage. Lazy verbs lack action, commonly called “to be” verbs, such as is or was, or verbs turned into adjectives or adverbs.

Pay close attention to the tense of your verbs. A common practice exists in using the past tense to review the literature and report results of past studies. The past tense represents a commonly used form in quantitative research. The future tense appropriately indicates that the study will be conducted in the future, a key verb used in proposals. Use the present tense to add clarity to a study, especially in the introduction. This tense form frequently occurs in qualitative studies. In mixed methods studies, researchers employ either the present or past tense. The appropriate tense often reflects whether the major orientation of the study will be quantitative or qualitative research (thus emphasizing one or the other in a study). The APA Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020) recommends the past tense (e.g., “Jones reported”) or the present perfect tense (e.g., “Researchers have reported”) for the literature review and procedures based on past events, the past tense to describe results (e.g., “stress lowered self-esteem”), and the present tense (e.g., “the qualitative findings show”) to discuss the results and to present the conclusions. We see this not as a hard and fast rule but as a useful guideline.

Expect to edit and revise drafts of a manuscript to trim the fat. Fat refers to additional words that are unnecessary to convey the meaning of ideas and need to be removed. Writing multiple drafts of a manuscript is standard practice for most writers. The process typically comprises writing, reviewing, and editing. In the editing process, trim excess words from sentences, such as piled-up modifiers, excessive prepositions, and “the-of” constructions—for example, “the study of”—that add unnecessary verbiage (Ross-Larson, 1982). We were reminded of the unnecessary prose that comes into writing by the example mentioned by Bunge (1985):

Nowadays you can almost see bright people struggling to reinvent the complex sentence before your eyes. A friend of mine who is a college administrator every now and then has to say a complex sentence, and he will get into one of those morasses that begins, “I would hope that we would be able. . . .” He never talked that way when I first met him, but even at his age, at his distance from the crisis in the lives of younger people, he’s been to some extent alienated from easy speech. (p. 172)

Begin studying good writing about research using qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods designs. The eye does not pause and the mind does not stumble in good writing. The prose moves along quickly.

We attempt in this book to draw examples of good research from health and social science journals, such as Administrative Science Quarterly, American Educational Research Journal, American Journal of Sociology, Journal of Applied Psychology, Journal of Mixed Methods Research, The International Journal of Multiple Research Approaches, Journal of Nursing Scholarship, Annals of Family Medicine, and Sociology of Education. In the qualitative area, good literature serves to illustrate clear prose and detailed passages. Individuals teaching qualitative research often assign to students well-known books from literature, such as Moby Dick, The Scarlet Letter, and The Bonfire of the Vanities, as reading assignments (Webb & Glesne, 1992). The Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, Qualitative Family Research, Qualitative Health Research, Qualitative Inquiry, and Qualitative Research represent good, scholarly journals in qualitative research. When using mixed methods research, examine journals that report studies with combined qualitative and quantitative research and data. Examine social science journals, such as the Journal of Mixed Methods Research, The International Journal of Multiple Research Approaches, Field Methods, Quality and Quantity, and the International Journal of Social Research Methodology. Examine numerous articles cited in the SAGE Handbook of Mixed Methods in Social and Behavioral Research (Tashakkori & Teddlie, 2010) and in The Mixed Methods Reader (Plano Clark & Creswell, 2008).

Ethical Issues

In addition to conceptualizing the writing process for a proposal or study, researchers need to anticipate the ethical issues and devise strategies for addressing them (Berg, 2001; Hesse-Biber & Leavy, 2011; Punch, 2005; Sieber, 1998). Research involves collecting data from and about people (Punch, 2014), leading to difficult ethical issues. Writing about these ethical issues is a cornerstone of good research writing. As shown in Table 4.1, attention needs to be directed toward ethical issues prior to or before conducting the study, beginning a study, during data collection and data analysis, and in reporting, disseminating, and storing the data. Ethical issues arise in qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods research and all stages of research.

Table 4.1 Ethical Issues in Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Research

[图片: images/009_Chapter 4 Writing Strategies and Ethical Considerations/002_10.4135_9781071817988-table7.jpg]

Table 4.1 Ethical Issues in Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Research

Process of Research Where the Ethical Issue Occurs

Type of Ethical Issue

How to Address the Issue

Prior to conducting the study

Examine professional association standards.

Seek college/university institutional review board (IRB) approval.

Gain local permission from site and participants.

Select a site for the study.

Negotiate authorship for publication.

Plan to keep the burden of research for participants to a minimum.

Consult the code of ethics for professional associations in your field or discipline.

Submit a proposal for IRB approval.

Identify and seek local approvals; find gatekeepers or key personnel to help.

Select a site where the researcher can be objective and not have a personal interest.

Decide on author order for publication based on each author’s contribution.

Use brief instruments, pilot-test user acceptability of data collection, collect data at convenient times, and provide compensation for participants’ time.

Beginning the study

Identify a research problem that will benefit participants.

Disclose purpose of the study.

Do not pressure participants into signing consent forms.

Respect norms and charters of indigenous societies.

Be sensitive to vulnerable populations’ needs (e.g., children).

Determine the needs of participants through a needs assessment or informal conversations.

Contact participants and inform them of the general purpose of the study.

Tell participants that they have a right not to sign the consent form.

Contact indigenous leaders, and involve them in all phases of research.

Obtain appropriate consent for vulnerable populations (e.g., parents as well as children).

Collecting data

Respect the site, and disrupt as little as possible.

Make certain that all participants receive the same treatment.

Recruit participants by collaborating with stakeholders and community partners.

Avoid deceiving participants.

Respect potential power imbalances and exploitation of participants (e.g., through interviewing, observing).

Do not “use” participants by gathering data and leaving site.

Avoid collecting information harmful to participants.

Build trust, and discuss extent of anticipated disruption in gaining access with participants.

Put into place wait-list provisions for treatment for participants in the control group.

Recruit to support the representation of special populations and access to diverse national networks.

Discuss purpose of the study and the use of the data.

Avoid leading questions, withhold personal opinions, do not disclose sensitive information, and involve participants as collaborators.

Provide rewards for participating.

Stick to questions stated in an interview protocol.

Analyzing data

Avoid siding with participants.

Avoid disclosing only positive results.

Respect the privacy and anonymity of participants.

Report multiple perspectives.

Report contrary findings.

Assign fictitious names or aliases, and develop composite profiles of participants.

Reporting, sharing, and storing data

Avoid falsifying authorship, evidence, data, findings, and conclusions.

Do not plagiarize.

Avoid disclosing information that would harm participants.

Communicate in clear, straightforward, appropriate language.

Share data with others.

Keep raw data and other materials (e.g., details of procedures, instruments).

Do not duplicate or piecemeal publications.

Provide complete proof of compliance with ethical issues and lack of conflict of interest, if requested.

State who owns the data from a study.

Report honestly.

See American Psychological Association (2020) guidelines for permissions needed to reprint or adapt work of others.

Use composite stories to protect the identity of participants.

Use biased-free language, and refrain from discriminatory language.

Provide copies of reports to participants and stakeholders, and consider website distribution.

Keep and store materials for five years.

Refrain from using the same material for more than one publication.

Disclose funders for research and those who profit from the research.

Give credit for ownership to researchers, participants, and advisers.

Sources: Adapted from APA (2020); Creswell and Poth (2018); Lincoln (2009); Mertens and Ginsberg (2009); and Salmons (2010).

Prior to Beginning the Study

Examine Codes of Ethics.

Consult early in the development of your proposal the code of ethics for your professional association. In the literature, ethical issues arise in discussions about codes of professional conduct for researchers and in commentaries about ethical dilemmas and their potential solutions (Punch, 2014). Many national professional associations publish standards or codes of ethics on their websites. For example, see the following websites:

The American Psychological Association Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct, current version, 2017 (www.apa.org)

The American Sociological Association Code of Ethics, current version, 2008 (www.asanet.org)

The American Anthropological Association’s Code of Ethics, current version, 2012 (ethics.americananthro.org)

The American Educational Research Association Ethical Standards of the American Educational Research Association, current version 2011 (www.aera.net)

The American Nurses Association Nursing Code of Ethics, current version, 2015 (www.nurse.org)

The American Medical Association Code of Ethics, current version, 2016 (www.ama-assn.org)

Apply to the Institutional Review Board.

Researchers need to have their research plans reviewed by an institutional review board (IRB) on their college and university campuses. IRB committees exist on campuses because of federal regulations that protect against human rights violations. Approval is needed by the IRB before data collection occurs. The IRB committee requires the researcher to assess participant potential risk, such as physical, psychological, social, economic, or legal harm (Sieber, 1998). Also, the researcher needs to consider the special needs of vulnerable populations, such as minors (under the age of 19), mentally incompetent participants, victims, persons with neurological impairments, pregnant women or fetuses, prisoners, and individuals with AIDS. Before the study begins researchers file an application with the IRB that contains procedures and information about participants. The committee reviews the extent to which participants are at risk in the study. In addition to this application, researchers need to have participants sign informed consent forms agreeing to the provisions of the study before they provide data. This form contains a standard set of elements that acknowledges protection of human rights. They include the following (Sarantakos, 2005):

Identification of the researcher

Identification of the sponsoring institution

Identification of the purpose of the study

Identification of the benefits for participating

Identification of the level and type of participants’ involvement

Statements of potential risks to participants

Guarantees of confidentiality to the participants

Assurance that participants can withdraw at any time

Names of persons to contact if questions arise

Obtain Necessary Permissions.

Prior to the study, researchers need to obtain approval of individuals in authority (e.g., gatekeepers) to access sites and study participants. This approval often involves writing a letter specifying the extent of time, potential impact, and research outcomes. Use of internet responses through electronic interviews or surveys also needs permission from participants. First obtain permission and then send out the interview or survey via the internet.

Select a Site With No Vested Interests.

Select a site to study where you do not have an interest in outcomes. It does not allow for quantitative objectivity or full expression of qualitative multiple perspectives. Select sites that will not raise these questions of power and influence in your study.

Negotiate Authorship for Publication.

If planning to publish your study (e.g., a dissertation project), negotiate authorship order and involvement before beginning the study. Order of authorship typically follows individuals’ contributions to the study. Israel and Hay (2006) have discussed the unethical practice of “gift authorship” where individuals receive authorship who do not contribute to a manuscript. They also discuss “ghost authorship,” where researchers omit junior staff who made significant contributions from the list of authors. The inclusion of authors and the order of authorship may change during a study, but a preliminary understanding early in the project helps address this issue before publication.

Beginning the Study

Identify a Beneficial Problem.

When studying a research problem, identify a problem beneficial to participants and one meaningful to others besides the researcher (Punch, 2014). Hesse-Biber and Leavy (2011) raise awareness of this issue when they ask, “How do ethical issues enter into your selection of a research problem?” (p. 86). To identify the best problem to study, proposal developers often conduct pilot projects or a needs assessment or hold informal conversations with participants. Such strategies help detect any potential marginalization of participants through the research before the study begins.

Disclose the Purpose of the Study.

In developing the purpose statement or the central intent and questions for a study, proposal developers need to describe the purpose of the study to participants (Sarantakos, 2005). Deception occurs when participants understand one purpose, but the researcher holds a different purpose. Another disclosure is the specification of the study’s sponsors. Such disclosure can occur by designing cover letters inviting participants to a study with sponsors’ names attached.

Do Not Pressure Participants to Sign Consent Forms.

The researcher should not require participants to sign the informed consent form when collecting consent for a study. Participation in a study is voluntary, and this needs explanation in the informed consent form instructions.

Respect Norms and Charters of Indigenous Cultures.

The researcher needs to anticipate and respect cultural, religious, gender, or other differences in the participants and sites. Recent discussions about the norms and charters of indigenous populations, such as Native American tribes, need to be observed (LaFrance & Crazy Bull, 2009). As Native Americans take over the delivery of services to members, they have reclaimed their right to approve research and its report in a sensitive way to tribal culture and charters. Respect also occurs through research approaches such as refraining from using the language of the dominant culture (instead of indigenous gestures, tone, expressions) and emphasizing cultural conversational methods (e.g., talking circles, storytelling). It also occurs through seeking out wise “knowers” of the language, practices, and rituals and including participants as co-researchers. Researchers should be accountable and respectful, reciprocate for visiting the people and sites, and observe indigenous rights and regulations of participants (Chilisa & Tsheko, 2014).

Assess the Burden of the Research on Participants.

Another respectful strategy is to respect the potential burden the research places on participants. All forms of research place a burden on participants, but often an undue burden occurs when the researcher collects multiple forms of data. In mixed methods, strategies need to be planned to use short and brief instruments to collect data, pilot-test user acceptability of data collection, provide compensation for participants’ time, and gather data at convenient times for participants (Stadnick et al., 2021).

Collecting the Data

Respect the Site, and Disrupt as Little as Possible.

Researchers need to respect research sites and leave them undisturbed after a study. This requires that inquirers, especially in qualitative studies involving prolonged observation or interviewing at a site, be aware of their impact and minimize their disruption of the physical setting. For example, they might time visits to not disrupt the flow of participant activities. Also, consult organizational guidelines that provide advice conducting research without disturbing settings.

Make Sure That All Participants Receive the Benefits.

In experimental studies, investigators can collect data so that all participants benefit from the treatments, not only an experimental group. This requires providing some treatment to all groups or staging the treatment so that ultimately all groups receive the beneficial treatment (e.g., a wait-list). Further, both the researcher and the participants should benefit from the research.

Collaborate With Participants.

In some situations, the abuse of power occurs when researchers coerce participants to be involved in projects. Involving individuals collaboratively in the research provides reciprocity. Collaboration with groups and populations and using networks helps recruiting diverse and special populations (Stadnick et al., 2021). Collaboration in qualitative research means involving participants throughout the research process, such as in design, data collection and analysis, report writing, and dissemination of the findings (Patton, 2002).

Avoid Deceptive Practices.

Participants need to know that they are actively participating in a research study. To counteract this problem, provide instructions that remind the participants about the purpose before the study begins.

Respect Potential Power Imbalances.

Interviews (and observations) should begin from the premise that a power imbalance exists between the data collector and the participants.

Interviewers should consider how the interview will improve participants’ lives, cause less potential stress for the participants, and provide a voice for participants. Further, readers might critically question interviewees’ comments, leading to difficult consequences for those interviewed.

Avoid Exploitation of Participants.

Researchers need to consider how they will give back to participants. Reciprocity can be offered by providing a small reward for participation, sharing the final research report, and involving participants as collaborators. Some researchers have taken advantage of participants by gathering data and abruptly leaving the research site. This results in participant exploitation. Rewards and appreciation provide respect and reciprocity for those who provide valuable data.

Avoid Collecting Harmful Information.

The possibility of gathering harmful, intimate information during data collection and disclosing it later presents a problem. A researcher’s challenge is anticipating and planning the impact of information during or after an interview (Patton, 2002). For example, a student may discuss parental abuse, or prisoners may talk about an escape. Typically, in these situations, the ethical code for researchers (which may be different for schools and prisons) protects the privacy of the participants and individuals involved in a study.

Analyzing the Data

Avoid Taking Sides.

It is easy for researchers to support and embrace the perspectives of participants in a study. In qualitative studies, this means “taking sides” and reporting only results that place the participants in a favorable light. In quantitative research, it means disregarding data that proves or disproves personal hypotheses held by the researcher.

Avoid Disclosing Only Positive Results.

In research, it is academically dishonest to withhold important results or to cast the results in a favorable light for participants or readers. In qualitative research, the inquirer needs to report the full range of findings, including results contrary to the themes. A good qualitative study includes the diversity of participant perspectives. In quantitative research, the data analysis should reflect the statistical tests and not be underreported.

Respect the Privacy of Participants.

In analyzing the data and reporting results, protect the anonymity of individuals, roles, and incidents. For example, in survey research, investigators disassociate names from responses during the coding and recording process. In qualitative research, inquirers use aliases or pseudonyms for individuals and places.

Reporting, Sharing, and Storing Data

Provide an Accurate Account of Information.

In interpreting data, researchers should provide an accurate account of the information. This accuracy may involve debriefing between the researcher and participants in quantitative research (Berg, 2001). In qualitative research, validity strategies (see Chapter 9) help the accuracy of an account. Other ethical issues in reporting research involve the potential of suppressing, falsifying, or inventing findings to meet a researcher’s or an audience’s needs. Professional research communities find these fraudulent practices unacceptable. They constitute scientific misconduct (Neuman, 2009).

Do Not Plagiarize.

Copying extensive material from others is an ethical problem. Researchers should give credit for the work of others. Use quotation marks and page numbers to set off the exact words of others. The key idea is to not present the work of another as your own (American Psychological Association, 2020). A paraphrase of sentences from others deserves a citation. Journals typically have guidelines for seeking permissions from publishers for information borrowed.

Avoid Disclosing Harmful Information.

One issue to anticipate about confidentiality is that some participants may not want to disclose their identity. By honoring this need, the researcher allows the participants to retain ownership of their voices and exert their independent decision-making. Participants should be informed about the risks of non-confidentiality, such as the inclusion of data in the final report. Participants may not appreciate disclosing information they wanted concealed (Giordano et al., 2007). In planning a study, anticipate the repercussions of conducting the research on participants and privileging the results of one group or another.

Communicate in Clear Language.

Report in the results bias-free and non-discriminatory language. Clear guidelines are available in the Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020). We briefly introduced in the discussion about abstracting the literature in Chapter 2. For example, when reporting the results about age, indicate exact ages or age ranges. When reporting on disabilities, mention specific names of conditions (e.g., people with intellectual disabilities). In writing about gender, include descriptors with modifiers rather than general categories (e.g., disenfranchised women rather than women). For racial or ethnic groups, use specific regions of origin rather than generalized origin (e.g., Japanese Americans rather than Asian Americans). When reporting about sexual orientation, mention the specific names of orientation rather than broad groups (e.g., gay men rather than homosexuals). When writing about socioeconomic status, indicate specific designations rather than general labels (e.g., below the federal level of poverty for a family of six rather than low income).

Share Data With Others.

Release the details of the research with the study design so that readers can determine the credibility of the study (Neuman, 2009). Strategies for sharing include engaging with stakeholders in the dissemination process, revisiting authorship agreements, providing copies of reports to participants and stakeholders, making distributions of reports available on websites, and publishing studies in multiple languages (see Stadnick et al., 2021).

Keep Raw Data and Other Materials.

Data, once analyzed, needs to be kept for a reasonable period. Sieber (1998) recommends 5 to 10 years; most guidelines recommend 5 years. For example, this material comprises details of procedures, instruments, and raw data. After this period, investigators discard the data so that it does not fall into the hands of other researchers who might misuse it.

Do Not Duplicate or Piecemeal Publications.

Researchers should not publish papers with duplicate or redundant information from a study. This duplication comprises presenting the same data, discussions, and conclusions without offering new material. Some biomedical journals now require authors to declare whether they have published or are preparing to publish papers closely related to the manuscript submitted (Israel & Hay, 2006).

Complete Proof of Compliance and Lack of Conflict of Interest.

Some academic campuses require authors to file statements indicating that they do not have a conflict of interest in publishing the research. Such conflict might arise from research payments, vested interests in the outcome of the data, or the misappropriation of research for personal use. Comply with requests for disclosure about potential conflicts of interests that surround your research.

Understand Who Owns the Data.

Ownership of the data, once it is collected and analyzed, represents another ethical issue. The ownership question can split research teams and divide individuals against each other. A research proposal might mention this issue of ownership and discuss how it will be resolved, such as developing a clear understanding among the researcher, the participants, and the faculty advisers (Punch, 2014). Berg (2001) has recommended using personal agreements to designate ownership of research data.

Summary

Plan the topics to be included in a proposal or research project. Consider addressing the nine arguments advanced by Maxwell (2013), and then structure the plan using the qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods formats suggested in this chapter. Good writing strategies include thinking through ideas by putting them down on paper and establishing the habit of routine writing. Be consistent in linking the sentences, paragraphs, and chapters in a research study. A good narrative structure is to write using umbrella thoughts, big thoughts, little thoughts, and especially attention or interest thoughts to keep the reader on track. Also use the active voice, use strong verbs, and revise and edit to strengthen your prose. Throughout the entire writing process and engaging in research, anticipate and address potential ethical issues. These issues may occur prior to conducting a study, when beginning the study, when collecting and analyzing the data, and in reporting and sharing the results.

Key Terms

Code of ethics 95

Coherence in writing 88

Fat 91

Habit of writing 85

Hook-and-eye exercise 88

Informed consent forms 96

Institutional review board (IRB) 96

Writing Exercises

Develop a topical outline for a quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods proposal. Include the major topics for an outline introduced in this chapter.

Practice the “hook and eye” exercise to identify consistency in writing. Locate a journal article that reports qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods research. Examine the introduction to the article, and apply the hook-and-eye method. Identify the flow of ideas from sentence to sentence and from paragraph to paragraph.

Consider one of the following ethical dilemmas that may face a researcher. Describe ways you might anticipate the problems, and employ strategies to address them.

A prisoner you are interviewing tells you about a potential breakout at the prison that night. What do you do?

A researcher on your team copies sentences from another study and incorporates them into the final written report for your project. What do you do?

A student collects data for a project from several individuals interviewed in families in your city. After the fourth interview, the student tells you that approval has not been received for the project from the IRB. What will you do?

Additional Readings

American Psychological Association. (2020). Publication manual of the American Psychological Association (7th ed.). Author.

This style manual is an essential tool for a researcher. It contains discussions about ethical issues and standards in publishing. Further, it covers writing clearly and concisely, addressing such topics as continuity, tone, precision, clarity, and strategies to improve writing style. It gives ample illustrations about how to reduce bias in a scholarly research report. Specific sections address the mechanics of style, such as punctuation, spelling, capitalization, and abbreviations.

Israel, M., & Hay, I. (2006). Research ethics for social scientists: Between ethical conduct and regulatory compliance. SAGE.

Case studies provide useful scenarios for thinking about and anticipating ethical issues. Mark Israel and Iain Hay critically analyze the practical value of thinking seriously and systematically about what constitutes ethical conduct in the social sciences. They review the different theories of ethics, such as the consequentialist and the non-consequentialist approaches, virtue ethics, and normative and case-oriented approaches to ethical conduct. They also offer an international perspective, drawing on the history of ethical practices in countries worldwide. They offer practical case examples and ways researchers might treat the cases ethically. In the appendix, they provide three case examples and then call upon leading scholars to comment about how they would approach the ethical issues.

Maxwell, J. (2013). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach (3rd ed.). SAGE.

We feel that Joe Maxwell’s nine steps of topics for a proposal provide a useful guide for designing a rigorous plan. Maxwell offers a good overview of the proposal development process for qualitative research that is applicable in many ways to quantitative and mixed methods research. He states that a proposal is an argument for conducting a study and presents an example that describes nine necessary steps. Moreover, he includes a complete qualitative proposal and analyzes to illustrate a good model.

Sieber, J. E. (1998). Planning ethically responsible research. In L. Bickman & D. J. Rog (Eds.), Handbook of applied social research methods (pp. 127–156). SAGE.

It is not enough to identify types of ethical issues. Equally important are the strategies used to address a study’s problem. Joan Sieber discusses the importance of ethical planning as integral to the process of research design. In this chapter she provides a comprehensive review of many topics related to ethical issues, such as IRBs, informed consent, privacy, confidentiality, anonymity, elements of research risk, and studying vulnerable populations. Her coverage is extensive, and her recommendations for strategies are numerous.

Stadnick, N. A., Poth, C. N., Guetterman, T. C., & Gallo, J. J. (2021). Advancing discussion of ethics in mixed methods health services research. Health Services Research. https://www.doi.org/10.1186/s12913-021-06583-1.

Little guidance exists in the mixed methods literature to help researchers identify and enact strategies to address ethical issues. An exception would be the article by Nicole Stadnick and colleagues. They advance a discussion of ethics building on results to a survey of scholars, faculty, and consultants participating in the National Institutes of Health-funded Mixed Methods Research Training Program in the Health Sciences. The survey respondents provided information about ethical issues and strategies specific to mixed methods research. Mixed methods strategies addressed participant burden, equitable recruitment practices, communication, and dissemination of findings. Within these broad categories, participants shared specific strategies they used to address the ethical issues.

Wolcott, H. F. (2009). Writing up qualitative research (3rd ed.). SAGE.

A guide to scholarly, concise prose would not be complete without studying carefully the work of a master writer. Harry Wolcott, a distinguished educational ethnographer, has compiled an excellent resource guide addressing numerous aspects of the writing process in qualitative research. He discusses techniques useful in getting started in writing; developing details; linking with the literature, theory, and method; tightening up with revising and editing; and finishing the process by attending to aspects such as the title and appendixes. For aspiring writers, this is an essential book, regardless of whether a study is qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods.

Descriptions of Images and Figures

Back to Figure

The text consists of circled words and phrases. Arrows connect a circled word or phrase with the subsequent circled word or phrase. Text reads, They, They is circled, sit in the back of the room not because they want to but because it was the place designated to them. Invisible barriers that exist in most classrooms divide the room and separate the students, students is circled. At the front of the room are the good students, students is circled, who wait with their hands poised ready to fly into the air at a moment’s notice. Slouched down like giant insects caught in educational traps, the athletes, athletes is circled, and their following occupy the center of the room. Those, Those is circled, less sure of themselves and their position within the room sit in the back and around the edge of the student body.

A new paragraph begins. Text reads, The students, students is circled, seated in the outer circle make up a population whom for a variety of reasons are not succeeding in the American public education system. They, They is circled, have always been part of the student population. In the past they, they is circled, have been called disadvantaged, low achieving, retards, impoverished, laggards and a variety of other titles, Cuban, 1989; Presseisen, 1988. Today they are called students-at-risk, students-at-risk circled. Their faces are changing and in urban settings their numbers are growing, Hodgkinson, 1985.

A new paragraph begins. Text reads, In the past eight years there has been an unprecedented amount of research on the need for excellence in education and the at-risk student, at-risk student circled. In 1983 the government released a document entitled A Nation At-Risk that identified problems, problems is circled, within the American education system and called for major reform. Much of the early reform, early reform is circled, focused on more vigorous courses of study and higher standards of student achievement, Barber, 1987. In the midst of attention to excellence, it became apparent the needs of the marginal student, the needs of the marginal student is circled, were not being met. The question of what it would take to guarantee that all students, students is circled, have a fair chance at a quality education was receiving little attention, Hamilton, 1987; Toch, 1984. As the push for excellence in education increased, the needs of the at-risk student, at-risk student is circled, became more apparent.

The text consists of circled words and phrases. Arrows connect a circled word or phrase with the subsequent circled word or phrase. Text reads, Much of the early research focused on identifying characteristics of the at-risk student, at-risk student is circled, O E R I, 1987; Barber and McClellan, 1987; Hahn, 1987; Rumberger, 1987, while others in educational research called for reform and developed programs for at-risk students, at-risk students is circled, Mann, 1987; Presseisen, 1988; Whelage, 1988; Whelege and Lipman, 1988; Stocklinski, 1991; and Levin, 1991. Studies and research on this topic, topic is circled, have included experts within the field of education, business and industry as well as many government agencies. Although progress has been made in identifying characteristics of the at-risk students and in developing programs to meet their needs, the essence of the at-risk issue, at-risk issue circled, continues to plague the American school system. Some educators feel that we do not need further research, research is circled, DeBlois, 1989; Hahn, 1987. Others, Others is circled, call for a stronger network between business and education, DeBlois, 1989; Mann, 1987; Whelege, 1988. Still others, Still others is circled, call for total restructuring of our education system, O E R I, 1987; Gainer, 1987; Levin, 1988; McCune, 1988. After all the research and studies by, research and studies by is circled, the experts, we still have students hanging on to the fringe of education. The uniqueness of this study will shift the, shift the is circled, focus from causes and curriculum to the student. It is time to question the students, students is circled, and to listen to their responses. This added dimension should bring further understanding to research already available and, available and is circled, lead to further areas of reform. Dropouts and potential dropouts will be interviewed in depth to discover if there, discover if there is circled, are common factors within the public school setting that interfere with their learning process. This information should be helpful to both the researcher who, researcher who is circled, will continue to look for new approaches in education and the practitioner who works with these students every day.
