=== PAGE 1 ===
Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Research Policy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/respol
Rethinking the role of the state in technology development: DARPA and the case
for embedded network governance
Erica R.H. Fuchs ∗
Department of Engineering and Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Baker Hall 131E, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States
article info
Article history:
Received 24 August 2009
Received in revised form 5 July 2010
Accepted 7 July 2010
Available online 19 August 2010
Keywords:
DARPA
State
Innovation
Social Network
Computer
abstract
This paper explores the role of the state in re-architecting social networks and thereby new technology
directions in the United States. It draws on a case study of DARPA’s Microsystems Technology Ofﬁce from
1992 to 2008. Leveraging one of the most radical directorships in DARPA’s history, I argue that the per-
ceived “death” of DARPA under Tony Tether was because past analyses, by focusing on the organization’s
culture and structure, overlooked a set of lasting, informal institutions among DARPA program managers.
I ﬁnd that despite signiﬁcant changes in the recipients and outcomes of DARPA attentions, these same
institutions for directing technology were in place both before and during Tether’s directorship. Draw-
ing on these results, I suggest that we must add to technology policy-making a new option— embedded
network governance.
© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Debates on the appropriate role for government in technology
policy often fall into two camps—proponents of free markets and
proponents of government choosing technology winners. Among
those who favor a strong role for government, most view the State’s
role as limited to facilitating technology investment through tax
policy, subsidies, and funding for basic research. A few argue for
coordination of technology investment across the many arms of
government. In search of this coordination, these few often turn
to top-down bureaucracy. But what is missing from these debates
is an alternative government role that has existed for the past 50
years in the U.S.: the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,
or DARPA.
Staffed at any moment with little more than 100 people and $3
billion with which to stimulate U.S. innovation, this small arm of
government charged with “preventing technological surprises” has
met with fame and controversy beyond what its size would suggest.
Historians have attributed to DARPA creation of everything from
the Internet ( Newman, 2002 ) and the personal computer ( Allan,
2001), to the laser (Bromberg, 1991) and Microsoft Windows (Fong,
2001). DARPA has appeared on the pages of Playboy Magazine
(Sedgwick, 1991 ), and the screen of the popular television show,
The West Wing (Graves, 2004). Most pertinently, among those who
study national innovation systems, DARPA has come to be seen as
∗ Tel.: +1 412 268 1877; fax: +1 412 268 3757.
E-mail address: erhf@andrew.cmu.edu.
the pioneer of the methods now used broadly in what is called the
U.S. Developmental Network State ( Block, 2007; McCray, 2009 ).
As a consequence, today, agencies ranging from the intelligence
community (ARDA – 1998, IARPA – 2006
1), to the Department of
Homeland Security (HSARPA – 2002), to the Department of Energy
(ARPA-E – 2007), all seem to want their own “ARPA.”
Despite such past success, between 2001 and 2008 DARPA
underwent tremendous change. This change, initiated by direc-
tor Tony Tether, brought on an outcry from the computing
community—one of the primary benefactors and success stories
of DARPA ( CRC, 2005; Lazowska and Patterson, 2005; Markoff,
2005). This criticism suggested that DARPA was no longer “the old
DARPA.” An in-depth look at history, however, shows that such
change, and subsequent criticism, as occurred under Tether were
not new. Rather, over the past decades, DARPA has gone through
repeated shifts in its focus and its internal governance structures.
This dynamic presents a puzzle—with so much change, what then
is the DARPA model that its imitators should be copying?
To answer this question, at least in part, this paper focuses on
the period immediately before and after the most recent changes
within DARPA. Drawing on over 50 interviews, the paper uses
grounded theory-building methods ( Glasner and Strauss, 1967;
Eisenhardt, 1989) to uncover the processes used by DARPA program
1 The Advanced Research and Development Activity (ARDA) was created in 1998,
and modeled after DARPA. ARDA’s name was changed to the Disruptive Technolo-
gies Ofﬁce (DTO) in 2006. In December 2007, ARDA/DTO was folded into the newly
created IARPA.
0048-7333/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.respol.2010.07.003
=== PAGE 2 ===
1134 E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147
managers to inﬂuence technology trajectories in the U.S., and how
those processes may have changed during Tether’s directorship.
The paper focuses on the involvement of DARPA’s Microsystems
Technology Ofﬁce (MTO) in the development of four semiconduc-
tor materials technologies critical to the converging telecom and
computing industry and to meeting the performance targets set
by Moore’s Law. The telecom and computing industries provide
a useful example of industrial sectors traditionally supported by
government funding and in particular by DARPA ( Flamm, 1988). In
addition, the telecom and computing industries are a classic exam-
ple of sectors that have undergone a recent decline in corporate
R&D labs and a shift to a vertically fragmented industry structure,
a phenomenon experienced more broadly in the U.S. innovation
ecosystem ( Mowery, 1999 ). Notably, despite the dramatic differ-
ences between DARPA from 1992 to 2001 versus from 2001 to 2008,
during both time periods, the telecom and computing industries
had already undergone vertical disintegration.
The results of this research suggest that past studies have, by
focusing on DARPA’s culture and structure, overlooked a set of
lasting, informal institutions among DARPA program managers.
In the case of DARPA’s Microsystems Technology Ofﬁce, what
changed under Tether was not the processes used by the program
managers, but rather the situations in which program managers
apply these processes. Prior to 2001, DARPA’s processes for seed-
ing and encouraging new technology trajectories involved (1)
bringing star scientists largely from academia together to brain-
storm new technology directions, (2) seed funding research themes
common across disconnected star researchers, (3) encouraging
early knowledge-sharing between these star researchers through
required workshops, and (4) providing third-party validation for
new technology directions to external funding agencies and indus-
try. These processes support the sources of, knowledge ﬂows
around, and development of social networks necessary for initi-
ating new technology directions in the research community. In
contrast, since 2001, the DARPA program manager’s processes for
coordinating technology directions involve (1) orchestrating the
involvement of established vendors with academics and start-ups,
(2) supporting knowledge-sharing between industry competitors
through invite-only workshops, (3) providing third-party valida-
tion of new technology directions, and (4) supporting technology
platform leadership at the system level. These new processes sup-
port the coordination of technology development within industry
across a vertically fragmented industrial ecosystem such that the
technology develops in line with longer term commercial and mil-
itary goals.
These results suggest that rather than being forced to choose
between the extremes of free-markets or the heavy-hand of
bureaucratic government, there is a third alternative for gov-
ernment support of cutting-edge technology development. In
this third alternative, embedded government agents – who gain
knowledge centrality and social capital in their role as DARPA
program managers – are able to re-architect social networks
2
among researchers so as to inﬂuence new technology directions.
In doing so, these embedded agents are in constant contact with
the research community, understanding emerging themes, match-
ing these emerging themes to military needs, betting on the right
people, bringing together disconnected researchers, standing up
competing technologies against each other, and maintaining the
2 In this paper, the phrase “re-architect social networks” encompasses all activ-
ities in which DARPA program managers bring together disconnected or less
connected members of the research community, subsequently building active
research communities, and thereby providing validation of technology directions to
achieve organizational goals. Section 5 unpacks the full range of activities engaged
in by DARPA under the umbrella of this phrase.
systems-level perspective critical to orchestrate these disparate
research activities spread throughout our national innovation
ecosystem.
2. The developmental network state
Debates on the appropriate role for the state in science and
technology development have continued for over 200 years (Smith,
1776). In the U.S., even when a role for the state is acknowledged,
the appropriate government function is often viewed as inﬂuencing
the volume, not the direction of investment (Graham, 1992). Under
Keynesian thought, “economic policy meant manipulating spend-
ing and taxation, money and credit,” not coordination of technology
development ( Graham, 1992 ). And yet, a host of literature docu-
ments alternative roles for the State in technology development
beyond manipulation of spending and regulation. One categoriza-
tion of this literature is to split it into two types of theories—those
that depict a Weberian-style hierarchy or “developmental bureau-
cratic state” and those that argue for “experimental federalism,”
“ﬂexible developmental state,” “developmental network state,” or
“networked polity” ( Ansell, 2000; Block, 2007; Breznitz, 2007 ).
Whereas the “Bureaucratic State” evokes descriptions of “central-
ized command-and-control” and “top-down policies” leveraging
“government-based research and ﬁrm subsidies to develop local
expertise in targeted industries;” the “networked” alternative is
often described as “decentralized and distributed” with “mutual
adjustment” and a focus on facilitating “building trust” and “coor-
dination and cooperation among relevant parties” ( Sabel, 1993;
Ansell, 2000; O’Riain, 2004; Breznitz, 2007 ). In both governance
forms, writers argue that to be successful, public ofﬁcials must
have “embedded autonomy”—i.e. be “embedded in a concrete set of
social ties that binds the state to society and provides institution-
alized channels for the continued negotiation and renegotiation of
goals and policies” ( Evans, 1995; Ansell, 2000 ).
In describing the networked polity, Ansell proposes “that the
state can operate as a liaison or broker in creating networks and
empowering nonstate actors, especially when state actors occupy
a central position in these networks” ( Ansell, 2000 ). The existing
network literature helps us understand the emergence and con-
sequences of being a broker. According to Burt (1992), a broker
is an individual who forms the only link between otherwise dis-
connected actors. Fleming and Waguespack (2007) adds to this
deﬁnition, distinguishing between brokers and boundary spanners.
Here, Fleming’s boundary spanners are individuals who span dif-
ferent theoretical or organizational areas, but need not be the only
individual playing that role. Thus, while all brokers are bound-
ary spanners, not all boundary spanners broker ( Fleming and
Waguespack, 2007). Notably, neither Burt nor Fleming gives agency
to the broker or boundary spanner. While Burt (1992) focuses
on how the structure of the network puts the broker in a posi-
tion of power, Fleming and Waguespack (2007) focuses on how
existing human and social capital lead to individuals emerging
as leaders in a community. In her qualitative ﬁeld study, Levina
(2005) brings in this agency. Speciﬁcally, she suggests that to cre-
ate a new ﬁeld, boundary-spanners must produce and use objects
that become locally useful to both ﬁelds and acquire a common
identity.
3 However, while Levina provides practical insights into
3 According to Levine, boundary objects are artifacts such as physical prototypes,
engineering sketches, or standardized reporting forms that can span beyond the
physical, temporal, or social limitations of an individual boundary spanner. A bound-
ary object as locally useful if it is incorporated into practice in multiple of the ﬁelds it
spans. A boundary object has a common identity if it is typical enough to be readily
recognized in both ﬁelds. For example, computer aided design (CAD) software is use-
ful and common to both the photonic and electronic semiconductor communities
(Levina, 2005).
=== PAGE 3 ===
E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147 1135
the boundary-spanning role, her boundary-spanner remains an
inside member of the focus community.
In contrast to this earlier work, recent research has begun to
explore network plasticity —or the ability of managers to change
social networks to achieve organizational objectives ( Davis, 2009).
In contrast to structural theories, which focus on how network
structures create constraints and opportunities for organizational
actors, or naturalistic theories, which focus on how spontaneous
forces shape network dynamics, these new agency theories focus on
network change agents who sit outside and act upon the commu-
nity or network of focus ( Davis, 2009). For example, in their study
of Levi’s jeans, Lester and Piore suggest that in the early, open-
ended stages of innovation, R&D managers must act as “cocktail
hostesses,” bringing together the correct parties to the table, and
helping facilitate the ﬂow of conversation in order to be successful
in their goal of promoting innovative new ideas ( Lester and Piore,
2004). Likewise, in his longitudinal study of eight technology col-
laborations, Davis found that managers of successful collaborations
prune networks of existing ties that are information bottlenecks
in the emerging network collaboration and, rather than rely on
social processes, remake these networks with competency pairing,
which forms ties between actors with complementary knowledge
across organizational boundaries ( Davis, 2009). This new research,
in which managers have agency to change the shape of the exist-
ing network to achieve organizational objectives, suggests that a
different, and more fundamental role may exist for the State in
inﬂuencing technology development. Describing the role of the
state in regional development in Western Europe, Ansell writes,
“the state does not simply act as a mediator or coordinator, but also
actively tries to create relationships between third-party actors”
(Ansell, 2000).
While the existing network polity literature hints of such activ-
ities by the state, the empirical examples of the networked state
contained therein are surprisingly similar. The majority of the
examples are of the government playing a role in industrial or
technology development in industrializing nations in the pro-
cess of catch-up (e.g. Johnson, 1982; Fransman, 1993; Amsden
and Chu, 2003; O’Riain, 2004; Breznitz, 2007 ). In the few devel-
oped country examples, the role of the state is to connect ﬁrms
to enable incremental innovation, support collaborative learning
among ﬁrms, and help smaller ﬁrms catch-up, primarily in the
context of regional economic development or upgrading in man-
ufacturing ( Sabel, 1996; McEvily and Zaheer, 1999; Ansell, 2000;
Whitford, 2005 ). In nearly all examples, the state acts by linking
ﬁrms to facilitate increased economic transactions, dissemination
of knowledge, or collaborative learning (i.e. Ansell, 2000; Amsden
and Chu, 2003; O’Riain, 2004; Whitford, 2005 ), or in linking indi-
viduals to build communities ( Breznitz, 2005 ). Throughout these
examples the state lacks an active role in identifying and inﬂuenc-
ing technology directions. Instead, the state, as a central node in the
network, helps create network linkages, disseminate knowledge,
or act as the breeding ground for communities without inﬂuencing
the direction or content of discussions. To ﬁnd an example of the
state inﬂuencing technology directions one must turn to Japan—a
country often characterized as a “bureaucratic” development state
that chooses technology winners. And yet, Japan’s facilitation of
research cooperation between competing ﬁrms echoes many of the
themes written in the literature on the networked polity ( Johnson,
1982; Fransman, 1993). Indeed, the literature on the Japanese gov-
ernment goes farther than what can be found in the networked
polity literature on Europe, the U.S., and industrializing nations.
Okimoto (1987) describes the importance of the Japanese govern-
ment’s focus on working with companies on consensus building
and articulating long-term vision in the development of new tech-
nologies (Okimoto, 1987). Relatedly, Fransman (1993) describes the
Japanese government’s self-identiﬁed role in helping ﬁrms over-
come the downfalls of “bounded vision”—i.e. the idea that different
kinds of organizations (a) receive different kinds of information
as the results of their primary activities, and (b) are limited in
what they search for and “see” by the overall objectives of the
organization. Here, according to Fransman, Japan believes that the
limitations in the vision of for-proﬁt ﬁrms and the vision of the gov-
ernment can be overcome by bringing the two together (Fransman,
1993). Both of these themes are echoed in the case study presented
here on DARPA.
Of course, organizational forms other than the state can also
facilitate the connecting of disconnected agents and architect net-
works. As suggested by Breznitz’s example of military training in
Israel ( Breznitz, 2005 ), education and training, such as being in
common graduate programs, can build scientiﬁc communities and
long-lasting networks. Conferences can act as venues for existing
communities to contest and form agreement around the viabil-
ity of competing technology directions ( Garud, 2008). Firms, such
as Intel, can orchestrate the co-development of technologically
interdependent platforms across ﬁrms, universities, and govern-
ment labs as is necessary to continue to advance their speciﬁc
business model ( Gawer and Cusumano, 2002 ). None of the above
pieces, however, are by themselves sufﬁcient to seed and develop
new technology directions that meet needs beyond the short-term
market demands that drive ﬁrms. While communities developed
through education and training may have common backgrounds
they do not in and of themselves have direction. While conferences
can act as direction deciders, for a conference to play this role, the
community must already exist. Finally, while ﬁrms may be able to
play many of these roles as platform leaders, they will not have the
same incentives as government (having a goal of proﬁts rather than
national security, economic growth, and social welfare), and their
“vision” ( Fransman, 1993) will be more short-term.
In this paper, I leverage extensive empirical data to unpack an
active, network-changing role of the state that goes beyond the
previous literature on the place and application of a networked
polity. First, I focus on cutting-edge, new technology development.
In particular, I describe how in the development of new technolo-
gies, the state need not stop at merely bringing the appropriate
actors together, nor must it go so far as choosing “focus industries”
or “technology winners,” but rather it can leverage its knowledge
centrality and ability to connect disconnected actors to identify and
inﬂuence new technology directions that achieve its organizational
goals. Further, I describe a state that, in the development of a single
new technology, leverages all of the earlier-described roles of net-
work governance – from building new communities to community
consensus-making on directions, to platform leadership outside of
the constraints of ﬁrm incentives – to achieve its goals. Finally, I
show that to ﬁnd such a networked polity inﬂuencing technology
development we need not look to Japan or to the late industrializ-
ing nations, but rather that this networked polity already exists in
the U.S. To unpack existing practices, I turn to the pioneer of the
U.S. Developmental Network State, DARPA ( Block, 2007).
3. The changing faces of DARPA
Long-time defense analyst Richard Van Atta writes, “There is
not and should not be a singular answer on ‘what is DARPA’—and
if someone tells you that [there is], they don’t understand DARPA”
(Van Atta, 2007). And yet, with so much success, it has been hard for
analysts not to try to pin down the “DARPA model.” Van Atta him-
self summarizes the DARPA organizational environment into three
key characteristics: (1) it is independent from service R&D organi-
zations, (2) it is a lean, agile organization with risk-taking culture,
and (3) it is idea-driven and outcome oriented ( Van Atta, 2007 ).
These themes are echoed in DARPA’s self-described 12 organiz-
=== PAGE 4 ===
1136 E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147
Table 1
The changing face of DARPA: a historical chronology of the organization.
Decade 1958 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s
Name ARPA (’58–72) DARPA (’72–93) ARPA (’93–96) DARPA (‘96–08)
Era Basic Research Military Missions Industry Focus Competitiveness,
Internationalization
Industry to Military
President Eisenhower Eisenhower (‘53–61) Nixon (‘69–74) Reagan (‘81–89) Bush (‘89–93) Bush Jr. (‘01–08)
(‘53–61) Kennedy (‘61–63) Ford (‘74–77) Clinton (‘93–01)
Johnson (‘63–69) Carter (‘77–81)
Legislative/political
environment
Cold War
Sputnik (‘57)
Cold War
Vietnam War (‘59–75)
Cold War
Vietnam War (‘59–75)
Mansﬁeld Act (‘69)
Cold War Ends
Star Wars
Noyce - more VC (‘78)
Concern about
competitiveness against Japan;
National Cooperative Research
Act (‘84)
Field forced to leave due to
excessive industrial focus
(‘90); Sematech desires
internationalization, weans
from public assistance
(‘95); DARPA criticized for
slow transition to military
(’97); Increased
inter-organizational and
international R&D linkages
World Trade Center
Attacked (Sept. 11, 2001);
Bush Jr. enters Iraq (‘03);
Increased concerns about
U.S. competitiveness,
especially against India,
China (Rising Above the
Gathering Storm, 2005);
Criticism of DARPA for not
funding basic R&D
(Lazowski House
Statement, 2005)
DARPA Directors Johnson (’58–60) Betts (‘60–61) Lukasik (‘70–75) Cooper (’81–85) Reis (’90–92) Tether (’01–08)
Ruina (‘61–63) Heilmeir (‘75–77) Duncan (’85–88) Denman (’92–95)
Sproull (‘63–65) Fossum (‘77–81) Colladay (’88–89) Lynn (’95–98)
Herzfeld (‘65–67) Fields (’89–90) Fernandez (’98–01)
Rechtin (‘67–70)
DARPA Environment Supercede inter-service
rivalry; prevent
technological surprises
Scientiﬁc merit over
military; focus on best
people - independence,
intellectual quality
Mid-term exams,
deliverables, success
measures
Strategic computing initiative
(’83); Sematech (‘87); pyramid
of technologies; connecting
academia and industry
Fernandez priorities:
people, competition,
outreach, experimentation
(‘98)
Phases, milestones,
accountability;
“Transforming Fantasy”
(01–03); “Bridging the
Gap” (’03–‘08)
=== PAGE 5 ===
E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147 1137
ing elements, along with two additional themes—a focus on hiring
quality people (“an eclectic, world-class technical staff”), and the
importance of DARPA’s role in connecting collaborators (Bonvillian,
2006). Others have suggested that DARPA’s “single customer” (the
military) and “clear mission” (enhancing U.S. military capabilities)
is a critical aspect of the DARPA model ( Mowery, 2006 ). And yet,
as shown in the history that follows, the emergence, interpretation
and actualization of these organizational features has evolved dra-
matically over the decades since DARPA’s creation in 1958. In many
ways, these changes can be grouped into decade-based shifts, as
shown in Table 1. In this paper, I focus on the shift initiated in 2001
by Tony Tether. To understand this shift, however, it is necessary
to look back at the other shifts within DARPA across the previous
decades.
The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was founded
under President Eisenhower in February 1958 by Public Law 85-325
and Department of Defense Directive 5105.41, as a direct conse-
quence of the Soviet launching of Sputnik in 1957 ( NRC, 1999 ).
Initially, ARPA was charged with preventing technological surprises
such as Sputnik (NRC, 1999). Many blamed the advent of Sputnik on
the rivalry at the time between the military services, and ARPA was
set up to cut through that rivalry. After its founding, ARPA’s ﬁrst pri-
ority was to oversee space activities until NASA was up and running
and to screen new technological possibilities, shutting down those
without merit ( Flamm, 1987; Roland, 2002 ). By 1960, all of ARPAs
civilian programs were transferred to the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) and all of its military space programs
were transferred to individual Services. At this point, ARPA was
forced to face the question of its longer term role. President Eisen-
hower had always insisted that the Cold War was fundamentally a
contest between two economic systems, and that it would be won
or lost economically, not militarily (Roland, 2002). This perspective,
in which the distinction between military and civilian technology
was blurred, would stay with ARPA throughout the 1960s.
With space activity oversight behind it, ARPA focused its ener-
gies on ballistic missile defense, nuclear test detection, propellants,
and materials ( NRC, 1999 ). It was at this time that ARPA took on
the role of bringing along military ideas that other segments of the
nation would not or could not develop, and carrying them to proof-
of-concept ( Roland, 2002 ). ARPA’s goal was then to transition the
technology out of the laboratory into the hands of users or produc-
ers who would bring it to full adoption and exploitation ( Roland,
2002). ARPA’s independent status not only insulated it from estab-
lished service interests, but also tended to foster radical ideas and
keep the agency tuned to basic research questions ( NRC, 1999 ).
When the agency-supported work became too much like systems
development, it ran the risk of treading on the territory of a speciﬁc
service (NRC, 1999). ARPA also established in the 1960s its critical
organizational infrastructure and management style: a small, high-
quality, managerial staff, supported by scientists and engineers on
rotation from industry and academia, successfully employing exist-
ing DOD laboratories and contractors (rather that creating its own
research facilities), to build solid programs in new, complex ﬁelds
(Barber Associates, 1975; NRC, 1999 ). Finally, ARPA emerged as
an agency extremely sensitive to the personality and vision of its
director (NRC, 1999).
Following Army Brigadier General Austin Betts
4, Jack Ruina
became DARPA’s third director in 1961 at the same time as Presi-
dent Kennedy took ofﬁce. As director, Ruina cemented the agency’s
reputation as an elite, scientiﬁcally respected institution devoted
to basic, long-term research projects. Ruina believed indepen-
4 Betts, the second ARPA director, had suffered under the perception within the
Pentagon that he favored his own service agency. On his recommendation, all sub-
sequent ARPA/DARPA directors have been civilians ( Roland, 2002).
dence and intellectual quality were critical to attracting the best
people, both to ARPA as an organization and to ARPA-sponsored
projects ( Barber Associates, 1975; NRC, 1999 ). A Professor of
Electrical Engineering on leave from the University of Illinois,
Ruina valued scientiﬁc and technical merit above immediate rel-
evance to the military ( NRC, 1999; MIT, 2009 ). During his tenure,
Ruina decentralized management at ARPA, and began the tradi-
tion of relying heavily on independent ofﬁce directors and program
managers to run research programs. To meet his goals for the
agency, Ruina encouraged creative use of existing Department of
Defense managerial mechanisms including “no-year money,” unso-
licited proposals, sole-source procurement, and multi-year forward
funding ( NRC, 1999 ). Through the mid-1960s, DARPA remained
committed to supporting basic research with long-term impor-
tance, even if there was no immediate military application (Flamm,
1987).
By the 1970s, however, the war in Vietnam has become the
driving force at DARPA, tending to redirect research towards mil-
itary purposes and raising concerns about the effect of defense
funding on university research. Under President Nixon, Congress
forbade military funding for any research that did not have a “direct
or apparent relationship to a speciﬁc military function or opera-
tions” ( NRC, 1999 ). The legislation, which was enacted into law
as the Mansﬁeld Amendment to the Defense Authorization Act of
1970 (Public Law 19-121), was short-lived, but had the longer term
impact of shortening the time horizons for government research
support, and in particular defense research ( NRC, 1999 ). In keep-
ing with the political times, ARPA’s name was ofﬁcially changed
to DARPA (the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) in
1972. Then, in 1975, George Heilmeier became director of DARPA
(NRC, 1999). Under Heilmeier’s directorship, all proposals needed
to address six questions: (1) what are the limitations of current
practice, (2) what is the current state of technology, (3) what is
new about these ideas, (4) what would be the measure of success,
(5) what are the milestones and the “mid-term exams, and (6) how
will I know you are making progress. In contrast to Ruina, Heilmeier
led with a heavy hand, giving all DARPA orders a “wire brushing”
to ensure that they had concrete “deliverables” and “milestones”
(Roland, 2002 ). In short, Heilmeier viewed DARPA as a mission
agency, whose goal was to fund research that directly supported
the mission of the DOD ( Roland, 2002).
In the 1980s, with the Vietnam War over, defense concerns
gave way to industrial competitiveness as the primary driver of
research policy. The U.S. increasingly feared that the microelec-
tronics and computer industries would go the way of the auto
industry—to Japan. These fears were not unfounded. By the end
of the 80s Japanese semiconductor manufacturing equipment sup-
pliers were gaining market share at a rate of 3.1 percent a year, and
U.S. semiconductor manufacturers planned to purchase the major-
ity of their equipment from Japanese suppliers ( NRC, 1999). Given
the heavy-handed role of Japan’s Ministry of Trade and Interna-
tional Development helping companies cooperate on new markets
and technologies, there were increasing cries in the U.S. for gov-
ernment action ( NRC, 1999 ). In 1984, the National Cooperative
Research Act exempted research consortia from some antitrust
laws and further facilitated collaborations. Then, in 1987, 14 U.S.
semiconductor companies joined a not-for-proﬁt venture, SEMAT-
ECH, to improve domestic semiconductor manufacturing. The next
year, the federal government appropriated $100M annually for the
next 5 years to match the industrial funding. DARPA had since the
late 1970s been supporting the development of “silicon foundry”
capabilities to allow cost-effective fabrication of new types of inte-
grated electronic devices by designers lacking easy access to costly
production facilities (Flamm, 1987). With semiconductor manufac-
turing seen as vital to defense technology, the SEMATECH money
was channeled through DARPA ( NRC, 1999).
=== PAGE 6 ===
1138 E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147
Table 2
Shift in DARPA funding mechanisms 1992–2008.
Pre-Tether (1992–2000) Post-Tether (2001–2008)
/Delta1in DARPA Funding Structure
Funding primarily of university-based research Funding shifted from universities to industry
(especially, established vendors)
Broad area announcements (BAA), few checks and
balances on meeting program targets
Multiple phase solicitations: 12–16 month intervals,
Funds tied to go/no-go reviews linked to pre-deﬁned
deliverables
4
Solicitations open to anyone being the prime
contractor
Many solicitations preclude universities and small
start-ups as prime contractors, instead requiring the
formation of teams with the established vendors as the
prime contractors
This paper begins its story in the 1990s. During this period, the
U.S.’s focus on international competitiveness grew, further distanc-
ing DARPA from its role with the military. In 1992, Secretary of
Defense Richard Cheney announced “a new, post-Cold War DoD
strategy of spending less on procurement of new military systems,
while maintaining funding for R&D to develop new technologies for
building future systems and for upgrading existing systems”( OTA,
1993). The next year, the OTA wrote, “Early stages of R&D, in which
ARPA is most heavily involved (basic research through technology
demonstration), will probably be least affected by reductions in
defense spending” (following the cold war). The OTA continued,
“Furthermore, based on military interests alone, ARPA will probably
become more involved in the development of dual-use technolo-
gies. Despite the apparent divergence of military and commercial
systems, many component technologies from which these systems
are constructed continue to converge” ( OTA, 1993 ). During the
period from 1992 to 2001 DARPA was led by three directors—Gary
Denman (1992–1995), Larry Lynn (1995–1998), and Frank Fernan-
dez (1998–2001). During Gary Denman’s tenure, DARPA brieﬂy
dropped its “D” and returned to its original name of ARPA. Both
Lynn and Fernandez continued Denman’s focus on basic research.
Lynn was part of DARPA’s ﬁrst inclusion of basic biology research
into DARPA’s budget ( Marshall, 1997). Fernandez focused on qual-
ity and independence in a manner reminiscent of ARPA’s second
director, Ruina ( Fernandez, 2000).
On January 20, 2001, however, George W. Bush took ofﬁce as
the 43rd President of the United States, and DARPA’s focus on dual-
use technologies came to an end. On June 18, 2001, Tony Tether
was appointed as the new Director to head DARPA. Prior to becom-
ing the director of DARPA, Tether had steadily risen in his career
through a variety of military and industrial positions. Having served
for four years as the director of the DOD’s National Intelligence
Ofﬁce (1978–1982), he came to the position of DARPA director
under a directive from Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld that
the new director must make DARPA “an entrepreneurial hotbed
that will give the U.S. military the tools it will need to maintain
the nation’s access to space and to protect satellites in orbit from
attack” ( Rensselaer, 2002). Less than three months after Tether was
appointed, the U.S.’s post-cold-war peace time landscape began to
change. On September 11, 2001, two hijacked planes were ﬂown
into the World Trade Center in New York City, a third hijacked plane
was ﬂown into the Pentagon, and a fourth hijacked plane attempted
an attack on D.C. In response, on October 7, 2001 the U.S. invaded
Afghanistan, and on March 21, 2003, the U.S. began its invasion of
Iraq. In his March 27, 2003, statement to the House of Representa-
tives Tether highlighted DARPA’s role in “bridging the gap” between
fundamental discoveries and military use ( Tether, 2003). This slo-
gan, “Bridging the Gap,” was subsequently added to the ofﬁcial logo
for DARPA.
During his time at DARPA, Tether made signiﬁcant changes to
the agency’s policies, shown below in Table 2, which brought on an
outcry from the academic community, especially the computing
community ( CRC, 2005; Lazowska and Patterson, 2005; Markoff,
2005). Although overall DARPA funding remained constant, the
proportion going to university researchers dropped by nearly half
(Lazowska and Patterson, 2005; Markoff, 2005 ). In contrast to the
ﬂexibility and discretion given to researchers in the 1990s, funds
under Tether were tied to “go/no-go” reviews linked to pre-deﬁned
deliverables – i.e. technical achievements deﬁned either in the
solicitation itself or by the researchers as part of responding to the
solicitation – that must be achieved within a pre-speciﬁed time
period (typically 6–9 months).
5 This focus on milestones and go/no-
go reviews is reminiscent of DARPA policies under Heilmeier. In
addition, DARPA raised the classiﬁcation of research programs and
increased restrictions on the participation of non-U.S. citizens (CRC,
2005; Lazowska and Patterson, 2005 ). Most signiﬁcantly, many
solicitations precluded universities and small start-ups from sub-
mission as prime contractors, instead requiring the formation of
teams and forcing start-ups and universities to team with large
established vendors ( DefenseScienceBoard, 2005).
Looking back over the decades since DARPA was founded, it is
not immediately clear that the concerns expressed in the 2000s by
the academic community with regards to DARPA being “dead” were
warranted. Under Tether, DARPA, indeed, shifted its funding away
from academia and at the same time shifted its funding model.
However, change in DARPA’s immediate goals and the director-
level rules on how to meet those goals, is common, if not the
rule, over the DARPA’s history.
6 With so much change, the puzzle
is what is the DARPA model, and is there something fundamen-
tal about DARPA, across the decades, that its imitators should be
copying? Past research has focused on DARPA’s organizational cul-
ture, structure, and goals as the critical and lasting features of the
“DARPA-model.” In this paper, I argue that beyond these organiza-
tional features, there are informal processes used by the program
managers to inﬂuence technology directions, which have been
overlooked in past literature, and have been institutionalized so
as to last through changes in directorship and organizational focus.
5 The Ultraperformance Nanophotonic Interchip Communications (UNIC) pro-
gram, discussed in greater detail in Section 5.2, provides an example of a proposal
under Tether with multiple phases, each with go/no-go deliverables.
6 Mowery and Langlois and others have noted the tension between developing
technologies required for highly specialized, low-volume defense applications, and
technologies required for civilian applications (Mowery and Langlois, 1996). Several
items are worth noting on this point. First, as described in the above paragraphs
the extent to which DARPA’s location within the military narrowed the scope of
what science it could fund has varied signiﬁcantly over the decades—ranging from
periods such as those under Heilmeier and Tether where the immediate needs of
military missions ﬁgured prominently to periods such as those under Ruina or when
Sematech funding was channeled through DARPA where the needs of the military
missions ﬁgured less prominently. Second, while DARPA program managers must
as part of “selling” any project be able to describe its eventual beneﬁt for the U.S.
military, depending on the budget category (basic research, applied), the research
can be quite basic and thus far from any application, especially in an ofﬁce such as
the Defense Sciences Ofﬁce (DSO) and MTO. Finally, due to overlapping needs in
the area of microprocessors and commercial demand outpacing that of the military,
even under the Tether period DARPA commissioned roadmaps of military versus
commercial technical needs to help guide its funding decisions.
=== PAGE 7 ===
E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147 1139
4. Methods
This paper uses grounded theory-building methods ( Glasner
and Strauss, 1967; Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 1989 ) to unpack the
processes by which DARPA inﬂuences technology development. I
conduct a case study ( Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 1989 ) of four materi-
als technologies critical to the advancement of Moore’s Law. Two
of these technologies – SiGe and strained Si – received DARPA
funding in the mid-90s and were subsequently introduced into
microprocessor designs and mainstream Si-CMOS production lines.
The remaining two materials advances – 3D packaging technol-
ogy and integrated photonics – were funded under Tether, and are
identiﬁed by the ITRS Roadmap and in academic publications as
potentially critical to meeting the targets set by Moore’s Law in the
upcoming decade. All four of these technologies were supported
by program managers within DARPA’s Microsystems Technology
Ofﬁce (MTO), which until April 1999 went by the name of the Elec-
tronics Technology Ofﬁce (ETO) ( Reed, 1999).
In conducting my research, I triangulated participant obser-
vation, qualitative interview data, archival data, and bibliometric
data to provide a holistic view of the forces driving technological
change ( Jick, 1979 ). My results draw primarily from 50 semi-
structured interviews with DARPA ofﬁce directors and program
managers, industry representatives, and university professors who
were involved in the development of SiGe, strained silicon, inte-
grated photonics, and optical interconnects between 1992 and
2008. I identify key scientists and technologists in the “invisible
college” ( Price, 1963 ) in this technical area through a snowball
effect based on names mentioned in early interviews and in news
documents.
7 I subsequently cross-checked this list using DARPA’s
online archives for the period and identiﬁed additional DARPA
program managers involved in funding these technologies. All
together, I executed the interviews so as to ensure that they
included (1) DARPA MTO ofﬁce directors and program managers
from both before and after Tony Tether took the directorship, and
(2) a representative cross-section of scientists and technologists
from within academic institutions, start-ups, and the ﬁve estab-
lished microprocessor vendors—Intel Corporation, Advanced Micro
Devices (AMD), International Business Machines (IBM), Hewlett
Packard (HP), and Sun Microsystems (Sun). I also asked each
respondent to provide an up-to-date biography and curriculum
vita (CV), including a list of all of their publications and patents
to-date in their career. I used these individual CVs to better under-
stand the bibliometric records of each interviewee, as well as their
co-patenting and co-publishing records with other scientists. I
completed all interviews between September 2006 and October
2008.
I conducted several participant observations throughout the
course of the study to gain insights into both the optoelectron-
ics and microelectronics industries and DARPA’s role in technology
development. Early on, I was able to conduct a 3-h participant
observation of a DARPA-funded team in the process of develop-
ing its technology so as to acquire Phase II funding. I was also
able to attend multiple industry conferences throughout the course
of the study, due to my own prior technical activity in the area,
through additional connections from my interviews, and through
my ongoing professional activities studying the converging tele-
7 Derek de Solla Price described the “invisible college” as an informal commu-
nication network among elite scholars from different research institutions often
within a subject specialty. I use the term “invisible college” a bit loosely since the
list is one of researchers identiﬁed by each other as “key people in this area” or “key
people to talk to,” and while communications are documented in the interviews,
the exact form or extent of communication is not known. Finally, it is worth noting
that in this “invisible college,” “research institutions” encompasses everything from
universities, to start-ups, to large computing ﬁrms, to DARPA itself ( Price, 1963).
com and computing industry. These industry conferences included
three of the Bi-annual Microphotonics Industry Consortium confer-
ences (Fall 2007, Spring 2007, Fall 2008), Phontics North 2007, the
2007 IEEE Computer Elements Vail Workshop, the Optoelectron-
ics Industry Association (OIDA) 2008 Annual Forum, and the OIDA
Manufacturing and Innovation in the 20th Century Workshop in
Spring 2008.
Finally, I have been able to draw on extensive archival data avail-
able through the Carnegie Mellon University libraries, online, and
saved within the personal collections of David Hounshell. DARPA
provides a wealth of archival data online, as well as through their
technical archives. In addition, a host of information about both
DARPA and company initiatives can be found in the popular press,
congressional hearings, and in industry trade journals. Together,
I use these online DARPA archives and available news sources to
document DARPA solicitations, workshops, conferences, and press
releases as related to the four materials technologies.
5. Results and discussion
I present my results in three sections. In the ﬁrst section, I unpack
ﬁve distinct steps by which DARPA program managers seed and
encourage new technology trajectories. This section draws exclu-
sively on archival data and interviews with academics, industry
members, and program managers before Tony Tether’s period as
director, speciﬁcally between 1992 and 2001. The second section
of the results then explores the changes within DARPA under Tony
Tether. Here, I again draw on archival data and interviews with
academics, industry members, and program managers but instead
from 2001 to 2008. This section again proposes ﬁve methods by
which DARPA seeded and encouraged new technology trajectories,
and compares these methods, and the recipients of their efforts,
to those found in the previous period. In the ﬁnal section, I dis-
cuss overarching themes that emerge across the two periods, and
describe the role of the program manager.
5.1. DARPA in the 1990s (1992–2001)
Based on archives and interviews from academics, industry
members, and DARPA program managers active during this period
from 1992 to 2001, I identify ﬁve processes by which DARPA pro-
gram managers during this period tap into existing social networks
to seed and encourage new technology trajectories. These ﬁve pro-
cesses are (1) identifying directions, (2) seeding common themes,
(3) building community, (4) validating new directions and (5) not
sustaining the technology. I describe each of these processes in
detail, and their signiﬁcance below.
(1) Identifying directions : To inﬂuence the direction of technol-
ogy development so as to meet mission goals, a DARPA program
manager must ﬁrst identify the direction in which to go. To do this,
DARPA program managers engage in three complementary activi-
ties: talking with mission directors to understand the needs of the
military, bringing together elite scientists to brainstorm research
directions that meet the needs of the military, and talking with
existing researchers to understand emerging technology directions
within the research community. The ﬁrst activity DARPA program
managers cannot escape. There are military liaisons in the DARPA
building, who are senior ofﬁcers, and have the role of connect-
ing program managers with the needs of the military. In addition,
DARPA program managers visit military installations around the
country throughout the year to better understand military needs.
The second and third activities, however, require greater agency
on the part of the DARPA program manager. I discuss the second
activity –bringing together elite scientists to brainstorm research
directions – below, and the third activity – talking with existing
=== PAGE 8 ===
1140 E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147
Table 3
Mid-90s collaborators brought together by a DARPA program manager to brainstorm on carbon nanotubes.
Paul Robinson Richard Smalley Charles Lieber
Occupation, mid-90s President, Sandia Corporation and Laboratories,
Director Sandia National Labs
Professor Chemistry, Physics,
Astronomy, Rice University
Professor, Chemistry, Harvard
University
Total patents 15 >90 >30
Total publications ? >394 >290
Lifetime achievements Elected member NAE, Outstanding Public Service
Medal from Joint Chiefs of Staff
1996 Nobel Prize for discovery
of “buckeyballs”
Elected member NAS
Co-authorships with each other None None None
researchers to understand emerging directions – in the next sec-
tion.
Over the years, DARPA has developed several formal institu-
tions that enable DARPA program managers to bring together elite
scientists to brainstorm research directions that meet the needs of
military missions. Among its formal institutions, most notable is the
DARPA-Defense Sciences Research Council. The DARPA-Defense
Sciences Research Council holds an annual summer conference that
brings together “a group of the country’s leading scientists and
engineers for an extended period, to permit them to apply their
combined talents in studying and reviewing future research areas
in defense sciences” ( DSRC, 1997). At this summer conference, top
scientiﬁc and technical researchers in the country are exposed to
major problems facing the U.S. military, and asked to identify tech-
nological directions to solve these challenges.
In addition to the Council’s annual summer conference, DARPA
leverages several smaller task forces and technology groups.
Throughout each year following the Council’s summer meeting,
smaller groups of Council members meet for Council workshops
and program reviews, whose reports are made directly to DARPA
(DSRC, 1997). Other formal advisory activities include Department
of Defense’s Defense Science Board (DSB) task forces, and Infor-
mation Sciences and Technology Study Groups (ISAT).
8 Like the
Council’s workshops and program reviews, DSB 9 and ISAT task
forces can be called to address speciﬁc topics or challenges.
DARPA is not limited to holding these brainstorming sessions to
identify directions within formal committees. Brainstorming ses-
sions can also be called together by individual DARPA program
managers, and can be much more informal. One DARPA program
manger describes his role in bringing scientiﬁc leaders together
around a common theme.
We were talking with Paul Robinson about the notion of building
very very high volume carbon nanotubes that were functionally
matched... . And I said, gee, Rick’s always been working in that
area, let’s just call him in. Rick’s a Nobel Prize chemist. So we
called him. He was there in two days. And so Lieber came over
from Harvard. We sat around. And it was a great discussion.
The above-described interaction occurred in the mid-90s. Here,
in supporting innovation DARPA program managers are the cocktail
hosts described by Lester and Piore as necessary for the early-stage
brainstorming of new ideas ( Lester and Piore, 2004 ). The DARPA
program managers select the members of the party, and help start
the conversation necessary to brainstorm and identify the neces-
sary new directions.
8 ISAT has similar workings to the Defense Science Board task forces, but are
focused on military challenges associated with information technology.
9 The DSB was established in 1956, in response to recommendations of the Hoover
Commission. Today, the DSO’s authorized size is 32 members selected for the pre-
eminence in science and technology and its application to military operations, and
seven ex-ofﬁcio members. The task force consists of DSO board members, and other
selected consultants or experts ( DSB, 2008).
It is important, however, to look closer at the above quotation.
As shown in Table 3, all of the people at the above-mentioned gath-
ering, with the exception of the DARPA program manager, could be
characterized as Zucker’s “star scientists” ( Zucker and Darby, 1996).
None of them, however, have bibliometric or other paper trails of
intellectual ties with each other. These results are in striking con-
trast with the majority of social networks research, which focuses
on documenting collaborations through patent co-authorships.
These early-stage, informal, roundtable technical conversations
are the type of conversations that cannot be found in biliometric
studies. Further, it is in precisely in these formative conversa-
tions where the State’s involvement in bringing together the right
parties may be particularly inﬂuential in determining future direc-
tions.
(2) Seeding common research themes: DARPA program managers
do not stop at a series of brainstorming session with elite scientists.
In addition, DARPA program managers are continually returning
to the ﬁeld to ﬁnd emerging projects and capabilities within the
research community. In this role, they not only identify additional
research directions, but also encourage research in those direc-
tions by funding researchers working on common themes that
have the potential to contribute to military needs. Further, in con-
trast to the brainstorming sessions, in this ﬁeld-based activity of
identifying emerging directions and encouraging research in those
directions, the DARPA program manager need not necessarily, or at
least immediately, bring everyone into the same geographic space.
One DARPA program manager explains,
So I’ll tell you the SiGe story... . So, the ﬁrst guy to show me this,
actually two guys, ... was the guy who founded Amberwave. He
showed me this is possible. And then Jason Woo and UCLA, ...
he showed me a plot of bandgap as a function of percent Ge. And
he had two plots. He came to DARPA. And he said, look, there
is a dependency, here it is, it follows band gap theory. ... And
I said, ‘Jason, two dots don’t make a program ... . I need a third
dot.’ And he faxed me a chart the next day. ... So I sent him a
small seeding.
At the same time I called Bernie (a fellow at IBM), and I said,
‘Bernie, have you ever seen this bandgap dependency in SiGe?
You know, do you think it’s something we can exploit?’ He said,
‘Funny you should ask. We’ve been looking at the same thing,
and we’ve got some ideas as well.’ So I funded him $2M or
whatever it was.
In this function, the DARPA program manager is neither act-
ing as a broker – connecting otherwise disparate actors; nor as a
boundary-spanner – identifying, translating, and relaying informa-
tion across ﬁrm, cultural, or technical boundaries; in the traditional
sense ( Fleming and Waguespack, 2007 ). Instead, the DARPA pro-
gram manager is using his connections with researchers to identify
emerging directions and capabilities within the research com-
munity, and seed-fund common themes across these disparate
researchers. While the program manager is perhaps relaying some
knowledge about the one researcher to the other or about general
=== PAGE 9 ===
E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147 1141
Table 4
Technologists funded by a DARPA program manager to gain momentum around Si Ge and strained Si technology.
Eugene Fitzgerald Bernard Meyerson Jason Woo
Occupation, mid-90s Associate Professor,
Materials Science and
Engineering
IBM Fellow, Group Director Professor, Electrical Engineering, UCLA
Occupation, 2008 Professor, Materials Science
and Engineering
IBM Fellow, V.P. and Chief
Technologist, Systems and
Technology Group
Professor, Electrical Engineering, UCLA
Total patents >15 >40 >1
Total publications >186 >180 >100
First paper in SiGe technology 1986 1986 1991
Evidence of co-authorships with each other,
or other cooperation
None None IBM Faculty Award, 1998
activities in the technical community, at ﬁrst, he may be the only
connection between them.
Upon closer scrutiny of the above quote, these results also have a
second signiﬁcance. Speciﬁcally, similar to the results in section (1),
background research on the technologists referenced by the DARPA
program manager in the above quote, show both Eugene Fitzger-
ald (“the guy who founded of Amberwave”) and Bernard Meyerson
(“Bernie”) again to be what Zucker and Darby would classify as star
scientists (Zucker and Darby, 1996) (see Table 7). Thus, this DARPA
program manager is describing his contact with three star scien-
tists, working in the same area. These results are signiﬁcant given
Zucker and Darby’s ﬁndings that star scientists are very protective
of their techniques, ideas, and discoveries in their early years, tend-
ing to collaborate most within their own institution, which slows
diffusion to other scientists ( Zucker and Darby, 1996 ). Assuming
Zucker and Darby’s ﬁndings are correct, here, the sole connecting
person, who is aware of all three of the star scientists’ activities,
may be the DARPA program manager ( Table 4).
Finally, it is worth noting that in playing out this role of seeding
common research themes across disparate researchers, the DARPA
program manager does not always fund the same technologies.
At times, DARPA program managers fund competing technologies
aimed as solving the same problem. The same program manager
explains such an example in a different funding situation,
Take the case of thin-ﬁlm technologies. In that case I funded two
parallel programs. I funded IBM, because they were convinced
that the parallel junction for thin-ﬁlm SOI wasn’t going to go on
forever, and they wanted more thick-ﬁlm SOIs for the company
manufacturing purposes. And then I funded Lincoln Labs to do
thin-ﬁlm SOI ... . I pitted Lincoln against IBM ... . So, they both
succeeded, and IBM is still manufacturing thick-ﬁlm SOI today.
(3) Building community: increasing information ﬂows, growing
the base : DARPA’s role in seeding disparate researchers working
on common research themes (whether the same or competing
technologies) has a second signiﬁcance. In receiving funding from
DARPA, researchers are required to present to each other in work-
shops, thus further increasing the ﬂow of knowledge between
star scientists during early-stage research. Fitting with their clas-
siﬁcation as star scientists, neither Fitzgerald nor Meyerson –
who are at different institutions – have ever co-patented or co-
published. Yet, through DARPA, Fitzgerald and Meyerson were
brought together in workshops to present to each other their
research. What would otherwise have been knowledge kept within
their organization was forced at some level (with the exception of
some company-proprietary details which are presented solely to
the program managers) to ﬂow between the two. In funding dis-
parate researchers, DARPA program managers promote the sharing
of knowledge between star scientists, who left to their own devices
would, according to the literature, tend to be very protective of their
knowledge. In the some cases, these workshops may even lead to
new collaborations. Jason Woo, for example, started in the ﬁeld a
bit later than Fitzgerald or Meyerson (1991), and, as the 1998 IBM
Faculty Award he received suggests, may have even developed a
relationship with IBM through his funding from DARPA.
(4) Providing third-party validation of new technology direc-
tions: In addition to DARPA program managers’ roles in bringing
researchers together to brainstorm new technology directions,
seeding disparate researchers to gain momentum around those
directions, and bringing those researchers together to share their
results, DARPA program managers play a fourth role in technol-
ogy development. Speciﬁcally, DARPA program managers’ funding
actions act to provide external validation for new directions. One
program manager explains, “So the DARPA piece, while large, was
the validation for IBM to spend their own money.” He continues,
“The same way for the Intel piece. You know, Intel certainly looked
at that project, and then Intel ended up funding it internally, but the
fact that DARPA went back to them three and four times and said,
this is an important thing, this is an important thing, you know, it
got to the board of directors, and it got high enough that they set up
a division to do this.” A university professor makes the same point
with respect to DARPA’s role with other funding agencies, in this
case NSF. The professor explains, “See, once you’ve gotten funding
from DARPA, you have an issue resolved, and so on, then you go
right ahead and submit an NSF proposal. By which time your ideas
are known out there, people know you, you’ve published a paper
or two. And then guys at NSF say, yeah, yeah, this is a good thing.”
He continues, distinguishing DARPA’s place within the broader U.S.
government system, “NSF funding usually comes in a second wave.
DARPA provides initial funding.” As a consequence, he concludes,
“DARPA plays a huge role in selecting key ideas” (from among the
broader set of ideas present in the research community).
(5) Avoiding reliance on the state : Finally, despite DARPA’s role
in validating new technology directions both to other funding
agencies and in industry, DARPA program managers from the
1992–2001 period take note to point out that DARPA is not the
“sustaining piece” in commercializing a new technology. As one
DARPA program manager explains, “So we ran all of these design-
of-experiment concepts, and you know, ... we were doing great
stuff, really good science. But the tipping point, ... is the fact that
IBM saw the value in this to the point that they started investing in
it.”
This emphasis on the State not sustaining a technology is an
important ﬁnal piece. Past research has warned of the tendencies
for companies to become reliant on support from the state (Allen et
al., 1978; Sirbu, 1978; Zysman, 1983 ). History suggests that DARPA
has had many successes transitioning subsequent development
and production of its early-stage technologies to commercial (e.g.
laser (Bromberg, 1991), the Internet (Newman, 2002), and the per-
sonal computer ( Allan, 2001 )) and military (e.g. F117-A, Predator,
Global Hawk ( Van Atta and Lippitz, 2003 )) organizations. Future
research should explore DARPA program manager’s mechanisms
=== PAGE 10 ===
1142 E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147
Table 5
DARPA microsystems technology ofﬁce (MTO) ultraperformance nanophotonic intrachip communications (UNIC) program.
Phase I Phase II Phase II
Award date February 2006 November 2006 March 2008
Description Super-seedling, validity demonstration $44M
Timeline 9 Months 2 Years 5½ Years
Primary contractor awardees 1. HP 1. HP 1. Sun Microsystems
2. IBM 2. IBM
3. Sun Microsystems 3. Sun Microsystems
4. MIT I
a 4. MIT I a
5. Analog Devices?
Additional team members 1. ? 1. Intel 1. Luxtera, Kotura, Stanford, UCLA
2. Luxtera 2. Luxtera
3. Luxtera 3. Luxtera
4. BAE Systems 4. BAE Systems
5. MIT II
a
a Here, MIT I and MIT II are abbreviations for two teams out of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. MIT I was led by M.I.T. Materials Science and Engineering Professor
Lionel Kimerling and M.I.T. Electrical Engineering Professor Anant Agarwal. MIT II was led by M.I.T. Electrical Engineering Professor Rajeev Ram.
for transitioning technology development, and how they handle
technologies that do not transition.
5.2. DARPA under Tony Tether (2001–present)
Tony Tether was appointed director of DARPA on June 18,
2001. As discussed in Section 3, Tether made many changes
within DARPA, which were poorly received from the academic, and
particularly the computing, community. These changes included
shifting funding from universities to industry (especially, estab-
lished vendors); changing funding solicitations from broad area
announcements with few checks and balances to announcements
with go/no-go reviews linked to pre-deﬁned deliverables; and pre-
cluding universities and start-ups as prime contractors on many
solicitations, instead requiring the formation of teams with estab-
lished vendors as the prime contractors.
These changes in the framework of funding at DARPA can best
be understood by looking at a program during this period.
10 One
such program, DARPA’s Ultraperformance Nanophotonic Intrachip
Communications (UNIC) program, is outlined in Table 9 below. As
shown in the table, the UNIC program consisted of three phases.
The ﬁrst phase lasted nine months. To pass this phase required the
“development, fabrication, and demonstration, of silicon nanopho-
tonic devices.” The second phase was two years. This phase was
focused on designing and validating photonic networks between
the devices developed in phase I, and “established the credibility of
the technology within the microprocessor community.” Program
submissions were required to establish “interim milestones every
six months,” associated with “demonstrable, quantitative measures
of performance.” As shown in Table 9, with the exception of one
10 One pre-dominant type of DARPA solicitation is called a “broad area announce-
ment” or BAA. BAAs occurred regularly during both the pre-Tether and the Tether
period. The nature of many BAAs changed, however, under Tether. An example of
the phases and pre-deﬁned deliverables associated with a Tether-period BAA is pro-
vided in this paragraph. For the purpose of comparison, a Very Large Scale Integrated
(VLSI) Photonics solicitation from the pre-Tether period (i.e. with fewer checks and
balances) reads as follows: “(DARPA/ETO) is soliciting innovative research propos-
als to develop VLSI-level microﬂuidic analysis and synthesis systems (MicroFlumes)
and to develop the design tools for the implementation of mixed technology sys-
tems that include microﬂuidic, electrical, kinematic, optical, and electromagnetic
domains (Composite CAD). Of particular interest in Area 1 (MicroFlumes) are tech-
nology developments... that integrate multiple analysis & synthesis programs (or
sequences of microﬂuidic processing steps) in one system ... . Of particular but not
sole interest in Area 2 (Composite CAD) are design support tools, models and meth-
ods that include, but are not limited to, [list of possible interest areas] ... ”.
team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT I), estab-
lished companies, like HP, IBM, and Sun Microsystems, were placed
in the position of prime contractors, while universities (MIT II, Stan-
ford, UCLA) and start-ups (Luxtera, Kotura) were members of the
contractor-led team.
And yet, despite these dramatic changes under Tether in the
framework of funding at DARPA, as shown in the upcoming section,
the ﬁve processes by which DARPA program managers inﬂuence
technology directions have remarkably remained the same. The
recipients of these processes, however, and as a consequence the
implications, have changed signiﬁcantly ( Table 5).
(1) Identifying directions : As in the 1992–2001 period, to iden-
tify new technology directions that meet military needs, DARPA
program managers in the 2001–2008 period engaged in three
complementary activities: talking with mission directors to under-
stand the needs of the military, bringing together elite scientists to
brainstorm research directions that meet military needs, and talk-
ing with existing researchers to understand emerging technology
directions within the research community. As there are no changes
in their activities talking with mission directors, I skip that dis-
cussion here. I discuss the program managers’ activities bringing
together elite scientists to brainstorm research directions that meet
military needs brieﬂy below. I discuss program managers’ activities
talking with existing researchers to understand emerging technol-
ogy directions within the research community in the next section.
Based on the empirical data to which I had access, nothing
changed within the formal institutions used by DARPA program
managers for bringing together elite technology leaders to brain-
storm new technology directions. The same institutions as were
used during the 1992–2008 period, existed and were used through-
out the 2001–2008 period. For example, a February 2005 DSO
task force focused on High Performance Microchip Supply, a topic
of great interest to DARPA, and around which the Microsystems
Technology Ofﬁce had several solicitations. What I could not tell
from my empirical data, was whether the composition of these
brainstorming sessions may have changed after Tether took on the
directorship. In particular, while I was able to access nearly half of
the DARPA-Defense Sciences Research Council summaries for the
pre-Tether period (1992, 1993, 1996, and, 1997), I was not able
to gain access to any of these summaries from the period after
Tether took ofﬁce. While this lack of public access to these reports
could be representative of increased classiﬁcation of research pro-
grams during this period, it also could be that the 2001–2008 period
is more recent, and these summaries have simply not yet been
released.
=== PAGE 11 ===
E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147 1143
(2) Seeding common themes: orchestrating the involvement of
established vendors with academics and start-up companies : As from
1992 to 2001, DARPA program managers during 2001–2008 did
not stop at a series of brainstorming sessions with elite scientists.
Instead, program managers continually return to the ﬁeld to ﬁnd
out emerging directions and capabilities within the research com-
munity. As described in Section 5.1, the DARPA program managers
need “vision,” but not necessarily the original ideas. One program
manager explains, “This is an opportunity that people will actually
tell me their best ideas and we can see what we can do with those.
It’s really amazing in that sense.” Another program manager clari-
ﬁes, “I was not working in a vacuum, right?” He continues, “[I would
ask people], ‘Can you provide this functionality? Can you provide
that functionality?”’ This probing and testing of the research com-
munity to explore what is possible in a given technology—here
silicon photonics, mimics the same probing being done by the pro-
gram managers in the 1992–2001 period, in the case quoted, in
SiGe.
As discussed in Section 5.1, at times DARPA program managers
fund disparate researchers doing similar research for achieving a
particular end-goal, and at other times, DARPA program managers
fund competing technologies for achieving a particular end goal.
One DARPA program manager suggests, “I think our best [pro-
grams] are the ones where there’s multiple solutions to a common
problem.” He explains that in one program, “I have six perform-
ers and the reason I have six is because I was able to convince the
Director that this is an extremely high risk effort. I don’t know which
technology or which architecture is going to win, if any ... . [But], if
you give me four and they all fail, maybe you left the wrong two
out.” This theme is echoed in the ﬁrst program manager’s com-
ments, “I wanted to have three or four ideas that I could say, ‘Look,
... here are paths we could go along. I don’t know which if any of
them will be successful.’ ... if I didn’t have those, then I cannot go
and sell the program.”
In their continual connection with the ﬁeld, DARPA program
managers not only identify additional research directions, but also
encourage research in those directions by funding researchers
working on common themes that have the potential to address
military needs. In seeding disparate researchers around common
themes, the DARPA program manager is neither a broker nor a
boundary-spanner. Rather, he takes in ideas from the existing
research community, identiﬁes directions, and then funds disparate
researchers working on common themes that hold potential in con-
tributing to achieving an end-goal. He synthesizes emerging ideas
into common themes. He integrates common themes into direc-
tions to meet military goals. Finally, he directs researchers along
these directions through carefully crafted funding solicitations.
The disparate researchers in the 2001–2008 time period are,
however, very different than those funded in the period from 1992
to 2001. Where in the ﬁrst time period the disparate researchers
were star scientists, in the latter period, the disparate researchers
are teams of start-ups, universities, and prime contractors. A start-
up company founder described his interactions with DARPA’s
program managers, and the role the program managers played in
encouraging research in the academic and industrial communities
around their ideas: “So DARPA has program managers, and we were
talking to them, and they got excited about this project, and they
said, let’s try to get a program out. So we worked with... the DARPA
program manager, and they got interested in the ﬁeld, and they got
a program out of this. They got a bunch of other people involved
in the program.” Here, the “other people” are the companies and
universities for the UNIC program shown in Table 9.
Unlike in 1992–2001, when start-up companies would have
been funded directly, in 2001–2008, start-up companies were fre-
quently not able to be the primary contractor on a proposal. In
the case of the above start-up company, the company needed to
team up with an established vendor to receive funding for the
project. Describing this process, the program manager clariﬁes, “I
have never ... said, ‘I want you to work with these two.”’ He clar-
iﬁes, “You have to structure the solicitation in such a way that ...
they would do that on their own.” The program manager goes on
to describe this system-level goal, “There was one ... condition
imposed on [the teams], and that was that these things must be
developed in a... foundry compatible process.” He explains, “I don’t
want people to go out and do something in the basement, and say
that, ‘Ah, I produced the best results in the world,’ in a process
that is totally incompatible with anything else that the industry
does. Because the whole idea here was to leverage the industry’s
path down the road of smaller and smaller devices.” While at ﬁrst
glance, this requirement for established vendors to be the primary
contractors may seem limiting, it may also have an important pur-
pose. In particular, recent research has shown that with the decline
of corporate R&D labs and the vertical fragmentation of industries,
ﬁrms today face new challenges coordinating across ﬁrms when
advancing technology platforms ( Gawer and Cusumano, 2002;
Iansiti and Levien, 2004), aligning incentive structures across these
interdependent ﬁrms ( Casadesus-Masanell and Yofﬁe, 2005 ), and
supporting long-term research within such ecosystems ( Macher
and Mowery, 2004 ). By leveraging his birds-eye view of research
in the community, the DARPA program manager can help ensure
that technical activities being engaged by disparate entities, such
as start-ups, in the vertically disintegrated framework ﬁt in the
broader industry picture.
11
(3) Building community: supporting knowledge ﬂows between
competitors and enabling technology platform leadership at the sys-
tems level : As in Section 5.1, DARPA’s role in seeding disparate
researchers working on common themes has a second signiﬁ-
cance. In receiving funding from DARPA, researchers are required to
present to each other in workshops, thus further increasing the ﬂow
of knowledge between researchers working on common themes.
Under Tether, DARPA funding recipients are required to attend and
present to each other in workshops at the end of each go/no-go pro-
gram phase. However, in contrast to the 1992–2001 period, where
institutionally isolated start scientists were brought together, in the
2001–2008 period, these researchers are established vendors and
their teams of start-ups and university professors. In response to a
presentation of an early proposal for this work, which I gave at an
industry conference, one university professor angrily responded,
“I can tell you what you’ll ﬁnd. I was there (at the DARPA work-
shop), and they’re (the companies) all presenting to each other
what they’re going to do. They’re all talking to each other. And
they’re all doing the same thing.” And yet, in the case of estab-
lished vendors, DARPA workshops may provide them with a critical
opportunity to share new ideas and agree (implicitly or explicitly)
on technology directions. One industry respondent explained the
importance of such an opportunity to coordinate in today’s indus-
try environment, “You just can’t make anything happen in industry
(today) on your own, because it’s completely impossible. You have
to ﬁnd a partner, you have to convince your competition this is
the right thing to do.” He continued, “You’re guiding people [your
competitors], ... and they ask, ‘Why are you helping me with this?,’
11 Multiple academic informants in areas outside the technical scope of this paper
described situations under the Tether administration in which they shared a new
idea with a program manager, expecting to subsequently be funded under the BAA,
only to ﬁnd later that a large contract manufacturer had been funded to do their
idea, and they had received no funding. While these stories could not be validated,
they highlight the importance of trust between the program managers and the
researchers they fund in DARPA’s system of technology development. If this trust is
lost, the DARPA program managers lose their position of knowledge centrality, and
are no longer able to successfully identify and inﬂuence new technology directions
within the research community.
=== PAGE 12 ===
1144 E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147
and the fact is you give them information so the suppliers are in the
right place to help you.”
DARPA is not only supporting the coordination of technology
directions across competitors. By encouraging teams of start-ups,
universities, and prime contractors, DARPA may also be helping
coordinate technology directions in a vertically fragmented indus-
try in a second way. One established vendor emphasizes both the
importance of DARPA’s systems perspective and of DARPA giving
the established vendors power by making them the primary con-
tractors. He explains, “Here, the technology is being driven by the
systems companies. Very few companies have the resources to do
system-level exploration without DARPA funding. DARPA fund-
ing is enabling the system players to determine the direction of
this technology. If you don’t get the system guys involved, you
end up getting widgets that don’t work in the bigger picture.”
This system-level goal is already hinted at in section (2) by both
the start-up company – which notes that DARPA “got a bunch of
other people involved,” and by the DARPA program manager –
who emphasizes the importance of developing new technologies
compatible with the established industry platform. Finally, another
established vendor emphasized the importance of DARPA’s longer
term vision in supporting technology trajectories across the ver-
tically disintegrated industry, saying, “You need someone with a
longer term horizon. Ten years from now, we want a teraﬂop of
computing. But we don’t have more than a six month time hori-
zon.”
With the decline of corporate R&D labs and the vertical fragmen-
tation of industries, ﬁrms today face new challenges in establishing
appropriate sources of new inventions and in coordinating sub-
sequent technology development across the myriad of affected
ﬁrms. Recent research has documented challenges in the coordi-
nation across ﬁrms in advancing technology platforms ( Gawer and
Cusumano, 2002; Iansiti and Levien, 2004 ), in aligning incentive
structures across interdependent ﬁrms ( Casadesus-Masanell and
Yofﬁe, 2005 ), and in particular, in supporting long-term research
within such ecosystems. Within DARPA between 1992 and 2001,
the mandate to present early-stage research in DARPA work-
shops encouraged star scientists to divulge information that they
might otherwise have kept conﬁdential within their institution, and
thereby helped align them on similar trajectories. In contrast, in
the case of DARPA under Tether, the teams DARPA forms between
universities, start-ups, and established vendors, and its subsequent
mandatory workshops are supporting the coordination of technol-
ogy trajectories across a vertically fragmented industry and the
alignment of long-term technology trajectories.
(4) Providing third party validation for new technology direc-
tions: As during 1992–2001, DARPA also played a fourth role in
technology development from 2001 to 2008. Speciﬁcally, it pro-
vided external validation for new directions. Under Tether, instead
of DARPA’s funding providing validation to industry and NSF for
latter-stage funding and commercialization, it instead validates
technology directions within the vertically fragmented industrial
ecosystem. This validation of a new technology can be particularly
helpful for start-ups. The CEO and founder of one start-up described
the challenge of breaking into the broader industry knowledge net-
work, saying, “[In contrast to a large company or M.I.T.], “ ... as a
small company, you have to develop a contact. Headhunters... [can]
also bring information to you. We are starting to discuss with (large
systems vendor) ... . They’re trying to keep us developing pieces
of technology they need.” Another start-up founder emphasizes
the importance of DARPA’s validation. He explains, “[Venture cap-
ital] investors are highly motivated to see the company succeed.
As a consequence, they will lie through their teeth about what
the company can do. DARPA funding and ATP funding have the
added beneﬁt of communicating to a third party a validation of the
technology.”
(5) Breeding reliance on the state ?: Finally, like the DARPA pro-
gram managers from 1992 to 2001, DARPA program managers from
2001 to 2008 were concerned to not become the sustaining force
for any technology. Under Tether, DARPA program managers were
particularly encouraged to focus on the last step of transitioning
the technology to the military and (or) to industry. As one program
manager explained, “The third phase is a very important phase
usually... it’s the last phase... . [It] deﬁnes how you will transition
the technology in this ofﬁce, say, to somewhere else.” He continues,
“Dr. Tether pays extra attention to your plan for Phase III.”
And yet, some members of the industrial community whose
positions involved shorter term time horizons and the pressing
realities of commercialization expressed caution about participat-
ing in DARPA-based activities. One established computing vendor
explained, “So, <my company> as a whole has just shied away from
government funding. ... <Our company> labs, or whatever, they’ll
get a little DARPA funding, but most of that is, has never, produced
anything of value, from a ... commercial perspective. That wasn’t
saying it wasn’t of value within the industry, but just trying to
delineate.” A start-up company CEO and founder expressed simi-
lar concerns, “Sometimes I’m very nervous about getting too much
focus on defense money. I don’t want to lose track of the fact that
I’m developing products, not technology.” He continues, “DARPA is
funding the industry so far ahead. If you’re developing for 10 years
from now, DARPA is great. But how do you manage not to lose rev-
enue unless the market is starting in now... Some of the technology
developed for the next generation—I don’t know if it is applicable
that well to (now). I’m not sure DARPA’s direction is the direction
to go.” He concludes, “I think ... <my company> is ideally placed for
(today’s technology). But, admittedly, not necessarily for the long
term.”
These results do not conﬂict with the supportive comments
made by established computing vendors in section (3). Rather,
they help underscore DARPA’s role in coordinating longer term
technology trajectories, while not being accepted by industry for
coordinating technologies required in the shorter term. Notably,
while the interviewee was not participating in any DARPA-funded
projects, the labs at the same established computing vendor were
participating in DARPA contracts from the Microsystems Technol-
ogy Ofﬁce at the time of the interview.
Further, the concerns expressed by the above established ven-
dor and start-up founder may not be unwarranted. A recent study
on SBIRs by the National Academy of Sciences shows that while
small businesses receiving government funding are good at achiev-
ing mission goals, they are frequently not successful at surviving in
the long-term or at technology commercialization (Wessner, 2007).
Since the time of the interview, the above-described start-up has
joined an established vendor’s team, and acquired DARPA funding
for developing the longer term technology. Most recently, as part of
the UNIC program described in Table 9, Sun Microsystems received
a $44 million contract for the next ﬁve years to continue to develop
the photonic system-on-a-chip technology. Whether or not some
start-ups and established vendors who were involved in DARPA
funding during the Tether period end up developing a reliance on
the State, will remain to be seen.
6. Discussion: the DARPA program manager – embedded
network agent
Key to understanding DARPA’s role in inﬂuencing technology
directions is understanding the role of the program manager, not
as someone who “opens windows” to which researchers can bring
funding ideas ( Block, 2007 ), nor merely as a “boundary spanner”
(and possibly a “broker”) who connects different communities
(Ansell, 2000; Block, 2007 ), but rather in a more active role. The
=== PAGE 13 ===
E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147 1145
nature of this role makes it difﬁcult to describe, as it comes
through in the seemingly conﬂicting descriptions of the DARPA
program manager role by members of the research community.
One former ofﬁce director explains, “It really comes down to the
program manager. A program manager that has a passion for an
idea, that understands the technical elements of an idea, and has
some vision for where it might go.” On the other hand, indus-
try and academic researchers consistently describe themselves as
the people with the ideas, and DARPA program managers as the
people who funded them, provided legitimacy, and helped pro-
vide the funding and community support to bring the vision to
fruition. In the words of one university professor, a DARPA pro-
gram manager would “touch” on “people like [professor’s name]
and others he knew well, and [say] ‘hey, help me, give me the
ideas.”
This seeming inconsistency, however, can be resolved through
the DARPA program managers’ own description of their role.
As a former member of the research community who suddenly
rises in status and holds the promise of money, the DARPA
program manager becomes a central node to which informa-
tion from the larger research community ﬂows. In this role,
the DARPA program managers are in constant contact with the
research community, bringing people together to brainstorm new
directions, understanding emerging research themes, matching
these emerging themes to military needs, “betting on the right
people,” connecting disconnected communities, standing-up com-
peting technology solutions against each other, and maintaining
the system-integrating view. In executing these tasks, they must,
indeed, have “vision,” but this vision does not necessarily involve
themselves having the ideas. In the words of one program manager,
“There were people around who I could go [to] and talk to [and] see
what their ideas were ... . What they could do.” Program managers
from both periods, 1992–2001 and 2001–2008, describe this same
idea-seeking behavior.
Most importantly, DARPA program managers conduct all of
these activities, without explicitly choosing the technology win-
ners. At times they seed disconnected researchers working on
common themes – whether with the same or with competing tech-
nologies – that hold potential to meet military needs. As the DARPA
program manager from the preceding paragraph explains, “So obvi-
ously ... I would not propose a program if there were no ideas
[among researchers] that would address the challenges that we
[at DARPA] had to address. I just didn’t know what ... particular
idea would work.” He continues, “But I wanted to have three or
four ideas that I could say, ‘Look, ... here are paths we could go
along. I don’t know which, if any of them, will be successful.’ ... if I
didn’t have those, then I cannot go and sell the program.” In other
cases, they bring together disconnected researchers, whether to
brainstorm directions, to work together (on teams), or to learn
from each other (in workshops). As described by program man-
ager from the 1992–2001 period, “You get communities together
that don’t naturally talk and you give them some latitude and some
life, and you push them forward and see what comes out of it.”
In this situation, “Conversations were often ... one upsmanship.
... You know, sort of realizing what other people were doing and
you’d reset your goals, and you’d kinda all move. And the role
of the program manager was kind of to keep the band march-
ing down the street.” Finally, throughout these activities, whether
bringing together members of research communities that may not
normally talk, or funding an entire suite of technologies necessary
to meet an integrated outcome, DARPA program managers con-
tribute a system-level perspective to organizing national R&D. As
one program manager from the 1992–2001 period explained, “ ...
we were able to broaden it out, do the VLSI, do the hardware, accel-
eration, do all the stuff [necessary to advance Moore’s Law] and sure
enough we stayed on that ops curve and we were pulling the indus-
try along.” The same systems-level view is seen in the 2001–2008
period.
Thus, while the DARPA program manager is, indeed, sometimes
a broker – acting as the only connection between disconnected
researchers or communities – and sometimes a boundary spanner
– connecting communities to support the development of a new
ﬁeld – his role is much more active than that prescribed to these
positions in previous literature. The DARPA program manager is not
only a connector, but also a conductor and a systems integrator. He
comes to his position through his prior social capital and position
in the network. Once in this position, he holds and leverages partic-
ular powers. Yet, what is most signiﬁcant, is the deliberate role the
DARPA program manger plays in changing the shape of the network
once in this position, so as to identify and inﬂuence new directions
for technology development.
7. Conclusions
Several years after Tony Tether took ofﬁce, popular press
articles began suggesting that the U.S.’s great engine of technol-
ogy change – DARPA – was “dead” ( CRC, 2005; Lazowska and
Patterson, 2005; Markoff, 2005; Shachtman, 2008 ). Drawing on a
case study of DARPA’s Microsystem’s Technology Ofﬁce from 1992
to 2008, I argue that this perceived death is because past analy-
ses have, by focusing on the organization’s culture and structure,
overlooked a set of lasting, informal institutions among DARPA
program managers. In the case of DARPA’s Microsystems tech-
nology ofﬁce before and during the directorship of Tony Tether,
what changed is not the processes used by the program man-
agers, but rather the situations to which program managers apply
these processes. Prior to 2001, DARPA’s processes for seeding
and encouraging new technology trajectories involved (1) bring-
ing star scientists largely from academia together to brainstorm
new ideas, (2) seeding disparate researchers around common
themes, (3) encourage early knowledge-sharing between these
star researchers through workshops, and (4) providing third-party
validation for new technology directions to external funding agen-
cies and industry. By identifying ideas across, bringing together,
and seed funding star scientists (who may otherwise institution-
ally isolate their knowledge) around common themes, DARPA
was able to support the sources of, knowledge ﬂows around,
and development of social networks necessary for initiating
new technology directions in early-stage research. In contrast,
since 2001, the DARPA program manager’s processes for gain-
ing momentum around new ideas involve (1) orchestrating the
involvement of established vendors with academics and start-ups,
(2) supporting knowledge-sharing between industry competitors
through invite-only workshops, (3) providing third-party vali-
dation of new technology directions to a vertically fragmented
industry, and (4) supporting technology platform leadership at
the system level. Here, DARPA is supporting the coordination of
technology development across a vertically fragmented indus-
try in whose direction the military has interest and in which
long-term coordination of technology platforms is particularly
challenging.
These results suggest a new form of technology policy, in which
embedded government agents re-architect social networks among
researchers so as to identify and inﬂuence new technology direc-
tions in the U.S. to achieve an organizational goal. In this role, these
agents do not give way to the invisible hand of markets, nor do they
step in with top-down bureaucracy to “pick technology winners.”
Instead, they are in constant contact with the research community,
understanding emerging themes, matching these emerging themes
to military needs, betting on the right people, connecting discon-
nected communities, standing up competing technologies against
=== PAGE 14 ===
1146 E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147
each other, and maintaining that birds-eye perspective critical
to integrating disparate activities across our national innovation
ecosystem.
Acknowledgements
My sincerest thanks to John Alic, David Andersen, Fred Block,
Glen Fong, David Hounshell, Matthew Keller, Michael Piore, Ray
Reagans, Alex Roland, Sean Safford, Shane Greenstein, Josh Whit-
ford, participants in the 2008 Sloan Industry Studies Conference,
and participants in the Society for the and Advancement of
Socio-Economic Research Conference for their insights at vari-
ous stages of this paper. Thanks to the M.I.T. Microphotonics
Center and the Chemical Heritage Foundation for their gen-
erous funding of parts of this research. Many thanks, also,
to Woody Powell, Martin Kenney, and the four anonymous
reviewers at Research Policy for their excellent feedback. Finally,
thanks to the countless government, academia, and industry
interview participants, who shared their own personal expe-
rience and insights in making this document possible, and
remain unnamed. All mistakes in the document remain my
own.
References
Allan, R., 2001. A History of the Personal Computer. Allan Publishing, Ontario, CA.
Allen, T., Utterback, J., Sirbu, M., Ashford, N., Hollomon, J., 1978. Government inﬂu-
ence on the process of innovation in Europe and Japan. Research Policy 7 (2),
1978.
Amsden, A., Chu, W., 2003. Beyond Late Development: Taiwan’s Upgrading Policies.
M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ansell, C., 2000. The networked polity: regional development in Western Europe.
Governance: An International Journal of Policy and Administration 13 (3),
303–333.
Barber Associates, R., 1975. The Advanced Research Projects Agency 1958–1974.
Defense Technical Information Center. Prepared for the Advanced Projects
Research Agency, Springﬁeld, VA.
Block, F., 2007. Swimming Against the Current: The Hidden Developmental State in
the U.S. Politics and Society.
Bonvillian, W., 2006. Power play. The American Interest II (2), 39–49.
Breznitz, D., 2005. Collaborative public space in a national innovation system: a
case study of the Israeli military’s impact on the software industry. Industry and
Innovation 12 (1), 31–64.
Breznitz, D., 2007. Innovation and the State. Yale University Press, New Haven, RI.
Bromberg, J., 1991. The Laser in America, 1950–1970. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Casadesus-Masanell, R., Yofﬁe, D.B., 2005. Wintel: cooperation and conﬂict. Man-
agement Science 53 (4), 584–598.
CRC, 2005. Joint Statement of the Computing Research Community. House Science
Committee Hearing on the Future of Computer Science Research in the U.S.
Washington, DC.
Davis, J.P., 2009. Network Dynamics of Ecploration and Exploitation: Pruning and
Pairing Processes in Collaborative Innovation. MIT Working Paper.
DefenseScienceBoard, 2005. High Performance Microchip Supply. National
Academies Press, Washington, DC.
DSB, 2008. Defense Science Board: History. Retrieved November 3, 2008, 2008, from
http://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/history.htm.
DSRC, 1997. Defense Sciences Research Council Summer Conference Summary
Report. Defense Science Research Council Summer Conference. LaJolla, Cal-
ifornia, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. DARPA Order No.
8884.
Eisenhardt, K., 1989. Building theories from case study research. Academy of Man-
agement Review 14 (4), 532–550.
Evans, P., 1995. Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation. Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Fernandez, F., 2000. Statement by Frank Fernandez Director, Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency Before the U.S. Senate. Senate, U.S. Washington, DC.
Flamm, K., 1987. Targeting the Computer: Government Support and International
Competition. The Brookings Institute, Washington, DC.
Flamm, K., 1988. Creating the Computer: Government, Industry, and High Technol-
ogy. The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Fleming, L., Waguespack, D., 2007. Brokerage, boundary spanning, and leader-
ship in open innovation communities. Organization Science 18 (2), 165–
180.
Fong, G., 2001. ARPA does windows: the defense underpinnings of the PC revolution.
Business and Politics 3 (3), 1469–3569.
Fransman, M., 1993. The Market and Beyond: Information Technology in Japan.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Garud, R., 2008. Conferences as venues for the conﬁguration of emerging organiza-
tional ﬁelds: the case of cochlear implants. Journal of Management Studies 45
(6), 1061–1088.
Gawer, A., Cusumano, M.A., 2002. Platform Leadership: How Intel, Microsoft, and
Cisco Drive Industry Innovation. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Glasner, B., Strauss, A., 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies of Qual-
itative Research. Wiedenfeld and Nicholson, London.
Graham, O., 1992. Losing Time: The Industrial Policy Debate. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Graves, A., 2004. The Stormy Present. The West Wing. U.S., NBC.
Iansiti, M., Levien, R., 2004. The Keystone Advantage: What the New Dynamics of
Business Ecosystems mean for Strategy, Innovation, and Sustainability. Harvard
Business School Press, Boston.
Jick, T.D., 1979. Mixing qualitative and quantitative methods: triangulation in action.
Administrative Science Quarterly 24, 602–611.
Johnson, C., 1982. MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The Growth of Industrial Policy,
1925–1975. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
Lazowska, E., Patterson, D., 2005. An endless frontier postponed. Science, 308.
Lester, R.K., Piore, M.J., 2004. Innovation: The Missing Dimension. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Levina, N., 2005. The emergence of boundary spanning competence in practice:
implications for implementation and use of information systems. MIS Quarterly
29 (2), 335–363.
Macher, J., Mowery, D., 2004. Vertical specialization and industry structure in high
technology industries. Business strategy over the industry life cycle. Advances
in Strategic Management: A Research Annual 21, 317–355.
Markoff, J., 2005. Pentagon Redirects its Research Dollars. New York Times, New
York, NY.
Marshall, E., 1997. Too radical for NIH? Try DARPA. Science 275 (5301), 744–746.
McCray, W.P., 2009. From lab to iPod: a story of discovery and commercialization in
the post-cold war era, project muse: today’s research. Tomorrow’s Inspiration,
58–81.
McEvily, B., Zaheer, A., 1999. Bridging ties: a source of ﬁrm heterogeneity in com-
petitive capabilities. Strategic Management Journal 20, 1133–1156.
MIT, 2009. Research Afﬁliates: Jack Ruina. MIT Security Studies Program Retrieved
August 17, 2009.
Mowery, D., 2006. Lessons from the history of federal R&D policy for an “Energy
ARPA”. Committee on Science, Washington, DC.
Mowery, D.C., 1999. America’s Industrial Resurgence? An Overview. U.S. Industry in
2000: Studies in Competitive Performance. National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, DC, pp. 1–16.
Mowery, D.C., Langlois, R.N., 1996. Spinning off and spinning on (?): the federal
government role in the development of the US computer software industry.
Research Policy 25, 947–966.
Newman, N., 2002. Net Loss: Internet Prophets, Private Proﬁts, and the Costs to
Community. Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park, PA.
NRC, 1999. Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board. History, C. o. I. i. C. a. C. L. f.
Commission on Physical Sciences Mathematics and Applications, Washington,
DC.
O’Riain, S., 2004. Politics of High-Tech Growth: Developmental Network States in
the Global Economy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Okimoto, D., 1987. Between MITI and the Market: Japanese Industrial Technology
for High Technology. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
OTA, 1993. Defense Conversaion: Redirecting R&D. U.S. Congress, Ofﬁce of Technol-
ogy Assessment, Washington, DC.
Price, D.D.S., 1963. Little Science, Big Science. and Beyond. Columbia University Press,
New York, NY.
Reed, 1999. Defense advanced projects agency’s electronics technology ofﬁce
changes name. In: High Beam Research. Reed Business Information, Farmington
Hills, MI.
Rensselaer, 2002. DARPA Inside. Rensselaer Magazine.
Roland, A., 2002. Strategic Computing: DARPA and the Quest for Machine Intelli-
gence 1983–1993. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Sabel, C., 1993. Studied trust: building new forms of cooperation in a volatile econ-
omy. Human Relations 46 (9), 1133–1170.
Sabel, C., 1996. A measure of federalism: assessing manufacturing technology cen-
ters. Research Policy 25 (2), 281–307.
Sedgwick, J., 1991. The men from DARPA. In: Playboy, vol. 38. Michael Perlis, Chicago,
IL, pp. 108, 122, 154–156.
Shachtman, N., 2008. Darpa Budget Cut $130 Million for ‘Poor Execution’. Wired.
Online, Conde Nast Digital.
Sirbu, M., 1978. Government aid for the development of innovative technology:
lessons from the French. Research Policy 7 (2), 176–196.
Smith, A., 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
Edinburgh.
Tether, T., 2003. Statement by Dr. Tony Tether, Director, defense advanced research
projects agency. In: Subcommittee on Terrorism, Unconventional Threats, and
Capabilities, House Armed Services Committee. United States House of Repre-
sentatives, Washington, DC.
Van Atta, R., 2007. Energy Research and the “DARPA Model”. Subcommittee on
Energy and Environment, Committee on Science and Technology. Washington,
D.C.
Van Atta, R.H., Lippitz, M., 2003. Transformation and Transition: DARPA’s Role in
Fostering an Emerging Revolution in Military Affairs, Institution for Defense
Analysis. Volume 1 - Overall Assessment.
=== PAGE 15 ===
E.R.H. Fuchs / Research Policy 39 (2010) 1133–1147 1147
Wessner (Ed.), 2007. SBIR and the Phase III Challenge of Commercialization. Policy
and Global Affairs Division. National Academies Press, Washington, DC.
Whitford, J., 2005. The New Old Economy: Networks, Institutions, and the Organi-
zational Transformation of American Manufacturing. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.
Yin, 1989. Case Study Research. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Zucker, L., Darby, M., 1996. Star scientists and institutional transformation: patterns
of invention and innovation in the formation of the biotechnology industry.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 (23), 709–712.
Zysman, J., 1983. Governments, Markets, and Growth: Financial Systems and the
Politics of Industrial Change. Cornell University Press, Ithica, NY.