Cultural Foundations of Learning
/a,t a)d w/,t
Jin Li
Brown University

cambridg/ u)iv/r,ity :r/,,
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town,  
Singapore, São Paulo, Delhi, Mexico City
Cambridge University Press
;2 Avenue of the Americas, New York, )y 1001;-2?7;, u,a
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/A7B0C211D0D2A
© Jin Li 2012
Tis publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception  
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,  
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written  
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2012
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication data
Li, Jin, 1AC7–
Cultural foundations of learning : east and west / Jin Li.
 p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
i,b) A7B-0-C21-7DB2A-0 (hardback) – i,b) A7B-0-C21-1D0D2-A (paperback)
1. Learning, Psychology of. 2. Learning – Cross-cultural studies.  
;. Learning – Western countries. ?. Learning – East Asia. I. Title.
lb10D0.lC 2012
;70.1C′2;–dc2;   20110?7B;B
i,b) A7B-0-C21-7DB2A-0 Hardback
i,b) A7B-0-C21-1D0D2-A Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of url,  
for external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication and does not 
guarantee that any content on such Web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

vii
!()t/)t,
Preface 
page ix
 1. Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda 
1
 2. Learning to Master the Universe and to Transform Self 
20
 ;. Time Past and Time Present 
D;
 ?. Mind-Oriented and Virtue-Oriented Learning Processes 
10C
 C. Curiosity Begets Inquiry and Heart Begets Dedication 
1C;
 D. Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven 
1B7
 7. Socratic and Confucian Tutors at Home 
22;
 B. Te Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker 
27D
 A. Implications for the Changing Landscape of Learning 
;2A
Bibliography 
;C;
Index 
;B1

ix
“Grinding a sword for ten years, but the blade is yet to be tried.” Tese two 
poetic lines by the Chinese poet Jia Dao (77A–B?;) have come to signify 
working on something for a long time, hoping the time and labor produce 
good results. For me, writing this book took not ten years in preparation 
but much longer. But I did not mind grinding it out slowly, even if what 
came out was not always to my liking. As the pages of the book will explain, 
the grinding itself gave me much joy and meaning.
Te idea of writing a book like this came to me at the end of my doctoral 
dissertation in the late 1AA0s. Te original book title had in it the phrase “a 
heart and mind for wanting to learn” (hao-xue-xin, 好學心), as it was the 
research topic of my dissertation. Te phrase is a native Chinese learning 
concept that my mother suggested to me. When I was exploring a disser-
tation topic, I asked my mother Erst, as I always did, to share my learning 
with her, to brainstorm learning concepts upon hearing the translated term 
achievement motivation (成就動機) from Western psychology. She was 
puzzled about the Western concept, could not produce a single association 
in Chinese, and sat there speechless quite some time. Finally, she muttered, 
“What does learning have to do with motivation?! I only know a motive 
to murder” (in Chinese, motivation and motive are translated as the same 
term 動機. Upon reﬂection on these two English terms, I, too, failed to 
discern really meaningful diﬀerences!). I knew that if my college-educated 
mother – who had, in eﬀect, also received a secondhand doctoral education 
through me – could not make sense of achievement motivation, chances 
are that the people I was going to study in China would not either. I then 
asked her what Chinese concept captures people’s desire to learn. Without 
any hesitation, she said hao-xue-xin. “Yes, you are right! Why didn’t I think 
of it?” I exclaimed and felt that I had just hit the jackpot. When I con-
sulted my Chinese peers at the Harvard Graduate School of Education, 
Fr/-ac/

Preface
x
they unanimously embraced this concept, to my delight. My peers and I 
racked our brains to come up with a good translation but failed. We decided 
to stick to the somewhat awkward English translation, for we felt that the 
translation is accurate in meaning and feeling and speaks to us: a heart and 
mind for wanting to learn. Subsequently, this native concept came to stand 
for the Chinese learning model in my research and writing.
Tat the Chinese learning model reﬂects their native ideas, attitudes, pas-
sions, and approaches did not surprise me, given that I grew up with them. 
However, my follow-up comparative research with European-American 
elite college students, chosen as exemplary learners from the West, did. I 
was struck by the very fact that both cultures value learning, have a compa-
rably long intellectual history, possess a similarly large repertoire of learn-
ing concepts, run the same education system of kindergarten, elementary, 
secondary, and college education, and above all teach much of the same 
content (math, science, and also English in Chinese-speaking regions). Yet, 
the meanings of the found learning concepts diﬀer so markedly that there is 
very little overlap. I did not know that research could produce such surpris-
ing results and wondered how such cultural diﬀerences escaped previous 
researchers’ attention. But I must admit that by the time I saw the research 
results, I had been engaged in learning from the West for more than EGeen 
years. It was not until I conducted my doctoral dissertation research that 
I fully realized how large the diﬀerence is. My later research on children’s 
developing beliefs also conErmed the shaping power of culture. I reasoned 
that if I, as a cognizant learner of both Chinese and Western orientations, 
did not fully grasp the profundity of cultural learning models, then others 
may not either. Hence, they may appreciate an opportunity to learn about 
the diﬀerences beyond the technical realm of journal articles and special-
ized academic circles. Tis realization solidiEed my decision to embark on 
this book project. I wanted to piece scattered research together to answer 
two fundamental questions: (1) What are the two diﬀerent cultural learn-
ing models that produce diﬀerent learners? (2) Why are the models so 
diﬀerent?
My eﬀort in writing this book is descriptive and interpretive rather than 
prescriptive. My goal is to lay out the basic cultural models by tracing their 
respective intellectual traditions and by showing how cultural learning 
models inﬂuence children’s beliefs and how these beliefs manifest them-
selves in the learning process. By describing the patterns of cultural learn-
ing models and children’s learning beliefs, I hope to highlight the idea that 
cultural models serve as permeating light under which adults guide and 
children develop. But diﬀerent cultures have diﬀerent lights and ways of 

Preface
xi
responding to them. Te task of research is to let the lights illuminate and 
then document their inﬂuence.
Years ago when I was still a student of German literature, a Chinese liter-
ary critic of German drama lamented that the Chinese have plenty of lived 
experiences and great art, yet they are poor at turning their experiences 
and art forms into theories. Tis provocative claim came from his knowl-
edge that the celebrated German playwright Bertolt Brecht (1BAB–1ACD) had 
an epiphany for his “alienation eﬀect” from watching a performance by 
the Peking Opera singer Mei Lanfang in Moscow. Te fact that Brecht was 
able to see the abstract but common technique in Peking Opera and then 
“discovered” the unique eﬀect made this Chinese literary critic realize that 
Chinese could and should have come up with the theory of their own art. 
Instead, they had to depend on a Westerner to help “elevate” their art form. 
In a similar way, researchers do what Brecht did: provide understanding of 
lived cultural experiences at a theoretical level. Tis theoretical perspective 
does not replace thoughts and feelings at the gut level, but it helps us appre-
ciate our own culture in ways lived experiences alone (without reﬂection) 
cannot. I hope that this book will stimulate readers in thinking about learn-
ing and development under the theorized cultural light.
I wish to make clear that this book focuses on the general cultural ori-
entations of learning instead of on individual diﬀerences within East Asia 
and the West. It is not my intention to generalize the cultural orientations 
to every individual in these cultures. Even with empirical research that 
claims to be based on culturally representative samples, the power of gen-
eralization is limited. Nevertheless, researchers generally agree that if the 
same phenomenon has been studied by many from many a diﬀerent angle 
and with diﬀerent methods over a long time, and if similar conclusions are 
drawn, then chances are that the phenomenon exists. No culturally minded 
social scientist is seeking across-the-board generalization to all individuals. 
My own research and that of others are subject to the same inherent limita-
tions. Neither does this book attempt to cover inconsistencies and coun-
terforces that work against the basic cultural orientations. To be sure, these 
forces abound. Individuals who disagree with or are not served well in either 
cultural system deserve to be researched and understood, but they are not 
the focus of this book. I chose to look at the general cultural orientations, 
instead of the atypical tendencies or discord within each culture, because I 
am interested in the workings, not anomalies or failures, of culture.
Finally, the slow process of writing this book has enabled me to con-
template freely, broadly, and deeply the various topics written about in this 
book. Tis slow grinding aﬀorded me the opportunity to change from a 

Preface
xii
swallow-whole learner of anything that came her way to one that is more 
observant and questioning, from being an incessant critic of her own cul-
ture to one who has discovered its strengths. Tis transformed intellectual 
stance has helped me learn from Western masters but also to relearn what I 
had learned from my own culture. Tis type of cross-cultural learning and 
its beneEts lie in the process of making the strange familiar (Western) and 
the familiar strange (Chinese) Erst, then absorbing both into myself, but at 
the same time also holding both as objects of continuous contemplation.
I am very grateful to the William T. Grant Foundation for funding my 
collaboration with Janine Bemperchat and Susan Holloway on Chinese 
adolescents from immigrant families along with peers from other eth-
nic groups; to the Foundation for Child Development (FCD) for funding 
my research on preschool children from Chinese immigrant families; to 
the Chiang-ching Kuo Foundation for supporting my collaboration with 
Dr. Heidi Fung; and Enally for the Spencer Foundation’s support for my 
early research on preschool children’s learning beliefs as well as for the con-
tinuation of my longitudinal project started with FCD’s funding. Any state-
ments that may appear to be unorthodox and unusual or any failures in this 
book are not theirs but mine.
To the many research assistants I have had the good fortune to work with 
at Brown University, in China, and in Taiwan, I owe much gratitude. I thank 
the hundreds of children, college students, and families in these countries 
for their participation in my research. It was their permission that allowed 
me a chance to peek inside cultural learning models and their individual 
learning beliefs. It was their generous sharing of their thoughts, feelings, 
upbringing, and their parents’ sharing of their childrearing that enabled me 
to “uncover” what has been ﬂowing for millennia. Reading each parent’s 
interview, each child’s story, and each college student’s description of learn-
ing made me realize what a privilege it is to be a researcher. All the work day 
and night that I embarked on was, without regret, totally worth it.
Te able and professional staﬀ at Cambridge University Press helped 
craG this book. I would like to thank Simina Calin, the editor of Cambridge’s 
psychology list, for her willingness to consider my book proposal and for 
her patience with my slow writing. Her successor, Emily Spangler, helped 
me with the submission of my manuscript. My gratitude is extended to 
Adina Berk, current editor of Cambridge’s psychology and cognitive sci-
ence list, editorial assistant Amanda O’Connor, and production controller 
Joshua Penney, as well as many other team members behind the scenes for 
making this book possible. Jayashree Prabhu, project manager of Newgen 
Knowledge Works in India, managed all versions of the manuscript skillfully 

Preface
xiii
and eHciently. Finally, I would like to thank the professional team at PETT 
Fox, Inc., in New York, who provided excellent copyediting. Without any 
doubt, this book is much better as a result of their work.
Tinking back, I would feel that something is amiss if I skipped a num-
ber of special people who played a decisive role in shaping this book. Tese 
were all of my German teachers, Erst Herr and Frau Bieg for opening my 
mind to the German language and culture, to Elizabeth Kurz for her inter-
est in Chinese culture, to Ursula Müller for teaching German literature and 
Western art history, and to Reneta Bürner-Kotzam and Susanne Günthner 
for their encouragement and support of my further learning.
I thank Professors Donald Mushalko and Barbara Fredette at the 
University of Pittsburgh for teaching how to foster children’s creativity and 
their support for my application to Harvard Graduate School of Education. 
I was very lucky to study with my mentor, Kurt Fischer, who encouraged 
me to study self-conscious emotions, particularly shame and its signiEcant 
variations across cultures. Tis intellectual adventure enabled me to write 
much of the chapter on learning aﬀect.
To Howard Gardner, also my mentor, I am indebted for life. He took a 
risk by admitting me as a doctoral student in fear that I might not have suf-
Ecient English proEciency to last through the program. He was quite right, 
given that I studied German rather than English in college. Mentioning this 
beginning of a cherished mentor–student relationship is to emphasize how 
much more a European-American doctoral mentor had to do to transform 
a learning-thirsty but confused foreign student to one who can channel her 
passion into productivity. Tere is not enough space for me to enumerate 
the many and unforgettable ways that Howard mentored me as a student 
from a diﬀerent culture and a diHcult environment. SuHce it to say that 
for me Howard served and continues to serve as an exemplar of Western 
learning. His writing was inspirational to me and his teaching in and out of 
class was mind-opening. Howard continues to mentor me beyond his call 
of duty in ways only few match. His insights into research, scholarship, and 
our world and his wisdom about life continue to amaze me and are among 
the things I treasure most. I am sure that this book would not have been 
written if I had not lucked out with Howard.
I would like to thank my dear friend, Heidi Fung, for her moving and 
beautiful work on Chinese shame as a moral concept and for her willing-
ness to collaborate with me on Taiwanese children’s learning beliefs and 
their parents’ guidance. Te way she does her work and writes about the 
people she studies sets an unparalleled example for how a researcher can 
truly get under the skin of her research subjects. No utterance and no 

Preface
xiv
expression could escape her attention. Her research report is so authentic 
that it speaks to the people whose cultures she studies, and yet at the same 
time her writing is artful and profound. It was Heidi’s example that heart-
ened me to attempt discourse analysis of how mothers talk to their children 
about learning in both cultures. Heidi was also tremendously encourag-
ing and generous in supplying references from Erst-rate Taiwanese scholars 
and writers and for granting me her permission to use a photo that shows 
how a grandfather demonstrates to his grandson what concentration means 
in learning for the Chinese.
My admiration also goes to my son, Kylee Hench, who would read draGs 
of my chapters and oﬀer comments and sonly appreciation, and dutifully 
and unﬂaggingly point out awkward expressions and incorrect grammar. 
His love and help invariably resulted in better thinking and writing on my 
part. Finally, my gratitude goes to my husband, Michael Hench, my life-
long companion and tireless editor of my writing. His love for theater and 
spontaneous recitations of great Western writing and poetry permeate my 
life. But he also appreciates Asian writers and poets, frequently more deeply 
than I do. It would have been a lot harder for me to make progress in writ-
ing, let alone this book, if it were not for Michael’s lasting love, support, and 
literary fondness. My work owes much to him.

