!
1
Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
Enco&nt()ing ,-&.t
Based on a real person, Dr. Faustus, who lived in Europe in the early 
 sixteenth century, several artistic works combined to build the legend of 
Faust and the Faustian Bargain. Accordingly, Faust came to be known 
as a man who sought forbidden knowledge and made a bargain with the 
Devil. In exchange for his immortal soul, Faust would be given the power 
to know. Te two best-known and most acclaimed renditions of the Faust 
tale were created by English playwright Christopher Marlowe and German 
poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. Marlowe dramatized the irrevocable 
nature of a pact signed in blood with the Devil, the frivolous and unsat-
isfying end to which the knowledge was put, and, ﬁnally, the passionate 
and desperate damnation that lay at the end of Faust’s search for “illegiti-
mate power through learning.”! Goethe in his mid-nineteenth-century geist 
modiﬁed the bargain and made it contingent on Faust’s having a moment of 
contentment. Goethe allowed the angels to rescue Faust because his search 
and aspiration never ceased. Faust triumphed in the end. Although these 
two literary works diﬀer in their emphasis and form, they both kept the 
Faustian Bargain as the crux of their artistic vision.
Surprisingly, Goethe’s Faust was also translated, along with other impor-
tant Western works, into Chinese, and therefore it served as an inspiration 
for a New Cultural Movement in China during the early twentieth century.2 
My late mother remembered seeing the book as a middle-school girl in the 
!930s in her school’s library in a rural Chinese town where only a few priv-
ileged children could attend school. She did dare to open this book with a 
strange title, but her desire to read further was put to rest for good because 
she could understand nothing.

Cultural Foundations of Learning
2
Later, in the !970s, the ﬁrst group of Chinese students emerging from 
the farm labor of Mao Zedong’s reeducation program,3 afer ten years of 
closed schools and condemnation of education, entered college. We woke 
up from a deep slumber and were shocked to ﬁnd that China had been lef 
behind. “Economically destitute and culturally barren” (一窮二白) was the 
general sentiment. Te indescribable sorrow that befell everyone was that 
the Mainland Chinese thought that they had it right, ﬁghting a noble cause 
to correct a great social wrong, pursuing relentlessly equality, equity, and 
emancipation from their millennia-long cultural yoke toward some unde-
ﬁned ultimate bliss. But we were wrong (even evil in the world’s eye); what 
was even harder to bear was that we were more pathetic than Don Quixote 
tilting at windmills mistaken for giants. A hitherto unknown sense of col-
lective shame and anger toward our leadership erupted. A quick reaction 
was, rightfully, to restore education. All of a sudden, schools were reopened 
and knowledge, particularly scientiﬁc knowledge, prized.
Backed up ten years, millions of students waiting their turn for higher 
education, still dispersed in the countryside, were urged to hurry to review 
their book knowledge in order to partake in the ﬁrst college entrance 
exam. Many simply gave up because afer high school they had trashed or 
burned their books to display their anti-bourgeoisie resolution, or else they 
packed their books away, never to touch them again. But many rose to the 
occasion and gave it their best shot. I was lucky to pass the exam, and the 
reported ratio of college admissions was 4.7 percent from those who took 
the exam.4 Although we were not given much choice of schools and sub-
jects of study (there were few to begin with), most students desired schools 
and programs that had a reputation of Western disciplines such as natural 
sciences and technology. However, the most desired subject of study was, 
perhaps, European languages, with English ranking at the top and French 
and German next. Tese languages were especially sought by those who felt 
not less desirous, but less prepared, to pursue scientiﬁc studies. At that time, 
it was true that few Chinese were ﬂuent in these languages. Te Chinese 
government and people alike had known, since the end of the imperial sys-
tem at the turn of the twentieth century, that for them to have any chance 
of making it in the modern world, they had to increase their population’s 
proﬁciency in Western languages. Afer all, foreign language is, as Marx 
asserted, a tool in human struggle – a slogan that every schoolchild could 
recite, if not comprehend. Studying foreign (really Western) languages 
became an ever-greater aspiration even when Marx’s glow grew dimmer.
Te idea that one could be lifed out of the ruins of a collapsed state 
and learn new things from the advanced human world was analogous to a 

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
3
drowning person holding onto a thread of air. Not only did those who passed 
the exam harbor the utmost hopes for their own lives, but their government 
also regarded them as its only hope and epoch-deﬁning fresh blood. Tese 
students went to college with all tuition and all study-related fees waived. 
Moreover, they were not expected to engage in energy-draining work-study 
to earn extra money. In other words, they were made worry-free, all for one 
purpose: to devote their time and energy to study, to master what China 
had lamentably neglected for ten years.
Such was the ethos under which I began my college career. We were an 
elite group, but not by birth or socioeconomic status; there was no birth 
class or diﬀerence in socioeconomic status. We passed the exam and were 
chosen; that was the commonality. Before the exam, all exam takers had 
to declare three schools and three subjects for each school as their prefer-
ences. I named English as my ﬁrst choice of study, followed by French and 
German, for all three schools. I was admitted into my second-choice col-
lege, one of the best schools for foreign languages in the country. Te col-
lege admissions o:cer later told me that the reason he placed only me in 
the German group from all the province’s applicants was that I was the only 
student qualifying for English but also willing to study German. Without 
any regret and with only gratitude, I welcomed the placement and plunged 
into my German studies.
To maximize these students’ success, the Chinese government contracted 
with West Germany to send teachers from gymnasiums and universities. As 
a result, my four years of college were mostly taught, quite unusually, by 
West German instructors with a curriculum much tuned to their pedagogi-
cal theory and design. Although we also had Chinese professors who taught 
some German classes and other subjects such as history, Chinese literature, 
economics, and English, German teachers were mostly responsible for what 
we studied. As far as I can tell, students of my class had a good taste of 
liberal arts education from the West, understandably with a German bent 
(the same was true in the French and English departments based on their 
respective instructors from abroad).
Students exhibited high energy and motivation for learning by any 
standard. We all got up early in the morning and read our texts aloud. 
All tried to memorize their vocabulary sheets and related texts. All went 
to the library to study, and all read into the night in their tent-like mos-
quito nets until lights went out. No one missed a class unless one was too 
ill or had an emergency. We did sports and extracurricular activities, but 
the sight of everyone holding a book in their hand reading, and of a very 
crowded library, was a daily occurrence. My husband, European American 

Cultural Foundations of Learning
4
by origin, taught at the same college and to this date attests that he had 
never – and has never since – seen such a sight on any of the campuses of 
some twelve American colleges and universities where he has taught. He 
still could not believe the level of these Chinese students’ dedication to 
their learning.
German is not an easy language for any non-Germanic Westerner, but 
it was notoriously harder for the Chinese, whose native language does 
not have conjugations for anything, let alone the three articles, four cases, 
and endless combinatorial variations. But we absorbed all those mechani-
cal di:culties of the language. We mastered the pronunciation, sentences, 
comprehension, grammar, even some medieval words and usages. We 
studied German history and read Goethe, Schiller, Heinrich Heine, Georg 
Büchner, Gerhart Hauptmann, Tomas Mann, Robert Musil, Franz Ka;a, 
Bertolt Brecht, and the writers afer World War II. We listened to Mozart, 
Beethoven, Schubert, Schumann, Mahler, even Wagner. I loved learning 
about this important European culture. As this learning deepened, Chinese 
culture became more and more a distant and vanishing memory. Anything 
Chinese was scorned. We did not even speak much Chinese on campus 
because we were busy practicing our German. We also frequently dismissed 
our German teachers’ curiosity about Chinese culture and told them that it 
was not worth their while because it was the Chinese culture (mistakenly, 
in hindsight) that brought our country to ashes.
But then came Goethe’s Faust, a monument of German literature. By 
then, the knowledge-thirsty students had gained some perspective and had 
cooled down from the embracing zeal they had cultivated in the revolution-
ary time. Print materials that revealed unheard-of things were “smuggled 
in” from Hong Kong, and some classmate even got connected to a Buddhist 
monk who sent her hand-printed material about Buddhism. We read these 
things with a ﬂashlight in bed. Tis exposure and gradual change prepared 
the students for what might be called a questioning spell. We began ques-
tioning everything, not necessarily in open forums but certainly in chats 
with peers, leisurely strolls, and romantic interactions. We contemplated 
our existence, our sein, our experiences, our society, German culture and 
people, America, life, death, love, virtually every subject. It was like a mini-
renaissance where free spirits roamed outside classrooms. I remember a 
poem that I wrote in Chinese to share with my peers:
Progress and Regress
Te train is dashing through the Yellow Plateau, and I am counting the 
tombs of ancient emperors. . . .

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
5
Who says that tombs
Symbolize only death?
I’d say they symbolize immortality and eternity
Who says that the running train
Is progress in our time?
I’d say it’s blind curiosity
Like children
Who have to tear into pieces the mushroom
To see what’s hidden inside
People on the train are fooled by it
Modernization is not visible in the far end
But tombs are visible right here with us
As if they are reminding us
To contrast, to reason, and to reﬂect
Te train lures us
To follow, to dash, and to blunder
However, despite this vibrant learning, we remained quite “uninterested” in 
our own culture.
Faust, especially the ﬁrst parts where the Faustian Bargain took place, 
was read slowly and discussed line by line. Although the poetic form was 
no longer daunting, we had di:culty with all the religious tradition and 
allegories. I remember thinking to myself, tossing ideas to my friends, and 
hearing their echoes back: Why does Faust have to lose his soul, his life, for 
wanting to know more? Ignorance was precisely what the Chinese suﬀered. 
What’s wrong with Faust wanting to be more knowledgeable and wanting 
to have full human experience? Why did Goethe, the literary giant, write 
an epic in such a way that seeking knowledge is like committing a crime 
somehow? Even more, aren’t we this guy? Here we are devoting ourselves 
with all our might and passion, seeking knowledge, resembling in some way 
Faust’s spirit, if not his full scope. We were puzzled. But neither my peers 
nor I actually raised these questions to our German teacher in fear that we 
might make fools of ourselves, questioning Goethe. At least for me, I could 
not abandon these questions until I found their satisfactory answers. But 
before that happened, I had to come to America to endure more bewilder-
ment and soul searching.
.hock in -?()ic-
A few years afer college, I gave up my position teaching German and 
immigrated to America. My ﬁrst desire was to make myself useful to my 

Cultural Foundations of Learning
6
newly married life: ﬁnding a job. But my English was abysmally poor. Tis 
self-assessment was actually not an incidence of the well-known “Asian” 
self-eﬀacement. My English was abysmal; I had spent all my time perfecting 
my German. I simply did not spend enough time mastering English. Truth 
be told, I did not even like English very much because it did not have the 
complicated articles and cases, or the elegance of the logical combinations 
of sentence variations. I managed to learn to read and write English at some 
grade level. But speaking and listening proved to be out of reach. Coming 
to America was not planned, but I fell in love with a European American. 
Although I lucked out with this marriage, Gott sei Dank, at the time I expe-
rienced a profound displacement when I found myself in the United States 
instead of Germany.
I registered, with my husband’s help, as a substitute teacher for German 
in Burlington, Vermont, where I ﬁrst landed afer immigration. Te reason 
was simple: Tat was the only thing I could do, short of being a Chinese 
restaurant kitchen aide. Tis job did not require a teacher’s certiﬁcate, and 
for a while I thought that I could at least teach the fun German language to 
American students.
Unfortunately, my ﬁrst teaching assignment at the local high school was 
English rather than German, which, as confessed previously, I could hardly 
speak, let alone teach. I had to admit it to the caller just in case she made a 
mistake. But despite my honesty and insistence that I lacked any qualiﬁca-
tion for teaching English, I was told that the school needed me, and I had 
to be there. So I went, in a cold sweat, too scared to face something like an 
English equivalent of Faust – Shakespeare or anything vaguely literary! I 
wanted to disappear into the ground.
Someone ushered me into the o:ce, trying to calm me down, saying 
that it would be an easy job, and that the only thing I needed to do was 
to follow the lesson plan made by the called-in-sick teacher and “to keep 
the kids out of trouble.” “What trouble?” I said to myself, gazing around. I 
had never seen, not even in my dreams, such a school, with all the brightly 
lit classrooms, hallways, and all the books in the library. Te students 
were undoubtedly well nourished and well clothed, projecting more self-
 conﬁdence and happiness than I or any student I had seen back home. Tis 
is a learning paradise! What trouble could there be for such blessed lives?
To my shock, those students did not seem to care about maintaining 
a good learning environment: Tey chatted freely and giggled and threw 
things at each other as if I, the teacher, did not exist. What struck me most 
was that they were not the least bit interested in learning the content of the 
already minimal English tasks. But my surprise did not lead me to blame 

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
7
the students. Instead, I blamed myself and my poor English. It was then that 
I vowed to learn English well enough not to let this disappointing situation 
happen again in my substitute classroom.
As my English and self-conﬁdence improved, sadly, I saw a recurrent, 
actually more severe, scenario in Pennsylvania. I became, on a blitz track, a 
supervisor for student teaching at the University of Pittsburgh only a year 
later. I thought that it was strange to bestow such responsibility on me given 
how little I knew about American education. It was even more bizarre for 
me to supervise student teachers while struggling through my own student 
teaching (in German ﬁnally) at a high school in a remote town where I pro-
vided the only ethnic diversity. Perhaps this was the university’s way to kill 
two birds with one stone. In any event, I was forced to function like a two-
headed creature, or else a split personality, while still struggling to improve 
my English.
My regular visits to ﬁve schools across four districts and my daily work 
in the classroom gave me a pretty good chance to encounter students’ 
lack of interest in learning. Tis time I could not hold myself responsible 
because I mostly did not teach. Where I actually taught, I did succeed in 
boosting their morale for learning from moment to moment, but it ofen 
felt like a drop in the ocean of disinterest. In fact, it was this very di:-
culty that discouraged me once and for all from pursuing my certiﬁcate to 
teach high school in America. Nevertheless, in hindsight, I must say that 
these Pennsylvanian students were angels. No one really had any “trouble,” 
at least not the type I was aware of: dropping out, drugs, teenage pregnancy, 
and violence, barring perhaps smoking and other petty oﬀenses. By and 
large, these students showed up at school on time, remained through the 
day, and did their assigned work. Not everyone made the best eﬀort, the 
kind I would have liked to see – certainly not the one that would resem-
ble the by-now already archaic fantasy in my head, the eﬀort worthy of the 
Faustian spirit. But compared to what I later saw in urban places, these 
students were any teacher’s dream.
Massachusetts students were not better, not even in the supposedly 
better towns, away from the really troubled inner city. Te same lack of 
enthusiasm in learning continued to shock me as I again endeavored to 
work more in schools. Of course, the education reform, along with the 
weekly news reports, drumming up the meager academic performance of 
American students gave me a clear sense that what I observed was not 
an isolated phenomenon. My perplexity deepened; the idea of the richest 
nation on earth inhabited by so many students not wanting to learn really 
threw me for a loop.

Cultural Foundations of Learning
A
Bi.h Ci.coD()ing E-t()
At the University of Pittsburgh, I took several courses in educational psy-
chology and child development as required for my teacher certiﬁcation. 
Te most thrilling course ever was on how to develop children’s creativity. I 
had never studied or even fancied that creativity could be studied, let alone 
taught. Contemporary Chinese people inherited a long-held (more than a 
century) belief that their age-old Confucian tradition was the root of all 
their political, social, and economical ills. Confucianism was even called a 
culture that “ate people” by radical thinkers such as Lu Xun (!AA!–!936).5 In 
education, the most condemned were children lacking creativity – the sen-
timent holding strong to the present day. Now, to Chinese people’s horror, 
not only did Marx’s dogma and audacious experiment fail to emancipate 
people into freedom and creativity, but it managed to suck the last breath of 
human vitality out of their children. Part of my motivation to continue my 
graduate studies in America was to ﬁnd ways to help rectify Chinese educa-
tion problems (another part had to do with my lost conﬁdence that I could 
ever teach in an American high school). Learning about the teachability of 
creativity raised hope for me again.
When I inquired where I could study creativity for a PhD, my profes-
sors recommended Harvard Graduate School of Education,6 where Howard 
Gardner was attracting many students. Tey gave me his book, Frames of 
Mind, to read, and reading that book made me decide that I wanted to study 
not just creativity but the whole human potential. I lucked out again with 
the admissions and began a marathon of doctoral training in human devel-
opment and psychology. But my single desire to ﬁgure out human creativity 
and potential could not be fulﬁlled without also studying other impor-
tant processes that inﬂuence child development. Finally and inevitably, I 
encountered culture as a developmental concept. As I delved deeper into 
my studies, I realized – this time, to my personal astonishment – that I had 
been blind to culture. I was the ﬁsh who was the last to discover water.
Once discovered, I could not see the world without water. Culture soon 
became the looking glass that was impossible for me to put down, even afer 
all those years of unawareness on my part. Culture, as the largest human-
created system (as opposed to our biology), penetrates so profoundly into 
all spheres of human life that it alters human cognition, emotion, and 
behavior, setting us apart from the next smartest creatures in the animal 
 kingdom.7 Culture is like the air we breathe; we are completely dependent on 
it. Together with our biology, culture produces us, but we also alter culture 

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
9
continuously. Tis interactive process is the inescapable force underlying 
child development.
For me, however, the awakening was not about human culture as a 
whole, but a particular culture, my own culture. Yes, what about my culture? 
Because I was born into a preexisting world, did my own culture imprint 
me in any speciﬁc way? If so, in what way? I lived my own culture as any 
anthropologist would attest, but why was I unaware of it for so long? Did 
Marxism push my culture out of me, or perhaps it buried my culture and 
pushed something else into me? My questions were endless, and this process 
was not fun. My peers from China seemed to have gone through a similarly 
painful process. We shared our identity crises, confusions, and reﬂections. 
One friend was already writing her dissertation and introduced me to the 
writings of Professor Tu Wei-ming (杜維明), an authoritative scholar on 
Confucianism at Harvard Yenching. I went to the Yenching Library and bor-
rowed his books. He led me to other related books. Now, for the ﬁrst time, 
rather late in life, I read, word for word for myself, Confucius’s Analects, 
Mencius, and other original works. I experienced an intense process simi-
lar to when I ﬁrst peeked into Western cultures through the German gate 
opened in college, but this time I was gazing into my own soul.
I could not believe the words and passages I was reading from these 
books. What we as children growing up in China were toldA (but not allowed 
to read directly) about Confucius and his ideas and the actual words by 
Confucius and Mencius were like day and night. I knew that if we had no 
reason to believe that Chinese people’s intelligence is no less than that of 
any other people on this planet, something must have gone terribly wrong. 
Why did the Chinese admire Confucius for 2,500 years? Why was he called 
a sage and an “exemplary teacher for all ages” (萬世師表) even by the pow-
erful (for example, emperors) and smart people (i.e. scholars), and why was 
his Analects required reading of all schoolchildren for millennia?9 Were all 
the Chinese who lived before me wrong – stupid even? Tese questions 
greatly disturbed me.
Further reading and contemplation led to the realization that the Chinese 
had gone through a century-long tormented soul searching because they 
could not defend themselves against the surging Western powers. China was 
in an all-around steady decline until its eventual defeat and the subsequent 
chaos, suﬀering unprecedented humiliation and loss of self- conﬁdence. 
Intellectuals were the ﬁrst to turn inward to self-examine, and they came to 
a devastating verdict: Te root cause was the Confucian ideology all ruling 
dynasties had adopted.!0 It relied on the personal moral cultivation of the 

Cultural Foundations of Learning
!0
ruler to bestow mercy onto his subjects. If a ruler succeeded in cultivating 
himself, he attracted good and able ministers to manage his dynasty, and 
people enjoyed peace and prosperity as a result. But if a ruler was ruth-
less and tyrannical, such as the Qin Emperor who built the Great Wall but 
caused great suﬀering to people, then people revolted against the empire, 
sometimes successfully but ofentimes not. Whenever such a peasant upris-
ing prevailed, another ruler arose and reinstated the same old system with 
the same old Confucian ideology.!! Although China was blessed with some 
good rulers, the bad and incompetent ones outnumbered the more virtuous 
and able ones.
Tis cycle of the political process and dynastic ruling lasted for millen-
nia, but its vitality was exhausted when Western powers pounded open 
China’s door.!2 What defeated the Chinese system at the turn of the twenti-
eth century, as intellectuals and politicians agreed, was really not Western 
troops but their science, which the Confucian ideology clearly lacked. 
Western science was most admired because it produced “solid ships and 
eﬀective cannons” (船堅炮利), while the Chinese were still relying on 
spears, swords, and even martial arts to ﬁght on land and sea. Tis conclu-
sion led to a whole series of new education policies and political reform. 
Waves of Chinese students were sent to the West to study science and tech-
nology. Moreover, many leaders and scholars attributed Western power to 
their better democratic governmental systems. China, along with other East 
Asian nations that suﬀered a similar fate, began a protracted endeavor of 
learning from the West (a process that has not yet reached its peak), despite 
a period of interruption immediately afer the communist takeover. I must 
admit that I myself was also a small element of this massive cross-cultural 
learning process.
chin(.( c&Ft&)( -nC B-&.t -g-in
Tis grasp of the general historical perspective eased my distress to some 
extent, but it did not persuade me that Confucius and his ideas were the 
root cause of, and therefore were to be blamed for, all Chinese political, 
social, and economic ills. Confucius lived 2,500 years ago and did not have 
any noted political power. He was a thinker, philosopher, and, most of all, 
teacher. Students came to him and sought his teaching of their own volition. 
It would be groundless to blame him or even his ideas for China’s later prob-
lems. If anyone were to be blamed, it would be those who, under the name of 
Confucianism, waged unjust wars, conquered land, and established illegit-
imate dynasties, not to mention those who buried alive Confucian scholars 

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
!!
and burned their books,!3 those who ruthlessly oppressed their people and 
neglected their civil duties, and those who were driven more by power and 
wealth than by benevolence and virtue. In other words, those who failed to 
achieve Confucian self-perfection but unfortunately held power. Blaming 
Confucius is like blaming Jesus for the medieval Inquisition and other 
immoral acts committed in the name of Christianity.
Tis new reﬂection made me ﬁnally realize that part of my confusion 
came from equating a country’s political system with its culture. Tis con-
fusion was the reason why, during my undergraduate years, we thought that 
anything Chinese was bad. But then, in graduate school, I discovered and 
began to feel the enormity of culture, thanks to anthropology, Confucian 
works, and the great body of scholarly interpretations of Ames, de Bary, 
Fingarette, K. K. Hwang, Ivanhoe, Munro, Rosemont, Wei-ming Tu, 
C. F. Yang, K. S. Yang, and Ying-shi Yu, among others. Culture is much larger 
and more long-lasting than any political system. Culture is even larger than 
the existence of society or nation: Whereas either of the latter is usually 
bound by a geographical location under a certain political system at a given 
time, the former encompasses people beyond geographical boundaries, as 
the case of Jewish culture demonstrates. A given society or nation can wit-
ness many political systems come and go even in a short period of time, as 
is the case with China.!4 But people living in diﬀerent systems, both succes-
sively and simultaneously, such as the Chinese living in the Mainland, Hong 
Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, the United States, Europe, and other parts of the 
world, having nothing to do with a particular political system or particular 
society, still unambiguously identify themselves as Chinese.
Tis jagged intellectual journey of mine raised the inevitable question 
for me: Given that I have no doubt that I am Chinese by cultural heritage, 
what then marks me as such a cultural member, particularly when I am no 
longer a citizen of Mainland China? As it turns out, this type of question 
is commonly asked, not just by Chinese, but by anyone who experiences 
cross-cultural living and the acculturation process. Although commonly 
asked, answers to this question are not easy to come by. Ofen one feels that 
one is diﬀerent, but articulating such diﬀerences proves to be immensely 
challenging. In a sense, cultural psychologists and anthropologists spend 
their lives trying to do just that – understanding and articulating such dif-
ferences among the world’s peoples.
Considering the intellectual path by which I encountered two Western 
cultures, German and European American, it was impossible for me to 
ignore the topic of learning and knowing. Te shadow of the Faustian 
Bargain still hovered over my head, and American students’ indiﬀerence 

Cultural Foundations of Learning
!2
toward learning still troubled me. But afer I began asking the cultural ques-
tion about myself, it became clear that I, not Faust or American students, 
was the cause of my puzzlement and problem. I grew up in a culture that 
has, despite the apparent political and social upheaval, a very diﬀerent out-
look toward learning and knowledge. Tat I inherited this outlook (my idi-
osyncratic characteristics notwithstanding) is, I dare to assert, a result of 
what anthropologists refer to as the process of enculturation!5 rather than 
the storm of the Marxist swirl.
Te reason, from a developmental perspective, is that the child is cared 
for, loved, and nurtured day to day by the caregivers. Few caregivers in 
Mainland Chinese families, during political turmoil or otherwise, and 
rarely if at all, assigned any kind of priority to delivering political mes-
sages to their children (it would be absurd). Even if parents did that, it is 
highly doubtful that this would have any eﬀect during infancy and subse-
quent years. Based on anthropological psychology, the overarching polit-
ical and economic climate is only an indirect factor that inﬂuences child 
 development. Te local cultural customs, the caregiver’s psychological 
characteristics, and the actual daily interactions are the more direct shap-
ing force on the child.!6 Tis inﬂuence has its most observable eﬀect during 
the formative years of infancy and early childhood, which is foundational 
to a person’s further development. To the extent that my parents and my 
nannies inherited from their parents childrearing values and practices 
of a long-existing culture, it is likely that they adopted these deep-seated 
cultural frames to care for, to guide, and to discipline their child, rather 
than using Marxist doctrine to cook, to feed, or to love the child (to my 
 knowledge, Marxism says nothing about human psychology, let lone chil-
drearing routines).!7
Terefore, I grew up thoroughly Chinese. For learning and education, 
my parents’ voices will probably ring forever in my head. I recall some of 
their words I heard whenever they tried to encourage and instruct me and 
my siblings with regard to learning:
Having studied, to then always practice what you have learned – is this 
• 
not a pleasure? 學而時習之，不亦說乎？(when we did not want to 
practice what we learned)
In strolling with only two people, I am bound to ﬁnd a teacher. 
• 
Identifying their strengths, I follow them, and identifying their weak-
nesses, I correct them in myself. 三人行，必有我師焉，擇其善者
而從之，其不善者而改之 (when we failed to see what we could 
learn from others)

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
!3
Continue studying without respite, instruct others without growing 
• 
weary 學而不厭，誨人不倦 (when we grew tired of studying and of 
helping others in school)
Love for learning 
• 
好學 (when we talked about going through the 
motions in learning)
To know what you know and know what you do not know – this is 
• 
wisdom 知之為知之, 不知為不知, 是知也 (when we pretended to 
know)
Learn, then you will know your inadequacy 
• 
學然后知不足 (when we 
claimed that we knew enough)
Do not impose on others what you yourself do not want 
• 
己所不欲勿
施於人 (when we pushed things we did not like on each other)
Tese words turned out to be those spoken by Confucius, but I did not 
know that growing up. My parents began quoting with “the ancient said” 
(古人說) rather than “Confucius says” because they feared that announc-
ing Confucius’s name would bring political persecution during a time when 
Confucius (and Confucianism) was singled out for criticism.
School learning also instilled much of these same values, norms, and 
preferences in me, even though schools were under greater pressure to pro-
mote Marxist ideology. Consider the following: Any Chinese classroom 
was, and still is, decorated with a motto “Learn well and make progress 
everyday” (好好學習，天天向上) – a quote by Mao Zedong. I always 
found it interesting that out of all of his ﬁerce attacks of traditional edu-
cation philosophy and pedagogy as expressed in his voluminous writings, 
this very motto was picked to be posted in every classroom to encourage 
student learning. Purely in its wording, the message is completely consis-
tent with traditional Chinese learning philosophy. When I visited schools in 
Beijing, Nanjing, Shanghai, Shandong, Sichuan, and Guangdong during the 
!990s and early 2000s, I also saw secondary and college classrooms quite 
uniformly decorated with these poetic verses among other similar motiva-
tional aphorisms:
Long-term diligence is the road to the mount of knowledge; endurance 
of hardship is the boat to the boundless sea of learning 書山有路勤為徑,  
學海無涯苦作舟.!A
In all my school years, when we had a quiz or exam in class, the teacher 
frequently asked the most hardworking student, not the highest-achieving 
one, to stand up to receive applause from peers for his or her great learning 
virtue. Whenever any student did well in class, teachers would say to them, 

Cultural Foundations of Learning
!4
“don’t be too proud but continue to strive to achieve better. Tere is no end 
to learning.” Whenever a student did not do well, the ﬁrst line of advising 
and disciplining was “you did not work hard, you did not concentrate, you 
did not listen well in class, and you did not practice enough.” Sometimes 
teachers would mention that a student uses his or her mind ﬂexibly 
(腦筋靈活), but I never heard any teacher, or any peer for that matter, 
attribute a student’s high achievement to his or her born intelligence alone; 
likewise, no student’s low achievement was ever attributed merely to his or 
her lack of inherited potential.
Tis unwinding of my childhood experiences has crystallized for me the 
intellectual tradition that holds the following notions about learning:
 
!. Learning is the most important thing in life; it is the life’s purpose.
 
2. Learning enables one to become a better, not just smarter, person. 
Te ultimate purpose of learning is to self-perfect and to contribute 
to others at the same time.
 
3. Learning is a life-long process. It starts early in life and continues 
throughout one’s life.
 
4. Te kind of knowledge that sets one person apart from another does 
not come to one automatically. One must seek it. Seeking knowl-
edge requires resolve, diligence, endurance of hardship, steadfast-
ness, concentration, and humility. One must have what the Chinese 
call “a heart and mind for wanting to learn” (好學心), a passion for 
learning.
 
5. Learning does not privilege anyone, and neither does it discriminate 
against anyone. Everyone is capable of seeking and achieving knowl-
edge regardless of one’s inborn capacity and social circumstances.
 
6. One begins the learning process as a beneﬁciary from others’ ded-
icated guidance. But one will become a benefactor to others’ learn-
ing and self-cultivation as one matures, making harmony with the 
world.!9
Tese ideas were (and to a large extent still are) passed down to children 
through the implicit as well as explicit process of enculturation. As any 
other cultural process, the deep-seated beliefs were learned and internal-
ized so successfully that hardly any child questioned them and the associ-
ated values, preferences, and norms they carried.20
As this returning to my own culture took place, my understanding of 
Western traditions also deepened. Evidently, Faust epitomizes an entirely 
diﬀerent way of learning and knowing. Inheriting a long-standing intellec-
tual tradition that originated from Greek antiquity through the Christian 

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
!5
scholarship and ﬁnally standing at the cusp of modern science, Faust (either 
the real person or, more likely, the combined ﬁgure created by Marlowe 
and Goethe) represents an approach to learning and knowing that has been 
essential in the Western world, and this approach still ﬂourishes in the pre-
sent day and quite possibly will continue for long. Tis tradition emphasizes 
the following key themes:
 
!. Human curiosity about the external world is the inspiration for 
knowledge.
 
2. Relentless spirit of inquiry into the universe will lead to knowledge.2!
 
3. Mind is the highest human faculty that enables this inquiry.
 
4. Reason (not heart) is the process by which we know the world.
 
5. Learning privileges those who have superior ability.
 
6. Te individual is the sole entity for inquiring, discovery, and ultimate 
triumph.
Juxtaposing these two learning traditions, the reason for the di:culties my 
mother, my college peers, and I had about the Faustian Bargain revealed 
itself: Learning and knowledge in the Confucian world are deﬁned funda-
mentally diﬀerently. Learning and knowing are geared not to the external 
world, but to one’s self as a goal of personal striving. Learning how to per-
fect oneself and to become a better person morally and socially is never 
viewed as a cost or liability to oneself or anyone else. As such, it is viewed 
not just positively, but as an ultimate good.
Apparently, my shock about American students’ lack of interest in 
learning also stemmed from this diﬀerence in the learning outlook. My 
reaction may have appeared judgmental and harsh, and in hindsight was 
quite regrettable. American students’ motivation for learning turned out 
to be an intricate ﬁeld of study in itself, but it is no less connected to the 
Western intellectual tradition, as will be discussed in Chapters 2–A. Still, 
if not anything else, my initial encounter with the students in Vermont 
and Pennsylvania stimulated me to look into myself, to discover my own 
 culture, and to peek through the looking glass that has both enabled and 
constrained my own learning.
Tis arduous but eventually fruitful search ﬁnally gave birth to a research 
agenda. Now, afer a journey on which I myself have inherited some of the 
Western learning spirit, I could not resist returning to the Faustian quest, 
but this time with much more grounding and understanding. I wanted to 
know if these basic learning concepts were still alive today in both cultural 
worlds. As a developmental researcher, my natural curiosity is directed to 
children. Assuming the empirical answer would be found a:rmatively, 

Cultural Foundations of Learning
!6
how are these beliefs transmitted to children generation afer generation? 
Finally, how do diﬀerent learning beliefs inﬂuence children’s learning?
As will be seen in later chapters, I have reviewed and gathered consis-
tent empirical support that, despite much political, social, and economical 
change and exchange in recent decades, the basic learning models still per-
sist in their respective cultures. Tey underlie much of thinking, feeling, 
and behavior of learners as well as actions of their social world, and exert 
profound inﬂuence on their children.
not(.
 !. Quote from Knox, M. M., McGalliard, J. C., Pasinetti, P. M., Hugo, H. E., 
Spacks, P. M., Wellek, R., Doughlas, K., & S. Lawall (!992) Te Norton anthology 
of world masterpieces, Vol. 2. New York: Norton, p. 462.
 2. Te New Cultural Movement (!9!5–!923) was a part of China’s radical and pain-
ful modern history. Tis movement was launched by intellectuals to reform 
the political, economic, educational, linguistic, literary, and artistic traditions to 
embrace Western democratic and scientiﬁc spirit. For example, Chinese written 
language was forced to change from traditional grammar to vernacular gram-
mar across all curricular materials in school. For a comprehensive discussion 
of the movement, see Yu, Y.-S. (!992). 中國文化與現代變遷 [Chinese culture 
and modern evolution]. Sanmin Publishing House.
 3. Mao Zedong’s reeducation program (!96A–!97A). In the peak of his absolute 
political power, Mao launched the movement, urging the so-called educated 
youth from middle and high school to go to the countryside to learn from 
the farmers. In his espoused radical theory, book knowledge was regarded as 
divorced from life and therefore useless for his revolution. But his theory in 
action, according to scholarly analyses, was a strategy to shif the burden of 
the large unemployment and therefore looming threat of youth unrest to the 
already destitute but vast farming land. Some !6 million youth were sent down, 
separated from their families, to work in the ﬁelds. In addition to worsening 
farmers’ livelihood, many young people suﬀered social isolation, displacement, 
abuse, and emotional disturbances under the conditions of this vast forced-
 labor camp. For detailed accounts, see Meisner, M. (!999). Mao’s China and 
afer: A history of the People’s Republic (3rd ed.). New York: Free Press; and 
Chang, T. H. (!999). China during the Cultural Revolution, 1966–1976: A selected 
bibliography of English language works. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
 4. Te ﬁrst college admissions rate in !977 afer ten years of Cultural Revolution 
was 4.7G (27,000 admitted from 5,700,000 who took the exam. However, mil-
lions more youth from the ten years of Cultural Revolution did not take the 
exam. Te percentage of successful students entering college that year would be 
much smaller if all of the potential pool were included). See SSB (State Statistics 
Bureau). (2005). 新中國55年統計資料匯編 [China’s ﬁfy-ﬁve years of statisti-
cal data]. Beijing, China: China Statistical Press for related statistics.

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
!7
 5. Lu Xun was the most forthright writer, critic of traditional Chinese culture. His 
novels and essays attacked Confucianism most vehemently. See reference in 
Note 2 to this chapter for a historical discussion and reevaluation of the anti-
tradition writers and other intellectuals in early-twentieth-century China.
 6. Finally, I have a chance to express my much belated gratitude to Professors 
Mushalko and Fredette at the University of Pittsburgh for opening my mind 
to creativity in children and for mentioning Harvard Graduate School of 
Education to me. I had no clue that I might not have been qualiﬁed to apply. I 
am forever indebted for their encouragement and conﬁdence.
 7. See Tomasello, M. (!999). Te cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press for his research on the topic of how human cul-
ture as a whole has been part of our heritage and how human cognition and 
social understanding are irreversibly altered.
 A. During my formative years, we read nothing by Confucian scholars. But 
because Mao Zedong liked some writing by Xun Zi (Hsun Tzu 荀我, 325–235 
BCE), strangely, the centralized textbook for middle school children during 
the !970s contained one of Xun Zi’s most famous essay “Advice on Learning” 
(厭學焉), which we were required to memorize. Xun Zi was, with Confucius 
and Mencius, one of the three early Confucians. However, other than this ser-
endipity, schoolchildren were told that Confucius and his followers were coun-
terrevolutionaries; they disregarded working people; they only valued book 
knowledge and preached ideas for the ruling class. Tis vicious distortion and 
Machiavellian attack of Confucius was the reason why many of my generation 
felt cheated and lied to about our own culture. Tese lies become apparent when 
one opens the Analects and Mencius and reads for oneself. What a change we 
witnessed when the 200A Beijing Olympic Games opened with the second line 
in Confucius Analects “To have friends [who share the goal of self-cultivation] 
come from distant quarters – is this not enjoyment?” (translated in watered-
down English as “Welcome my friends”) in front of the !.3 billion Chinese not 
just in Mainland China but all Chinese in the world! What a sharp contrast it is 
for the current Chinese leadership to revamp the fundamental Confucian value 
of harmony and elevate it to a national agenda for building a harmonious soci-
ety (although no leader has openly acknowledged its Confucian origin)! All this 
is signaling to me a cultural awakening, as far as Confucianism is concerned, 
despite the fast process of Westernization and globalization.
 9. Analects was a required reading of all schoolchildren since the Han Dynasty (206 
BCE–22 CE) until the early twentieth century when the Civil Service Examination 
system was abolished. But the Fours Books and the Five Scriptures continued to 
be taught as the basic texts to schoolchildren until the communists took power in 
!945. However, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore continued (many schools to 
date still) to require such Confucian books in school; see a review by C.-L. Yang 
(!995). 誨倦好知為是也然后從足己擇所其善欲勿知為施是於古 [Reciting 
or listening to the origin and ideal of children’s classics training]. 天向國文學
上 [Bulletin of Chinese] (National Kaohsiung Normal University), 8, !–50. As 
such, my mother at age nine in !930 began her schooling by formally acknowl-
edging Confucius as the “teacher for all ages” and her own private tutor and by 

Cultural Foundations of Learning
!A
being taught Confucius’ Analects ﬁrst. She could still recite much of it well into 
her late A0s. Likewise, my father at age ten in the !920s began his schooling with 
Confucian Analects in a village private tutoring school (書山).
 !0. See the paragraph on the Civil Service Examination system in the section Taking 
the World Upon Oneself in Chapter 2.
 !!. See X.-R. Han (2006). Chinese discourses on the peasant, 1900–19,9. Albany, NY: 
State University of New York Press; and Gernet, J., Foster, J. R., & Hartman, C. 
(!996). A history of Chinese civilization. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
for reviews of the dynastic cycle in Chinese history.
 !2. Western powers opened the door to China. Te Opium War and events that 
followed led to Dr. Sun Yat-sen’s revolution in !9!!, ending the millennia-long 
dynastic ruling system in China. Te subsequent period was governed by the 
Nationalist government until the Communist takeover in !945.
 !3. Emperor Qin (259–2!0 BCE) murdered Confucian scholars by burying them 
alive and by burning their books (2!3–2!2 BCE).
 !4. China for the last century went through dynasty to semi-colony, republic, war-
lord rule, communist, planned economy, and now market economy. Te notion 
of culture outlasts all of these short-lived governmental forms.
 !5. See LeVine, R. A. (!990). Enculturation: A biosocial perspective on the develop-
ment of self. In D. Cicchetti & M. Beeghly (Eds.), Te self in transition: Infancy 
to childhood (pp. 99–!!7). Chicago: University of Chicago Press on the notion of 
enculturation.
 !6. See Harkness, S., & Super, C. (!992). Te developmental niche: A theoretical 
framework for analyzing the household production of health. Social science and 
Medicine, 38, 2!7–226 for their introduction to the notion of “developmental 
niche.” See Trevarthen, C. (!99A). Te concept and foundation of infant inter-
subjectivity. In S. Braten (Ed.), Intersubject communication and emotion in early 
ontogeny (pp. !5–46). New York: Cambridge University Press for a review of 
research on infant-caregiver intersubjectivity.
 !7. Tis section was not frivolously written but intended to respond to those who 
falsely assumed that because the Mainland Chinese lived under a particular 
political system, somehow they were not normal, worse yet that their paren-
tal love and care somehow were subquality, and worse, because they did not 
receive any cultural heritage.
 !A. Tere is little wonder why this set of verses entered the top-twenty list of my 
learning lexicon study (see more details of the research in Chapter 3).
 !9. Tat learning and acquisition of culturally desirable skills also brings practi-
cal beneﬁts such as getting a job or supporting oneself or one’s family is not a 
unique Chinese value. It is common value for all humans. Naturally, Chinese 
people also learn for practical purposes. Chapters 2 and 3 discuss how this part 
is integrated with the higher purposes of Confucian learning tradition.
 20. Yes, Emperor Qin buried Confucian scholars alive and burned their books, and 
there were other times of persecution of learning, including censored learning 
in recent history. But these events only proved the Emperor’s cruelty and the 
subsequent times’ inhumanity, which faces continuous condemnation. Tis side 
of the history, particularly Emperor Qin’s tyranny, remains a permanent blem-
ish on Chinese conscience. Te learned were and still are the cultural heroes. 

Faust and the Birth of a Research Agenda
!9
Intellectuals during the New Cultural Movement and in a more distorted form 
throughout recent Chinese history also questioned, attacked, and rejected this 
learning tradition. However, as will be seen in later chapters, this tradition is 
not easily done away with. Its power and tenacity are yet to be understood. Te 
fact that only one slogan, “Learn well and make progress everyday,” from Mao’s 
voluminous writings got posted in every classroom (but no other quote from 
him enjoyed this persistent popularity) is testimony to the tenacity of this learn-
ing tradition. Whenever children see this quote, no speciﬁc context in which 
Mao uttered those words accompanied the sight; nor did any teacher bother to 
qualify to children that the quote was only for communist purpose. Te quote 
hangs above the blackboard, viewable without failure by anyone entering the 
classroom. It hangs there, decontextualized forever, as if it is a stand-alone and 
eternal halo. It is so powerful and enduring that it continues to be the sight in 
every classroom today. All I had ever heard in China for my twenty-ﬁve years 
of school presence was study hard to contribute to society. Terefore, what mes-
sage children and teachers receive is the bare meaning of these words, which, 
as already noted, is but consistent with the enduring Confucian learning tradi-
tion. Children study hard regardless of the political system. In a strange way, 
the very political force that thought itself iconoclastic against tradition ended 
up promoting and perpetuating the tradition. To me – but to no surprise of any 
anthropologist – this is but a common manifestation of the enduring power of 
culture. Viewed from this perspective, this learning tradition transcends time 
and space and therefore any political system. Te claim of this learning tradi-
tion meets ample empirical support in and outside China wherever Chinese 
ﬂourish in the world.
 2!. However the universe was deﬁned. Faust got himself in trouble because the 
universe was conceived of, at his time, as God’s will and design that was not 
fully knowable by humans; humans were forbidden from pursuing such knowl-
edge. Although modern philosophy and science no longer treat divinity as the 
ontological giving of the world, and modern Fausts do not have to give up their 
lives for their quest, the questions of how the external world is knowable or how 
certainly it is knowable to humans continue to generate epistemological debates 
in these ﬁelds.

