!0
2
Learning to Master the Universe and  
to Transform Self
Although many observers of cultures have noted general diﬀerences 
between Western and Confucian philosophy,1 few have analyzed the diﬀer-
ences in learning approaches. Te purpose of this chapter is to outline both 
cultures’ foundational outlooks on learning. By tracing leitmotifs of these 
diﬀerent intellectual traditions, I hope to establish the basis for examining 
and interpreting empirical research &ndings that will be discussed in later 
chapters.
A brief review of recorded history reveals that both cultures have rich, 
long-standing, and inﬂuential outlooks, weltanschauung, on learning. Each 
outlook is an essential part of their respective philosophy. Both outlooks, by 
the sheer fact that they are distinguishable from one another, can be ana-
lyzed as framed by their fundamental questions about learning. Tese ques-
tions have been guiding their thinkers in pursuing their work. Intellectual 
pursuit resulted in the generation of schools of thought and theories about 
the world and human life. In response to changing times, later thinkers 
modi&ed existing paradigms of thinking and developed new ideas. Tis 
pattern of idea production continues and is similar in both cultures’ intel-
lectual histories.
Despite these general patterns, the two cultures’ intellectual traditions 
started out with quite diﬀerent interests and premises and evolved there-
a(er along their own paths. As such, they did not and are still not likely to 
intersect or, as has been suggested, to merge in the foreseeable future. Te 
Confucian scholar Shuming Liang,! who was also well versed in Western 
thought, captured this divergence succinctly: If you follow the Western way 
of knowing and learning, it is unlikely that you will end at the Confucian 
way. Likewise, if you follow the Confucian approach, you will have little 
chance of landing in the Western approach. For my purposes, I have iden-
ti&ed four themes that I believe are important to consider in the Western 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
!1
intellectual tradition. Each will be discussed in a separate section under 
the respective headings: know the world, certainty of knowledge, mind 
and its wonders, and examined life. Likewise, I have also identi&ed four 
main themes to consider in the Confucian intellectual tradition. Tese 
carry the headings of perfect self (完善自我), take the world upon oneself 
(以天下為己任), learning virtues (學,美德), and action is better than 
words (/勝於言). Each culture’s sections end with a discussion of the 
concept learner in that culture. Let us examine the Western tradition &rst.
)es,e-. /.,ellec,ual ,-ad/,/o.
Know the World
Opening books on Western intellectual history,3 one encounters the cen-
tral focus of learning, from the earliest times to the present, on human 
epistemology. As an essential philosophical concept in the West, the term 
epistemology is an amalgamation of Greek επιστήμ( (episteme), meaning 
“knowledge,” and )όγ,- (logos), or “principle,” thus creating its current 
meaning – “theory of knowledge.” Epistemology is a branch of philosophy 
that studies the nature and scope of human knowledge.4 A textbook de&-
nition of epistemological studies includes questions such as what is knowl-
edge, how is knowledge acquired, what do people know, and how do we 
know what we know.
However, a discussion of Western and Confucian diﬀerences cannot 
proceed with this within-culture frame of questions as a starting point. 
Clearly, all of these questions already assume an implicit agreement of the 
legitimacy or validity of the concept of “knowledge.” As will be seen later 
in the chapter, this assumption is not shared when the two cultures’ out-
looks are set side by side. For the purposes of the present book, but more 
importantly from a cultural perspective, I start with a question at a more 
general level applicable to both cultures (or any culture, for that matter). 
Tis question does not favor one culture’s delineation of knowledge and 
knowing over that of the other, but rather puts them on equal footing: 
“What are humans to know?” – however the term know might be de&ned. 
Te weight of this question is on the notion of what, and it probes the 
key issue of what is important for humans to know or what ought humans 
bother to know &rst.
Te response to the aforementioned question, from what I can gather in 
reviewing Western intellectual history, is the external world. Humans are 
conceived of as the knowers. Here the notion of knower does not address 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!!
any degree of certainty of knowing. Te external world is the object to be 
known by humans. Te notion used here only concerns the observation 
that humans take mental action to try to know and do end up knowing 
some things, or at least they believe they do. Te concept of the external 
world has undergone gradual expansion, from a narrower scope of the 
physical world, to spiritual world, to social world, and &nally to the all-
encompassing world. Still, all of the versions of the world remain external 
to the person who does the knowing.
Generally speaking, the external world has been approached from two 
discernable levels. Te &rst is what meets the eye, the sense-data as phi-
losophers refer to it – that is, things directly sensible and experienced by 
humans. Te interest at this level is to &gure out how such things are related 
and function as a whole. Te second level, which assumes much more 
importance in the Western view,5 is the underlying, deep forces that cause 
and drive the surface things; it is uncovering the essence, the stable quality 
behind the unstable and changing things.
Te epistemological frame of the external world as the object of human 
knowing was &rst delineated by the Greeks. Te early Greek thinkers dealt 
with both levels. Some tried to link surface things, but those who made a 
name in history were more interested in knowing the nature, the deeper 
essence of the external world. Tey wanted to know what the physical 
world is made of and how it operates. In contemplating the substances of 
the world, for example, Tales (ca. 640–546 BCE) was recorded to have 
said that everything is made of water. Anaximander (ca. 611–54: BCE) had 
his own claim that all things come from a single primal substance, which 
is in&nite, eternal, and ageless. Heraclitus (535–4:5 BCE) believed that &re 
is the primordial element out of which everything else arises. Anaximenes 
(5;5–5!; BCE) declared that the fundamental substance of which the uni-
verse is made is air, which was subsequently regarded as a separate sub-
stance by Empedocles (ca. 490–430 BCE). More amazing was Anaxagoras 
(ca. 500–4!; BCE) who held that the world is in&nitely divisible and that 
even the smallest part of matter contains each element.
In pondering regularities and laws of the universe, they argued about 
the shapes of moving bodies, motions, and the temporal nature of the mov-
ing world. For example, they conjectured that the celestial bodies moved 
in perfect circles. Pythagoras (ca. 5:0–ca. 490 BCE) even discovered that 
the earth is spherical. At one end, Heraclitus argued that the world is in 
constant ﬂux as he illustrated with his well-known case: “[Y]ou cannot 
step twice into the same river; for fresh water is ever ﬂowing in upon you” 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
!3
(and “the sun is new every day”). At the other end, Parmenides (ca. 515–ca. 
450 BCE) and Zeno (ca. 490 BC–ca. 430 BCE) contended that the world is 
eternal and nothing changes, countering Heraclitus’ claim.6
Tese Greek thinkers showed an extraordinary attitude and style 
toward the material world, one that Russell called “disinterested eﬀort”: 
to understand the world. On the one hand, they had profound curiosity 
about and fascination with the external world, namely displaying childlike 
innocence that was “imaginative and vigorous and &lled with the delight 
of adventure.”; Tey were interested in everything – stars, winds, sea tur-
tles, beans, gods, morality. On the other hand, their contemplation of the 
world was serene, exhibiting a genuinely scienti&c spirit, even by today’s 
standards. Tey hypothesized about the world and argued with each other 
about their ideas; some even tested their hypotheses. Later Greek think-
ing was taken up by religious devotion: Te object of human knowing was 
no longer merely the physical world but the divine spirit behind it, con-
ceived of as absolute and perfect. However, modern science in the sev-
enteenth century reclaimed this early Greek stance toward the physical 
and eventually mechanical world. Tis stance, as scientists and scienti&c 
historians readily agree,9 ought to be, and has been since, held as the core 
scienti&c approach for generations to follow. Needless to say, this model 
has successfully led great Western scientists to achieve their celebrated 
breakthroughs.
However, knowing the world is not the only goal of studying and inquir-
ing. Mastering the world in order to control it and to utilize our knowledge 
to serve human needs has also been a clear goal in the West. Humanity, 
especially in the West, was slow to accomplish this latter goal during the 
&rst several millennia. In time, human knowledge, particularly scienti&c 
knowledge, has been used to eliminate deadly diseases, improve health, 
reduce hunger, provide shelter to large populations, increase eﬃciency in 
productivity, generate wealth, and enhance convenience of life in just about 
every possible way. Tese achievements notwithstanding, the last two cen-
turies have witnessed unprecedented and ruthless human exploitation of 
nature. Consequently, more diﬃcult problems have also been created by 
human activity, with the most serious ones coming as a result of scienti&c 
discoveries (e.g., nuclear weaponry and industrial pollution). Tis trend of 
destruction is accelerating at such a pace that, if no eﬀective counterforces 
intervene, the earth’s resources will soon be exhausted and real man-made 
disaster is likely to ensue. However, we remain hopeful that by studying the 
physical and the human world we will &nd solutions to these problems.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!4
Certainty of Knowledge
Beyond the basic interest in and stance toward the external world, Western 
intellectual tradition was further established by its serious pursuit of the key 
epistemological question: How do we know what we know? Tis question 
embeds the related set of questions such as “How does knowledge diﬀer 
from belief?” and “How certain is human knowledge?”
Te basic belief that the external world is knowable to humans also came 
from Greek antiquity. Tis belief gave birth to what has been referred to as 
rationalism, which holds that the world is orderly and that we can compre-
hend it. Rationalist tendency shaped the approach that values reason, mind, 
analysis, and abstract thinking more than intuition, emotion, social know-
ing, and experiential learning.
Te Greeks discovered logic (discovered by Parmenides and later for-
malized by Aristotle, 3;4–3!! BCE), which is the very foundation of reason-
ing. Tey favored deduction and used it to prove the existence of physical 
relationships and forces that the native eye could not see. Tey believed 
that they could obtain certainty of knowledge and discover things about the 
world by &rst noticing what is self-evident, called the axioms, and then by 
using deductive reasoning to arrive at theorems or other logical conclusions 
that are far from self-evident. Tis method of obtaining knowledge was pre-
dominant, and it inﬂuenced most Western thinkers.
Perhaps the most signi&cant discovery by Greeks was mathematics, 
which is even more certain and powerful than logic itself. For this reason, 
Pythagoras was acclaimed as “one of the greatest men [who] ever lived”10; 
it was he who used mathematics to express the ideal of contemplative life. 
Russell remarks:
It might seem that the empirical philosopher is the slave of his material, 
but that the pure mathematician, like the musician, is a free creator of 
his world of ordered beauty. . . . Mathematical knowledge appeared to be 
certain, exact, and applicable to the real world; moreover, it was obtained 
by mere thinking, without the need of observation. Consequently, it was 
thought to supply an ideal from which every-day empirical knowledge 
fell short. It was supposed on the basis of mathematics, that thought is 
superior to sense.11
Because mathematical knowledge was certain and absolute, it also gave rise 
to the belief that there was “eternal and exact truth as well as the super-
 sensible and intelligible world.”1! Socrates (469–399 BCE) and Plato (4!;–
34; BCE) were also two advocates for certainty of knowledge and eternal 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
!5
truth. Plato said in his Republic that “geometry compels one to look at 
being. . . . For geometrical knowing is of what is always.”13 In Greek antiq-
uity, mathematics and logic were also used to glorify gods and the immortal 
soul, but in subsequent centuries they became the means Christian theolo-
gians and scholars used to prove God’s existence, His absolute knowledge, 
His perfectness, and His power. For example, reason and logic were used 
by St. Tomas Aquinas (1!!5–1!:4), based on Aristotle’s argument of the 
unmoved mover, to prove that God is the unmoved mover of all things in 
the universe.
Te edi&ce of mathematics, deductive logic, and reason ruled and 
impelled the search for eternity and absolute truth for millennia. For a long 
time, there was no alternative way to inquire into the external world. Both 
philosophers and scientists were committed to this search and relied on 
these tools to pursue their work. Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Leibniz, and 
Newton were the founding giants of modern science in the seventeenth 
century, and all of their achievements are testimonies to the power of math-
ematics, logic, and reasoning (along with available but limited observations 
and facts).
Francis Bacon’s inductive method was introduced and accepted as a sys-
tematic way of Western scienti&c inquiry in the seventeenth century. Even 
though Bacon criticized medieval science and made his great methodolog-
ical contributions, he did not aim at challenging the search for true knowl-
edge itself. Instead, he energized the inquiry with a more viable method. 
Neither did John Locke in the eighteenth century abandon reason with his 
radical idea of all knowledge coming from experience. Quite the contrary, 
he maintained that rational people should hold their opinions with some 
measure of doubt and that even religious revelation must be judged by rea-
son. Terefore, reason remained supreme for him.
Reason triumphed again in philosophy. Immanuel Kant (1:!4–1;04), a 
Western philosophical icon in the eighteenth century and onward, wrote 
.e Critique of Pure Reason14 to distinguish knowledge that is a priori from 
knowledge that is not. Trough pure thinking, Kant arrived at his men-
tal categories, namely quantity, quality, relation, and modality (along with 
subcategories for each), into which, he claimed, the human mental appa-
ratus was to always &lter its experiences rationally (such as permanently 
wearing rosy spectacles to look at the world). Accordingly, humans have 
a priori ways of looking at and processing the world. Tus, human knowl-
edge consists not only of mathematics and logic a priori, but also of var-
ious other categories a priori, even though this latter kind of knowledge 
comes from experience &rst. Moreover, he deduced his well-known 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!6
“categorical imperative”15 in his moral theory and argued that all moral con-
cepts originate wholly a priori from reason.
Te standard of acceptable knowledge has changed much over the past 
three centuries. As a result, modern epistemology throws certainty of 
knowledge into doubt, and absolute truth as a standard has become prob-
abilistic degrees, patterns, and trends in many scienti&c &elds.16 However, 
I would argue that the basic question of how certainly we know anything 
in any scienti&c &eld is still a commonly used gauge to evaluate reliable, if 
not true, knowledge from unreliable information. And no knowledge can 
be evaluated without sound reasoning. Tis evaluative frame is applied to 
social sciences as well as nonscienti&c &elds such as criminal and civil litiga-
tion and judgment (e.g., a criminal can be judged guilty beyond reasonable, 
but not absolute, doubt). Tus, the central role of mathematics and logic 
reasoning in science and other areas of intellectual pursuit remains unques-
tioned to date and is likely to last for long in the West.
Mind and Its Wonders
So far I have discussed the questions of what the West regards as impor-
tant for humans to know and what primary means or methods were devel-
oped to obtain reliable knowledge. Tere is another important question 
that cannot be ignored in any discussion of knowledge and knowing – and 
by implication, learning – in the West. Tis question is “What in us does 
the knowing?” Te discussions in previous sections bear on this very ques-
tion, but they did not focus on the human knower per se. Te part of the 
human existence in charge of knowing is human intellect, the mind, which 
is understood as a human faculty, and later in psychology as capacity, and 
most recently in neuroscience as human brain circuitry. Tis intellect is 
endowed with our ability to follow logic, to compare and contrast, to ana-
lyze, and to generalize – in sum, to be rational.
What can this human faculty do for us to get knowledge? Again, the 
Greeks were the &rst to ponder this question. Te best-known thinkers 
were Socrates1: and Plato, and their ideas proved to be powerful and long-
lasting. Socrates held that human knowledge is not learned but recalled, 
that the human mind possesses knowledge at birth. One knows without 
being taught and without learning. He demonstrated his claim by tutoring 
a slave boy who at the beginning knew nothing about geometry but stated 
the conclusions correctly himself. Of course, the boy would not have come 
to the knowledge if Socrates did not guide him question by question with 
his acclaimed Socratic tutoring method. Socrates maintained that the only 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
!:
skills learned are those that serve mundane functions such as horseback 
riding, archery, and cra(s (including playing music instruments and mak-
ing statues!). Higher human knowledge, particularly the mathematical and 
logical kind, is innate.
Plato also advanced his theory of ideas. Accordingly, the human mind 
has “ideas” or “forms” for all things it knows (a condition that, from our 
current perspective, has to do with words we use in the language we speak). 
Our language has words with meanings, some of which denote more con-
crete ideas (Plato only discussed the notion of “idea” of “form” but not how 
to abstract concepts from perceived reality) whereas others denote the 
more abstract category. Take dogs as an example. Tere are individual dogs, 
and we can refer to them as “this dog” or “that dog.” But all dogs belong 
to the category “dog.” In Plato’s theory, this category “dog” is the universal 
dogginess that is shared by all dogs (today we would just place this spe-
cies of animals on Linnaeus’ biological taxonomy). Terefore, the human 
mind possesses this kind of abstract idea for all things humans see, hear, 
and sense in the world. Furthermore, Plato claimed that these universal 
ideas or forms are also ideals, and therefore true knowledge for humans 
to have. Te particular things that we experience are not true knowl-
edge but just appearances. Tus, minds that are not used for seeking true 
knowledge are satis&ed with knowing only beautiful or good things, but 
wise men, philosophers, use their minds to know beauty or the good itself. 
Socrates and Plato argued that it is our intellect, our mind, that achieves this 
true and ideal kind of knowledge, and therefore the intellect is superior to 
our senses.
Jennifer Michael Hecht writes in her book Doubt that the Greeks recog-
nized the chaotic nature of the world, but they also recognized the power 
of human rationality that can achieve human transcendence: “What is fas-
cinating is that Plato’s solution is both logical and transcendent. Here one 
does not use logic to conquer chaos. Rather, one uses logic because the logic 
itself is beauty, is truth. Plato oﬀers the amazing idea that contemplation 
of the way things really are is, in itself, a purifying process that can bring 
human beings into the only divinity there is.”1;
Russell points out that because of their abstract nature, mathematics 
and logic are wholly divorced from the reality that we directly experience. 
Mathematics and logic happen to be the only kind of knowledge that can 
be deduced entirely within itself, starting with an axiom, moving lockstep-
wise to its conclusion. What Socrates proved is not human knowledge per 
se but our capacity to follow logic and proofs. Moreover, I argue that Plato’s 
theory of ideas can be rethought as nothing more than the human cognitive 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;
capacity to classify objects in a hierarchical structure, from concrete inci-
dences to increasingly more abstract categories, and to use words to map 
this cognitive structure of our understanding of the world. Tere is no need 
to place one type of cognition as higher or lower, because all humans are 
capable of cognizing all levels as they mature developmentally.19
Nevertheless, as it turned out, the ideas introduced by Socrates and Plato 
about the human mind were not whimsical and short-lived. Tey resurged 
again and again in Western intellectual history, reaching the pinnacle with 
Descartes’ cogito (conventional short form for cogito ergo sum, “I think, 
therefore I am”).!0 Human existence is proved by the person’s metacogni-
tive awareness of his or her own thinking. Descartes (1596–1650) set out to 
doubt everything, which came to be known as the “Cartesian doubt,” and he 
eventually succeeded in doing so. He could not even be certain of his own 
existence by any other means except one – his cogito. It made him certain 
that he was thinking; thus he must exist.!1
It is important to point out that the nativist position of the human mind 
and its unmatched capacity in the animal kingdom are still alive and well 
today. Chomsky’s initial claim that human language is also a manifestation 
of this innate capacity, along with subsequent research, has provided hard-
to-refute evidence that human linguistic – particularly our rule-bound and 
generative – capacity is endowed to the species, not learned by or taught to 
each child a(er birth.!! Modern science on human infant cognition added 
the &nal stamp to the conclusion that we are indeed born with amazing 
innate capacity to cognize the world.!3
However, the nativist position is not the only one that declares the 
wonders of our mind. Other thinkers disagreed with the nativist view but 
savored the mind for other feats nonetheless. Contemporary to Socrates 
and Plato, Anaxagoras even suggested that mind is a primary cause of phys-
ical changes. Te idea (perhaps just as bold as those ideas voiced by Socrates 
and Plato) that the mind can make things happen, along with other similar 
ideas in later Greek antiquity, may have laid the ground for the eventual 
theological position that God is omniscient and omnipotent. It was true 
that the highest power imaginable by humans was, owing to Christian the-
ology, the divine mind that not only created the world out of nothing, but 
also controls the world and everything in it. Given that humans have been 
created by divine power, we are also connected to this power. Although we 
may not fully grasp and possess this power, we are able to recognize it, to 
hold it in awe, to have faith in it, and to follow it.
Even St. Augustine (354–430), the well-known Catholic bishop in early 
Christian history, contemplated the nature of the human mind. He discussed 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
!9
relativity of time as perceived by the mind and argued that neither past nor 
future, but only present, is reality because we can sense it as it is passing. 
He held that past is packed in memory and future in expectation. Hence, 
time is subjective; it is in the human mind, which expects, considers, and 
remembers. Of course, in St. Augustine’s persuasion, the human mind is 
created by God to begin with.!4
Te major counterview to the nativist position came from John Locke 
(163!–1:04).!5 Admittedly, this perspective emerged much later in history, 
but it nevertheless was a radical view that could not be dismissed ofand, 
either then or now. Locke argued that all our knowledge, perhaps aside 
from logic and mathematics, comes from our experience. Tere are no such 
things as innate knowledge, including the Platonic ideas as Socrates, Plato, 
and others had claimed; our mind is a tabula rasa, a blank slate on which 
we put our knowledge, &rst through our senses and then through the per-
ception of our mental operation. He further contended that all previously 
said metaphysical knowledge and concepts of the world were not a priori, 
but rather owing to the language terms we use. Locke’s theory of knowl-
edge opened an alternative inquiry into the nature and the workings of our 
mind, which calls for analysis of our experience and its impact on our mind 
and knowing. His theory also gave room for the subjective processes of our 
mental functioning. However, his theory did not dismiss mind itself, but 
instead pointed to diﬀerent ways our mind works its wonders.
Two important philosophers followed up on Locke’s theory and oﬀered 
further arguments about the experiential and subjective nature of our mind. 
George Berkeley (16;5–1:53)!6 maintained that all reality, not just discrete 
things in the world, is mental. We only perceive qualities of things, not things 
themselves. For instance, heat and cold are only sensations existing in our 
minds, and things tasting sweet are perceived as pleasure whereas things 
tasting bitter are perceived as pain. Pleasure and pain are mental, however, 
not inherent in the food itself. Whatever we know is already &ltered through 
our mental working. Terefore, only minds and mental events can exist, 
but not the world independently. David Hume (1:11–1::6)!: went even fur-
ther, suggesting that our thinking and reasoning process impressions from 
our experiences to form simple ideas. Our complex ideas come from both 
impressions and imaginations. We use language terms to process our ideas. 
He also contended that much of our knowledge of causality is not from the 
objects themselves, but from our inference and belief about two things seen 
constantly conjoined together, with one beginning and the other following. 
Tis inference or belief makes us expect the causal relationship. Immanuel 
Kant, in response to these empiricist challenges and in an attempt to retain 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
30
human innate capacity, presented his mental categories to reconcile these 
opposing views. From the perspective of philosophy as a discipline, these 
later thinkers may have cast much doubt on human rationality, and one may 
agree with or refute these later arguments. In my view, whether the human 
mind is rational or subjective and variable to experience is not important, 
but that the mind as a topic has received so much philosophical thinking 
resulting in identifying its many remarkable functions is signi&cant.
Te mind’s wonders have continued to fascinate Western researchers. 
Modern psychology was built to do just that, studying mental functions and 
their manifested behaviors. Te whole research on human intelligence and 
its measures and multiple facets has been and still is one of the hallmarks 
of modern psychology.!; A century-long research (also from anthropology) 
involving diﬀerent peoples across cultures has provided much evidence 
that human mental processes may share some basic structures such as our 
beginning capacities to process phonemes, human voices, socioemotional 
exchange and bonding, and the sequence of language acquisition. But 
beyond the notion of capacity, human mental processes are, by and large, 
not uniform, but vary from culture to culture, from ethnicity to ethnicity 
within diverse cultures, and even from gender to gender. Te mind seems 
to be quite adaptable to the particular cultural and social contexts in which 
people live. Even for what might appear to be simple categories of color, 
time, object classi&cation, seeing &sh in a tank, looking at a wooden tri-
angle, or weighing contradictions, minds diﬀer across cultural groups and 
sometimes even between men and women.!9 Regardless of how the human 
mind has been studied, few in the West would doubt its essential role in 
human life. Current research in psychology, cognitive science, and neu-
roscience continues to focus on mapping out the precise functions of our 
mind. As research deepens, more mind’s wonders will surely be revealed.
Examined Life
At least since the time that Socrates lived, the West has valued the idea that 
one ought to examine life. Socrates is also famous for having said in the 
Apology – his purported self-defense before the Athenian jury who con-
demned him to death – that “the unexamined life is not worth living.”30 His 
life is a total embodiment of this very conviction.
In every dialog that Plato wrote, Socrates was portrayed as very steadfast 
in questioning all conventional concepts that people took for granted. He 
engaged his interlocutors, particularly those who contended that they were 
sure of their ideas, to answer questions about the meanings of their familiar 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
31
concepts. For example, he saw Euthyphro at the court, who was prosecuting 
his own father for having murdered a laborer who himself was a murderer. 
Euthyphro told Socrates that his family and friends thought him impious (for 
a son to prosecute his own father), but Euthyphro found them mistaken and 
believed that his folks did not understand piety. Socrates took this opportu-
nity to seek the universal de&nition of piety with Euthyphro as illustrated in 
the following excerpt between Socrates (S) and Euthyphro (E):
s: Tell me then, what is the pious, and what the impious, do you say?
e: I say that the pious is to do what I am doing now, to prosecute the wrong-
doer, be it about murder or temple robbery or anything else, whether the 
wrongdoer is your father or your mother or anyone else; not to prosecute 
is impious . . .
s: For now, try to tell me more clearly . . . you did not teach me adequately 
when I asked you what the pious was, but you told me that what you are 
doing now, prosecuting your father for murder, is pious.
e: And I told you truth, Socrates.
s: Perhaps, you agree, however, that there are many other pious actions.
e: Tere are.
s: Bear in mind then that I did not bid you tell me one or two of the many 
pious actions but that form itself that makes all pious actions pious, for 
you agree that all impious actions are impious and all pious actions pious 
through one form, or don’t you remember?
e: I do.
s: Tell me then what this form itself is, so that I may look upon it, and using 
it as a model, say that any action of yours or another’s that is of that kind 
is pious, and if that is not that it is not.
e: If that is how you want it, Socrates, that is how I will tell you.
s: Tat is what I want.
e: Well then, what is dear to the gods is pious, what is not is impious.
s: Splendid, Euthyphro!31
Although he allowed Euthyphro to respond and to oﬀer counterarguments, 
Socrates frequently asked sharp questions (disregarding how Euthyphro 
would feel about being pushed into a corner). He moved forward one step at 
a time skillfully, leaving Euthyphro no room but to agree with him, thereby 
arriving at his general de&nition of piety in the end.
Socrates displayed his commitment and relentlessness in his pursuit of 
true knowledge. At his trial, he was accused of corrupting youth (as well as 
not believing in the gods of the city) because he taught them to question 
everything as he himself did. He refused to escape from prison when it was 
possible for him to do so and died, calmly and bravely, drinking the poison 
as his sentence demanded.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3!
Because of the way he lived his life, because of his teachings, and because 
of how Plato presented that life, those teachings, and that honorable death, 
Socrates has come to represent not only the “gadﬂy” prodding the rich and 
powerful, but also the sage exercising careful judgments and judicious eval-
uation. Indeed, he is the very embodiment of not just good thinking but 
critical thinking in the West.
Today, in the West, academic freedom is widely respected. Teachers and 
students are free to inquire, to think, and to challenge old ideas and express 
new ones. Tey are also free to some extent, and obligated to some extent, 
to challenge authority both in the school or university and in the society at 
large. As a Western cultural ethos, the inquiring and examining spirit in any 
form (so( or confrontational) is highly prized.
Tere have been countless thinkers ever since the Greek antiquity who 
resemble, if not purposefully follow, the critical spirit of Socrates, with the 
exception of the long, dark Middle Ages (but there was as also the daring 
image of Faust). All philosophical, scienti&c, political, and cultural icons 
who advanced new knowledge or new ways to solve political and social 
problems challenged existing canons of thought or status quo. Some were 
more &erce and radical than others, but all inherited this critical inquiring 
spirit. Take the eighteenth-century Jean Jacques Rousseau (1:1!–1::;) as an 
example. In his volume Emile,3! Rousseau launched a major attack on edu-
cational practice of his day (in addition to his other major attacks on the 
political and religious system). He claimed that civilization as a whole had 
done more harm than good to people because it ruins their natural tenden-
cies, which he prized as the ultimate good. In an attempt to radicalize edu-
cation, he introduced his imaginary and ideal learner, Emile, who has no 
teachers but only a tutor. Emile is naturally curious about the world, inde-
pendent in his thinking, innocent in his outlook, and immune to human 
misery and corruption. Emile learns only according to his inner timetable, 
and his tutor does not impose anything on the pupil but waits patiently to 
supply what Emile is ready to learn, to discover for himself. Rousseau’s criti-
cal charge probably met much resistance in his own culture and abroad. But 
his ideas proved to enjoy lasting impact on education down to the present 
time. Progressive educational traditions in Europe and the United States owe 
inspiration to him, and the currently much celebrated educational model of 
Reggio Emilia in Italy also retains the kernel of Rousseau’s thought.
In today’s education, from preschool to university, it remains a central 
goal to teach students how to think critically. Students are (ideally) encour-
aged to think for themselves, to raise questions about the subjects they are 
learning, and to challenge the existing knowledge as well as authority.
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
33
An interesting case in point that attests to the enduring nature of the 
Western intellectual tradition can be oﬀered from the mottos still present in 
many of the best Western universities’ crests in Latin (from a brief Google 
search): Harvard University’s Veritas (truth), Yale University’s Lux et veritas 
(light and truth), Columbia University’s In lumine Tuo videbimus lumen (in 
Ty light shall we see light), University of California, Berkeley’s Fiat lux (let 
there be light), University of Oxford’s Dominus illuminatio mea (the Lord is 
my light), and University of Cambridge’s Hinc lucem et pocula sacra ([From] 
here [we receive] light and sacred draughts). Truth and light convey a sim-
ilar meaning of the ultimate knowledge. Other universities’ mottos stress 
the mind, the openness, freedom, and critical spirit of inquiry as well as 
expansion of knowledge: MIT’s Mens et manus (mind and hand), Stanford 
University’s Die Lu/ der Freiheit weht in German (the wind of freedom 
blows), University of Chicago’s Crescat scientia; vita excolatur (let knowl-
edge grow from more to more; and so be human life enriched), University 
of Heidelberg’s Semper apertus (the book of learning is always open), and 
University of Toronto’s Velut arbor ævo (as a tree through the ages).
One might think that these are vestiges of archaic traditions. However, for 
each motto found, I saw multiple current discussions linked to it. Students, 
faculty, administrators, and alumni are actively engaged in interpreting 
and reinterpreting these crystallized expressions that represent respective 
universities’ fundamental missions. Indeed, each time a new generation of 
students, faculty, and staﬀ enters the university, the meaning of its motto is 
reexamined and its spirit revived.
Te Western Learner
Within Western intellectual tradition, the concept of the learner did not 
occupy prominence in philosophical debates. Most thinkers did not write 
much about the learner as a whole person, but instead focused on the mind. 
However, despite their primary interest in the nature of knowledge and the 
mental world, Socrates and Plato (in his Dialogues, noticeably his Republic) 
elaborated quite comprehensively on how children should be reared and 
who among them should be selected to receive the best education (to 
become the guardians) and later to assume leadership as philosopher kings. 
Some of the later philosophers, namely Locke33 and Kant,34 also wrote force-
fully on the need to educate people. Tey also oﬀered proposals on how 
education should take place. Other important education theorists and lead-
ers in the West, particularly, those since the sixteenth century – Comenius, 
Pestalozzi, Rousseau, Herbart, Froebel, Montessori, American education 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
34
theorists Spencer, Dewey, and Kilpatrick, as well as those who have led edu-
cation reform in the United States in recent decades – have all advocated for 
the importance of education, with some creating new forms of schooling.
From all of these &gures, there seems to be much more suggested for 
the provision of education to children than elaboration on the learner him- 
or herself.35 Nevertheless, one can still discern key assumptions about the 
learner or characteristics the learner is ideally to possess, as well as the 
processes in which the learner is desirably to engage to achieve the envi-
sioned educational goals. For the purpose of conducting cultural compari-
sons, I have identi&ed the following four characteristics and processes for 
the learner that in my judgment are most central in Western intellectual 
tradition.36
Te &rst and foremost characteristic of a learner is to have a good mind 
and to use it well. Individual minds were originally thought to be from the 
divine source (e.g., Comenius, 159!–16:0, took that as a given to launch his 
education for everyone). Individual minds, therefore, should be enabled to 
ﬂourish. Later, this divine source was recast into human natural tendency 
(as advocated by Rousseau and Froebel [1:;!–1;5!], the father of the idea 
and practice of kindergarten), and eventually into individual’s born poten-
tial that needs to be developed fully. Te notion of individual potential is 
still the predominant view held today. It is clear that since Greek antiquity, 
there has been a strong view that individuals diﬀer in their potential at the 
outset. Some have greater potential, whereas others may possess ordinary 
intelligence. Distinguishing the very able learners from the ordinary ones 
has been important in Western learning tradition.
Te mind does not just become great by itself; it needs nurturance to 
develop fully. For the development of minds, earlier thinkers advocated 
for strict discipline of children as seen in Plato’s Republic and the Spartan 
model.3: Since the seventeenth century, education theorists and practitio-
ners have increasingly promoted intellectual stimulation, nurturance, expe-
rience, and social interaction and participation as the processes by which 
children develop their minds. Te purpose of having a well-developed mind 
is to use it well. Hence, the learner can seek and ascertain reliable knowl-
edge and truth through critical reasoning, as well as reach sound judgments 
and make informed decisions.
Te second characteristic of the learner is to have natural curiosity, 
interest, playfulness, and intrinsic enjoyment. Tis valued characteristic 
directly reﬂects the much praised Greek stance toward the world. Since the 
inception of Froebel’s kindergarten, children’s innocence as well as natural 
curiosity about, and interest in, the world have been treasured and held as 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
35
a central goal for early – and ideally all – formal education. Learners who 
display curiosity, playfulness, and delight (the notion of fun in American 
preschool and later education) are believed to lead to intrinsic motivation 
for children to seek knowledge and understand of the world.
Te third characteristic of the learner is to inquire into the world. It is 
important for the learner to maintain an open mind and a free inquiring 
spirit. A good learner is expected to display his or her intrinsic interest in 
the world at large on the one hand and to use his or her mind to inquire 
and to discover on the other. Te learner should have what Teodore Sizer 
calls a “habit of mind”3; to ponder about essentials of the world, to observe, 
to ask questions, to argue and debate about issues, to challenge existing 
canons of knowledge and authority (both teachers and experts), and to self-
express.
Te fourth characteristic of the learner is to understand and to mas-
ter the world as the ultimate goal of learning. Such learning is manifested 
in true personal insights, creativity, discoveries, and problem solving. Tis 
type of achievement displays the learner’s personal brilliance and calls for 
reward and celebration. Tose achieving the highest level are canonized in 
the cultural body of knowledge to be transmitted to young generations.39 All 
the Western philosophers and scientists that have been mentioned in this 
chapter and many who have not been presented (who are excellent contrib-
utors in other &elds of intellectual and artistic pursuit) are clear models of 
the best images of the Western learning tradition. Even those who achieve 
lesser degrees of excellence – the ordinary learners in daily classroom set-
tings – are rewarded and celebrated for their fresh ideas, thoughtful ques-
tions and answers, novel solutions to problems, and o(en just any form of 
self-expression. Figure !.1 shows a diagram of the Western learner.
co.?uc/a. lea-./.g ,-ad/,/o.
It is not my intention here to provide an account of the intellectual devel-
opment throughout Chinese – or East Asian – history. What is impor-
tant in this section is to outline the core values of learning purposes and 
processes.
Perfect Self
Te Confucian learning tradition is the predominant tradition through-
out Chinese (as well as much of Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese) his-
tory. Te single most important thinker for this tradition is Confucius 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
36
(551–4:9 BCE).40 According to scholarly accounts, Confucius did not 
“invent” the core values himself; he inherited a rich culture that had been 
in existence for several thousand years. However, “it was he who enabled 
the millennia-long culture before him to be transmitted, and it was also he 
who charted the path for later cultural ﬂourishing for millennia a(er him.” 
Indeed, one writer, Yizheng Liu, went so far as to say, “Confucius is the 
center of Chinese culture. Without Confucius, there would be no Chinese 
culture.”41 Confucius achieved this impact by compiling the scriptures and 
texts on religion, philosophy, government, human relations, morality, his-
tory, as well as poetry and music. He founded his own school in China and 
taught some 3,000 students from all walks of life. He was also the &rst edu-
cator in human history to proclaim equality of education for anyone regard-
less of their social backgrounds and individual diﬀerences. If Confucius had 
only one of the aforementioned accomplishments, his name would remain 
eternally in the Chinese pantheon. But he achieved all of them. However, 
the most important legacy that Confucius le( is not these compilations, but 
rather his own teaching on how to be a person, how to learn, and how to 
achieve human excellence.4!
Western Learner
Self expression:
- Speaking
- Writing
- Other forms
Personal achievement: 
- Creativity/brilliance/
  insight/problem solving
- Discovery
- Invention
Learner
Inquiry
External 
World
Challenging
attitude 
Master the world
Rewards for achievement 
Intellectual affect:
- Curiosity
- Interest
- Intrinsic motivation
Mind:
- Reasoning
- Intelligence
?/gu-e !.1. Western Learner: Te basic learning approach is for the learner to 
study the world out there. In the Learner, there are two large components of mind 
and intellectual aﬀect, with the mind being the most essential. Te two most impor-
tant processes underlying inquiry are for the learner to engage in all forms of self-
expression on the one hand and challenging authority and the existing canon of 
knowledge on the other. Tere are also two outcomes of inquiring into the external 
world: personal creativity and mastery of the world.
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
3:
For Confucius, the most important purpose of human life is to self-
 perfect (自我完善), or self-cultivate (修身, 自我修養), socially and mor-
ally. It is the person’s self, not the external world, that is the object of his or 
her intellectual attention, contemplation, practice, and living. Te self is the 
project for the person to work on, to improve, to re&ne, and to accomplish. 
Because no one is born with this approach to life, one must learn to self-
perfect. Te sum total of one’s lifelong self-perfection constitutes the core 
meaning of learning. Tis outline of life’s purpose and its process through 
learning is deeply inspiring to the Chinese and other East Asians (as well as 
increasingly more non-Asian people in the world).
Counter to the popular belief, the power of Confucius does not focus on 
the political system, not even political careers of his pupils,43 but the funda-
mental question that each human being has to face: How do I live my life? 
What kind of a person do I want to be? Tese questions assume personal 
choices, but they are not framed from the perspective of the individual as 
a biological entity or as a rights-bearing individual as may be the case in 
the West. Tese questions concern the very fact that all humans survive, 
develop, and ﬂourish in social relationships. A person is not just Jenny (or 
David), but much more importantly a daughter, a sister, a wife, a mother, an 
aunt, a teacher, a colleague, and so forth. Tis means that a person’s existence 
is inevitably enmeshed in profound human relationships. As one develops 
and ages, one’s relationships and roles change. Tese relationships and their 
associated social and moral signi&cance – not our biology – de&ne our indi-
vidual humanity. How Jenny goes about her roles and relationships with 
various people, particularly those who are deeply involved in her life (i.e., 
parents, siblings, spouse, bosses, and friends), will mold Jenny into the kind 
of person she is and will be. Tis basic social nature of her life is the very self-
project for Jenny to observe, contemplate, practice, and achieve. Tis lifelong 
self-project cannot proceed without learning. Ames and Rosemont state that 
Confucius’ vision of human lives was “not simply one to be understood, and 
accepted, modi&ed, or rejected on the basis of its congruence with the world 
‘objectively’ perceived. . . . On the contrary, his vision was one that had to be 
felt, experienced, practiced, and lived. He was interested in how to make 
one’s way in life, not in discovering the ‘truth’” (emphasis in the original).44
Confucius and later Confucians outlined what have been called the 
&ve cardinal human relationships: (1) parent–child relationship, (!) sibling 
relationships, (3) husband–wife relationship, (4) basic economic relation-
ship (employer–employee or boss/supervisor–subordinate), and (5) friend-
ship.45 Note that the &rst three relationships, located within the family, are 
regarded by Confucius and his followers as the most essential. Without 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3;
succeeding in the familial relationships, a person is not likely to achieve the 
other two types of relationship. Since within a family everyone has these 
relationships, it is then incumbent upon each person to establish and regu-
late these relationships. Confucius believed that a person who is not able 
to maintain these fundamental relationships would face diﬃculties in life. 
He did not consider such a person to be either able or &t to assume greater 
responsibilities for the community and society at large.
How then can a person achieve these basic yet very diﬃcult tasks? 
Confucius taught &ve virtues corresponding to these relationships for 
one to learn and four general moral principles for all to strive for. For 
parent-child relationships, the parent shall show unconditional love (ai/
ciai, 愛/慈愛) – that is, total commitment to children’s welfare – whereas 
children express what is known as &lial piety (xiao, 孝). Unconditional 
love and &lial piety are mutually constitutive. Moral obligation lies in 
this mutuality. Terefore, parental total commitment and children’s &l-
ial piety are not mere emotions (o(en determined by momentary spurts 
of feelings), but rather are anchored in corresponding moral obligations 
to nurture each other’s well-being. So understood and practiced, these 
obligations shall endure for life.
Confucius talked at great length about the core meaning of &lial conduct, 
for example: “Tose today who are &lial are considered so because they are 
able to provide for their parents. But even dogs and horses are given that 
much care. If you do not have [&lial feelings] toward your parents, what 
is the diﬀerence?”46 Here Confucius emphasizes the genuine human feel-
ings toward parents as the real diﬀerence, not the performance of duties as 
a formality. Te appropriate conduct here is to show &lial piety willingly, 
ungrudgingly, and gladly. Tus, to Confucius, &lial piety is the very begin-
ning of all human morality (百善孝為先) now. Te assumption is that if 
one cannot even feel &lial love and respect toward one’s parents who gave 
birth and, o(en at great sacri&ce, nurtured oneself, how can one show love 
and care to unrelated people?
For the husband-and-wife relationship, the virtue is respect (jing, 經). 
Respect here is not simply social etiquette, politeness, or obedience that 
wives owe to husbands as may be understood in popular parlance. Neither 
is it the kind that Li and Fischer referred to as ought-respect, extended to 
everyone, based on political and legal rights in the West. Instead, respect in 
this context is a combination of honoring the other as a full human being 
and at the same time expressing what Li and Fischer termed aﬀect-respect 
of love and admiration in a marriage.4:
For sibling relationships, the virtue is sibling love and responsibility 
(ti, 字). Accordingly, the older siblings care for the younger ones whereas the 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
39
younger ones remain receptive to and accepting of the care and guidance of 
the older siblings. Ti ensures that siblings continue to stand by one another as 
a family and look a(er each other’s well-being, prosperity, and moral growth. 
Tis is especially important when parents are unable to care for and to guide 
their children (because of illness, other incapacities, or death).
For the employer–employee (originally king–subject) relationship, the 
virtue is utmost dedication or loyalty (zhong, 三). Tis is a basic ethic one 
has toward work for someone else. Te idea is to dedicate oneself to the best 
of one’s ability and without reservation to the cause, the service, or the posi-
tion. If one agrees to and enters into this relationship, one shall make one’s 
best eﬀort to accomplish the goals. It is simply unethical to cut corners, to 
provide half-hearted service, to sabotage the work, to engage in conﬂict of 
interest, and worse, to betray this relationship. As for many other cultures, 
this ethical principle is considered very serious.
Finally, for friendship, the principle is trust (xin, 典). Although this 
virtue is also universal across cultures, the Confucian emphasis rests on 
commitment to friendship and ways that lead to its endurance. Trusting 
that one’s friends will last through good and bad times (辭期苦,共患難) is 
key to friendship, and such trust is ideally not conditioned to actual time 
spent together, physical proximity, oscillating emotions, and changing 
circumstances.
Beyond these &ve virtues for these cardinal relationships, Confucius 
articulated four further moral principles that transcend speci&c relation-
ships, applicable to common life circumstances: propriety (li, 禮), rightness 
(yi, 義), integrity (lian, 廉), and a sense of shame (chi, 恥).4; Ames and 
Rosemont, in comparing the Confucian moral concepts with those of the 
West, oﬀer this explanation of the notion of propriety:
[Li] are a social grammar that provides each member with a de&ned place 
and status within the family, community, and polity [at a given time]. Li 
are life forms transmitted from generation to generation as repositories 
of meaning, enabling youth to appropriate persisting values and to make 
them approach to their own situations. . . . What makes propriety pro-
foundly diﬀerent from laws or rule is [the] process of making the tradi-
tion one’s own.49
Te English term propriety does not do full justice to the concept of li, which 
is much more encompassing and penetrating into daily life for the Chinese 
and other East Asians. Te idea of li extends from the highest level of rit-
ual performance, such as cultural memorial ceremonies, to one’s ancestral 
oﬀerings, and to the most mundane interpersonal interactions such as giv-
ing and receiving gi(s, praising and accepting praises, serving dinner, and 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
40
the like. Li essentially enables people to acknowledge, to attend or attune 
to, to connect with, to validate, to honor, and ultimately to care for each 
other.
Rightness, righteousness, or uprightness (yi) refers originally to appropri-
ateness of an act in a given situation. But by extension and lived tradition, 
the term denotes upholding the right things and a sense of justice in human 
communities, especially when individuals are confronted with lures of self-
interest. For example, self-serving at the cost of others is an incidence of not 
yi. Making a promise without the intent of keeping it or simply breaking 
one’s promise are acts of breaching yi. Betrayal of friendship, cheating, fraud, 
and similar acts are also serious violations of yi. Mencius (孟子, ca. 3:!–!;9 
BCE), a well-known sage and a direct follower of Confucius, said that a great 
person is one who “will not be led into excesses when wealthy and honored 
nor deﬂected from his purpose when poor and obscure, nor will he [bend] 
before superior force.”50 Te moral conviction possessed by such a person is 
rightness. Te speci&c behaviors and acts of it in concrete life situations are 
not stated, but each person ought to develop a sense of rightness so that he or 
she will know right from wrong and act accordingly in any situation.
Of the four moral principles, shenzheng or lian is readily matched with 
the English term personal conduct or  integrity. Similar to the Western con-
cept, it applies mostly to public life or people who hold leadership posi-
tions entrusted to them by communities and organizations. Diligence in 
performing one’s work, a sense of duty, honesty, and clean management of 
funds are hallmarks of personal integrity. Corruption, greed, and embezzle-
ment of public funds are violations of integrity.
Te &ve virtues for relationships and the three general moral principles 
are stated in the positive. Te last one, sense of shame (chi), is stated in the 
negative. However, unlike the sheer negativity associated with shame in the 
West, Confucius and his followers greatly emphasized the importance and 
positivity of shame in human lives. As in the West, shame is a self-conscious 
emotion that occurs when the self fails socially and morally, o(en in the 
presence of others. In Confucian teaching, having a sense of shame is equal 
to having a nagging conscience, therefore a discretional capacity for one 
to recognize one’s own wrongdoing (note that shame and guilt are much 
more closely related in Chinese culture). Te most important function of 
shame, however, is to urge one to correct oneself. To Confucius, not having 
a sense of shame is tantamount to losing the very human self-corrective 
capacity. Shame/guilt thus allows room for personal growth. Should one 
fail any of the desirable virtues and ethnical behaviors, feeling shame is 
the &rst response that enables a person to honestly look inward in order to 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
41
self-examine, to summon the courage to admit wrongdoing, and then to 
commit to self-recti&cation. Mistakes and failures are reasons not to stop 
self-improving, but to self-perfect further.51
However, acquiring these virtues and moral principles is not the ultimate 
end for human excellence. For Confucius, the highest level of self- cultivation 
is the larger concept of ren (仁). Te signi&cance of this concept is evinced 
in the word ren occurring 105 times in only about 55 pages of fragmented 
passages in the Analects. Ren has been translated as human goodness, benev-
olence, humanity, humanheartedness, and most recently authoritative con-
duct. Tere is no precise English concept that captures the full meaning of 
ren. Many of Confucius’ students asked him about the meaning as well as 
conduct of and ways to reach ren. Each of them represented an individual 
personality that purportedly possessed admirable moral qualities and supe-
rior intellectual abilities and skills. Confucius acknowledged these students’ 
merits but remained reluctant to claim ren in them. Terefore, although 
foundational, merely possessing some virtues and moral qualities or hav-
ing a superior mind or knowledge does not suﬃce for ren. To Confucius, a 
truly ren person is one who commits him- or herself to a lifelong striving 
to become the most genuine, sincere, and humane person he or she can 
become. Tis life journey is also referred to as following the Way.5! Tis 
 process, Confucius concluded, must be never-ending. It requires that the 
person charts a path for him- or herself with “vigilant self-watchfulness, in 
a reverential and respectful spirit, to be exercised in relation to every mat-
ter, every action, every thought one becomes engaged in.”53 Because each 
person’s actual living circumstances diﬀer, the process is also open and calls 
for personal creativity. When engaged in seeking ren, the person bears wit-
ness to his or her own self-project, moving forward with deep joy, satis-
faction, and ful&llment. Tus, ren is a personally chosen life path that is 
simultaneously earthly bound and spiritually transcendent.
Confucius preserved a special term for those who commit themselves 
to the process of and follow the way of ren: junzi (君子). Junzi has been 
translated as gentleman and nobleman, and most recently as exemplary 
person by Ames and Rosemont, which, in my view, conveys the meaning 
much better than previous terms. According to Rosemont,54 Confucius 
spoke of several categories of persons, all of whom display human good-
ness through dedicated learning. However, the exemplary person is the 
concept Confucius discussed and savored most (the term junzi occurs 
ninety-one times in the Analects). Scholar apprentice (shi, 士) is the one 
who has achieved some virtues and understood the moral principles. 
Tis person has also moved beyond the family, kin, and local community, 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
4!
and is committed to pursue ren. Still, much learning and self-cultivation 
remain ahead.
Compared to a scholar-apprentice, Junzi is nearer to the ultimate goal of 
self-cultivation. Rosemont states:
Tey have traveled a goodly distance along the way and live a goodly 
number of roles. . . . Benefactors to many, they are still bene&ciaries of 
others. . . . While still capable of anger in the presence of evildoing, they 
are in their person tranquil. . . . Tey . . . perform all of their functions 
not only with skill, but with grace, dignity, and beauty, and they delight 
in the performances. . . . Still &lial toward parents and elders, they now 
work on behalf of others . . . especially the needy. . . . [T]heir conduct is 
not forced, but rather eﬀortless, spontaneous, creative. Tere is, in sum, 
a very strong aesthetic and ethical dimension to the life of a junzi.55
Junzi for Confucius not only cultivate themselves but also help others 
achieve this height of human excellence. Tey are viewed as teachers and 
models for others to emulate; hence, they are exemplary persons. Indeed, 
junzi as described by Confucius is the highest level, and therefore a human 
ideal, yet it is still possible for most of us to reach.
Confucius did not stop here, however; he pointed to an even “lo(ier 
human model,” namely the sage (sheng, 聖 or later shengxian, 聖賢). He 
identi&ed some historical &gures prior to his time, speci&cally Emperors Yao, 
Shun, and Yu, King Wen, King Wu, and most of all the Duke of Zhou, who set 
the highest possible examples of human moral excellence. Even junzi stand 
in awe of them, and the goal of becoming a sage is out of reach for ordinary 
people. Confucius’ own assessment aside, there is no doubt that, despite his 
own humility, Confucius himself together with Mencius have since been 
regarded as sages by Chinese people. Sages are those who love, care for, and 
extend their benevolence to all. “Clearly such persons have extended their 
human feelings and thoughts to embrace the entire human race.”56
Ever since Confucius outlined this life purpose and the possibility for 
humans to reach it, Chinese (as well as other East Asian) people have been 
inspired by it. Mencius advanced the basic Confucian tenet by arguing 
that what Confucius promoted presumes human nature to be that which 
is not shared with animals but which is uniquely human (therefore, self-
cultivation ought to focus on what is uniquely human). Accordingly, this 
unique human nature is our moral sense.5: Mencius highlighted four 
endowed human capacities, which he termed four germinations of human 
moral development: (1) ability to have compassion for others’ suﬀering, (!) 
ability to feel shame, (3) ability for courtesy and modesty, and (4) ability 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
43
to distinguish right from wrong. He argued that our ability for compas-
sion leads to our ren, our ability for shame leads to our sense of rightness, 
our ability to be courteous and modest leads to our observance of propri-
ety, and our ability to distinguish right from wrong leads to our wisdom 
(superior knowledge). Mencius’ conviction is that moral self-perfection is 
not reserved to special people or the elite of society, but is available for 
everyone. By this conviction, Mencius essentially opened the possibility of 
human excellence to all. However, these human capacities by themselves do 
not lead to great moral achievement because they are mere germinations. 
Each individual must make a great eﬀort to learn and to self-perfect con-
tinuously in order to realize his or her full moral potential.5;
Elaborating on Confucius’ theme of learning for one’s self (為己之學, 
that is, learning to cultivate oneself, not to impress others), Mencius advised 
learners: “[T]he exemplary person steeps himself in the Way because he 
wishes to &nd it in himself (自得之).”59 For Neo-Confucians in the Song and 
Ming periods (960–1!:9 and 136;–1644, respectively), &nding ren in one-
self became the key to repossessing the Way, thereby reclaiming Confucian 
purpose and process of learning.
A(er a much diminished role of Confucian learning tradition for nearly 
a millennium, the early Song Confucians reopened this learning  tradition. 
Te &rst two inﬂuential thinkers were Cheng Hao (程颢, 103!–10;5) and 
Cheng Yi (程颐, 1033–110:), brothers who argued that the Way advocated 
by Confucius represents the heavenly principle (天理) that underlies all 
matters in the universe, including human moral nature. Following the Way 
is reaching the highest principle. However, to follow the Way, one must 
investigate the principle and its particular manifestations (including under-
standing physical particularities). Te Cheng brothers saw this investigative 
spirit as a necessary step for one’s self-cultivation, one’s learning, which was 
new because early Confucians did not elaborate on individuals’ investiga-
tion of the universe. Nevertheless, the Cheng brothers reaﬃrmed that the 
purpose of learning is to become the sage (notice that they did not focus 
on junzi, but rather on sage directly), the lo(iest goal as envisioned by 
Confucius. Te Cheng brothers believed not only that sagehood ought to be 
the ultimate purpose of every learner, but also that it is reachable by every-
one. Tey outlined more concrete learning processes and methods to guide 
learners in this pursuit. Tus, one needs to begin by investigating things 
(格物) in order to extend one’s knowledge (致知), which enables one to 
grasp (getting to the bottom of) the principle (窮理).60
Zhu Xi (策發, 1130–1!00), probably the most well-known Confucian 
thinker a(er Confucius and Mencius, was profoundly inﬂuenced by 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
44
the Cheng brothers. Zhu Xi’s thought carries so much aﬃnity to that of 
the Cheng brothers that their school of thought is called the Cheng-Zhu 
School. Continuing the basic tenet of the Cheng Brothers, Zhu Xi provided 
detailed commentaries to the Confucian texts and compiled the Four Books 
(i.e., Great Learning, 展學; the Doctrine of the Mean, 史府; the Analects, 時
語; and Mencius, 孟子). Tese books became what has been regarded as a 
must-read for every student and scholar until 1949.61 In the Great Learning, 
Zhu Xi integrated the Cheng Brothers’ argument that investigating things 
and extending one’s knowledge are necessary for grasping the heavenly 
principle. Tese learning steps are important for self-cultivation, which is 
foundational for the life path toward sagehood.
Te Cheng-Zhu school strongly emphasized complete personal dedica-
tion and commitment to this learning. Neo-Confucian learners had many 
more books and materials to study than their counterparts in Confucius’ 
time. Terefore, studying books (讀書) was a very serious endeavor (in fact, 
the term study books became a general notion standing for education still 
commonly used today). Borrowing from the Buddhist method of medita-
tion, Confucian learners also adopted quiet sitting and deep contemplation. 
All of this was to be geared toward getting it (Confucian Way) for oneself 
because no one else can learn for another. Without achieving this standard 
of learning, further learning goals are not likely.
Even though the Cheng-Zhu School dominated Chinese education 
since then, there were also other Confucians who advocated for diﬀerent 
aspects of learning. Notably, Wang Yang Ming (王阳明, 14:!–15!9) argued 
that human inborn conscience (良知), rather than heavenly principle, is the 
real governing power, as &rst discussed by Mencius (i.e., his four germina-
tions). Terefore, learning to become a sage is not just to follow the moral 
principle, but to extend what is already there to begin with in each person 
(致良知). He emphasized that people need to hold on to their innate con-
science, not allowing negative life circumstances to taint this innate moral 
knowing of theirs. Furthermore, continuing the Confucian standard of 
judging moral achievement by one’s action rather than by one’s words, 
Wang Yang Ming held that one must practice tirelessly what one knows in 
order to achieve sagehood (知/合一). Tis way of thinking opened the 
otherwise lo(y and hard-to-reach goal of sagehood to all people, including 
commoners, with no regard for social constraints or scholarship (the latter 
was emphasized by the Cheng-Zhu School). Tis tenet greatly encouraged 
ordinary people to pursue the same moral excellence.
Wang Yang Ming also inspired many followers, who, like Zhu Xi, opened 
many schools and taught many pupils. Since the Ming time, Wang Ken, 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
45
Li Zhi, Huang Zongxi, Gu Yanwu, Wang Chuanshan, and Yan Yuan, among 
others, have either elaborated on Wang Yang Ming’s innate conscience 
doctrine or adhered to his principle of learning and practicing one’s moral 
knowing. Despite their diﬀerences in emphasis, all Confucians still share 
the fundamental purpose as originally outlined by Confucius himself: 
learning to self-cultivate.6!
Take the World Upon Oneself
Confucius’ own teaching emphasized personal self-perfection toward ren 
through daily self-examination and practice. Some of his students had 
ambition to serve the courts (of many small kingdoms). Confucius was 
very clear that personal gain either for wealth or fame was not part of self-
 cultivation in his teaching (although he also acknowledged the material 
need for human survival). Te point of serving kings is to ensure ren in 
them. Mencius further clari&ed the relationship between a junzi and a king: 
Te former possesses superior moral power despite lack of political or social 
power, whereas the latter frequently has the opposite. Terefore, in serving 
the kings, junzi must assume the role of a bearer of moral responsibility as 
well as a moral teacher/advisor for those in power. Mencius (among other 
intellectuals of his time) refused to serve any king in any other role or to be 
“bought” by any of them despite the fact that he was made minister at one 
court for a few years. Instead, he remained an independent teacher who 
taught many students and tutored kings and nobles. Moreover, Mencius 
was exemplary in his insistence on being an independent thinker and voice 
(not dissimilar to Socrates in this regard). When kings and dukes sought his 
tutoring, he confronted them critically, urging them to examine their own 
conduct in order to return to ren toward their people. Te opening encoun-
ter of Mencius shows a vivid example:
Mencius went to see King Hui of Liang. “Sir,” said the King, “you have 
come all this distance, thinking nothing of a thousand li.63 You must 
surely have some way of pro&ting my state?”
“Your majesty,” answered Mencius, “what is the point of mention-
ing the word ‘pro&t?’ All that matters is that there should be ren and 
rightness.”64
Mencius moved on to reason with the king that if pro&t is the governing 
principle in the kingdom, then his ministers will seek to pro&t themselves, 
and those at lower ranks will do the same for their own self-interest; soon 
the whole kingdom will see everyone looking a(er himself. Ten who looks 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
46
a(er the sick, the poor, and the needy who cannot look a(er themselves? 
Terefore, a king should not set pro&ting himself as a priority, but rather 
providing care and ren to his people.
Tis kind of upholding the moral principle by a single individual, cou-
rageous against the abuse of political power and insisting on reforming the 
ruler to seek ren, is the ultimate task for a Confucian learner, known as 
taking the world upon oneself. Mencius was the &rst to articulate this idea 
as “taking on the weight of the world.”65 “Weight” here is one’s irrevocable 
responsibility. De Bary explains:
Tis is in accord with voluntarism in the moral life and of action that is in 
keeping with “learning for one’s self – that is, with the idea that one must 
take full responsibility for one’s own actions. . . . In Neo-Confucianism 
this is closely associated with the conception of the moral hero. . . . In 
turn the idea of taking upon oneself responsibility for the Way, or accept-
ing the duty to uphold it, is predicated on [Zhu Xi’s] view of the individ-
ual as a self-determining moral agent.”66
In the Great Learning, Zhu Xi expanded the Confucian learning path as 
starting from the Cheng Brothers’ doctrine on grasping the heavenly prin-
ciple – that is, investigating things (格物) and extending knowledge (致知). 
He clari&ed this path to move further to being sincere (誠意) and rectifying 
the mind (正心) in order to cultivate self (修身), regulate family (齊家), 
order the state (治國), and ultimately bring peace to the world (平天下). 
Taking the world upon oneself is reﬂected in the last two steps. Tis refor-
mulated path has come down to the Chinese as the process of reaching the 
sagehood. As pointed out in the previous section, sagehood is not preserved 
for the privileged elite, but is available to every learner as the ideal and ulti-
mate self. In Zhu Xi’s words, “all men should take responsibility themselves 
for becoming a sage or worthy. Many men think becoming a sage or a wor-
thy is too lo(y a goal and regard themselves as unworthy of it. Terefore, 
they make no eﬀort to advance toward it. . . . Yet, the natural endowment is 
the same in all human beings . . . how can one not take responsibility oneself 
for becoming a sage?”6:
It is thus clear that learning in the Confucian way is not just for per-
sonal ful&llment, self-actualization, or personal gain in a practical sense; 
rather – and more importantly – it moves from an individual starting 
point and expands gradually to the large spheres of human life as a whole. 
One begins with a quest for understanding things in the world (note this 
understanding focuses on the social, not the physical, world). Ten one 
sets one’s heart and mind on the path of lifelong self-cultivation. When 
one achieves maturity, one has the moral strength and practical skill to 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
4:
manage one’s family. With the family regulated, one is suited to assume 
greater responsibility in the community, presumably because one has won 
trust and respect of the people. If one can lead the community (locally or 
at higher levels) well, one is &t to lead the world. Tus, one’s individual self-
perfection is not individualistic but has a strong social component from 
the very beginning.
Tis ideal of learning may appear unrealistic. Yet, it has remained a high 
ideal to date. Against prevailing corruption and decline in any given his-
torical era, the Confucian learning tradition has (and here I paraphrase de 
Bary’s remarks originally on Neo-Confucians because I believe that they 
apply to the whole Confucian learning tradition):
upheld a lo(y conception of the dignity, integrity, and independence 
of the individual learner. It has a high estimate of the moral and spiri-
tual resources of humans, and while its celebration of the heroic virtues 
may seem hopelessly idealistic to modern minds, it aims . . . at the moral 
nobility of humans, judged on the basis of individual worth [cultivation] 
rather than special rank or social status.6;
One historical reason that the Neo-Confucians felt strongly about this 
path toward sagehood (rather than personal achievement of junzi per se) 
was that almost all of them were court oﬃcials. Tey were called scholar-
oﬃcials, literally scholars-turned-into-oﬃcials – a uniquely Confucian elite 
that served the dynastic courts.
Given the learning aspiration to sagehood, how to ensure that the highly 
self-cultivated and knowledgeable individuals were able to enter the court 
government became a serious concern, not only for those who took the 
world upon themselves, but also for the rulers themselves. Starting in the 
Han Dynasty (!06 BCE–!!0 CE), such individuals were selected based on 
local recommendations for the court. Tis system was called meritorious 
service. In the seventh century, this practice was re&ned and &nally insti-
tutionalized as the Civil Service Examination system. Young boys from all 
backgrounds, not nobility alone, were encouraged to begin learning early 
on and to persist through disciplined studies. All of them were allowed to 
take the examinations on their understanding of Confucian texts, their lit-
erary skills, and their ideas of governance. Te successful ones advanced to 
higher levels and eventually were selected as scholar-oﬃcials who assumed 
leadership positions at the court. At least in principle, a person could make 
his way from the humblest background to the highest ministerial oﬃce in 
the land, and the motivational impact for individual learners could not be 
underestimated. Tis system lasted for more than thirteen centuries until 
its abolishment in early twentieth century.69
Cultural Foundations of Learning
4;
Tis unprecedented coalescence of moral achievement, academic learn-
ing, political power, social status, and economic gain led to the suprem-
acy of learning in Chinese culture. Such learning has become cemented as 
an unquestionable and nonnegotiable value. Although many scholars were 
more motivated by material rewards, they nevertheless had to go through 
the ordeal of the same learning process. Willingness to endure this tre-
mendous process, regardless of their original goals, was already testimony 
to personal strength and commitment, which was reason for admiration. 
Tose who could advance all the way to the sage level (great leaders) were 
held in awe, and those who tried their best but did not advance far were still 
appreciated for their eﬀort. Tus, for Chinese people as a whole, learning 
to self-cultivate and learning to receive everything else good in life joined 
forces and passed down through history as one and the same path. As 
empirical research shows, this way of viewing and engaging in learning has 
not changed much since then, despite dramatic political, social, and eco-
nomic changes in recent times.
What about Chinese students learning in the modern educational cur-
riculum, particularly science? Interestingly, the very acceptance of “taking 
the world upon oneself” as a moral duty for Chinese learners can be said 
to underlie the massive learning from the West that the Chinese (and other 
East Asians) have been undertaking for more than a century. As noted in 
the Introduction to this volume, during the mid-nineteenth century, China 
encountered the surging powers from the West. Te Opium War (1;39–
1;4!), and Sino-Japanese War (1;94–1;95), the Boxer Rebellion (1;9;–1901), 
and other confrontations forced the last dynasty to open its door and led to 
the eventual demise of the dynastic system in 1911. Tese historical events 
also led many Chinese intellectuals to blame Confucian learning as the 
cause of their culture’s decline, because the Chinese lacked Western learn-
ing. Many intellectuals and students regarded themselves as the agents of 
change – that is, taking their world upon themselves – and went to Europe 
and the United States (as well as Japan for learning how it carried out its 
political reform and achieved industrial advancement a step ahead) to learn 
science and democratic thought. Many founding leaders of the two major 
political parties at that time in China – the Nationalist Party (國民黨) and 
the Communist Party (共產黨) – were students returning from the West 
and Japan. Te motto held by those studying abroad was “saving our nation 
and our people” (救國救民). Many other students sought to study science 
in the West, among them, notably, future Nobel Prize winners in physics 
C. N. Yang, T. D. Lee, and C. C. Ting. Educational reform took place under 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
49
the Nationalist government from 1911 to 1945. As a result, the Chinese edu-
cation system adopted the U.S. system, and the curriculum from elementary 
school to higher education has kept up to date with Western mathematics 
and science as the core, in addition to traditional subjects of Chinese and 
Chinese history.:0 In sum, although the learning content has been broad-
ened and the Western-style schooling established, the value of learning and 
the ways learners engaged in this process still remained quintessentially 
Confucian, as will be seen in the empirical research in later chapters.
Learning Virtues
Te third characteristic of the Confucian learning tradition is the notion 
of learning virtues, which is personal agency for Confucian learners. Most 
Confucian writings discuss the core set of learning virtues that any learner 
has to develop and to exercise in their learning. Tus far I have identi&ed 
seven core learning virtues: sincerity (誠心), diligence (勤奮), endurance 
of hardship (刻苦), perseverance (恆心), concentration (政心), respect for 
teachers (華長), and humility (成甘). Tese are called virtues for two rea-
sons. First, they have long been part of Chinese moral discourse. As such, 
they denote personal qualities and dispositions that are regarded as highly 
positive and desirable for any learner. Second, parents, teachers, and society 
at large make concerted eﬀorts to foster these learning virtues in children; 
therefore, they are an integral part of Chinese/East Asian education.
As already alluded to previously, sincerity (chengxin) is a key virtue for 
Confucian learning. It stresses the self-chosen nature of a person’s decision 
to pursue ren or even sagehood. It is the honest and authentic commitment 
that the person makes to him- or herself as the target of learning. An exam-
ple can illustrate the meaning of sincerity for learning. Te Cheng Brothers 
in the Song period had a student who traveled all the way from the south 
to study with them. On a cold winter day, this student went with a friend 
to Cheng Hao’s place. Upon arrival, he realized that his teacher was nap-
ping. He decided to wait outside. It began snowing. His friend could not 
endure the cold any longer and pleaded with him to awaken the teacher. 
But the student insisted on waiting. When the teacher woke up, he saw the 
two men covered in snow. Cheng Hao was deeply moved by the sincerity 
of these students.:1 Tis story has passed down as the epitome of sincerity 
(as well as respect for teacher, discussed in more detail later). Sincerity is 
regarded as the starting virtue for Confucian learning and prevails through 
the process.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
50
Te second virtue, diligence (qinfen), urges the learner, a(er a sincere 
commitment has been made, to come to a course of action so that his or 
her commitment will be followed through. Tis course of action requires 
that one exerts oneself and resists any temptation to stray from the path or 
simply to give up in the face of obstacles. Diligence, thus, is the virtue that 
underlies frequent, constant, studious behavior. It emphasizes much time 
spent on learning. Diligence is also believed to increase familiarity, which 
in turn opens opportunities for mastery.
Te third virtue, endurance of hardship (keku), focuses on overcoming 
diﬃculties one is bound to encounter in learning. Diﬃculties in the Chinese 
context mostly mean lack of resources for learning (e.g., poverty) and lack 
of time for studying because one needs to make a living, usually via harsh 
physical labor. A learner may also face intellectual diﬃculties such as not 
understanding concepts or lacking natural ability. However, no diﬃculty, 
irrespective of type and intensity, is reason for giving up. Instead, one needs 
to develop the virtue of keku, where the learner acknowledges diﬃculties as 
an inherent part of learning and must &nd ways to overcome these hard-
ships. Tere are many models of keku from real learners in history that are 
still widely read to and by schoolchildren. One of them describes Kuang 
Heng, a great writer and prime minister of the Han Dynasty, whose child-
hood was very poor. His family could not even aﬀord light at night. To 
study, he chiseled a hole in the wall to read. His story is the well-known say-
ing “chiseling a hole in the wall to borrow the neighbor’s light” (恥苦孟子), 
which has inspired later learners.:! Not only do many Confucian learners 
not fear hardship, but they actually take pride in meeting the ordeal, thereby 
displaying their personal strength.
Whereas keku is the virtue in the face of diﬃculties, perseverance 
(hengxin), the fourth virtue, concerns the lasting strength for learning from 
the beginning to the very end. Two key notions are stressed. First is the belief 
that learning is a long and gradual process; no sudden insight or shortcut 
can replace this accumulative process. One’s willingness to follow through 
is already testimony to one’s attempts to achieve the virtue. Second, the path 
is full of obstacles and distractions, which demands that one hold fast to the 
commitment. Te following exchange illustrates how a Confucian learner 
struggles with perseverance: “Ranyou, a student of Confucius, complained 
that it is not that he did not like Confucius teaching about becoming ren, 
but that he did not have enough strength to follow through with this pro-
cess. Confucius replied: ‘Tose who do not have the strength for it collapse 
somewhere along the way. But with you, you have drawn your own line 
before you start.’”:3
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
51
Ranyou’s problem was not his desire for ren, but his inability to follow 
through with action. Perseverance is the virtue that he lacked for he could 
not even take the &rst step, as Confucius pointed out. Te central meaning 
of the well-known phrase, “a thousand-mile journey starts from the &rst 
step,”:4 lies in the countless steps it takes to actually cover that “thousand 
miles.” Perseverance is the virtue of holding this long distance in view while 
taking the &rst, the second, and all the subsequent steps to reach the end of 
the journey.
Te &(h virtue, concentration (zhuanxin), is not exclusive to speci&c 
learning tasks, but is rather attributable to any learning. Concentration 
emphasizes studying with consistent and extended attention and focus. 
It also includes patience, carefulness, and thoroughness of learning. 
Concentration is believed to allow the full engagement of one’s mind and 
aﬀect in study. Meditative quiet sitting and retaining a tranquil mind are 
viewed as conducive for learning.
Respect for teachers (zunshi), the sixth virtue, is highly valued in the 
Confucian tradition. It is closely linked to sincerity and humility (see 
 discussion later). However, respect among East Asian learners has been 
taken as a sign of obedience, docility, and lack of critical thinking.:5 Te 
need for respect stems from two mutually constitutive sources. Te &rst 
is from the learner. As a learner, particularly a beginner, one has much to 
learn. Respect for the teacher makes the learner receptive to the teacher’s 
guidance. One needs to put one’s ego aside in order to make a sincere com-
mitment to learning. Respect acknowledges the student–teacher relation-
ship as follows: the teacher will do his best to instruct the learner, and the 
learner will do his or her best to learn from the teacher. Te pupil is not 
an equal peer to the teacher. Tis acceptance of the teacher is not regarded 
as something that causes the pupil low self-esteem. Te pupil’s submission 
to the teacher’s teaching is similar to Western people going to a religious 
minister for guidance. One does not approach such a moral guide with the 
idea of challenging the minister. If one does not like the minister, one sim-
ply goes to someone else. Likewise, Western children take sports or music 
instrument lessons from private teachers, and learners generally do not 
approach such teachers with arguments and challenges.
Te second source for respect is from the teacher. Teachers in this learn-
ing tradition are not just hired as employees to ful&ll a contractual obli-
gation, namely to teach objective/scienti&c knowledge. Teachers serve as 
moral guides, and for this purpose they themselves must embody moral 
self-cultivation. In other words, they are viewed as the immediate models 
for students to emulate. Te title teacher/mentor comes with the assump-
tion that the person has respectable moral and intellectual achievement 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
5!
to warrant respect from pupils. Pupils’ respect in turn functions to hold 
teachers accountable for their own continuous self-cultivation. Terefore, 
the high esteem granted to teachers does not come free. Moreover, in the 
Chinese (not just the Confucian) tradition, the teacher–student relation-
ship is likened to that of parent–child. Teachers do not just impart speci&c 
knowledge, but also must look a(er the students’ well-being as they do for 
their own children. Unless one is willing to accept the pupils’ expectations 
and the role of a teacher–parent, one does not take on the heavy responsi-
bility of teaching in the Confucian tradition.
Te &nal learning virtue is humility (qianxu), which is closely related but 
not limited to respect for teachers. Humility directs one to regard oneself as 
always in need of self-improvement no matter how much one has achieved 
in life. Humility is believed particularly important when one reaches high 
levels of achievement. In such situations, the natural human emotion is 
pride. In Confucian tradition, however, pride is viewed as an emotion that 
may lead one to develop an inﬂated sense of self, hence distracting one from 
self-improvement. Humility is likely to prevent one from developing related 
problems of arrogance or self-conceit. Confucius oﬀers the advice on how 
to remain humble: “[I]n strolling with only two people, I am bound to &nd 
a teacher. Indentifying their strengths, I follow them, and identifying their 
weaknesses, I correct them in myself.”:6 Humility enables one to want to 
learn from anyone. Confucius also exempli&ed humility himself when he 
acknowledged Xiang Tuo, a prodigious child at age seven, to be his teacher 
because this child purportedly raised questions to the already well-known 
Confucius, which he could not answer.:: Confucius’ humility against the 
background of his own monumental achievement sets a clear example for 
Chinese learners. Tus, humility is not regarded as a personal weakness but 
a personal strength because humble individuals are willing to self-examine, 
admit their inadequacies, and self-improve.
Action Is Better Tan Words
East Asian learners have been widely noted to be quiet in school and reluc-
tant to talk in any public forum. Tis observation applies to learners in 
East Asia as well as those in the West (foreign students and immigrants). 
However, labeling East Asian learners as unengaged, unwilling to partici-
pate, or simply withdrawn from the classroom is grossly mistaken. To put 
this matter in a sharper light, the best Chinese science and technology uni-
versity, Tsinghua, has the aphorism carved on campus in front of its assem-
bly hall – “Action Is Better Tan Words” (/勝於言or Facta non Verba in 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
53
Latin) – as their university’s proud spirit (仁君). Tus, what speaking means 
and how it operates in relation to action in Chinese culture (and other East 
Asian cultures) is an important, albeit hitherto poorly understood, phe-
nomenon (see a more detailed discussion on this topic in Chapter ;).
Confucius was suspicious and distrustful of glib-tongued talkers. 
Perhaps for that reason, he did not write anything about his own teaching. 
He says that “the ancients [great moral leaders] were loath to speak because 
they would be ashamed if they personally did not live up to what they said,” 
and “the exemplary person wants to be slow to speak yet quick to act.”:; Tis 
type of remarks occurs frequently in the Analects. To Confucian learners, 
their words and, for that matter, speaking in general are a very serious mat-
ter. Tere are several clear reasons. First, since the whole point of learning is 
to cultivate the self morally, the standard of personal progress is one’s moral 
conduct – that is, what one does rather than what one says. One’s trustwor-
thiness (xin, 典) weighs heavily on one’s daily living and conduct. Speaking 
commits one to the expected action by others, and diﬀerent types of speak-
ing cause diﬀerent liabilities for the person. Accordingly, speaking to mis-
lead and deceive deliberately is immoral; speaking without the intention to 
back oneself up with action is dishonesty; speaking to urge others but not 
the self to follow through is hypocrisy; speaking without understanding is 
ignorance; speaking without attending to the context is uncouthness; and 
speaking to praise oneself is to display self-weakness. None of these con-
sequences reﬂect well on the person. In sum, speaking in Chinese culture 
tends to lean toward moral intent and judgment in general. Tis is why 
exemplary persons are slow to speak but quick to act. When they speak, 
they do so with careful words and sincere intentions.:9
Second, speech is much easier than action; people are more prone to 
speaking than acting. One area for learners to improve on is to watch out 
for their tendency to say more than they can deliver. It is believed that one 
has much to gain by examining one’s own actions and interactions and by 
bettering oneself rather than merely speaking about one’s behavior.
Tird, this learning tradition also emphasizes the great silent breadth 
and depth that is the realm of in&nite wisdom. Lao Tzu’s well-known say-
ing “those who understand are not talkers; talkers don’t understand”;0 is a 
clear expression of this belief. Lao Tzu and Confucius agree on this point 
about human wisdom being much greater than articulated words. As such, 
Chinese teachers, be they religious teachers, martial arts masters, cra(s-
men, or Confucian tutors, tend to speak little or speak just enough, but 
not exhaustively, to leave room for learners to ruminate, digest, and con-
template. Such a way of speaking and instructing is regarded as conducive 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
54
to the learners’ getting it for themselves (自得). It is rare that the learner 
and the teacher engage in immediate and lavish verbal exchange. Patience, 
a virtue related to concentration, is prized in this learning style, whereas 
impatience is discouraged.
As discussed at the end of the four Western themes, I also performed 
a Google search for the mottos of iconic Chinese universities in China, 
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore. Te results revealed sharply contras-
tive meanings (to those of the Western universities): Tsinghua University’s 
自士聖賢,之德得物 (strengthen self ceaselessly and cultivate virtue to 
nurture the world – taken from the Book of Change), Beijing University’s 
勤奮,程颢,共颐,患難 (diligence, rigor, truthfulness, and creativity – 
notice the placement of diligence); Fudan University’s 理學格物致,知窮
格朱熹 (learn broadly and focus on your purpose, question earnestly and 
reﬂect closely – taken verbatim from the Analects), Nanjing University’s 
誠大中庸,論學禮/ (be sincere and hold high aspirations, learn diligently 
and practice earnestly – taken from the Book of Rites), Jinan University’s 
三典物經 (utmost dedication, trust, earnestness, and respect), Wuhan 
University’s 自語,讀義,共書,王難 (strengthen yourself, carry for-
ward your resolution, seek truth, and create anew), Xiamen University’s 
自語聖賢, 阳明良善 (strengthen self ceaselessly and strive for the high-
est good), National University of Taiwan’s 禮合,論學,愛國,愛一 (culti-
vate virtue, advance intellect; love one’s country, love one’s people), Hong 
Kong University’s 明德格物 (Sapietia et virtus in Latin, cultivate virtue and 
investigate things – taken verbatim from the Great Learning), Hong Kong 
Chinese University’s 理誠意禮 (learn broadly of culture and discipline 
learning with propriety), and National University of Singapore’s per ardua 
ad alta in Latin (through hard work, great things are achieved).
Most of these words, as hinted, were taken either directly or condensed 
from Confucian texts, and they unambiguously and unanimously empha-
size the cultivation of one’s morals and one’s self, which must precede 
inquiry into the world. Even when truth or fact seeking and creativity are 
mentioned, it is o(en the case that they are placed a(er the Confucian learn-
ing purposes and processes are laid down. It is also important to note that 
the idea of university was not a concept of Chinese learning. Most Chinese 
universities were founded and modeled a(er Western universities in the 
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, when China was undergo-
ing dramatic political, social, and economic changes. Even so, Confucian 
learning purposes and processes assumed the &rst and foremost impor-
tance. Again, these mottos enjoy the enduring impact similar to those from 
Western universities. Tey, too, convey the central educational missions 
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
55
of their respective universities to the students, faculty, administrators, and 
staﬀ. Teir contemporary relevance is again evident by the many links to 
lively discussions in the Google search by each university’s community.
Te Chinese Learner
Te foregoing four sections on the Confucian learning tradition oﬀer 
explicit expectations and characteristics of their learners. Instead of reiter-
ating them here, I provide a summary note: Te learner starts learning liter-
acy and numeracy and other basics of the world including Western subjects 
of modern schooling. Upon reaching the age of maturity (which can vary 
from individual to individual), the learner ideally makes a commitment to 
learning. Under the guidance of family and teachers, the learner gradually 
understands the need and possibility to become ren (the modern term for 
this process is zuoren, 正一, to learn how to be a person). Tis path is both 
individual and social in nature. As such, one needs to practice in the family 
what one is learning and to increase one’s learning through practice. When 
this task has been achieved, one aspires to take one’s community, coun-
try, and &nally the world upon oneself. Tis cultural mandate translates 
into today’s parlance as contributing to society (心齊廉家). From the very 
beginning, the learner is socialized to develop the seven learning virtues. 
Once developed, they last for a lifetime. Figure !.! shows a diagram of the 
Chinese learner.
Confucius, as an exemplary teacher for all ages, reﬂected on his own 
learning path toward the end of his life: “From &(een, my heart-and-mind 
was set upon learning; from thirty I took my stance; from forty I was no 
longer doubtful; from &(y I realized the propensities of [heaven]; from 
sixty my ear was attuned; from seventy I could give my heart-and mind free 
rein without overstepping the boundaries.”;1 Confucius took ten or &(een 
years to reach each milestone of self-transformation. He made his sincere 
commitment to learning at &(een, rather late from today’s perspective. At 
thirty, he established himself with recognizable achievement; at forty, he 
would not doubt the path; at &(y, he was in harmony with the world; at 
sixty, he could hear all people empathetically; and at seventy he no longer 
agonized about how to act in any situation.
Indeed, Confucius’ teaching mirrors his own life of learning, which 
projects a profound creative, aesthetic, and ethical quality. He did not need 
to write books; his whole life, as recorded by his students, was and still 
remains an open book of inexhaustible inspiration for later generations to 
read, understand, and emulate.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
56
Chinese Learner
Rectify heart/mind
Bring peace to the world
Sincerity
Order the state
Extend knowledge
Regulate family
Investigate things
Cultivate self
Rewards for achievement
Learning virtues for all levels/processes
Learner
?/gu-e !.!. Chinese Learner: Te four inner circles have increasing thick lines, 
representing the &rst four learning levels. Te ﬁfh circle has the thickest line, indi-
cating the most important level of self-cultivation as envisioned by Confucius. Te 
circles smaller than the &(h circle do not develop further without self-cultivation, 
and the larger circles are also not achievable without self-cultivation. Te remain-
ing three circles have thinner (than the &(h) but still increasingly thicker lines, 
showing the expansion of one’s learning from oneself to one’s family, community, 
and the whole world.
Te upward arrow in the center represents the self-perfection process in which 
the learner engages on the path to becoming a junzi and sage, the ideal image of 
humanity, as held and practiced by Confucians. Te upward direction indicates the 
open-ended and lifelong as well as emotionally upli(ing and spiritually transcen-
dent nature of this learning process.
Te downward arrows correspond to each level of learning as personal growth in 
both height and breadth. One’s achievement is both individual and social/moral.
Te arrows moving away from the learner indicate learning virtues applied to all 
levels and processes.
Te arrows moving toward the learner indicate increasing rewards to the learner 
as he or he achieves greater levels of learning.
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
5:
.o,es
 1. See Hsu, F. L. K. (19;1). Americans and Chinese: Passage to diﬀerence (3rd 
ed.). Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press; Ivanhoe, P. J. (!000). Confucian 
moral self cultivation (!nd ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett; Rosemont, H. Jr. 
(199!). Rights-bearing individuals and role-bearing persons. In M. I. Bockover 
(Ed.), Rules, rituals, and responsibility: Essays dedicated to Herbert Fingarette 
(pp. :1–101). La Salle, IL: Open Court; Shun, K.-L., & Wong, D. B. (!004). 
Confucian ethics. New York: Cambridge University Press; and Yang, K. S. (Ed.). 
(19;;). 史國一治心理學 [Chinese people’s psychology]. Taipei, Taiwan: Gwei 
Gwan Tu Shu for samples of thoughtful discussions of diﬀerences in general 
philosophies and ways of life.
 !. Li, Y.-T, & Yan, B.-H. (!003). 國平民先黨產救孟 [Liang Shuming on Confucius 
and Mencius]. Guilin, China: Guangxi Normal University Press.
 3. For discussing Western intellectual tradition, I rely mostly on Russell, B. (19:5). 
A history of western philosophy and its connection with political and social 
circumstances from the earliest times to the present day. New York: Simon & 
Schuster.
 4. See Moser, P. K., & Nat, A. V. (!00!). Human knowledge: Classical and contem-
porary approaches. New York: Oxford University Press; Williams, M. (!001). 
Problems of knowledge: A critical introduction to epistemology. New York: 
Oxford University Press for general philosophical discussion on epistemology.
 5. See Ames, R. T., & Rosemont, H. Jr. (1999). .e Analects of Confucius: A philo-
sophical translation. New York: Ballantine for a good discussion on essentialism 
in Western thought.
 6. All sources and quotes are from the reference in note 3 to this chapter.
 :. See note 3 to this chapter, p. :!.
 ;. See note 3 to this chapter, p. :3.
 9. Holton, G. (19:3). .ematic origins of scientiﬁc thought. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press; and Westfall, R. (19:1). .e construction of modern 
science: Mechanisms and mechanics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 10. See note 3 to this chapter, p. !9.
 11. See note 3 to this chapter, pp. 33–34.
 1!. See note 3 to this chapter, p. 3:.
 13. Plato (1991). .e republic of Plato (!nd ed.). (A. Bloom, Trans.). New York: Basic 
Books, p. !06.
 14. Kant, I. (1:;:/1999). Critique of pure reason. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
 15. Kant’s categories of a priori knowledge and “categorical imperative.”
 16. See Popper, K. (19:!/19;9). Objective knowledge: An evolutionary approach. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press for an example.
 1:. Socrates did not write anything but has come to be known through his student 
Plato’s accounts of his life and thought. Tus, he is commonly referred to as the 
Platonic Socrates as opposed to another version of Socrates that was portrayed 
by another, but intellectually much inferior, contemporary, Xenophon. I use the 
short name Socrates as the Platonic Socrates for convenience.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
5;
 1;. Hecht, J. M. (!003). Doubt, a history: .e great doubters and their legacy of 
innovation from Socrates and Jesus to .omas Jeﬀerson and Emily Dickinson. 
New York: HarperCollins, p. !0, italics in the original.
 19. See Rosch, E. (19:;). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd 
(Eds.), Cognition and categorization (pp. !:–4;). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum for a 
discussion on human hierarchical categorization of natural objects. See Anglin, 
J. M. (19::). Word, object, and conceptual development. New York: Norton; and 
Luria, A. R. (19;1). Language and cognition. New York: Wiley for research on 
how children have diﬀerent conceptual understanding of objects and how they 
acquire the formal structure of word meanings in their language to classify 
objects.
 !0. Descartes writes about “Cartesian doubt” in the two books: Descartes, R. 
(163:/!00:). Discourse on method. Miami, FL: BN Publishing, and Descartes, R. 
(164!/!00:). Meditations. Miami, FL: BN Publishing.
 !1. In modern views, a person in a vegetative state is biologically alive but uncon-
scious. He or she is certainly not self-aware. Self-awareness necessarily requires 
thinking of oneself. Terefore, the Cartesian cogito is remarkable in that it 
attaches to human metacognitive thinking, which is thought to be unique in 
humans and the bare-minimum requirement for us to sense our existence.
 !!. See Chomsky, N. (19:!). Language and mind. San Diego, CA: Harcourt; and 
Pinker, S. (1994). .e language instinct. New York: Harper for details of how 
human innate language works.
 !3. See Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1969). .e psychology of the child (H. Weaver, 
Trans.). New York: Basic Books for sample research on human infants’ cogni-
tive capacity; second reference in note 16 to Chapter 1 for infants’ social engage-
ment with caregivers; and Eimas, P. D. (19;5). Te perception of speech in early 
infancy. Scientiﬁc American, 252(1), 66–:! for infants’ phoneme detection.
 !4. St. Augustine (39:/199;). St. Augustine confessions (H. Chadwick, Trans.). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
 !5. Locke, J. (1690/!00;). An essay concerning human understanding. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
 !6. Berkeley, G. (1:13/!006). George Berkeley: .ree dialogues between Hylas and 
Philonous. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
 !:. Hume, D. (1:40/!00;). A treatise of human nature. Sioux Falls, SD: NuVision.
 !;. See Gardner, H. (19;3). Frames of mind. New York: Basic Books; and 
Sternberg, R. J. (19;5). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of human intelligence. 
New York: Cambridge University Press for an overview of research on human 
intelligence.
 !9. See Nisbett, R. E. (!003). .e geography of thought. New York: Simon & Schuster 
for research on these diﬀerences between Western and East Asian thinking; 
Rogoﬀ, B. (!003). .e cultural nature of human development. New York: Oxford 
University Press for diﬀerences in perceptions of time and age across cultures; 
Jameson, K. A. (!005). Te role of culture in color naming research. Cross-
Cultural Research: .e Journal of Comparative Social Science, 39(1), ;;–106 for 
cultural diﬀerences in color perception; and Herlitz, A., & Rehnman, J. (!00;). 
Sex diﬀerences in episodic memory. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
17(1), 5!–56 for gender diﬀerence in facial processing.
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
59
 30. Plato (19;1). Five dialogues (G. M. A. Gruber, Trans.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 
p. 41.
 31. See note 30 to this chapter, pp. 9–11.
 3!. Rousseau, J. J. (1:6!/19:9). Emil, or on education (A. Bloom, Trans.). New York: 
Basic Books.
 33. Locke, J. (1693/!00:). Some thoughts concerning education. Sioux Falls, SD: 
NuVision.
 34. Kant, I. (1;03/1960). Kant on education. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press.
 35. Modern educational psychology and child development are the only two 
and closely related areas of empirical research that focus on the learner and 
the learning process itself. Te review of these two areas will be dealt with in 
Chapters 3, 4, and 5.
 36. Although many early educational philosophers advocated for pupils’ moral 
and character development through formal education, the intellectual and aca-
demic types of development dominate in formal education in today’s Western 
world. Moral education is le( by and large to family and religion.
 3:. In his Life of Lycurgus, Plutarch eulogized the Spartan system, including how 
children were taught and strictly disciplined. According to Russell, this book 
strongly inﬂuenced Rousseau, Tomas Arnold, and English public school. Te 
idea that children need to be subjected to strong discipline has never disap-
peared in childrearing and education practices. Much of religiously endorsed 
schooling still holds it important to discipline children, although perhaps not 
so strictly as before (see a good discussion in Jackson, P. W., Boostrom, R. E., & 
Hansen, D. T. [1993]. .e moral life of schools. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass).
 3;. Sizer, T. R. (1996). Horace’s hope: What works for the American high school. 
Boston, MA: Houghton MiAin.
 39. See Olson, D., & Katz, S. (!001). Te fourth folk pedagogy. In B. Torﬀ and R. S. 
Sternberg (Eds.), Understanding and teaching the intuitive mind (pp. !43–!63). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum for an informative discussion of how great intellectuals, 
scientists, and artists become canonized and hence perpetuated as the imper-
sonal body of knowledge that is to be transmitted to young generations through 
formal education.
 40. See de Bary, W. T. (1991). Learning for one’s self. New York: Columbia University 
Press for a comprehensive treatment of the Confucian learning inﬂuence on 
Japan and Korea, and reference in note 5 to this chapter for Confucian inﬂu-
ence on Vietnam. Te fact that this learning tradition is named a(er his profes-
sion, Rujia, 勤家 (not the Latinized name Confucius. During Confucius’ time, 
the term ru was used to refer to priests in charge of religious ceremonies for 
the courts as well as teachers. Because Confucius did such work, his school of 
thought carries the term ru) signi&es the important role that Confucius played.
 41. Quoted by Shuming Liang, p. !03 in reference in note ! to this chapter.
 4!. Despite all the compilations of scriptures and texts, Confucius never wrote 
anything on his own teaching (much like Socrates). Te Analects of Confucius, 
which contains fragmented statements and questions and responses between 
him and his students, is the primary source from which we glimpse Confucius’ 
thinking and teaching. As many scholars throughout history have argued, some 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
60
of the content may have been modi&ed and added by his students. Nevertheless, 
the &rst ten chapters are believed to be Confucius’ own words. See Fingarett, H. 
(19:!). Confucius: .e secular as sacred. New York: Harper & Row and reference 
in note 5 to this chapter for more discussion on the authenticity of the Analects.
 43. Although Confucianism became the predominant ideology for all dynastic 
ruling, Confucius’ own teaching did not focus on that. When he talked to his 
pupils about serving kings and dukes in their courts, it was not for career devel-
opment but to ensure humane ruling in government. See Li & Yan (!003) in 
note ! for more comprehensive discussions on these points by Shuming Liang.
 44. See note 5 to this chapter, p. 5.
 45. To be sure, at the time Confucius lived, the employer–employee relationship 
was the one between the king and the subject. He also referred to the father-son 
instead of parent–child relationship given the male-dominant orientation of 
society at that time. However, this historical condition is less important for our 
purpose of understanding Confucian teaching of the cardinal relationships as 
the base for human lives. Today, his teaching is understood as still relevant to 
the general parent–child and employer–employee relationships.
 46. See note 5, !.: to this chapter, p. ::.
 4:. Li, J., & Fischer, K. W. (!00:). Respect as a positive self-conscious emotion in 
European Americans and Chinese. In J. L. Tracy, R. W. Robins, & J. P. Tangney 
(Eds.), .e self-conscious emotions: .eory and research (pp. !!4–!4!). New 
York: Guilford. It is important to point out that even though the roles of hus-
band and wife were delineated at the time, Confucius did not state that women 
were lower than men in their capacity and moral worth. Gender discrimina-
tion against women was more a result of later historical development. During 
Confucius’ time, another great sage, Lao Tzu, argued that femininity was an 
equal (and o(en neglected) force in the universe.
 4;. Tese four moral principles are carved on the Chinatown gate in Boston, MA. 
Tey serve as a monument and reminder of the core Confucian values to 
Chinese even in a culture vastly diﬀerent from their own. Te term lian (廉) 
was &rst used not by Confucius himself but by Guanzhong (ca. :!3/:16–645 
BCE), a highly esteemed prime minister of State Qi. Confucius used the term 
shenzheng (身正) to discuss this essential virtue in any government oﬃcial. 
Lian is the present-day term for integrity.
 49. See note 5 to this chapter, p. 51.
 50. Mencius (19:0). Mencius (D. C. Lao, Trans.). Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 
p. 10:.
 51. See Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (!00:). Te self in self-conscious emotions: 
A cognitive appraisal approach. In J. L. Tracy, R. W., Robins, & J. P. Tangney 
(Eds.), .e self-conscious emotions: .eory and research (pp. 3–!0). New York: 
Guilford for chapters on the negativity of shame in the West. See Li, J., Wang, 
L. -Q., & Fischer, K. W. (!004). Te organization of Chinese shame concepts. 
Cognition and Emotion, 18(6), :6:–:9: for research on the meaning of shame 
in Chinese, and see Fung, H. (1999). Becoming a moral child: Te socialization 
of shame among young Chinese children. Ethos, 27, 1;0–!09 for how parents 
socialize children with a sense of shame in Taiwan.
 5!. See Tu, W. M. (19:9). Humanity and self-cultivation: Essays in Confucian thought. 
Berkeley, CA: Asian Humanities Press for discussions of ren.
Learning to Master the Universe and the Self
61
 53. See note 40 to this chapter, p. 34!.
 54. See Rosemont, Jr., H. (!003). Is there a universal path of spiritual progress in the 
texts of early Confucianism? In W. M. Tu & M. E. Tucker (Eds.), Confucian spir-
ituality, vol. 1 (pp. 1;3–196). New York: Crossroad for an insightful discussion of 
various kinds of persons talked about by Confucius.
 55. See note 54 to this chapter, p. 190.
 56. See note 54 to this chapter, p. 191.
 5:. See note 50 in D. C. Lau for Lau’s discussion of Mencius’s contribution to 
Confucianism in the introduction to his translation of Mencius. Also see 
Wilson, J. Q. (1993). .e moral sense. New York: Simon & Schuster for a review 
of research on human moral sense. Tere is strong evidence that very young 
infants are able to display empathy toward other infants with distress. Tis sup-
ports the Mencian argument for innate human moral sensibilities.
 5;. See note 50 to this chapter, pp. ;!–;3.
 59. See note 50 to this chapter, p. 130. Note that the Chinese term junzi is not gen-
dered, although at that time only men could be educated.
 60. Te Neo-Confucian movement was in part a response to the prevailing 
Buddhism and Taoism at that time. Whereas Buddhism advocated eradicating 
human desires altogether (奮刻) to achieve enlightenment, Taoism promoted 
harmony with nature by avoiding human strife and arduous eﬀort for achieve-
ment (奮為). Neither doctrine appealed to the Confucians because Confucian 
teaching encouraged individuals to regulate family, serve the community, and 
take greater social and moral responsibility for one’s society. However, Neo-
Confucians incorporated some elements to oﬀer a compromise position (e.g., 
eliminating human desires in order to uphold the heavenly principle and quiet 
sitting to study taken from Buddhism and arguing that the enduring human 
values are consistent with the Taoist tenet of the Supreme Ultimate [恆專] – as 
a normative principle and at the same time the Non&nite [奮專] as an open-
ended and ﬂexible principle to guide human lives). See reference in note 40 of 
de Bary for more discussions on the integration of the three diﬀerent schools 
of thought.
 61. Te Four Books along with the other Five Scriptures (Book of Changes, Book of 
History, Book of Songs, Book of Rites, and the Spring and Autumn Annals) were 
the core curriculum of any Confucian student and were the content of the Civil 
Service Examinations. Tese books continued to be required of and read by 
students even a(er the abolishment of the Civil Service Examination system in 
1905. When the Communists took power in 1949, these books were no longer 
part of the school curriculum. But they continued to be taught to and read by 
students in Taiwan. Interestingly, there has been a new movement to teach chil-
dren Confucian values since the 1990s in Taiwan, which is now rapidly expand-
ing to Mainland China and other Chinese regions (see a review of this topic in 
the reference in note 9 Chapter 1).
 6!. See note 40 to this chapter for a comprehensive account of the Cheng-Zhu 
school and Yang Ming school and their respective inﬂuences. Also see Lee, 
T. H. C. (1999). Education in Traditional China: A History. Boston, MA: Brill 
Academic for a detailed historical account.
 63. A li is a little more than 400 meters.
 64. See note 50 to this chapter, p. 50.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
6!
 65. See note 40 to this chapter, p. !9. Also see Yu, Y-.S. (!003). 士尊史國誠師 
[Intellectuals and Chinese culture]. Shanghai: Shanghai People’s Press for a his-
torical account of the role of Confucian intellectuals.
 66. See note 65 to this chapter.
 6:. See note 40 to this chapter, p. 30.
 6;. See note 40 to this chapter, p. 3:.
 69. See Lee, W. O. (1996). Te cultural context for Chinese learners: Conceptions 
of learning in the Confucian tradition. In D. A. Watkins & J. B. Biggs (Eds.), 
.e Chinese learner (pp. 45–6:). Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research 
Centre for a discussion on meritorious service; and Lee, T. H. C. (19;5). 
Government education and examinations in Sung China, 9:;–1278. Hong 
Kong: Chinese University Press for a historical account of the Civil Service 
Examination system.
 :0. See Su, Y.-F., & Wu, J.-Y. (!005). 史國難謙虛治鑿壁尊偷光 (18:;–1928) [Te 
emergence and development of new Chinese education (1;60–19!;)]. Taipei, 
Taiwan: Wunan Publishing; and Wu, J.-Y. (1990). 史校民國謙虛風強不息厚 
(國民風載嚴謹 1925–194;) [History of the development of education policy 
during 19!5–1940 under the China’s Nationalist government]. Taipei, Taiwan: 
Wunan Publishing for a thorough treatment on the modern history of Chinese 
education.
 :1. Wang, T., et al. (19;5). 史國偷語展求實 [Dictionary of Chinese idioms]. 
Shanghai: Shanghai Dictionary Press, pp. 166–16:.
 :!. See note :1 to this chapter, p. 1;16.
 :3. See note 5 to this chapter, p. 106.
 :4. Lao Tzu (199!). .e Tao of the Tao Te Ching (M. LaFargue, Trans.). Albany: State 
University of New York Press, p. 156.
 :5. See Pratt, D. D., Kelly, M., & Wong, K. M. (1999). Chinese conceptions of 
“eﬀective teaching” in Hong Kong: Towards culturally sensitive evaluation of 
teaching. International Journal of Lifelong Learning, 18, !41–!5;; and Tweed, 
R. G., & Lehman, D. R. (!00!). Learning considered within a cultural con-
text: Confucian and Socratic approaches. American Psychologist, 57(!), ;9–99 
for general discussions on obedience and docility of East Asian students. See 
also Flowerdew, J., & Miller, L. (1995). On the notion of culture in L! lectures. 
TESOL Quarterly, 29(!), 345–3:3, and McGuire, J. (199:). English as a foreign 
language in China. Occasional Papers, 48. University of Southhampton: Centre 
for Language in Education for similar observations in Chinese students.
 :6. See note 5 to this chapter, p. 116.
 ::. Huang, D. Y., & Peng, H. J. (199!). 創新博 [Tree character classic]. Taipei, 
Taiwan: Ruisheng Book & Magazine Publishing House, p. 90.
 :;. See note 5 to this chapter, pp. 93–94.
 :9. See Chang, H. C. (199:). Language and words: Communication in the Analects 
of Confucius. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 1:, 10:–131 for a com-
prehensive discussion on Confucius’ treatment of speaking.
 ;0. See note :4 to this chapter, p. 66. Also in Japan, a talkative person, particularly 
a man, is regarded as unintelligent according to Doi, T. (19;1). .e anatomy of 
dependence [J. Bester, Trans.]. New York: Kodansha International.
 ;1. See note 5 to this chapter, pp. :6–::.
