!3
3
Time Past and Time Present
With the core values of each culture’s learning tradition having been out-
lined, I now turn to the central question of this book: Do these respective 
learning traditions still inﬂuence the present-day learners? In this chapter, I 
present empirical research that gives an aﬃrmative response to the question. 
Research for the past several decades documents speciﬁc ways the pres-
ent-day learners’ beliefs and actual learning processes reﬂect their respec-
tive cultural learning traditions. However, before I present that empirical 
research, it is necessary to address some important questions about current 
education practice in China (and by extension, in East Asia as a whole) that 
may lurk in the minds of readers.
&h()ge, &-../&-l-m (), /)&.e(se, &ompet/t/o)
No one disputes that times have changed and that ancient values have 
undergone signiﬁcant changes in much of the world. East Asia and the 
West are no exception. Yet, at least with regard to intellectual pursuit, 
the West has not undergone changes as radical as East Asia has, as noted 
in Chapter 1. In fact, there is little regarding approaches to learning that 
the West has adopted from other cultures. Admittedly, educational con-
tent in the West – that is, what children learn about – has opened up to 
knowledge of other cultures and ethnic groups. Clearly, the most notable 
changes the West has witnessed are the broadening of compulsory educa-
tion to all and the elevation of achievement standards for all.1 Yet, we do 
not have evidence that any Western country has put in the core of their 
curriculum to teach children, for example, how to study as a Confucian or 
a Buddhist learner does. By contrast, education in China (and East Asia in 
general) has been fundamentally altered as a result of Western inﬂuence, 
ranging from its system (i.e., at what age children attend school, move to 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!4
the next level, etc.) to the very curricular content.2 Tus, I focus more on 
the changes in China in this section.
Peculiarly, media and even some researchers have asserted that perhaps 
the present-day Chinese learners are no longer inﬂuenced by the Confucian 
learning tradition but have instead become more Westernized. I had a recent 
personal encounter that drives this perception home. I met a Mainland 
Chinese graduate student in sociology in Germany, who came to my research 
presentation on Chinese versus Western learning beliefs. During the break, 
we chatted. He asked me, “Do you really think that we have anything to do 
with Confucian values? I think that we are more Westernized.” I had a deja 
vu lapse. His question and remark were incredibly reminiscent of questions 
I asked during my undergraduate years. However, many Westerners with 
whom I have spoken view not only Mainland Chinese but all East Asians 
(including Asian immigrants with generations behind them in their host 
countries) as very di:erent. Quite a bit of cross-cultural research demon-
strates that Confucianism is largely responsible for that di:erence.
To be sure, educational curriculum, as noted previously, has changed 
in such a way that Western mathematics and science (and English at an 
increasing rate) have become the required core. Te case can be made 
that learning fundamentally di:erent subjects in school is bound to alter 
the learner’s approach to learning. A;er all, it is presumed that to succeed 
in learning math and science, learners must develop logical reasoning, 
causal inference, scientiﬁc methods, and objectivity in looking at the world. 
Furthermore, such learners need to adjust their purposes of learning as well. 
Tat Asian students have been documented to achieve well in these subjects 
adds more weight to the argument that East Asians must have changed or 
ought to have changed their approach to learning.
Moreover, the social conditions have changed dramatically, which 
increases demands on education. China has the largest population on earth, 
and since 19=!, under their compulsory education law, every child must 
receive nine years of education.3 Population growth and compulsory edu-
cation are similar in other Chinese and East Asian regions. Tese changes 
have resulted in a much greater need and pressure on the governments to 
educate people. Exacerbating this social burden is the fact that the world has 
been witnessing an explosion of knowledge, which also demands prolonged 
learning to ensure mastery. From the perspective of individual learners, 
competition for higher education, especially for the highly selective univer-
sities, is becoming more and more ﬁerce as both the population and knowl-
edge continue to grow. If desirable employment opportunities do not grow 
proportional to the highly educated workforce, the workforce may have to 
Time Past and Time Present
!5
retrain or upgrade skill sets. Tus, Chinese and other East Asian learners’ 
learning beliefs and achievement may well be a direct response to these 
social changes, having nothing to do with Confucian learning tradition.
Tese arguments are well taken. However, with regard to the conten-
tion about learning Western subjects, the fact remains that before enter-
ing formal schooling, children have lived some ﬁve-to-six years under the 
intimate care of their families – in the Asian case, frequently of not just 
parents but the grandparents and extended kin. Although nuclear families 
are becoming the norm, they still remain more or less a living arrange-
ment rather than a true nuclear structure as deﬁned in the West. It is still 
very common for grandparents and even relatives to co-parent children; 
this pattern applies, surprisingly, also to Chinese immigrants who live in 
the United States.4 According to developmental research, the ﬁrst few years 
are essential to children’s later development.5 Terefore, during these very 
important formative years, Chinese children, as children from any culture, 
develop many important culturally informed beliefs and behavioral ten-
dencies regarding learning,! and they come with these beliefs and behav-
ioral tendencies to the ﬁrst day of school. As alluded to in Chapter 2, the 
teacher–child relationship is modeled a;er the parent–child relationship in 
the Confucian tradition (more detailed empirical research on this topic will 
be discussed in later chapters). Tere is much more home-school coher-
ence than may be the case in an ethnically diverse culture.? Although chil-
dren begin learning math and science, sometimes even during preschool, 
the social environment in which learning takes place is still fundamentally 
Confucian. Terefore, it is quite likely that while children learn math and 
science as subjects, the way they engage in learning may be di:erent from 
their Western peers.=
With regard to social changes, Asia is not unique; most developed and 
developing nations also face similar educational challenges. However, 
nowhere is competition for education as intense as in East Asia. Pressure for 
children to achieve highly in school seems to be particularly pronounced. 
Again, this pattern also applies to East Asians living outside Asia in many 
societies where the mind, creativity, and intrinsic motivation are more prized 
than in East Asia. Moreover, although Western societies provide more edu-
cational opportunities and longer compulsory education than many Asian 
countries, competition for the best schools is just as ﬁerce among Asian 
immigrants.9 Becoming the best in education seems to be the guidepost for 
Asians regardless of where they live. When asked “as a parent, what expec-
tations do you have for your child’s future?” one parent responded, “Magnet 
High, Harvard, and Heaven!” (Magnet High is a pseudonym for one of the 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!!
most competitive public high schools in the United States.) Desiree Qin, the 
researcher, describes this kind of desire for their children to go to the very 
best schools and universities as very common among immigrant Chinese 
parents whether they are from well-to-do or humble backgrounds.10
At this juncture, it is also important to acknowledge that popular press 
has portrayed Asian students’ achievement as coming at a high price of 
their psychological well-being.11 While comparable data are diﬃcult to 
obtain from the Asian countries because of unclear reporting procedures 
and methods, available data do not support this view. A study compar-
ing Chinese, Japanese, and American high school students’ psychological 
adjustment in relation to parental and school pressure found that despite 
their reports of higher parental expectation and lower parental satisfac-
tion with their achievement, Japanese students indicated fewer, not more, 
adjustment problems than their American peers. Chinese students also 
reported less stress, academic anxiety, and aggressive feelings than the 
Americans, although they did reveal higher frequencies of depressive mood 
and somatic complaints. Moreover, high achievement was not correlated 
with these adjustment problems for Asian students, but it was for American 
high achievers. Another recent study from Korea shows that parental pres-
sure had positive, not negative, inﬂuence on adolescents’ e:ort and achieve-
ment motivation.12 Te most recent data on suicidal thoughts among youths 
with major depressive episode (MDE, a strong predictor of suicide) from 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services show a lower rate of 
MDE among Asian youth than European-American youth aged twelve to 
seventeen.13 Finally, nationally representative data on Asian Americans’ 
mental health indicate that as a whole, they su:er less, not more, men-
tal problems than European-Americans.14 If parental pressure for school 
achievement truly causes these problems (because most Asian parents 
exert such pressure), Asian-American population as a whole should have a 
higher proportion of mental problems. Te data, however, do not support 
this conclusion.
Recent research does indicate that Asian immigrant children in the 
United States display adjustment problems, particularly among adolescents. 
Tis issue merits our attention. However, academic pressure may be the easy 
scapegoat. If the Asian-American youth as a group do not show a higher 
rate of mental illness, and if some Asian immigrant children in the West 
show adjustment problems, then the immigrant context and the interactions 
between the home culture’s childrearing values and practice and those of 
the mainstream culture may need to be studied in order to explain the true 
causes. Unfortunately, little research exists in this area. A few pioneering 
Time Past and Time Present
!?
studies shed light on some key factors, such as cross-language use (parents 
talk in their native language, but children respond in English, which leads to 
the breakdown in parent–child communication), the gap between desired 
parental warmth and the actual received warmth, decreasing time together, 
parents not understanding children’s changed worldviews, and children not 
understanding parents’ perspectives from their native culture all predict 
adjustment problems. But pressure to achieve has yet to be shown to be a 
direct cause of Asian immigrant children’s mental health problems.15
eA(m/)(t/o) hell
Te most astonishing part of the current Asian education system is its 
infamous examination system. Tat East Asian education system is 
 examination-driven is no secret to the world. Any discussion of Chinese 
and Asian learning without acknowledging this condemned side is bound 
to face skepticism. Tis system has been accused of doing everything bad 
compared to the known good education practices from the West. Te sys-
tem, it is claimed, is notoriously teacher-centered and authoritarian, favors 
learning by rote, fosters extrinsic motivation, and stiﬂes creativity.
As such, this system has been, quite unsurprisingly, under ﬁerce crit-
icism for quite some time (in fact, for more than a century). To express 
the aversion toward this system, Ishisada used the phrase “examination 
hell.”1! Tis loathing is echoed not only by non-Chinese researchers and 
educators, but also by many East Asian researchers and educators them-
selves. Nevertheless, anyone with some degree of sanity must ask the obvi-
ous question of why this notorious system still remains, is even ﬂourishing 
today, and why Asians do not seem inclined to abandon it in spite of its hav-
ing received such condemnation for so long. To be sure, many attempts to 
change the system have been made across East Asia (e.g., Japan and Taiwan). 
Yet, the system is no more likely to disappear than it ever was. Even more 
bizarre is the fact that most education policy makers in these societies are 
familiar with the “better” practices in the West, and many of these leaders 
were themselves trained in Western educational ﬁelds.
Tis fact is unsettling and demands some explanation. To my knowl-
edge, no one has explained the legitimacy and vitality of this “examination 
hell” better than Samuel Peng.1? According to him, East Asian societies are 
“stuck” with the exam system because it is the only solution to a predica-
ment with which East Asian cultures are faced. As stated previously, the 
Confucian tradition regards respect for and honoring of one’s family as the 
most important moral foundation for oneself. At the same time, Chinese 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!=
people and societies uphold the moral principle also espoused by Confucius: 
equality of education for all regardless of their backgrounds (有教無類). 
However, those holding power over educational access (e.g., college admis-
sions oﬃcers) face a serious moral dilemma when their family members 
request favorable treatment (consider the case of a relative who just missed 
a few points on the college exam, which, in all likelihood, indicates only 
a trivial di:erence between students). If the request is denied, the person 
with institutional power violates the familial moral code; if the request is 
granted, the person violates public ethical standards. Alternative means of 
evaluating students, such as teacher recommendations and interviews, are 
all subject to the same dilemma. Tere is no other solution but to resort to 
the impartial test score. Te only person responsible for advancement in 
education then is the student him- or herself. Viewed from this perspective, 
the examination hell may not be as hellish as it ﬁrst seems.
Tis predicament would not exist in the ﬁrst place if Chinese/East Asians 
as a whole, regardless of their socioeconomic status, did not desire and actu-
ally study to advance in learning. Te real question here is why the Chinese/
East Asians feel that they must pursue learning. Do they have nothing else 
meaningful in life to pursue other than academic learning?
A very well-established theoretical outlook among contemporary 
Western or Asian researchers alike is that school learning has one over-
whelming purpose: providing an individual with knowledge and skills 
to make a good living and increasing opportunities for social mobility. 
Although researchers may not set out to study learning for social mobility, 
much of the actual research tends to focus on products of learning such 
as academic achievements and practical gains that reﬂect utilitarian pur-
poses. Admittedly, economic survival goals may be valued by most, if not 
all, learners from any culture.1= However, if making a living were the only 
raison d’être for learning, we would not care about children’s natural ques-
tions about the world, such as “why do maple leaves turn golden in the fall?” 
or “why is the sun bigger but colder in the morning but smaller yet hotter at 
noon?” Neither would we admire adolescents who engage in philosophical 
debates about, for example, the meaning of justice. Nor would we continue 
to read Socrates’ demonstration of human innate knowledge in his tutelage 
of an uneducated slave boy, or Confucius’ words about commitment to self-
perfection in learning. But we do, and we do so diligently.
Making a living may be the convenient reason for pursuing academic 
learning among people at lower socioeconomic status. It does not, however, 
explain learning behaviors of aBuent people. I happen to teach at a uni-
versity where there is a mixture of aBuent and low-income but very bright 
Time Past and Time Present
!9
European-American, as well as quite a few Chinese/East Asian and Asian-
American students from both aBuent and humble backgrounds. It is my 
observation that regardless of their socioeconomic status, the European-
American students engage in learning with similar attitudes and behaviors – 
that is, emphasizing personal curiosity, inquiry, verbal communication, and 
individual insights and brilliance. Likewise, it is also common to see many 
Chinese/East Asian students from aBuent homes study just as hard as their 
peers from low-income backgrounds. Tese students do not need to make 
a living by studying hard; their families can ensure them a comfortable life. 
But they go through the ordeal of hard work willingly or feel they need to 
honor their parents by dedicating themselves to study even if they would 
not take on the ordeal so willingly for themselves. Chinese immigrant learn-
ers throw this issue in an even sharper light. Tese learners enjoy freedom, 
choice, and creative environments available to them at U.S. schools. Yet, 
they consistently display the same degree of seriousness and achievement 
as their peers in East Asia, which cannot be attributed to the pressures of 
the examination system. Tus, we are compelled to think that learning for 
the present-day European-Americans and Chinese/East Asians has to serve 
other purposes as well. As it turns out, the compelling forces behind their 
respective learning approaches are still their own cultural traditions.
eApl(/)/)g (s/() st-,e)ts’ (&h/eCeme)t  
/) e(.l/e. .ese(.&h
Tere was virtually no research on comparative learning beliefs or the 
related area of achievement motivation between Western and East Asian 
learners prior to 19!0. In 19!3, David McClelland published a paper on 
the motivational pattern of Chinese, in which he declared that traditional 
Chinese lacked achievement motivation, but thanks to the communist ideo-
logical spirit, Chinese people gained revolutionary zeal and became more 
motivated.19 A;er this publication, there was a long silence on the subject 
until the late 19?0s, when international assessment of educational achieve-
ment revealed that Japanese students outperformed their counterparts in 
many Western countries in math and science, with the United States falling 
behind other developed countries.20 Tis rather unexpected outcome sud-
denly spawned an interest in understanding East Asian schools and chil-
dren’s learning. Herald Stevenson and James Stigler launched a decade-long 
landmark research that compared American (mostly European-American) 
and Asian elementary school students from Japan, Taiwan, and China. 
Teir central objective was to ﬁnd out the causes of Asian children’s higher 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
?0
academic achievement. Te researchers overcame great challenges to con-
duct this multination, multilingual research. Tey ensured that elementary 
school students were representative in their own countries. Tey con-
structed their own achievement tests in math to control for bias, collected 
surveys from children and parents on their views of achievement, observed 
classroom teaching, and interviewed teachers.21
Te results were quite startling. Tey found that whereas American chil-
dren, parents, and teachers explained children’s achievement based on the 
notion of ability, their Asian counterparts attributed children’s achievement 
to their e:ort. Tey dubbed this learning di:erence the “learning gap.” Tey 
also found this major distinction of beliefs to be linked to how schools and 
the school day were organized. American children attended school for fewer 
days and shorter time daily than Asian children. Asian teachers assigned 
more homework, and parents expressed dissatisfaction with their children’s 
achievement even when the achievement was already very high. Teachers 
were not reluctant to display and correct children’s mistakes publicly and 
even to make children’s achievement public in the classroom (i.e., every-
one knew how everyone else did on any test). American teachers assigned 
less homework, and parents showed more satisfaction with their children 
even when the achievement was mediocre. American teachers would not 
do what Asians teachers did to expose children’s mistakes and weaknesses 
in public. Quite the contrary, they would keep children’s achievement con-
ﬁdential to protect their self-esteem.22
Tis research occupied the center stage and generated much more 
research interest. For example, American researchers studied American 
and Japanese concepts that learners used to describe their ability and e:ort, 
and their analysis yielded that Japanese learners display culturally speciﬁc 
dispositions such as seishin, the mental attitude that helps one tackle a task, 
and gambaru, a “positive orientation toward the intrinsic beneﬁts of . . . 
persistence.”23 Researchers in Hong Kong took the concept of eﬀort to study 
Chinese students. E:ort had been deﬁned, in Western motivation literature, 
as an internal but unstable factor (meaning that a person may or may not 
exert e:ort depending on the achievement task). Tey found that e:ort was 
not situationally unstable but, in fact, a stable factor across time and situ-
ations for the Chinese learners. In other words, Chinese students believed 
that they need to make an e:ort all the time for all learning tasks.24
Others also focused on U.S. and Asian curricular and classroom dif-
ferences within school and found that Japanese schools provided more 
opportunities for children to learn math and that their curriculum was 
more di:erentiated and better sequenced in intensity according to the 
Time Past and Time Present
?1
advancement of grades.25 Joseph Tobin, David Wu, and Dana Davidson 
observed and videotaped the routines of a preschool in the United States, 
Japan, and China for one day. Tey showed the representative footages to 
the teachers, administrators, and parents of each school as well as those 
of the other two participating schools. Teir video-ethnography captured 
details of how children’s daily activities were organized and guided, how 
they were instructed in class, and how they interacted with peers. Tis 
research revealed that the U.S. preschool education emphasized children’s 
self-expression, free exploration, enjoyment, smooth peer interaction, 
and enforcement of social and moral rules of school. Chinese preschool 
stressed nutritional care, collective activities under teachers’ close super-
vision, disciplined learning in class, and following social and moral rules 
strictly. Japanese preschool exhibited yet another feature: fostering chil-
dren’s learning among themselves. Teachers were mostly hands-o:, leaving 
children to play, ﬁght, and resolve their conﬂicts on their own. Quite sur-
prisingly, there was little academic learning.2! Similarly, Catherine Lewis 
documented Japanese elementary school teaching and learning in an in-
depth ethnography. She further showed that Japanese schools organized 
instructions and activities in a way that engaged not only children’s minds 
but also children’s a:ect in learning.2? Finally, Robert Hess and Hiroshi 
Azuma studied teaching styles in classrooms of U.S. and Japanese young 
children and discovered that whereas U.S. teachers preferred an eﬃcient, 
well-paced style of instruction, their Japanese counterparts used a slow 
but thorough style. Tese di:erent styles predicted children’s working hab-
its and achievement in their respective cultures.2= More researchers also 
documented e:ective teaching strategies in math and science in Japanese 
elementary classrooms, which promoted student achievement.29 Te best-
known e:ort was, however, the video-study led by James Stigler to com-
pare classroom teaching in the United States, Japan, and Germany. Te 
study concluded that Japanese pedagogy indeed had advantages compared 
to its Western counterparts.30
Research attention was also paid to the familial factors. Researchers 
investigated European-American and East Asian parents and found that 
although parents in both cultures valued education highly, they di:ered 
in several areas. Asian parents expressed higher expectations of their 
children’s achievement  (usually straight A’s compared to A’s and B’s by 
European-American parents). Asian parents also engaged their children in 
more structured learning activities such as enrolling them in a;erschool or 
weekend enrichment programs. Asian parents also monitored their chil-
dren’s home learning more closely than European-American parents did.31
Cultural Foundations of Learning
?2
Meanwhile, achievement in math and science by East Asian students 
from Singapore, Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, and Taiwan continues to rank at 
the top of the global rankings for the past three decades, as again conﬁrmed 
by the more recently published results from the Trends in International 
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and the Programme for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) results. It seems that regardless of 
how the students are tested, they remain at the top. Furthermore, they show 
larger improvements even in reading (e.g., Korea ranked sixth and Japan 
eighth in PISA, 2003). Asian immigrant students in North America, Europe, 
Australia, New Zealand, and other parts of the world also consistently show 
higher achievement. Note that all of these TIMSS and PISA assessments did 
not involve China until 2009 (when China’s Shanghai participated in PISA) 
probably because of China’s (then) lagging economic development. Given 
their ﬁrst placement in their only participation in one 1990 international 
assessment, they were unsurprisingly placed in 2009 PISA as ﬁrst with 1? 
points for reading, 54 points for math, and 3? points for science above the 
second-place Korea, followed by Finland and other East Asian countries 
who di:ered by only a few points (all these scores are based on a mean score 
of about 500).32
the p(.(,oA/&(l &h/)ese le(.)e.
Against this international backdrop, somewhat detached from U.S. interest 
in East Asian learning, a group of researchers from Australia, the United 
Kingdom, and Sweden working in Hong Kong wrestled with a phenomenon 
that they termed the paradox of the Chinese learner. Te basic problem is 
that whenever Westerners teach Chinese students or visit Chinese schools, 
they are disappointed with, if not outraged by and condemnatory toward, 
Chinese learning. As noted previously, the Chinese educational system 
consists largely of old-fashioned teaching and learning. On the one hand, 
pedagogy is teacher-centered, authoritarian, with a centralized curriculum 
(implying inﬂexibility and lack of attention to individual children’s learn-
ing needs). On the other hand, students are docile, obedient, and uncriti-
cal; they learn by rote, lack intrinsic motivation, and aim only for exams. 
In other words, everything known about good educational practice is vio-
lated in the Chinese/Asian educational system. I also remember attending 
a graduate course at Harvard Graduate School of Education. When I tried 
to share with the instructor that practicing writing Chinese characters or 
calligraphy really helps the child learn how to concentrate, the instructor 
dismissively said “All Chinese students do is rote learning! Tat is not what 
Time Past and Time Present
?3
we are dealing with in this course.” Tese remarks shut me up for the rest 
of the course. Indeed, at that time, I did not even know how to respond. It 
was clear to me, however, that Chinese learning was regarded as a negative 
model. As it turned out, my personal experience was not unique. Tere are 
plenty of articles, books, and popular press that have criticized East Asian 
learning.33
Yet, time and again – and by now it is quite unambiguous – Chinese/
Asian learners achieve well in comparison with students from other devel-
oped countries. Tey continue to do well when they come to the West for 
advanced studies, and more, their immigrant children in the West are also 
highly achieving. All these ﬁndings indicate to me that Chinese/East Asian 
children achieve well no matter how they have been (o;en quite exhaus-
tively) assessed. Tis stark contrast between poor learning approaches and 
high achievement has led keen observers of Chinese learning such as John 
Biggs and David Watkins to regard the whole phenomenon as begging for a 
new explanation. Indeed, how could such an educational system with such 
learners produce any meaningful achievement?
Watkins and Biggs assembled a team of researchers who contributed to 
their inﬂuential volume, Te Chinese Learner, in which they posited the 
phenomenon as a paradox.34 Because most East Asian learners are under 
the inﬂuence of the Confucian learning tradition, Watkins and Biggs used 
the term Confucian heritage cultures (CHC) to include countries of China, 
Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam. Te contribu-
tors presented empirical research that documented basic beliefs and learn-
ing processes observed in learners that are distinctly CHC. In 2001, Watkins 
and Biggs published a sequel of their ﬁrst book, Teaching of the Chinese 
Learner.35 Despite the focus on teaching, most research was conducted in 
close relation to learning. Alongside these volumes, other researchers also 
collected telling data that added weight to the needed explanation of the 
paradox. In the next section, I present the research ﬁndings from these 
e:orts.
Learning Beliefs
With regard to cultural beliefs, Wing On Lee provided a historical account 
of core Confucian values concerning learning and argued for their endur-
ing impact on Chinese learners today. Accordingly, most essential is the 
Confucian belief in human self-perfection pursued as the highest pur-
pose of life through personal commitment to learning. Tis belief is also 
linked to other beliefs such as one’s social contributions in the form of 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
?4
meritorious service and practical concerns for honoring their families as 
well as enhancing their own social status and mobility.3! Lee’s argument 
is coherent with the Confucian learning tradition reviewed in Chapter 
2. In support of Lee’s argument, Kai-ming Cheng collected data on peo-
ple’s beliefs about learning in a comprehensive ethnographic study on one 
Chinese province’s primary education. He concluded that Chinese parents, 
whether well o: or destitute, send their children to school not to learn lit-
eracy and numeracy skills, but to become a person who is knowledgeable 
of the world, able to function well in social relations, and, most important 
of all, morally  cultivated.3? Similarly, An Ran’s qualitative research exam-
ined how Chinese parents in Britain and British teachers clashed on the 
purpose of learning. Whereas British teachers focused on acknowledging 
and expressing satisfaction with Chinese children’s apparent high achieve-
ment, Chinese parents were discontented, emphasizing more demanding 
learning materials and their children’s continuous e:ort to self-improve 
regardless of their accomplishments.3=
Related to these studies, Lixian Jin and Marin Cortazzi found that the 
image of a good teacher as described by British students is one who is able 
to arouse students’ interest, explain clearly, use e:ective instructional meth-
ods, and organize activities. However, the image of a good teacher o:ered 
by their Chinese peers is one who has deep knowledge, is able to answer 
questions, and is a good moral model.39 Similarly, Lingbiao Gao and David 
Watkins used both qualitative and quantitative methods to identify di:er-
ent goals of teaching held by Chinese science teachers. Tey emphasized 
cultivating students’ adaptive attitudes toward learning and moral guidance 
in addition to other cognitive goals.40 Irene Ho interviewed Hong Kong 
and Australian teachers and found that Australian teachers viewed their 
teaching within the framework of professional responsibility with clearly 
deﬁned roles and boundaries. As such, they would notify the families if 
students failed or misbehaved, but they did not see as their responsibility 
to teach morals to their students. Instead, the family was more responsible 
for moral instruction. In comparison, Hong Kong teachers stressed their 
moral charge of guiding students on the “right path and were prepared to 
go all the way to rectify misbehaviour, spending as much time as they could 
and o;en getting personally involved.” Tey attributed students’ academic 
failure and misbehaviors more to their own inadequacy than to students 
themselves or their families.41 Finally, Tomas Tang used qualitative meth-
ods to study Hong Kong teachers’ conceptions of learning and teaching and 
found that moral development is the highest learning as well as highest 
teaching conception beyond the more cognitively oriented conceptions.42 
Time Past and Time Present
?5
In the studies where comparative perspectives were taken, Chinese students 
and teachers, but not their Western counterparts, emphasized moral and 
personal growth as a central purpose of learning and teaching.
Learning Processes
With regard to the learning process itself, Ference Marton, Gloria Dall’Alba, 
and Lai Kun Tse tackled rote learning and memorization, the notoriously 
Chinese/Asian style of learning that has received much criticism from the 
West as well as from Chinese educators themselves. However, it turned out 
that Chinese rote learning was not an end in itself but was used as the ﬁrst 
step of a larger strategy for achieving deeper understanding.43 In a related 
study comparing British and Chinese students’ use of memorization and 
repetition, Bo Dahlin and David Watkins further found signiﬁcant cultural 
di:erences. Whereas British students used repetition to check if they really 
remembered something, Chinese students used it to create “deep impres-
sions” to lay a foundation for developing understanding. Moreover, British 
students viewed understanding as a process of sudden insight, whereas 
Chinese students believed understanding to be a long process that required 
extensive mental e:ort.44
In exploring perceptions of e:ective teaching by Hong Kong college 
students and faculty (both Chinese and Western expatriate), Daniel Pratt, 
Mavis Kelly, and Winnie Wong found that Chinese students and faculty 
held di:erent views of learning from those of Western teachers. Western 
teachers o;en characterized Chinese students “as not knowing how to 
think, having only short term goals . . . wanting to be spoon-fed, needing 
too much structure . . . taking a quiet, receptive, and deferential attitude 
during class, and [unwillingness to] challenge or question . . . authority.”45 
However, Chinese students believed that learning is a gradual process that 
requires tremendous dedication and methodical steps (similar to Japanese 
learning and teaching style as documented by Robert Hess and Hiroshi 
Azuma).4! Generally, they engage in four distinct steps to accomplish any 
learning task. Upon encountering new materials, Chinese students initially 
commit the material to memory; next they seek to understand the inten-
tion, style, and meaning of the material. Tey then try to apply their under-
standing to situations that call for use of such knowledge, and ﬁnally they 
enter a deeper level of questioning and modiﬁcation of the original mate-
rial. Whereas the last step in their approach is verbally interactive by nature, 
the ﬁrst three steps may call for more solitary learning and contemplation 
(which is an important aspect of Chinese intellectual tradition4?). Clearly, 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
?!
this style is not bound by the immediate verbal exchange at the moment but 
can extend over a period of days, weeks, months, and in some cases even 
several years (as a doctoral student may publish a paper to challenge his or 
her mentor’s ideas with which the student disagreed several years earlier)! 
Tus, these researchers observed that Chinese students o;en feel frustrated 
and bewildered when they are confronted with a Western teacher “whose 
expectations and forms of assessment thrust them immediately to the far 
end of this chain (questioning and analysis).”4=
With regard to Asian learners being driven by extrinsic instead of 
the more desirable intrinsic motivation, one study shed some impor-
tant light on this topic: Sheena Iyengar and Mark Lepper examined how 
personal autonomy and choice functioned among Asian-American and 
European-American schoolchildren in learning and achievement situa-
tions. Personal autonomy and choice are hallmarks of intrinsic motiva-
tion, whereas social inﬂuence and determination (such as choice made 
by others) are forms of extrinsic motivation. It has long been assumed 
that personal autonomy and choice are conducive to learning and per-
formance, whereas the lack of such personal freedom is detrimental.49 
However, these researchers demonstrated that this assumption held true 
for European-American children but not for their Asian-American coun-
terparts. Te former enjoyed learning and performed better when given 
personal choices (of what to learn and how to learn it), whereas the lat-
ter enjoyed the learning just as much and did better when their task was 
chosen by signiﬁcant others (e.g., mothers or trusted peers). More recent 
research further documents that Asian children learn well and enjoy learn-
ing activities chosen by others with whom they have good relationships. 
Tus, Asian learners’ need for personal choice may not play as essential a 
role as for Western learners.50
D-.the. .ese(.&h: ,/gg/)g /)to &-lt-.(l  
le(.)/)g Eel/eDs
More than two decades of research has greatly enhanced our understanding 
of Chinese/East Asian learners. Notably, most of recent research has been 
done with impressive qualitative methods designed to uncover valid cultural 
meanings behind the observed di:erences in learning processes and out-
comes. Although small in size, Hong Kong o:ers a unique research ground 
for such truly cross-cultural research because of its unique free-trade status. 
Researchers in Hong Kong from both CHC and Western cultures interact 
with each other frequently, and more importantly, many Western teachers 
Time Past and Time Present
??
interact with CHC learners and schools directly. Tis research has indeed 
charted new grounds for further research.
Mapping Cultural Learning Models
Although learning research by the 1990s had made signiﬁcant advancement, 
the accumulated knowledge as a whole remained quite discrete and lacked 
a systematic approach to learning from a cultural perspective. Tere was 
no comprehensive description of learners in the West and Asia, or, for that 
matter, in any other culture. Te separate pieces of information may have 
represented fragmented learner images, but this information explained 
neither learners’ culturally based beliefs nor the underlying reasons and 
processes that produce such learner beliefs. If our goal was to understand 
human learning from all perspectives, a comprehensive documentation of 
cultural learning models – the missing link – was in order.
I began researching this topic by adopting what is called an emic per-
spective. An emic perspective is the insider perspective, originating with 
the people being studied, as opposed to the one originating with the out-
side observer/researcher, which is called an etic perspective.51 Scholars have 
advocated for the inclusion of both emic and etic views in any research on 
human cultures (or else cross-cultural understanding would be impossible). 
However, traditional research has been dominated by the etic perspective, 
particularly in the form of theory-driven and hypothesis-testing research 
modeled a;er the Western scientiﬁc paradigm. Anthropological research 
was the avant-garde in introducing the emic perspective and has helped us 
achieve a great deal of understanding of the world’s cultures. Research from 
the emic perspective tends to have high validity and is preferable to the 
etic perspective in uncovering native concepts and the beliefs that underlie 
observed behaviors of people.
I also explored this research topic from the framework of cultural  models, 
again an anthropological insight. Cultural models are established by his-
torical processes of the culture and continue to be revised as the culture 
evolves further. Tey are conceptual frames that shape members’ experi-
ences by supplying the group’s shared ways of explaining, predicting, and 
interpreting people’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Tese frames also 
guide people in forming their goals and motivate them toward obtaining 
their goals.52 An example of a cultural model is the image of a teacher in 
the United States. Anyone who has gone through school from K to 12 in the 
United States probably knows what a teacher does, what power and respon-
sibilities he or she has, what students ought to do in relation to the teacher, 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
?=
and what happens when a student fails to do what the teacher is charged to 
demand from the student. Similarly, Western and Chinese learning beliefs 
can be studied as such cultural models.
I conducted two studies comparing Chinese and European-American 
learning models. Te speciﬁc empirical methods I used are called prototype 
methods. Tese methods are based on the theory and empirical evidence 
that much of human understanding of the world consists of categoriza-
tions of objects, activities, and experienced events. For example, furniture 
as a higher-order abstract category contains functional categories of sofas, 
tables, chairs, and so forth, which people use for daily life. With each sub-
category, there are ﬁnely di:erentiated types such as couch, bench, and 
stool for people to sit on. Humans achieve this categorization system with 
the aid of language by giving objects names and labels. Once these categor-
ical structures exist, they become prototypes of objects, models, or scripts 
of human activities and events, according to which people categorize new 
objects, activities, and events. For example, when we see a chair-like object, 
we are likely to use the prototypical chair to conceptualize the object and 
subsequently categorize it as chair.53 Tus, the language of a given culture 
has these prototypes for people to use and to organize their understanding 
of the world. Prototype methods lent themselves to the study of learning as 
conceptualized by humans living in speciﬁc cultures.
To access the language that contains learning conceptions in each cul-
ture, we asked three native-speaking students from selective universities 
in each culture to free-associate the Chinese term xuexi (學習) and learn/
learning in English, respectively.54 To ensure that the Chinese and English 
terms were equivalent in meaning, several steps were taken. First, we con-
sulted the word frequency dictionaries in both Chinese and English. Word 
frequency is a standardized linguistic index for how frequently a word is 
used in a natural language. Te higher the frequency, the faster and more 
accurately the word is recognized by the users of that language.55 We chose 
the Chinese term xuexi (learn/learning) because it occupies a word fre-
quency of !?9, the highest of all the Chinese learning synonyms. Similarly, 
we identiﬁed learn/learning because its word frequency of 254 was the high-
est among its synonyms.5! Ten, we asked twenty ﬂuent bilingual adults, 
with half native-speakers and the other half non-native-speakers who had 
acquired high ﬂuency with the other language, from each culture to trans-
late the Chinese term into English and also translate the English term into 
Chinese. Te cross-translation and a rating procedure (see more discussion 
later) led to the conclusion that xuexi and learn/learning were the closest 
equivalents among synonyms in both languages.5?
Time Past and Time Present
?9
Te three college students in each culture respectively wrote down com-
mon words and phrases denoting aspects of learning that came to mind 
when they heard the word xuexi and learn/learning. Tis step resulted in 
an initial list of 242 in English and 145 in Chinese. Next, we presented each 
list to twenty more college students from similar backgrounds in each cul-
ture and asked them to add any items they thought referred to learning. 
Tis step was necessary to cast the nest wide so that important cultural 
learning concepts were not le; out. We obtained an expanded list of 49! in 
English and 4?= in Chinese. Finally, it was quite likely that these lists con-
tained items that might not have been shared by most cultural members, 
but instead represented idiosyncratic ideas of individuals. To obtain a core 
list likely shared by most cultural members, we asked sixty more partici-
pants in each culture to rate each item on a four-point scale according to 
its relation to learning with, “1” meaning no relation and “4” a deﬁnite 
relation to learning.
Following research conventions, we used the median number 2.?2 as a 
cut-o: line in order to select a core list from all the rated items.5= We care-
fully examined each item and selected a ﬁnal core list of 203 English and 
225 Chinese items, representing a reasonable degree of relevance to learn-
ing as determined by group consensus. Table 3.1 shows the top English and 
Chinese terms referring to learning.
As can be seen in Table 3.1, there are striking di:erences in these two 
lists of learning terms. Table 3.2 summarizes four types of di:erences 
immediately observable by glancing at Table 3.1. With regard to purely lin-
guistic features, English terms are mostly single and regular words. By con-
trast, Chinese terms typically have multiple words with many modiﬁers. 
Many terms are idiomatic expressions in the form of proverbs and sayings. 
Regarding the conceptual features, English terms have references to exter-
nal factors such as resources, institutions, and teacher. Te highest-rated 
items on the Chinese list have no such references (although there were such 
references with lower-rated items). Interestingly, among the nearly 500 ini-
tial English terms, there were no terms referring to hard work. In sharp 
contrast, many Chinese terms refer to hard work and related learning atti-
tudes (this ﬁnding does support the research by Stevenson and Stigler as 
reviewed earlier). Neither does the English list contain terms on life-long 
learning, but the Chinese list has several terms including the very top item 
(“keep on learning as long as you live”). Tere is one category that has the 
reversed trend: Te English list has many terms denoting thinking and 
mental processes (!1 terms, or 30F of the entire list of 203 terms), but only 
one such term appears on the Chinese list of the top 20 terms (and only 14 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
=0
terms overall, or !F of the entire list of 225 terms, with the remainder hav-
ing no reference to either logic or analysis).
With respect to a:ective features, the English terms lack a:ect. Te 
Chinese terms, in contrast, express strong a:ect, showing desire, passion, 
and intensity. Finally, in reference to behavioral features, there is no clear 
call for action in the English terms. Te Chinese terms exert a strong call 
for action.
Te signiﬁcance of these noted di:erences in the learning vocabu-
lary becomes quite clear when we consider the process by which children 
develop their learning beliefs in these two cultures. In Chapter ?, I present 
data on how the two cultures’ mothers converse with their children about 
learning. Mothers use many of the words and phrases captured in my initial 
t(Ele 3.1. Top twenty learning-related terms nominated and rated by  
U.S. and Chinese adults
English
English Translation (Chinese)
1. Study
Keep on learning as long as you live (life-long learning)  
(活到老, 學到老)
2. Tinking
Read extensively (博覽群書)
3. Teaching
Learn assiduously (刻/學習)
4. School
Read books (看書)
5. Education
Diligent (in one’s learning) (勤奮(學習)
!. Reading
Extensive knowledge and multifaceted ability (博學多才)
?. Teacher
Study (讀書)
=. Books
Make a ﬁrm resolution to study (發奮讀書)
9. Critical thinking
Study as if thirsting or hungering (如飢似渴地學習)
10. Brain
Tere is no boundary to learning (學無止境)
11. Discovery
Concentrate on learning (專心學習)
12. Understand
Eager to learn (好學)
13. Information
Take great pains to study (/心攻讀)
14. Knowledge
Seek knowledge (求知)
15. Motivation
Te learned understands reasoning (讀書人明理)
1!. Library
Study abroad (留學)
1?. Students
Do one’s utmost to self-study (勤勉自學)
1=. Learn by doing
Learning without thinking is labor lost; thinking without 
learning is perilous (Confucius) (學而不思則罔, 思而不 
學則殆 [孔子])
19. Applying ideas
A;er learning, one understands that one’s knowledge is 
inadequate (Confucius) (學然后知不足 [孔子])
20. Communication
Long-term diligence is the road to the mount of knowledge;  
endurance of hardship is the boat to the boundless sea of 
learning (書山有路勤為徑, 學海無涯/作)
Time Past and Time Present
=1
studies to guide their children in their discussions of their o:spring’s good 
and poor learning attitudes and behavior. Children develop their own learn-
ing beliefs by hearing and using these terms. Tus, the learning vocabulary 
plays an important role in child development.
To map out the relationships among various conceptions for each cul-
ture, we asked 100 college students from similar backgrounds to sort their 
culture’s core list into groups according to similarity in meaning. Tere 
sortings were then submitted to the statistical analysis called cluster analy-
sis, which resulted in two conceptual maps of learning, one for English and 
another for Chinese as shown in Figures 3.1 and 3.2.59
Both maps contain much detailed information, showing the magnitude 
and complexity of each culture’s learning model. Tere are two dimensions 
on each map: levels and clusters. Levels refer to the hierarchical structure 
of categorization as discussed previously in the section on prototype meth-
ods. As can be seen, both maps consist of four levels. At the very top is the 
Superordinate Level, below it is the Basic Level with two further levels, called 
Basic Level I and Basic Level II. Further down is the Subordinate Level, 
which has the most divisions. It is this level that contains the actual learning 
terms. Te clusters show similarities and di:erences in learning conceptions 
as sorted by the participants. Tey are found at the Subordinate Level that 
t(Ele 3.2. Linguistic, conceptual, aﬀective, and behavioral diﬀerences in English 
and Chinese learning lexicon
English
Chinese
Linguistic features
Single words
Multiple words with many modiﬁers
Regular words
Idiomatic expressions including proverbs 
and sayings
Conceptual features
Reference to external factors  
(e.g., resources and institutions)
No such reference
No references to hard work
Many references to hard work and learning 
attitudes
No references to life-long learning
Several such references
Many references to thinking/ 
mental processes
Only one such reference
A:ective features
A:ectively neutral
Strong a:ect (desire/passion/intensity)
Behavioral features
No clear call for action
Clear call for action
=2
European American Conceptualization of Learning
Superordinate
Level
(RMS  = 1.28)
Learning Processes (168, 83%) 
Learning Content (35, 17%) 
Basic
Level I
(RMS  = 1.15)
Learner Characteristics (145, 86%)
Social Context (23, 14%) 
(1)
Specific learning
processes 
(2)
Individual
characteristics 
(3)
Resources
(4)
Developmental
foundation 
(5)
Types of
school
(6)
People in
teaching
(7)
Subjects of
learning
Basic
Level II
(RMS  = .81)
Subordinate
Active
learning 
Thinking
Commu-
nicating
Cognitive
skill
Motivation “Intelligence”
Tools for
learning
Early
stages
Other
experiences
Basics
School
subjects
Level
Open mind/
creativity
Methods for
teaching
Life
processes
(RMS = .58)
Inquiry
# & % of
Terms in
Basic Cluster  
70 (48%)
34 (23%)
24  (17%)
17 (12%)
12 (52%) 11 (48%)
35 (35%)
100%
100%
D/g-.e 3.1. Diagram for a European-American hierarchical structure. From J. Li (2003). “European-American conceptuali-
zation of learning,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, p. 2!1. Copyright 2003 by the American Psychological Association. 
Adapted with permission.
=3
Chinese Conceptualization of Learning
Superordinate
Level
(RMS = 1.08)
Desirable Approach (195, 87%) 
 Undesirable Approach (30, 13%) 
Basic
Level I
(RMS = 1.07)
Seeking Knowledge (141, 72%) 
Achievement (54, 28%) 
(1)
Heart and
mind for
wanting to
learn (HXX) 
(2)
Learning
methods
(3)
Purpose of
learning
(4)
Teacher/
student
relationship 
(5)
Paths/
tools
(6)
Knowledge
terms
(7)
Kinds of
achievement
(8)
The
learned
(9)
Negatives
of learning
Basic
Level II
(RMS = .93)
Subordinate
Level
(RMS = .80)
Life-
long
pursuit
Quartet:
Diligence
Hardship
Steadfastness
Concentration
Humility  Desire
Activity
Under-
standing Application
Status
Paths Tools
Extraor-
dinary
abilities
Originality
Lack of desire
Learning
as an end in
itself 
Contribution
to society 
Knowing
&
morality  
Shallowness 
Ignorance
Breadth 
&
depth
# & % of
Terms in
Basic Cluster  
64 (46%)
34 (24%)
27 (19%)
16 (11%)
9 (17%)
6 (11%)
32 (59%)
7 (13%)
30 (13%)
100%
100%
D/g-.e 3.2. Diagram for a Chinese hierarchical structure. From J. Li (2001). “Chinese conceptualization of learning,” Ethos, 29, 
p. 123. Copyright 2001 by the American Anthropological Association. Adapted with permission.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
=4
literally “clusters” words and phrases from the lexicons into the various divi-
sions. How many clusters there are and how large each cluster is are deter-
mined by how many people sorted how many learning concepts into various 
groups. Based on the assumption of prototype methods, a greater number 
of items indicate greater awareness/emphasis of the conceptions in that cul-
ture.!0 Because these maps are empirically derived with group consensus, 
they are the culture-level learning beliefs, which are taken to represent a 
form of cultural learning models as accessed through language usage.
For our present purpose, it suﬃces to highlight the most relevant fea-
tures. Te U.S. map (Figure 3.1) focuses on learning processes (with the 
majority of terms) on one side and learning content (with fewer terms) 
on the other. Within the learning processes, a great many more terms fall 
within learner characteristics than within social context. Te two most sig-
niﬁcant dimensions are under learner characteristics: (1) speciﬁc learning 
processes elaborating on (a) thinking, (b) inquiry, (c) active learning, and 
(d) communicating; and (2) individual characteristics stressing (a) cogni-
tive skills, (b) motivation, (c) open mind, and (d) intelligence.
Te Chinese map (Figure 3.2) displays desirable versus undesirable 
approaches to learning with a preference/value at the top. Te majority of 
terms fall on the desirable side, which contains two further distinctions: 
seeking knowledge and achievement standards. Under seeking knowledge, 
the most signiﬁcant groups are: (1) heart and mind for wanting to learn (in 
Chinese, hao-xue-xin, 好學心), which includes (a) life-long pursuit, (b) a 
set of learning virtues (diligence, endurance of hardship, steadfast persever-
ance, and concentration), (c) humility, and (d) desire; and (2) purpose of 
learning, containing three essential ideas: (a) learning as an end in itself, (b) 
status, and (c) contributions to society. Under achievement there is one sig-
niﬁcant dimension: kinds of achievement emphasizing breadth and depth 
of knowledge, abilities, unity of knowing and morality, and originality.
In the second study, we asked !2 college students for each culture to 
describe their ideal learners in their respective cultures (124 in the sample).!1 
We targeted ideal-learner images instead of average learners because they 
provide what developmental researchers term the “optimum” of devel-
opmental outcome. Accordingly, cultures have preferable “endpoints” or 
“optimal ways of being” toward which younger members of a culture are 
enculturated.!2 Although no two children will achieve identical outcomes 
in the enculturation process because of diversity in individual characteris-
tics and contextual inﬂuence, it is important to describe the ideals because 
they exist in people’s minds and guide people’s behavior.!3 Te ideal-learner 
image, as opposed to words and phrases in the ﬁrst study, would also 
Time Past and Time Present
=5
compensate for the limitations inherent in the lexicon from which I derived 
culture-level learning beliefs. Ideal images are thus also culture-level, but 
not individual-level, learning models.
We probed four speciﬁc dimensions of the ideal learner: (1) thinking on 
the nature of knowledge, purposes and processes of learning, and views of 
intelligence and excellence; (2) understanding of the relationship between 
learning and one’s moral development; (3) learning behaviors in routine 
situations any learner is likely to encounter, such as high achievement, high 
intelligence, failure, not understanding concepts, inability to learn despite 
e:ort, and boredom; and (4) emotional patterns associated with good or 
poor learning. Te written descriptions of each of these dimensions were 
analyzed both qualitatively and quantitatively.!4 Tese procedures yielded 
four proﬁles corresponding to the four probed dimensions of the ideal 
learner for each culture.
Te basic ﬁndings from the two studies converge to two comprehensive 
pictures of the two cultures’ learning models. Table 3.3 summarizes the com-
ponents and dimensions of these two belief systems. As can be seen, there 
are at least four large common component headings across the two cul-
tures: purpose, agentic process, a:ect, and achievement. Te speciﬁc items 
within each component were determined by the number of each culture’s 
respondents who referred to these ideas as well as the presence of these 
components on the two cultural maps of learning concepts as derived from 
the ﬁrst study of learning terms. Below I discuss each culture’s model while 
highlighting similarities and di:erences between the European-American 
and Chinese models.
European-American Learning Model
Purpose of Learning
As indicated in Table 3.3, three main purposes emerged: (1) cultivate the 
mind/understand the world, (2) develop one’s ability/skill, and (3) reach 
personal goals. Te most frequently mentioned associations with the idea 
of the purpose of learning are to cultivate one’s mind and to understand the 
world. Te mind enables one to learn, but it also develops or becomes sharp-
ened as a result of exposure to a stimulating environment that demands its 
proper use for understanding the world.
Te second learning purpose is to develop the ability/skills that one 
needs to be a fully functioning member of one’s society. Important skills 
include those for a successful career, for one’s self-suﬃciency and inde-
pendence, as well as knowledge that enables one to solve problems and to 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
=!
take control of one’s life and surroundings. Te third learning purpose is 
to reach one’s personal goals (beyond ability/skill). Tis purpose includes 
ﬁnding self-fulﬁllment, achieving personal happiness, becoming a well-
rounded person, embarking on a spiritual quest, or reaching any personal 
goals individuals may desire.
Tese three types of purposes are inherently related. While the mind 
plays a central role in learning, it also needs cultivation. Tis very process is 
t(Ele 3.3. Components and dimensions of European-American  
and Chinese learning models
EA
Chinese
Purpose of Learning
Cultivate mind/understand world
Perfect self morally/socially
Develop ability/skill
Acquire knowledge/skills for self
Reach personal goals
Contribute to society
Agentic Process of Learning
Active engagement
Diligence
Tinking
Self-exertion
Inquiry
Endurance of hardship
Communication
Perseverance
Concentration
Kinds of Achievement
Understanding of essentials/expertise
Breadth-depth/mastery of knowledge
Personal insights/creativity
Application of knowledge
Being the best one can be
Unity of knowledge and moral character
A:ect
Positive
Curiosity/interest
Commitment (“establish one’s will”)
Intrinsic enjoyment
Love/passion/thirst
Challenging attitudes
Respect/receptivity
Pride for achievement
Humility for achievement
Negative
Indi:erence/boredom
Lack of desire
Extrinsic motivation
Arrogance
Disappointment/low self-esteem for failure
Shame/guilt for failure
Source: Li, J. (2011). Cultural frames of children’s learning beliefs. In L. Arnett Jensen (Ed.), Bridging 
cultural and developmental approaches to psychology: New syntheses in theory, research, and policy  
(pp. 2!–4=). New York: Oxford University Press; p. 30. Copyright 2011 by Oxford University Press. 
Reprint with permission. Originally adapted from table 14–1 in Li, J. & Fischer, K. W. (2004). Toughts 
and emotions in American and Chinese cultural beliefs about learning. In D. Y. Dai & R. Sternberg 
(Eds.), Motivation, emotion, and cognition: Integrative perspectives on intellectual functioning and 
development (pp. 3=5–41=). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Time Past and Time Present
=?
also one by which a person develops various abilities and skills in order to 
reach personal goals in life.
Agentic Process of Learning
Te features under this heading are called agentic because they are personal 
actions directed at achieving desirable goals. In other words, these are the 
processes in which people engage in order to learn, given their purposes and 
goals.!5 Four main agentic processes were found. First is active engagement, 
centering on the notion that a person needs to be actively involved in learn-
ing. Tis active nature emphasizes learning by doing and life experiences, 
both inside and outside the classroom. Te second process is captured in 
the idea of “thinking/critical reasoning,” which is what the mind does or 
ought to do. Tinking concerns the whole spectrum of mental processes 
involved in learning. For example, one could move from lower-order dif-
ferentiations of objects to higher-order synthesis of relations, or one could 
engage in rigorous deductive logic or inductive reasoning, or one is free to 
reﬂect, introspect, or contemplate on anything of personal interest.
Inquiry, the quintessential process and agency underlying Western sci-
entiﬁc development, is the third kind that stresses discovering the unknown 
and inventing the new. In this process, one seeks to ﬁnd out about things 
in the world through a variety of research activities such as gathering data, 
experimentation, observation, analysis, and drawing conclusions. Key to 
this process is one’s engagement in challenging existing canons of thought, 
ﬁnding new problems, and searching for creative solutions.
Finally, the fourth process, communication, serves both as learning 
itself and a form of dissemination of one’s knowledge and discoveries. For 
learning itself, one participates in oral as well as written forms of social 
interactions. In these communications, one not only exchanges ideas with 
others, but also discusses, debates, critiques, or argues with others in order 
to achieve better understanding of a subject, using tools such as logic, evi-
dence, and devil’s advocacy. For dissemination purposes, one presents, 
explains, articulates, and demonstrates one’s views, positions, or research 
ﬁndings, o;en using visual forms and technical devices to reach audiences 
and readers.
Like the purposes, these four agentic processes in learning are also 
linked coherently, even though they each have distinct emphases. Active 
learning ensures fuller engagement of the mind, which promotes thinking 
at all levels, forms, and dimensions in inquiry. Communication is a natural 
part of active learning given its interactive nature, which in turn facilitates 
more active engagement, thinking, and inquiry.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
==
Kinds of Achievement
Tree kinds of achievement were most frequently identiﬁed (Table 3.3): 
(1) understanding of essentials/expertise, (2) personal insights/creative 
problem solving, and (3) being the best one can be. Understanding of 
essentials is not limited to a particular ﬁeld of study but includes anything 
deemed worthy of learning by the person. Expertise is a notion that applies 
only to an area of study, such as math or art. Given that the purpose of 
learning is to understand the world, the standard for gauging achievement 
is sensibly the extent to which a person gains better understanding of a sub-
ject. Many respondents asserted that excellence of learning does not rest 
just on knowing facts but on knowing the deeper underlying principles of 
things – that is, the essence of the phenomenon. Personal insight and crea-
tive problem solving, the second standard, displays one’s brilliance and cre-
ativity. Te third kind of achievement addresses being the best one can be in 
learning. Whereas the ﬁrst two standards imply less social recognition, the 
third standard is a more subjective and intrapersonal delineation of “being 
one’s best.” One sets his or her own goal of achievement and strives for it.
Of these three kinds of achievement, the ﬁrst two are more closely 
related with one another than with the third one, although when striving to 
be one’s best is aligned with understanding the world, developing expertise 
in a ﬁeld, and applying one’s knowledge/skill creatively to solving problems, 
the three kinds are synergistically linked and inform each other.
Aﬀect
A:ect is an integral part of learning beliefs and processes. Whenever 
human beings pursue their goals with any degree of e:ort, they experience 
related emotions and feelings. Whereas emotions typically involve phys-
iological responses such as heartbeat, muscle tension, facial expressions, 
and bodily gestures, feelings may not involve such.!! For example, if we feel 
strange in a situation, we may not experience bodily change. Nevertheless, 
our feeling strange is part of our a:ective system that allows us to detect 
noteworthy changes in our environment.!? A:ect in our research refers to 
all emotional responses as well as longer-term feelings toward learning and 
self- engagement in the learning process as has been deﬁned and used in the 
research on human motivation.!=
We found both positive and negative a:ects in our research on European-
American learning model (Table 3.3): For positive a:ects there were (1) 
curiosity, interest, and motivation for learning, (2) intrinsic enjoyment, (3) 
challenging attitudes, and (4) pride in achievement. For negative a:ects 
Time Past and Time Present
=9
there were (1) indi:erence and boredom, (2) extrinsic motivation, and 
(3) disappointment/low self-esteem for failure.
Curiosity, interest, and motivation were the most o;en mentioned pos-
itive a:ect for purposes. Intrinsic enjoyment was named as the a:ect that 
accompanies the learning process. Attitudes that challenged existing canons 
of knowledge and authority were greatly prized. Te general positive a:ect 
associated with achievement was pride – an expression for self-conﬁdence 
and self-esteem. Tese positive feelings about oneself in turn motivated the 
person to learn further.
Negative a:ects occur when the learning task is perceived as uninter-
esting or boring. When this happens, ideal learners were described usu-
ally as not giving up, but continuing to learn the materials, especially if the 
materials were still required or were important knowledge. Still, they would 
not display intrinsic motivation and enjoyment. Instead, they would persist 
with some level of indi:erence, boredom, even dread. Many respondents 
also acknowledged that these learners would stop investing time and e:ort 
into the materials if they were deemed less essential. Relatedly, respondents 
referred to extrinsic motivation as antithetical to natural curiosity, interest, 
and enjoyment.
When experiencing failure, ideal learners were described to feel a num-
ber of related negative emotions: disappointment, lack of conﬁdence, low 
self-esteem, and inferiority. Naturally, these emotions stand in sharp con-
trast to those associated with high achievement.
European-American Learning Model Echoes  
Western Intellectual Tradition
Taken together, it is remarkable that the ﬁndings regarding purposes and 
agency of learning reﬂect well the four key dimensions of the long-standing 
Western intellectual tradition since Greek antiquity as discussed in Chapter 2. 
Te purpose of learning remains to understand the external world. Although 
this external world has expanded to the social world, human psychology, the 
ﬁctional world, the brain, and even the self, the approach to these worlds is 
to treat them as objects of analysis rather than as a process of personal trans-
formation by the learner him- or herself. Mind still remains supreme as a 
human capacity to crack the worlds, and the process of obtaining veriﬁed, 
objective, and reliable knowledge is still prized. A critical attitude toward 
existing knowledge and inquiry into all phenomena is still essential in any 
course of learning and research. Te achievement standards are by and large 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
90
framed also within the Western intellectual tradition. Individual learners’ 
achievement is judged by how well they understand their chosen world of 
study. Teir personal excellence is intimately tied to the ultimate purposes 
and goals on the one hand and the learning processes on the other.
Similarly, their a:ects mirror the fascination, wonder, and intrinsic 
passion about the world as well as the inquisitive and critical spirit that 
characterize Western scientists since the Greeks ﬁrst displayed such a:ec-
tive tendencies. Although historical materials typically do not elaborate on 
a:ective responses to failure by the Greeks and subsequent scientists, the 
ﬁndings of our research on negative a:ects about personal failures were 
sensible, given the emphasis on those positive a:ects.
Chinese Learning Model
Purpose of Learning
Similar to the European-American model, there are also three main pur-
poses: (1) perfect oneself morally/socially, (2) acquire knowledge/skills for 
self, and (3) contribute to society (Table 3.3). Te ﬁrst, the most signiﬁcant 
one, was described as a need to perfect oneself in the moral and social 
realm. It is important to point out that some European-American respon-
dents also mentioned self-fulﬁllment and self-actualization as their ideal-
learner’s purposes. However, they emphasized being one’s best through 
learning academic subjects rather than cultivating themselves morally as 
deﬁned in Confucian terms. Interestingly, the term learning was le; open 
for respondents to construe. Whereas European-Americans interpreted it 
as understanding the world, their Chinese peers took it to connote moral 
and social self-perfection in addition to academic learning.!9
Te second purpose, acquiring knowledge/skills for self, is reminis-
cent of the European-American second purpose, developing one’s ability 
and skill. Chinese respondents stressed mastery of knowledge whereas 
European-Americans emphasized developing ability. Chinese ideal learn-
ers also needed knowledge/skill for leading a good life. Tey, too, must have 
those skills for survival, self-suﬃciency, and successful careers. Finally, 
these skills were seen as enabling and empowering them to solve problems, 
maintain satisfying social relations, and reach their personal goals.
Te third purpose is contributing to society, which reﬂects directly the 
core Confucian value. As Rosemont suggests, Chinese children are ben-
eﬁciaries of their social world’s love, care, and teaching, but they gradually 
become benefactors as they gain knowledge, skill, and moral maturity.?0 
Time Past and Time Present
91
Individual learning is not divorced from contributing to community as an 
ultimate purpose.?1
Tese Chinese purposes are also inherently related. Tey have been 
explicitly part of Confucian values regarding learning and are actively pro-
moted by families, communities, schools, and society at large.?2 Terefore, 
one needs to engage in personal skill learning and moral development 
before one can meaningfully contribute to society. However, one’s moral 
self-perfection and skill acquisition are not conceptualized as separate or 
sequential processes. Tey take place simultaneously from early on and 
continue throughout life. Many European-American ideal learners also 
desired to make a di:erence in the word, relieve su:ering, and help others. 
However, this purpose was not as strongly or prevalently expressed as by 
their Chinese peers.
Agentic Process of Learning
When asked to describe how their model learners learn (i.e., what they 
do, what steps they take, how they behave when they encounter diﬃcul-
ties such as failure or boredom), Chinese respondents did not, surpris-
ingly, describe much that would be considered learning processes per se as 
seen in European-American descriptions. Instead, they wrote extensively 
about the learning virtues, as discussed in Chapter 2. Tese learning vir-
tues also appeared in my study on Chinese learning terms (see “quartet” in 
Figure 3.2).
Five such virtues emerged. Te ﬁrst, the notion of earnestness/sincerity 
(renzhen, 認真/誠意), a variation of the ancient spirit of sincerity in learn-
ing (as discussed in Chapter 2), stresses the seriousness that one needs to 
bring to learning. Te seriousness is sensible given that Chinese learning is 
centered around one’s moral self-perfection. As respondents described, ear-
nestness is the predecessor of dedication, which is the long-lasting virtue all 
learners are urged to develop.
Te second virtue, diligence/self-exertion (qinfen, 勤奮/發奮), refers 
to frequent studying behavior a;er the person has made a resolve to pur-
sue learning. Te emphasis falls on the actual learning behavior, therefore 
much time spent on learning, following the person’s resolve.?3 Qinfen as a 
behavioral manifestation of self-exertion is believed necessary to ensure 
one’s clariﬁcation of goals; the course of action one must take to realize 
them; and a way to hold oneself accountable for any temptation to stray 
from one’s resolve. Frequently, upon making the resolve, the person shares 
his or her learning goal with his or her family, close friends, or teachers, 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
92
who serve as witnesses to monitor, to watch for, and even to demand con-
sistency between one’s resolve and follow-up action.
Te third virtue, endurance of hardship (keku, 刻/), focuses on over-
coming diﬃculties and obstacles one is bound to encounter in learning. 
Respondents described three kinds of diﬃculties: (1) physical drudgery and 
poverty, (2) diﬃcult knowledge, and (3) lack of natural ability. First, physi-
cal drudgery and poverty are considered hardships because they have been 
an unavoidable living condition throughout Chinese history (see Chapter 
2 for an account of this virtue as part of Chinese learning tradition). Even 
though living standards have improved in recent decades, physical labor 
and poverty remain the harsh reality for many. Diﬃculty in understand-
ing particular academic subjects or concepts is a routine hurdle for any 
learner. Finally, respondents were very clear about individual di:erences 
in their natural capacity and acknowledged the associated impact on peo-
ple’s learning. However, there was also consensus that these obstacles are 
not reasons for not learning. Instead, ideal learners developed endurance 
of hardship, which would enable them to face and combat these particular 
obstacles.
Te fourth virtue, perseverance (hengxin, 恆心), addresses a general atti-
tude toward learning and a behavioral tendency in learning. Perseverance is 
valued because of the belief that there is no shortcut to learning. Knowledge 
does not come about overnight, but through a bit-by-bit, accumulative 
process over a long period of time, a process fraught with obstacles and 
 distractions.?4 Perseverance is believed potent in helping one stay on the 
task from the beginning to the very end. It is a virtue required to achieve 
any serious learning.?5
Te ﬁnal virtue, concentration (zhuanxin, 專心), is used in Chinese 
more o;en to describe a general learning behavior, not necessarily related 
to speciﬁc tasks. Concentration emphasizes studying with consistent focus 
and unswerving dedication. It also includes carefulness and thoroughness 
of learning.?! Concentration is believed to be an essential quality of the 
learner because this disposition allows the full engagement of one’s mind 
and heart in study.??
Tese ﬁve learning virtues are clearly related and form a whole. Tey 
all presume a desire to learn because without it, these learning processes 
and behaviors cannot be sustained. Without resolve and its resultant com-
mitment, diligence, endurance of hardship, and persistence may be lim-
ited to sheer situational factors. Likewise, if concentration can be halted 
by “hardship” or if one lacks perseverance, one’s resolve may be aborted 
halfway.
Time Past and Time Present
93
Chinese respondents also revealed other learning processes and activ-
ities similar to those revealed by their European-American peers, such 
as thinking, observation, participation in social activities, and talking to 
people. However, compared to their European-American peers, they men-
tioned those categories signiﬁcantly less. Similarly, European-American 
respondents also acknowledged their ideal-learner’s hard work and per-
sistence, but their reference to these learning virtues was less central and 
consistent.
Kinds of Achievement
Tere were also three general kinds of achievement similar to the European-
American achievement (Table 3.3), but the two sets of achievement stan-
dards convey very di:erent meanings. Te ﬁrst one, depth and breadth and/
or mastery of knowledge, is also captured in Figure 3.2 under “kinds of 
achievement.” Whereas breadth refers to one’s extensive knowledge of dif-
ferent disciplines or subjects, depth concerns one’s profound understand-
ing of one subject. Moreover, the integration of breadth and depth is also 
emphasized. Mastery may not highlight breadth and depth, but it neverthe-
less stresses possession of knowledge, and by implication, the broader and 
deeper such possession, the better. Mastery together with breadth/depth is 
sensible considering that the ultimate goal is self-perfection, which is open-
ended and life-long in nature.
Te second standard, application of knowledge, is reminiscent of the 
European-American personal problem solving. However, the Chinese 
emphasis falls on the use of what one has learned in real-life situations. 
Te conceptual distinction lies in book knowledge versus knowledge in use. 
Whether such use is personal or social in origin matters less. Tis standard 
thus includes applications that may not be deemed as creative or insightful 
in any sense (e.g., use math to verify a bank transaction). Te third stan-
dard is unity of knowledge and moral character, also shown as one kind of 
achievement in Figure 3.2. Consistent with the purposes of moral and social 
self-perfection, acquisition of knowledge for self, and contribution to soci-
ety, achieving the unity of the cognitive/intellectual with the social/moral 
makes the elements compatible and harmonious.
Tese achievement standards are inherently related to each other. 
Acquisition of depth and breadth of knowledge can enable the person to 
better apply such knowledge, which in turn can broaden and deepen one’s 
knowledge. So long as the learner also continues to self-perfect morally and 
socially, he or she will likely continue to seek breadth and depth of learning, 
which loops back to his or her ability to use his or her knowledge in life.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
94
Aﬀect
Chinese a:ect also contained both positive and negative types. Four pos-
itive a:ects emerged: (1) commitment (“establish one’s will”), (2) love, 
passion, and thirst for learning, (3) respect and receptivity, and (4) humil-
ity for achievement. Tere were three negative a:ects: (1) lack of desire, 
(2) arrogance, and (3) shame/guilt for poor learning.
Te notion of commitment, establishing one’ will (lizhi, 立志), is part 
of one’s learning purpose. Tis concept aims at helping the learner, o;en 
during secondary school, start pondering his or her life’s purposes in order 
to come to a clear personal vision (zhixiang, 志向 or baofu, 抱負). In doing 
so, Chinese learners believe that they will not only ﬁnd a more speciﬁc path 
to focus on (e.g., I want to be an engineer), but also know to what path to 
attach their energy and dedication (e.g., therefore I will study math, physics, 
and engineering). Terefore, the process of lizhi is a spiritually very upli;-
ing and emotionally positive process.
Some European-American respondents also touched on personal ambi-
tions. However, such cases were not described consistently as a deliberate 
and socially concerted process where the learner is urged to search for a 
purpose and to establish commitment to reaching it.
Love, passion, and thirst were described similarly as enjoyment among 
European-American ideal learners. However, a signiﬁcant di:erence lies 
in the source of such a:ect. Whereas for the European-American learn-
ers, intrinsic enjoyment, curiosity, and interest were described as essential, 
this intrinsic source was not emphasized by Chinese respondents. In fact, 
many acknowledged that their ideal learners were initially not motivated or 
interested in learning at a young age, but they developed love and passion 
once they realized the importance of learning, or once their parents and 
teachers guided them into the process. Tis kind of formation of love and 
passion as cultivated and fostered by one’s social world parallels the recent 
work on intrinsic motivation as less essential for Asian-American children 
for school learning.?=
Respect/receptivity is another distinct a:ect that Chinese ideal learn-
ers express toward knowledge and teachers.?9 Because learning in the 
Confucian persuasion is not limited to academic learning but also includes 
social and moral learning, respect toward knowledge and teachers (that ide-
ally embody the self-perfecting process) is sensible and expected. However, 
this general attitude of respect/receptivity among Asian learners has been 
taken as a sign of docility, obedience, and lack of critical thinking.=0 Tis 
is a misunderstanding. Asian learners’ deference toward knowledge and 
teachers does not stem from their fear or blind acceptance of authority, but 
Time Past and Time Present
95
from their deep sense of humility. Instead of treating humility as a personal 
weakness, they regard it as personal strength and courage, because those 
who are humble are willing to self-examine, admit their inadequacies, and 
self-improve. Terefore, respect/receptivity and humility go hand in hand. 
When experiencing feelings of inadequacy, one’s ego or self-esteem is not 
seriously threatened and in need of protection as may be the case among 
European-American learners.=1 Chinese learners believe that one can always 
self-improve so long as one learns humbly and respectfully from others.=2
As alluded to earlier, Chinese learners’ receptivity and humility may 
be very di:erent from European-American learners’ challenging attitude, 
especially in the form of immediate verbal exchange in the midst of a class 
or a discussion. It was generally the case that Chinese respondents made few 
references to such challenging attitudes toward teachers, even though their 
ideal learners did engage in debates with their peers. However, this does 
not mean that Chinese learners do not challenge. In fact, many respondents 
wrote that challenging old knowledge or advancing new knowledge was 
an important goal for learners in the end. But one is reluctant to engage in 
challenges until one has thoroughly understood the knowledge in question 
or mastered one’s ﬁeld.=3
For achievement, Chinese learners generally display less pride even 
if they may be happy themselves.=4 Tis tendency is di:erent from their 
European-American peers who usually feel proud of themselves and like 
to share their joy with others.=5 Chinese ideal learners were described as 
feeling a need to remain calm and humble. Relatedly, the need to be hum-
ble comes from the same recognition that learning is a life-long journey. 
Although others may acknowledge one’s achievement publicly, focusing on 
celebration for oneself may be perceived as a negative tendency that pulls 
one away from further self-perfection.
Te two negative a:ects are lack of desire and arrogance. Te former 
shows some aﬃnity to the European-American indi:erence and boredom. 
Lack of desire is the opposite of a heart and mind for wanting to learn.=! 
Many Chinese learning-related terms refer to this state as being at the heart 
of any motivational problem. By using or hearing these words, learners 
sense disapproval and concern from their social world. Arrogance is also 
an a:ect that is the opposite of humility. Learners who achieve highly are 
believed to be particularly vulnerable to this inﬂated sense of self. Given the 
importance of humility in the Chinese learning model, there is little won-
der why pride/arrogance is a great concern among learners.
Similar to their EA peers, Chinese-model learners were described as feel-
ing a number of related negative emotions such as sadness and pain when 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
9!
they experience poor learning. Te most frequently revealed emotions are 
shame and guilt both for themselves as well as their families.=? Shame is a 
powerful and prevalent emotion in Chinese culture and is an emotion of 
disgrace or humiliation as in most cultures. However, it is also a moral dis-
cretion and sensibility that people desire to develop.== Tus, the meanings 
of shame and guilt shade into each other. Together they function to direct 
people into self-examination in order to recognize their own wrongdoings 
as well as to motivate people to mend and to improve themselves. Given that 
learning is geared toward self-perfection for Chinese lives, feeling shame/
guilt in poor learning is to be expected.
Chinese Model and Its Confucian Lineage
As alluded to throughout the preceding section, the key components as 
found in the research also reﬂect well the four key themes of the Chinese 
learning tradition as outlined in Chapter 2. Perfecting self, as the most 
important purpose of learning, continues to inspire Chinese learners 
as a whole. Although few college students in my study used the expres-
sion  “taking the world upon oneself (以天下為己任), they unequivocally 
named contribution to society as a major purpose of their learning. Tis 
latter expression is the modern manifestation of the ancient “take the world 
upon oneself.” Tey convey the same meaning by linking individuals’ learn-
ing to a larger social and therefore moral purpose beyond personal beneﬁts 
from learning.
With regard to learning virtues, the empirical ﬁndings virtually match 
the traditional phrases and expressions. In fact, learning virtues may be the 
most intact and potent survival of this Chinese learning tradition. Perhaps 
this is because learning virtues are more an individual psychological matter, 
and their cultivation and maintenance are not readily subject to political 
changes. Te process of forming such learning virtues takes place via family 
socialization and teacher–student interactions modeled a;er parent–child 
relationships, rather than in receiving or embracing political ideologies. So 
long as the political and large social movements do not vehemently attack 
these learning virtues, they have little reason to change (e.g., consider the 
possibility that the emancipation of women from homes to schools and 
workplace may have intensiﬁed the transmission of these learning virtues 
instead of destroying them – there are now twice as many people devel-
oping and exercising the learning virtues in school as both genders are 
schooled).
Time Past and Time Present
9?
Finally, none of the learning virtues and purposes of learning empha-
size self-expression and verbal communication. Chinese learners appear 
to think and behave in accordance with the principle of “action is better 
than words.” Tey prefer showing by doing over speaking about what they 
know.=9
&-lt-.e-leCel Ce.s-s /),/C/,-(l-leCel Eel/eDs
Te aforementioned research that I conducted provides descriptions of 
the European-American and Chinese learning models at the cultural level, 
which is not to be taken as a model of individuals. Tese learning mod-
els are considered as cultural models for two reasons. First, the models are 
derived from learning-related lexicons that are the properties of the two 
cultures, the languages that belong to the cultures, not to speciﬁc individu-
als. Second, the derived ideal-learner images are not speciﬁc real persons, 
but rather two generalized ideal images, despite the fact that a sample of 
participants, taken as representative of each culture’s learners, described 
their ideal image.
Each cultural learning model is recognizable by the members of the cul-
ture. It also serves to inﬂuence and guide (but not determine) the mem-
bers’ thinking and action in learning. Individual learning beliefs are not 
termed as models because they are speciﬁc to individuals. Teir own beliefs 
may di:er from their cultural model as a function of social categories such 
as gender, socioeconomic status, and region of residence, by context (e.g., 
political turmoil and increased educational opportunities), as well as by 
other changing factors such as age and role (e.g., parent versus student). 
Although cultural models do evolve over time, they tend to be stable rela-
tive to individual-level beliefs, which can change more rapidly as a result of 
changed circumstances or development of the person.
)otes
 1. See Mangan, J. A. (Ed.). (1994). A signi&cant social revolution: Cross-cultural 
aspects of the evolution of compulsory education. London: Woborn for a com-
parative account of compulsory education in the West; and see Toch, T. (1991). 
In the name of excellence. New York: Oxford University Press for an account of 
how the educational standard of excellence for all emerged in recent years in 
the United States.
 2. See reference in note ?0, Chapter 2 for details. Also see Wong, N.-Y., Han, 
J.-W., & Lee, P.-Y. (2004). Te mathematics curriculum: Toward Globalization 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
9=
or Westernization? In L.-H. Fan, N.-Y. Wong, J.-F Cai, S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso 
(Eds.), How Chinese learn mathematics: Perspectives from insiders (pp. 2?–!4). 
Singapore: World Scientiﬁc for a comprehensive review of the similarity in cur-
rent East Asian and Western mathematics curriculum.
 3. See National Center for Education Development Research (2001). 200( 年中國
教育綠皮書 [2001 green paper on education in China: Annual report on pol-
icies of China’s education]. Beijing, China: Educational Science Publishing for 
information on China’s compulsory education law and its implementation.
 4. See Chen, F.-N. (2005). Residential patterns of parents and their married chil-
dren in contemporary China: A life course approach. Population Research & 
Policy Review, 2)(2), 125–14= for research on how grandparents still care for 
their grandchildren and married children still care for their ailing parents. See 
Li, J., Holloway, S. D., Bempechat, J., & Loh, E. (200=). Building and using a 
social network: Nurture for low-income Chinese American adolescents’ learn-
ing. In H. Yoshikawa & N. Way (Eds.), Beyond families and schools: How broader 
social contexts shape the adjustment of children and youth in immigrant families 
(pp. ?–25). New Directions in Child and Adolescent Development Series. R. W. 
Larson & L. A. Jensen (Series Eds.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass for research 
on extended family’s co-parenting of Chinese American children.
 5. See Coley, R. J. (2002). An uneven start: Indicators of inequality in school readi-
ness. Princeton, NJ: ETS for the di:erences in school readiness as a function of 
the ﬁrst few years of home life.
 !. See Li, J. (2004). Learning as a task and a virtue: U.S. and Chinese preschoolers 
explain learning. Developmental Psychology, )0(4), 595–!05; and Li, J., & Wang, 
Q. (2004). Perceptions of achievement and achieving peers in U.S. and Chinese 
kindergartners. Social Development, (3(3), 413–43! for research reports on dif-
ferences in learning beliefs between EA and Chinese preschoolers.
 ?. See Kim, U., & Park, Y. S. (200=). Cognitive, relational and social basis of aca-
demic achievement in Confucian cultures: Psychological, indigenous and cul-
tural perspectives. In R. Sorrentino and S. Yamaguchi (Eds.), Handbook of 
motivation and cognition across cultures (pp. 491–515). New York: Elsevier for 
a discussion on home-school compatibility in East Asian societies. See Hill, N. 
E. (2009). Culturally based world views, family processes, and family-school 
interactions. In S. L. Christenson & A. Reschly (Eds.), Handbook of School-
Family Partnerships (pp. 101–12?). New York: Routledge for a review of home-
school incompatibility among U.S. ethnic groups.
 =. See An, S.-H. (2004). Capturing the Chinese way of teaching: Te learning-
questioning and learning-reviewing instructional model. In L.-H. Fan, N.-Y. 
Wong, J.-F Cai, S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso (Eds.), How Chinese learn mathematics: 
Perspectives from insiders (pp. 4!2–4=2). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc; and Wong, 
N.-Y. Te CHC learner’s phenomenon: Its implications on mathematics educa-
tion (same book, pp. 503–534) for reasons Chinese learners and teachers still 
use long-standing Confucian learning methods to learn and to teach math.
 9. See Te Economist (200=, September 11). Huddled classes: How migrants fare 
in school, and what schools can learn from them (print ed.). http://www.econ-
omist.com/world/international/displaystory.cfm?story_id=1220=!31 for the 
most recent report by Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 
Time Past and Time Present
99
of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) on 
immigrant children from and to di:erent countries. Among the four sending 
countries – Turkey, former Soviet Union, ex-Yugoslavia, and China – the ﬁrst 
three showed large variability with regard to where the students came from, 
where they landed, what language they spoke at home, and what SES their fami-
lies had. However, Chinese immigrant children achieved highest irrespective of 
these factors. Tat Chinese children in Macau, Hong Kong, New Zealand, and 
Australia continue to achieve well cannot be attributed to the particular regions 
they came from, their host countries, schools they attended there, and their 
SES levels. Te head of OECD, Andreas Schleicher remarked: “[I]n general, 
socio-economic status has less impact in East Asian countries than in Western 
European ones.” If these key factors did not impact Chinese learners, then we 
are compelled to look somewhere else to explain their learning. I suggest that 
the way in which Chinese parents socialize their children and the way Chinese 
learners engage in learning may be crucial. See also Ran, A. (2001). Traveling 
on parallel tracks: Chinese parents and English teachers. Educational Research, 
)3, 311–32= for clashes between immigrant Chinese parents and British teach-
ers’ expectations of children’s learning. See Zhou, M., & Kim, S. S. (200!). 
Community forces, social capital, and educational achievement: Te case of 
supplementary education in the Chinese and Korean immigrant communities. 
Harvard Educational Review, 7,, 1–29 for manifestations of Confucian learning 
values among Chinese and Korean immigrant families in the United States.
 10. Qin, D. B. (200=). Te other side of the model minority story: Understanding 
psychological and social adjustment of Chinese American students. In G. Li & 
L. Wang (Eds.), Model minority myths revisited: An interdisciplinary approach 
to demystifying Asian American education experiences (pp. 133–15!). Charlotte, 
NC: Information Age.
 11. Holman, R. L. (1991, December 21). Exam hell linked to depression. Wall Street 
Journal, (Eastern ed.). New York: Dec. 2!, p. 4.
 12. Crystal, D. S., Chen, C.-S., Fuligni, A. J., Stevenson, H. W., Hsu, C. –C., Ko, 
H.-J., Kitamura, S., & Kimura, S. (1994). Psychological maladjustment and aca-
demic achievement: A cross-cultural study of Japanese, Chinese, and American 
high school students. Child Development, ,5, ?3=–?53. Also see ﬁrst reference in 
note ? to this chapter for empirical ﬁndings on Korean adolescents.
 13. See U.S. National Survey on Drug Use and Health (2005). Te NSDUH report. 
Retrieved July =, 2009 from http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/2k5/suicide/suicide.
htm for the data provided by the Oﬃce of Applied Studies of Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration, U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services.
 14. See the second reference in note 4 to this chapter for research reporting that 
95F of low-income Chinese immigrant students indicated that their parents 
regard learning as the only way to a good life. Most of these students acknowl-
edged pressure from their parents. While some did not like the pressure, none 
disagreed with their parents’ emphasis on education. Also see, for example, 
Takeuchi, D. T., Chung, R. C. Y., Lin, K. M. et al. (199=). Lifetime and twelve-
month prevalence rates of major depressive episodes and dysthymia among 
Chinese Americans in Log Angeles. American Journal of Psychiatry, (55, 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
100
140?–1414 for a research report on lower rates of mental illness among Asian 
Americans in the United States.
 15. See Qin, D. B.-L. (200=). Doing well vs. feeling well: Understanding family 
dynamics and the psychological adjustment of Chinese immigrant adolescent. 
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 37(1), 22–35 for a qualitative study on socioe-
motional adjustment problems of some immigrant adolescents. Qin compared 
those who adjusted well with those who did not. See also Tseng, V., & Fuligni, 
A. J. (2000). Parent–adolescent language use and relationships among immi-
grant families with East Asian, Filipino, and Latin American Backgrounds. 
Journal of Marriage and the Family, ,2, 4!5–4?!; and Wu, C.-X., & Chao, R. 
K. (2005). Intergenerational cultural conﬂicts in norms of parental warmth 
among Chinese American immigrants. International Journal of Behavioral 
Development, 29(!), 51!–523 for attempts to explain factors related to Asian 
immigrant youth adjustment problems.
 1!. Ishisada, M. (19?4). Te civil service examination: China’s examination hell. 
Chinese Education, 7, 1–?4.
 1?. Peng, S. (199=, July). Communication at Meeting of Chinese American 
Educational Research and Development Association, Chicago, IL.
 1=. LeVine, R. A. (19?4). Parental goals: A cross cultural view. In H. J. Leichter (Ed.), 
Te family as educator (pp. 52–!5). New York: Teachers College Press.
 19. McClelland, D. C. (19!3). Motivational pattern in Southeast Asia with special 
reference to the Chinese case. Journal of Social Issues, (9(1), !–19.
 20. Medrich, E. A., & Griﬃth, J. E. (1992). International mathematics and sci-
ence assessment: What have we learned? Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Education. Note that other than Japan and Hong Kong, other East Asian coun-
tries did not participate in the studies until later in the 1990s.
 21. Teir results were summarized in their inﬂuential book: Stevenson, H. W., & 
Stigler, J. W. (1992). Te learning gap. New York: Simon & Schuster. Interested 
readers may look at the empirical details in their references.
 22. See note 21 to this chapter.
 23. White, M. I., & LeVine, R. A. (19=?). What is an “ii ko” (good child)? In H. 
Stevenson, H. Azuma, & H. Kenji (Eds.). Child development in Japan (pp. 
55–!2). New York: Freeman; and Holloway, S. D. (19==). Concepts of ability and 
e:ort in Japan and the US. Review of Educational Research, 5-, 32?–345.
 24. Hau, K. T., & Salili, F. (1991). Structure and semantic di:erential placement of 
speciﬁc causes: Academic causal attributions by Chinese students in Hong Kong. 
International Journal of Psychology, 2,, 1?5–193; and Salili F., & Hau, K. T. (1994). 
Te e:ect of teachers’ evaluative feedback on Chinese students’ perception of 
ability: A cultural and situational analysis. Educational Studies, 20, 223–23!.
 25. McKnight, C. C., Crosswhite, F. J., Dossey, J. A., Kifer, E., Swa:ord, J. O., Travers, 
K. J., & Cooney, T. J. (19=?). Te underachieving curriculum: Assessing U. S. 
school mathematics from an international perspective. Champaign, IL: Stipes.
 2!. Tobin, J. J., Wu, D. Y. H., & Davidson, D. H. (19=9). Preschool in three cultures: 
Japan, China, and the United States. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
 2?. Lewis, C. C. (1995). Educating hearts and minds: Re.ections on Japanese pre-
school and elementary education. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Time Past and Time Present
101
 2=. Hess, R. D., & Azuma, H. (1991). Cultural support for schooling: Contrasts 
between Japan and the United States. Educational Researcher, 20(9), 2–=.
 29. Kobayashi, Y. (1994). Conceptual acquisition and change through social inter-
action. Human Development, 37, 232–241; Matsushita, K. (1994). Acquiring 
mathematical knowledge through semantic and pragmatic problem solving. 
Human Development, 37, 220–232; and Inagaki, K., Hatano, G., & Morita, E. 
(199=). Construction of mathematical knowledge through whole-class discus-
sion. Learning and Instruction, -, 503–52!.
 30. Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert J. (1999). Te teaching gap: Best ideas from the world’s 
teachers for improving education in the classroom. New York: Te Free Press.
 31. Au, T. K. F., & Harackiewicz, J. M. (19=!). Te e:ects of perceived parental 
expectations on Chinese children’s mathematics performance. Merrill-Palmer 
Quarterly, 32(4), 3=3–392; Hess, R. D., Chang, C.-M., & McDevitt, T. M. (19=?). 
Cultural variations in family belief about children’s performance in mathemat-
ics: Comparisons among People’s Republic of China, Chinese American, and 
Caucasian-American families. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 1?9–1==; 
and Yao, E. (19=5). A comparison of family characteristics of Asian-American 
and Anglo-American high achievers. International Journal of Comparative 
Sociology, 2,(34), 19=–20=.
 32. Gonzales, P., William, T., Jocylin, L., Roey, S., Kastberg, D., & Brewalt, S. (200=). 
Highlights from TISMM 2007. Washington, DC: National Center for Education 
Statistics; Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
(2003). Education at a glance: OECD indicators 2003. Paris, OECD; OECD (200!). 
Education at a glance: OECO indicators 200,. Paris: OECD. In the study entitled 
International Assessment of Educational Progress (IAEP) as conducted by the 
Education Testing Service in 1990–1991, China did participate. Teir students 
were ranked ﬁrst in their math achievement; see Lapointe, A. E., Mead, N. A., & 
Askew, J. M. (1992). Learning mathematics. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing 
Service. See OECD (2009). PISA 2009 results: Executive summary. Retrieved 
January 5, 2011 from http://www.pisa.oecd.org/dataoecd/34/!0/4!!19?03.pdf 
for the most recent PISA results.
 33. See Gardner, H. (19=9). To open minds. New York: Basic Books; and Ginsberg, 
E. (1992). Not just a matter of English. HERDSA News, ()(1), !–= as examples 
for such reactions to Chinese learning from the West.
 34. Watkins, D. A., & Biggs, J. B. (Eds.) (199!). Te Chinese learner: Cultural, psy-
chological, and contextual in.uences. Hong Kong: Comparative Education 
Research Centre.
 35. Watkins, D. A., & Biggs, J. B. (Eds.) (2001). Teaching the Chinese learner: 
Psychological and pedagogical perspectives. Hong Kong: Comparative Education 
Research Centre.
 3!. See ﬁrst reference in note !9 to Chapter 2.
 3?. Cheng, K.-M. (199!). Te quality of primary education: A case study of Zhejiang 
Province, China. Paris: International Institute for Educational Planning.
 3=. See second reference in note 9 to this chapter.
 39. Jin, L., & Cortazzi, M. (199=). Dimensions of dialogue: Large classes in China. 
International Journal of Educational Research, 29(=), ?39–?!1.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
102
 40. Gao, L.-B., & Watkins, D. (2001). Identifying and assessing the conceptions 
of teaching of secondary school physics teachers in China. British Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 7(, 443–4!9.
 41. Ho, I. T. (2001). Are Chinese teachers authoritarian? In D. A. Watkins & J. B. 
Biggs (Eds.), Teaching the Chinese learner: Psychological and pedagogical per-
spectives. (pp. 99–114). Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research Centre, 
p. 102.
 42. Tang, T. K. W. (2001). Te inﬂuence of teacher education on conceptions 
of teaching and learning. In D. A. Watkins & J. B. Biggs (Eds.), Teaching the 
Chinese learner: Psychological and pedagogical perspectives (pp. 221–23=). Hong 
Kong: Comparative Education Research Centre.
 43. Marton, F., Dall’Alba, G., & Tse, L. K. (199!). Memorizing and understanding: 
Te keys to the paradox? In D. A. Watkins & J. B. Biggs (Eds.), Te Chinese 
learner (pp. !9–=3). Hong Kong: Comparative Education Research Centre.
 44. Dahlin, B., & Watkins, D. (2000). Te role of repetition in the processes of 
memorizing and understanding: A comparison of the views of Western and 
Chinese secondary school students in Hong Kong. British Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 70, !5–=4.
 45. See ﬁrst reference in note ?5 to Chapter 2, p. 250.
 4!. See note 2= to this chapter.
 4?. See note 40 to Chapter 2.
 4=. See ﬁrst reference in note ?5 to Chapter 2, p. 253.
 49. See Conti, R., Amabile, T. M., & Pollack, S. (1995). Enhancing intrinsic moti-
vation, learning, and creativity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
2(, 110?–111!; Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (19=5). Intrinsic motivation and self-
 determination in human behavior. New York: Academic Press; and Hennessey, 
B. A., & Amabile, T. M. (199=). Reward, intrinsic motivation, and creativity. 
American Psychologist, 53, !?4–!?5 for a sample of this well-established line of 
research in psychology.
 50. Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (1999). Rethinking the value of choice: A cul-
tural perspective on intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 7,, 349–3!!; and Bao, X.-H., & Lam, S.-F. (200=). Who makes the 
choice? Rethinking the role of autonomy and relatedness in Chinese children’s 
motivation. Child Development, 79, 2!9–2=3.
 51. See Berry, J. W. (19!9). On cross-cultural comparability. International Journal of 
Psychology, ), 119–12= for a more comprehensive discussion of the emic versus 
etic distinction in cross-cultural research.
 52. D’Andrade, R. G. (1992). Schemas and motivation. In R. G. D’Andrade & C. 
Strauss (Eds.), Human motives and cultural models (pp. 23–44). New York: 
Cambridge University Press; D’Andrade, R. G. (1995). Te development of cogni-
tive anthropology. New York: Cambridge University Press; Harkness, S. & Super, 
C. M. (1999). From parents’ cultural belief systems to behavior: Implications for 
the development of early intervention programs. In L. Eldering & P. Leseman 
(Eds.), Eﬀective early education: Cross-cultural perspectives (pp. !?–90). New 
York: Falmer; Quinn, N., & Holland, D. (19=?). Introduction. In D. Holland 
& N. Quinn (Eds.), Cultural models in language and thought (pp. 3–40). New 
York: Cambridge University Press; and Shweder, R. A. (1991). Tinking through 
cultures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Time Past and Time Present
103
 53. Rosch, E. (19?5). Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: General, (0), 192–233; and Shaver, P., Schwartz, 
J., Kirson, D., & O’Connor, C. (19=?). Emotion knowledge: Further explora-
tion of a prototype approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 
10!1–10=!.
 54. See Li, J. (2001). Chinese conceptualization of learning. Ethos, 29, 111–13?; 
and Li, J. (2003). U.S. and Chinese cultural beliefs about learning. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 95(2), 25=–2!? for details of these studies.
 55. Forster, K. I. (19?!). Accessing the mental lexicon. In R. J. Wales & E. Walker 
(Eds.), New approaches to language mechanisms (pp. 25?–2=?). Amsterdam: 
North Holland; and Morton, J. (19!9). Interaction of information in word rec-
ognition. Psychological Review, 7,, 1!5–1?=.
 5!. See Wang, H., Chang, B.-R., Li, Y.-S., Lin, L.-H., Liu, J., Sun, Y.-L. et al. (19=!). 
現代漢語頻率詞典 [Dictionary of the frequency of vocabulary in modern 
Chinese]. Beijing, China: Beijing Languages Institute Press for the Chinese term, 
and see Francis, N. W., & Kucera, H. (19=2). Frequency analysis of English usage: 
Lexicon and grammar. Boston, MA: Houghton MiBin for the English term.
 5?. See note 54 to this chapter.
 5=. See second reference in note 53 to this chapter.
 59. See note 54 to this chapter.
 !0. See second reference in note 53 to this chapter.
 !1. Li, J. (2002). A cultural model of learning: Chinese “heart and mind for want-
ing to learn.” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 33(3), 24=–2!9; and Li, J., 
& Fischer, K. W. (2004). Toughts and emotions in American and Chinese 
cultural beliefs about learning. In D. Y. Dai & R. Sternberg (Eds.), Motivation, 
emotion, and cognition: Integrative perspectives on intellectual functioning and 
development (pp. 3=5–41=). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
 !2. Bruner, J. S. (19=!). Value presupposition of developmental theory. In L. Cirillo 
& S. Wapner (Eds.), Value presuppositions in theories of human development  
(pp. 19–2=). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; Rogers, C. (19!9). Freedom to learn. 
Columbus, OH: Merrill; and Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Rathunde, K. (199=). Te 
development of the person: An experiential perspective on the ontogenesis of 
psychological complexity. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology. 
Vol (: Teoretical models of human development (5th ed., pp. !35–!=4). New 
York: Wiley, p. !39.
 !3. See ﬁrst reference in note 52 to this chapter.
 !4. See ﬁrst reference in note !1 to this chapter.
 !5. Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 52, 1–2!.
 !!. Brown, T. (1994). A:ective dimensions of meaning. In W. F. Overton & D. S. 
Palermo (Eds.), Te nature and ontogenesis of meaning (pp. 1!?–190). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
 !?. Buck, R. (1999). Te biological a:ects: A typology. Psychological Review, (0,(2), 
301–33!.
 !=. Atkinson, J. W., & Rynor, J. O. (19?=). Personality, motivation, and achievement. 
New York: Wiley; and Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination 
theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and 
well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1), !=–?=.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
104
 !9. See note !1 to this chapter.
 ?0. See the third reference in note 1 to Chapter 2.
 ?1. See note 54 to this chapter as well as Wu, S.-P., & Lai, C.-Y. (1992). 白話四書五
經全好勉 [Complete translations of the four books and ﬁve classics into mod-
ern Chinese]. Beijing, China: International Culture Press.
 ?2. See note !9 to Chapter 2.
 ?3. See the ﬁrst reference in note 54 to this chapter.
 ?4. See note 44 to this chapter for related research on Chinese students in compar-
ison with British students.
 ?5. See the ﬁrst reference in note 54 to this chapter.
 ?!. See note 2= to this chapter for similar research ﬁndings on Japanese children.
 ??. See note 54 to this chapter.
 ?=. See note 50 to this chapter.
 ?9. See note 4? to Chapter 2 for research on Chinese respect as a positive self-
conscious emotion.
 =0. See the second and third references in note ?5 to Chapter 2.
 =1. Brickman, P., & Bulman, R. J. (19??). Pleasure and pain in social compari-
son. In J. M. Suls & R. L. Miller (Eds.), Social comparison processes: Teoretical 
and empirical perspectives (pp. 149–1=!). Washington, DC: Hemisphere; and 
Ruble, D. N., Eisenberg, R., & Higgins, E. T. (1994). Developmental changes 
in achievement evaluations: Motivational implications of self-other di:erences. 
Child Development, ,5, 1095–1110.
 =2. See the ﬁrst reference in note !1 to this chapter. Also see Tangney, J. P. (2002). 
Humility. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology 
(pp. 411–419). New York: Oxford University Press; and Exline, J. J., & Geyer, 
A. L. (2004). Perceptions of humility: A preliminary study. Self and Identity, 
3, 95–114 for recent writings on similar concepts of humility in the West and 
related research.
 =3. See the third reference in note 29 to this chapter and also see ﬁrst reference in 
note ?5 to Chapter 2.
 =4. See the ﬁrst reference in note !1 to this chapter and Stipek, D. (199=). Di:erences 
between Americans and Chinese in the circumstances evoking pride, shame, 
and guilt. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29(5), !1!–!29.
 =5. Mascolo, M. F., Fischer, K. W., & Li, J. (2003). Te dynamic construction of 
emotions in development: A component systems approach. In N. Davidson, 
K. Scherer, & H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook of aﬀective science (pp. 3?5–40=). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
 =!. See the ﬁrst reference in note 54 to this chapter.
 =?. See the ﬁrst reference in note !1 to this chapter.
 ==. See the second and third references in note 51 to Chapter 2; and Fung, H., & 
Chen, E. C.-H. (2001). Across time and beyond skin: Self and transgression 
in the everyday socialization of shame among Taiwanese preschool children. 
Social Development, (0(3), 420–43?.
 =9. See Chapter = for a presentation of the most recent research on speaking versus 
action among EA and Chinese people.
