!05
4
Mind-Oriented and Virtue-Oriented  
Learning Processes
Given the cultural learning models, an important question to consider is 
how these cultural models may inﬂuence the actual learning process in 
which the members of each culture engage. I attempt to address this ques-
tion in this chapter. Before proceeding, however, it is important to lay out 
diﬀerent kinds of human learning and clarify to what kind of learning the 
cultural models are most relevant.
&i()s o, -./a( lear(i(g
It is a well-established scientiﬁc fact that human beings are capable of learn-
ing virtually unlimited things. Human learning takes place in many ways, 
and it starts even before birth. For the most part, infants and young children 
learn much about the world without being speciﬁcally taught; for example, 
they acquire vocabulary of their native tongue and social norms of behavior 
without deliberate adult instructions.! However, because it proceeds more 
or less without the need for eﬀort on the part of young children or deliber-
ate instructions on the part of adults, this kind of individual learning is not 
directly inﬂuenced by culture. It is instead testimony to the human capacity 
to learn.2
However, the emergence of human culture led to the accumulation 
of knowledge and skill, including all the tangible and intangible cultural 
artifacts (e.g., tools and symbols). Tis cultural development demanded a 
totally diﬀerent kind of learning, one that requires eﬀort from the learner 
and eﬀort from the person who can impart the knowledge/skill. Tis kind 
of learning can still be seen widely in informal settings in today’s world, 
such as a mother teaching her child how to feed pigs, or an older brother 
showing his younger siblings how to shoot a jump shot.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!06
As knowledge and skills continued to accumulate and division of labor 
widened during the long preliterate human history, most cultures relied 
on apprenticeship as a form of learning. In this system, most learners went 
to a master to learn a craf or trade such as blacksmithing or pottery mak-
ing. Apprenticeship learning took an extended period of time to complete 
before the apprentice could be regarded as having mastered the trade. 
Te typical learning process was one-on-one teaching, with the appren-
tice observing the master intently and starting with low-levels of tasks and 
gradually taking on higher levels of tasks. Most skills were not explicitly 
explained by the master but were embedded in the activities. It was the 
apprentice’s responsibility to learn the skill. Apprenticeship learning was 
also part of productive labor, producing tangible products such as tailor-
ing and carpentry that contributed to the livelihood or the business of the 
master.:
While apprenticeship learning continued, human cultures also devel-
oped literacy, arithmetic, and other higher-level and specialized knowledge/
skills. Such new forms of knowledge/skill enabled better human productiv-
ity and survival; therefore, transmitting such knowledge/skill became nec-
essary. Tese new forms of knowledge/skill diﬀered fundamentally from 
previous forms in that they could be written down on material (clay, stone, 
bronze, bark, cloth, and later paper) for preservation, unlike the previous 
reliance on human memory and oral transmission. Tis advancement of 
knowledge preservation also eased transmission of knowledge. Tis devel-
opment ushered in formal schooling where such knowledge could be sys-
tematically transmitted to the young. Te earliest formal schooling begun 
in the Middle East around ;000 BCE and in China during the Xia Dynasty 
around 2000 BCE, where young boys were taught literacy and other impor-
tant skills (poetry, music, and rites, among others). However, before mod-
ern time, formal schooling existed only for the ruling class and the elite in 
the West and aristocracy in China.;
Te learning that formal schooling demanded was yet a shif in kind. 
Reading, writing, and arithmetic lay in the heart of schooling, and they were 
encoded in intangible symbols that were abstract by nature. Learning such 
things was diﬀerent not only with regard to content, but more importantly 
to the great mental eﬀort that was required from the learner. Yet, learn-
er’s eﬀort alone was no guarantee for mastery; a specialist, the teacher, was 
needed for ensuring such learning. Te teacher had to achieve the intended 
knowledge in the ﬁrst place, usually demonstrating superior mastery before 
he could be acknowledged and granted the privilege to teach the young. 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!07
When teaching, the teacher had to continue to exert sustained mental eﬀort 
to ensure his pupils’ successful learning.
With industrialization came mass education. For the ﬁrst time in human 
history, formal schooling was not controlled by the powerful and the elite 
but extended to every child wherever the compulsory education law exists. 
Compulsory education is still expanding, and it is quite possible that such 
education will be realized across the globe in the foreseeable future.5
As knowledge grew more extensive, it also grew more abstract. Both 
the quantity and increasingly abstract nature posed great challenges to 
learning. How best to teach and to learn given the speciﬁc cultural heri-
tage became important questions for many cultures. Western and Chinese/
East Asian learning traditions were developed in response to these ques-
tions and concerns. As discussed in Chapter 2, the diﬀerent paths that 
the West and East Asia followed resulted in quite diﬀerent approaches to 
learning.
However, present-day formal schooling shares some common charac-
teristics regardless of the culture in which education takes place. Two such 
commonalities are particularly noteworthy. First, the world has been wit-
nessing convergence of knowledge, mostly because of Western contribu-
tions. Such knowledge has become the common human heritage regarded 
as important for any child to learn. Mathematics and science are such 
knowledge. Tere is hardly any current formal education system in any cul-
ture that does not include math and science in their curriculum. Second, 
formal schooling proceeds uniformly inside the classroom with additional 
learning assigned outside the classroom. Tis kind of learning aims at mas-
tery in the most eﬃcient way by the greatest number of learners. Regardless 
of how much inherent ability an individual learner has, any given learner is 
likely to spend much more time and to exert much more eﬀort to acquire 
currently desirable knowledge than the same learner would have a century 
or two ago, regardless of the culture.
Still, as research documents, individual culture’s ways of learning (and 
teaching) as formed in their long histories are unlikely to disappear even 
for cultures that have incorporated other cultures’ bodies of knowledge 
and pedagogy. Instead, these culturally formed ways of learning may con-
tinue to shape how learners actually engage in their learning. What seems 
to emerge is that cultures retain the best of their own practices as a more 
basic learning approach while assimilating elements from other cultures in 
order to respond to new challenges of learning. It is therefore important 
to describe each culture’s basic learning process. Tis understanding could 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!08
help us appreciate the more complex process of borrowing and incorpo-
ration of new elements from other cultures.
lear(i(g ?rocess i( AesBer( a() c-i(ese c.lB.res
In this section, I describe how each culture’s learners typically engage in 
the learning process. Tese portrayals of the respective learning processes 
are based on empirical research on learners’ self-descriptions and reﬂec-
tions, observations of academic learning inside and outside school, as well 
as observations of other but equally eﬀortful types of learning such as paint-
ing, dance, martial arts, and playing musical instruments. Although some 
examples come from speciﬁc individuals, particularly the cultural icons of 
learning, I do not suggest that these portrayals represent the learning pro-
cesses that every individual of the culture follows. Te discussion is only 
meaningful with regard to general cultural trends and patterns as found by 
research, not processes that are undertaken by speciﬁc individuals. Neither 
are these portrayals about pedagogy and teaching – that is, how school cur-
riculum is organized and executed and how teachers teach in the classroom. 
Tese portrayals are about learning.
Mind-Oriented Learning Process in the West
In describing Western learners’ process of learning, I highlight the pro-
cesses of active engagement, exploration and inquiry, thinking and critical 
thinking, and self-expression and communication (see Figure ;.!).
Active Engagement
From my study of the English lexicon of learning,6 active learning emerged 
as the very ﬁrst major category of speciﬁc learning processes.7 It has the fol-
lowing typical words and phrases: active learning, acquainting/ familiarizing 
oneself with something, competition, experience, getting the hang of it, 
hands-on, learn by doing, learning it the hard way, practice, study, training, 
trial and error, and work. As can be seen clearly, these are the actual activi-
ties in which learners engage. Tey are behaviors that can also be observed. 
What is emphasized in these expressions is the active nature of learning, not 
what is being learned or even what strategies are being used. When learners 
are said to be actively engaged, they are physically present, frequently with 
their hands and bodies, not just their minds, fully involved.
Descriptions of European-American ideal but real learners that I col-
lected also conﬁrm the active nature of learning. Many respondents wrote 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!0C
of active involvement in the learning process, for example, reading all kinds 
of books and newspapers, browsing the Internet, writing papers, perform-
ing observations, trying out ideas, and getting involved in activities.
Aside from these words and descriptions, it is a common scene in most 
Western schools that learners are highly encouraged to go to the library 
and get on the Internet to research topics of interest, to read books, to 
write essays and reports of their discoveries, to construct objects (e.g., a 
papier-mâché model of a volcano), to make models to demonstrate their 
understanding (e.g., a cardboard box showing the terrain and animals of 
the tundra), to do scientiﬁc experiments (e.g., lab experiment or following 
a hurricane’s movement over time), and to document their observations.
Another common form of active learning is taking children out on 
ﬁeldtrips. Entire classes of students go to real-life settings such as muse-
ums, aquariums, observatories, historical sites, power plants, and factories. 
Students take notes on site and discuss and write about what they have 
learned. A third form of active learning is the kaleidoscopic aferschool 
program. Many public and private schools oﬀer many diﬀerent kinds of 
programs that are, by nature, learning by doing (activities). Children learn 
crafs, such as how to draw, sculpt, play musical instruments, make books, 
make jewelry, dance, and play various sports. Finally, during the summer 
break, students also join camps and organized trips to other places within 
their country and abroad. Many such camps and trips are for fun, but many 
have a strong component of learning by doing.
Te best cases can be found in many Western preschools such as 
Montessori schools, schools inspired by John Dewey’s philosophy such 
as Shady Hill School in Cambridge, Massachusetts and Putney School 
in Vermont, and without doubt the much admired preschools of Reggio 
Emilia, Italy. What strikes visitors not from the West (and even from the 
West) is how much emphasis is placed on the active nature of children as 
learners. Sitting in a classroom to be instructed day in and day out is not 
the mode of these exemplary learners. Tey engage in learning with their 
senses, curiosities, experiences, and questions about their surroundings, 
human or physical, real or imagined. Tey draw, build, investigate, and 
design things in order to learn and to study them. For example, stepping 
into a puddle afer rain leads to children’s study of how water and mirrors 
reﬂect things. Children draw their images standing by the puddle or on top 
of a mirror, learning and thinking about what they discovered. Tese young 
learners also study man-made modern environments such as supermarkets 
by gathering information, by talking to store managers and shoppers, and 
by making suggestions on how to improve the stores.8
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!!0
Children also have plenty of opportunities to be active in learning out-
side school. Many museums are interactive just for that purpose. In other 
words, children are welcome to visit museums where they can touch things, 
take things apart and put them together, play, experiment, and explore. In 
Philadelphia, there is even a children’s museum called the “Please Touch 
Museum” where young children are invited to start touching and playing 
with their exhibits as soon as they enter the museum. Children’s museums 
in the West are exemplary in their eﬀort to actively involve children in 
learning and exploration.
In addition to and ofentimes embedded in the observable active learn-
ing engagements, there are a host of what is called learning strategies or self-
regulated learning strategies that Western learners employ in their learning. 
Tese may not always be observable, but they are nonetheless very active 
processes. In general, learners use three kinds of strategies: cognitive strat-
egies, metacognitive strategies, and support strategies as Paul Pintrich and 
colleagues labeled them. Te ﬁrst kind, cognitive strategies, are more basic. 
Tey include three speciﬁc processes: (!) processing of information from 
written material and lectures such as rehearsal (e.g., repeating words over 
and over and using ﬂash cards to recall information); (2) elaboration such 
as paraphrasing concepts and summarizing readings; and (:) organization 
such as outlining, grouping, and combining previously unorganized mate-
rial. Te second kind, metacognitive strategies, also include three speciﬁc 
processes: (!) planning (e.g., setting goals and steps), (2) monitoring (e.g., 
one’s own progress and understanding), and (:) regulating (e.g., allotting and 
adjusting one’s review according to one’s understanding). Te third kind, 
resource strategies, include (!) one’s time management (e.g.,  prioritizing 
one’s competing tasks), (2) maintaining a conducive study environment, (:) 
regulating one’s eﬀort (e.g., increasing eﬀort for more challenging work), 
(;) peer learning (e.g., forming study groups), and (5) seeking help when 
one needs it. Tese strategies have indeed been found to be commonly used 
by Western learners (more than Asian).C
Exploration and Inquiry
As detailed in Chapter 2, inquiry is of central importance to Western learn-
ing. What then does the learner do when he or she is said to engage in the 
process of inquiry? Te learning terms that were sorted into the concep-
tual group inquiry in my lexicon study contained these typical expressions: 
visual intake, visualization, questioning, brainstorming, exploring, breaking 
things down, experimenting, applying ideas, relating ideas, analyzing, problem 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!!!
solving, putting things together, and synthesizing. Tese terms emphasize the 
mental activities in the process of inquiry that learners carry out.
Tere are many facets of the notion of inquiry, and all are important. 
First, our most common human experience in daily life enables us to notice 
discrepancies between our current beliefs or knowledge about things in the 
world and those of others, or discrepancy between our self-derived beliefs 
and those of authority (i.e., parents, teachers, scientists, politicians, media, 
and government). For example, as a case for the ﬁrst kind of discrepancy, a 
child has learned how to swim and believes that everyone can learn how to 
swim, but her friend tried to learn and failed. Te friend told her that she 
cannot learn how to swim. Te child is likely to be in a state of realizing that 
her own belief and her friend’s are diﬀerent. As an example of the second 
kind of discrepancy, an elementary school student thought that lobsters 
were gigantic bugs when his parents ﬁrst brought them home. He there-
fore did not believe that lobsters were edible, and in fact the idea of eating 
bugs was scary and turned him oﬀ. But his parents kept inciting him into 
tasting the delicious “bug.” If the child were an inquisitive learner, he would 
likely wonder why a bug could be delicious as claimed by his parents, and 
perhaps he would want to ﬁnd out why his parents did not think lobsters 
were bugs.
In situations like this, most people raise questions. When Western learn-
ers ﬁnd themselves in this state, they are not only admired but highly encour-
aged to express their questions (not just keep the questions to themselves) 
and to look for answers on their own. Tus, being observant about existing 
beliefs and knowledge in oneself and in others and recognizing discrepan-
cies are the ﬁrst step in order for one to raise questions. Questions carrying 
the potential of prompting an inquiry are necessary before the learner can 
continue. Tis is why in Western intellectual tradition and pedagogy, ask-
ing questions is so prized. Being able to pose good research questions is 
the high point for graduate training, dissertation writing, and ultimately a 
successful academic life.
Curiosity and interest are similar mental states conducive to asking 
questions. A learner who is not curious and not interested in a topic is not 
believed to be able to raise questions, certainly not good and worthy ques-
tions for inquiry. When a learner is curious about something, he or she 
wants to know more about it. When a learner is interested in something, he 
or she moves beyond the momentary spurt of attention to which curiosity 
may be closely linked. For example, a learner with an interest in math is 
someone who likes math and is eager to learn more on that subject. Te ﬁne 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!!2
distinction between curiosity and interest in motivating the learner is not 
the focus here (the aﬀective dimensions will be discussed in Chapter 5).!0 
Suﬃce it to say that both of these mental activities and attentional states are 
likely to generate questions similar to noticing discrepancies. Curiosity and 
interest frequently do result in good and worthy questions that can lead to 
inquiry. In Western learning, curious and interested learners are in some 
ways more prized than the discrepancy-dependent questioners because 
their curiosity and interest are indicative of an enduring and highly valued 
disposition in the learners: inquisitiveness.
Afer raising questions, the learner may begin the process of  exploration. 
Tis process for children, particularly toddlers and preschool children, is 
usually, barring any endangerment, unrestricted. Children are ensured 
freedom to explore anyway they prefer, be it something that happens to 
draw their attention or something that is their “obsession” such as a child 
being completely enamored with dinosaurs. Adults and teachers are delib-
erately hands-oﬀ, leaving children to wander oﬀ, to take apart or put 
together objects (and many do break objects), to ask questions endlessly, 
to make noise, even to make mistakes and get frustrated. Adults and teach-
ers are reluctant to spoon-feed children with the “right” ways to do things 
or the “correct” answers to their questions because they believe that chil-
dren’s natural curiosity and interest need to be protected and promoted. 
Overly involved adult teaching in this process is considered as “interfering” 
and therefore stiﬂing children’s sense of wonder about the world, which is 
regarded as the most precious quality in children.
Spontaneity in children’s learning is synonymous with their explora-
tion. Children, particularly preschool children, are believed to possess a 
spontaneous thirst for learning. Tis belief rests largely on the scientiﬁc fact 
that children’s rapidly developing brain and body enable them to perform 
many cognitive and social feats such as inventing words and other symbols 
and to imagine social scenes in their pretend play without the apparent 
need for heavy-handed instructions from adults. Preschool children are 
also admired for their innocence from conventional constraints. Tis is one 
reason why children’s thoughts, expressions, drawings, and behaviors seem 
inherently creative to adults.!! Some world-renowned artists – for exam-
ple, Picasso, Klee, and Miro – were so fascinated with children’s drawings 
that they imitated them and perhaps discovered their essence. Constraining 
young children in the classroom and subjecting them to the strong disci-
pline of studying are considered inappropriate because this type of adult 
control makes children passive. Passivity in children is the death of explora-
tion and inquiry. Passivity, therefore, is to be prevented as much as possible. 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!!:
If a preschool in the West wants to be successful, the best way to achieve 
that goal is to make children spontaneous, lively, and exploratory learners.
A vivid example oﬀered by Howard Gardner in his book To Open 
Minds can illustrate this precious process of exploring by their toddler 
son Benjamin and their strong eﬀort to protect the child from being 
 “interfered” with by well-intentioned but not so inquiry-oriented Chinese 
adult helpers:
When Howard Gardner and his wife Ellen Winner spent a month in 
Nanjing in the late !C80’s for studying Chinese children’s arts educa-
tion, they stayed in a hotel. Tere was a key slot for guests to insert their 
keys before leaving the hotel. Teir one-year-and-half-old son Benjamin 
enjoyed playing with the key. He also tried to put the key into the key 
slot. But because the slot was narrow and rectangular, it was hard for 
the toddler to succeed. Since he seemed to have so much fun with this 
key and the key slot, the parents did not intervene, leaving him alone to 
engage in his exploration. But the Chinese hotel attendants and pass-
ers-by would watch the child, then show and even help him put the key 
into the key slot.!2
One repeated reason that the preschools in Reggio Emilia are regarded as the 
champion of Western preschool education is that children are truly allowed 
to explore themselves and their worlds. Tese Italian children enjoy com-
plete freedom of exploration. But unlike the incident described in Gardner’s 
book, these children’s explorations – including their movements, activities, 
questions, conversations, and other utterances – as well as their detours 
and setbacks are recorded, analyzed, and revisited. In other words, their 
explorations are valued so much that the skillful teachers actively follow 
up, support, and guide these children’s explorations to the next level, bear-
ing intellectual and artistic fruit. Tese children’s drawings, sculptures, and 
other constructed objects as well as their conversations with peers stun the 
world with their spontaneity, sophistication, and beauty, yet show no trace 
of adult educators’ interventions and impositions. Reggio Emilia once again 
demonstrates that there is no limit to how much children can explore and 
inquire even at preschool age.!:
Te inquiry process involving older children and college students is 
somewhat diﬀerent. Older learners, too, are encouraged to explore and ask 
questions, but the actual process is not purely self-initiated and spontaneous 
with parents and teachers staying hands-oﬀ. School-aged learners attend 
compulsory education in most Western countries. Tis means that they 
must receive either a certain number of years of education (typically nine 
or more years) or they must attend school up to a certain age (e.g., sixteen 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!!;
in most U.S. states). Schools are usually charged to teach a curriculum of 
government-mandated content (e.g., subject matters), pedagogy (e.g., there 
must be instructions and feedback given to students), and achievement stan-
dards (e.g., passing statewide or national tests). Completely free exploring 
by students alone cannot guarantee the attainment of such a curriculum.
However, compared to Asian learners, Western schoolchildren still have 
much more freedom to inquire into many topics. Beyond sitting in the 
classroom listening to the teacher, children are ofen asked to build models. 
For instance, in learning about atoms, middle school children may be asked 
to learn the basic structure of atoms, and then go home and ﬁnd household 
materials (e.g., yarn, cloth, dried noodles, plastic, and crayons) to build a 
model of an atom. Each child then brings a model built with diﬀerent mate-
rial back to school. Tis is a typical process of engaging schoolchildren in 
the process of inquiry. Without such personal exploration, children may 
not be able to gain such clear understanding of what atoms are and how 
they function. Te diverse approaches by diﬀerent children also serve to 
inform each of them that there are many ways to achieve understanding 
and discoveries.
Children also frequently replicate scientiﬁc experiments in class that 
were done by the original scientists who discovered the laws. By going 
through the experiments, children learn step by step how such laws were 
discovered. Ofentimes, children are given opportunities to vary from the 
original experiments in order to formulate their own hypotheses, gather 
genuinely new data, and draw informed conclusions. In other words, this 
learning process models afer the real scientiﬁc inquiry. Moreover, children 
participate in science fairs in most schools, where they must come up with 
their own research topics without any teacher input and follow the inquiry 
process to complete their projects.!; At the science fairs, they present their 
discoveries and the steps they took to make their discoveries.
In English and social studies, inquiry is also highly valued. Children’s 
learning in these disciplines is not characterized by memorization, for 
example, of a whole model essay or poems in order for them to imitate. 
Instead, they are required to investigate and analyze topics. For investiga-
tion in a history class, for example, children may dress up as historical ﬁg-
ures in order to reenact an important event, or they may build a set and 
present a short scene about a historical movement. Children may also inter-
view real people who lived through the Great Depression or World War II 
and then write a research report about what they found. My son in third 
grade engaged in his English project where he was asked to imagine himself 
as a plant. His task was to observe and record how he-as-the-plant grew, 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!!5
what support he needed, what enabled him to mature, and what maturity 
entailed. He went to his grandmother’s vegetable garden behind their house 
and found a bitter squash sprout. He decided to be that sprout. He went out 
everyday and observed how the sprout grew. He also watered the plant. He 
took notes on all of his observations. Eventually, this plant bore many bitter 
squashes growing from small to large. He wrote an essay about the sprout’s 
growth and its life stages. In this type of learning, inquiry as inspired by 
great scientists such as Darwin is still commonly promoted and prized in 
Western schools.
Tis exploratory and inquiring spirit is not limited just to school, but it 
also permeates the whole society, particularly children’s TV programs and 
Web sites. As an example, in the United States, Public Broadcasting Services 
(PBS) presents preschool and school-aged children with many excellent 
daily shows that focus on engaging children in exploring and inquiring 
into the world, ranging from the jungle, the ocean, and space to the human 
world of cities, countryside, neighborhood, and home. Tere are also shows 
that teach children and teenagers how to design things and how to ﬁnd 
out about things in the world. Among these shows, Curious George, It’s a 
Big, Big World, Kratt’s Creatures, and Design Squad are children’s favorites. 
Similarly, many commercial TV programs also oﬀer shows that encourage 
children to explore the world.
Finally, the Nobel Museum in Stockholm keeps the autobiographies 
of Nobel laureates. A perusal of recent Nobel Laureates in physics reveals 
clearly that all of these scientiﬁc icons, almost without exception, spent their 
childhood exploring, investigating, building things, and tasting the fruits of 
their own discoveries. Here is the testimony of George F. Smoot, who won 
the Nobel Prize in physics in 2006 for his co-discovery of the blackbody 
form and anisotropy of the cosmic microwave background radiation. As a 
child, he was curious about the moon:
Te ﬁrst pivotal event I remember in my development as an inquiring 
scientist began with a visit to my cousins, as we took a night drive across 
the state of Alabama. . . . Excited from the visit with my cousins, I stayed 
awake, looking out the window rather than taking a nap. I noticed that 
the moon was following us mile afer mile tagging along like my dog but 
with greater speed and persistence. I asked my parents, “How does the 
moon know to follow us?” Tey told me that the moon followed all the 
cars, not just ours. I was intrigued and wanted to know how the moon did 
this. Was it immensely superior to a dog? My parents patiently explained 
that the moon was very big and very far away and thus the angle did not 
change noticeably as we drove for miles. Tey gave examples of near and 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!!6
far objects that we could see along the way, so I could realize this for 
myself. I was impressed by how big and far away the moon must be but 
even more impressed that one could understand what they saw in the 
world and that it was so beautifully simple and clear when visualized 
in the proper way. It was a startling revelation that the world could be 
understood by simple rational evaluation.!5
Roy J. Glauber, the 2005 Nobel laureate in physics for his contribution 
to the quantum theory of optical coherence, also wrote about his childhood 
curiosity and exploration:
[W]hen I was four, we actually had a radio. It occupied a wooden cabinet 
about the size of a steamer trunk. I remember insisting there must be a 
man inside it. He had given his name as Maurice Chevalier. Discovering 
that the cabinet top was hinged, I opened it and can still feel my baDe-
ment at discovering within it only a few glowing radio tubes. Electricity 
mystiﬁed me throughout childhood and I vividly remember once at age 
seven trying to see what it was all about. Plugging lamp cords into wall 
sockets must lead to the ﬂow of something through those wires, but what-
ever it was, one never got to see it before it was swallowed up by the lamp. 
One morning I awoke early, determined to catch sight of it. I screwed the 
wires of a short length of lamp cord into a male plug and inserted it into 
a wall socket, leaving free the frayed wires at the other end. Tere was a 
bright blue ﬂash at that end, accompanied by a muDed bang. Tat was 
followed by silence, till my parents awoke and began wondering why 
none of the light switches seemed to be working. Te fuse was easily 
replaced, but I never overcame my surprise that what passed so silently 
through slender wires could behave so aggressively.!6
Although these scientists received great encouragement and support from 
their parents or teachers, it is clear that their wonders about the world 
and their inquiring passion since their childhood have been the real drive 
for their later achievements.
Tinking and Critical Tinking
As discussed in Chapters 2 and :, Western intellectual tradition places heavy 
emphasis on the mind, and one great power of the mind is to think. From 
my lexicon study on learning concepts, the following terms were rated as 
highly relevant to learning and sorted into the thinking category: think-
ing, critical thinking, reasoning, derivation, deductive, inductive, infer, free 
thinking, absorbing, challenge, challenging assumptions, contemplating, pon-
dering, enlighten, expanding, internalize, introspection, realize, recognition, 
self-reﬂection, discovery, and understand. Tis array of thinking terms refers 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!!7
to diﬀerent aspects, processes, and functions of thinking. Proﬁles of ideal 
learners also contain many descriptions of all kinds of thinking processes.
Tere are three levels of thinking: (!) pure mental processes, (2) thinking 
geared toward understanding, and (:) critical thinking. With regard to pure 
mental processes, the Western learner engages in reasoning, which includes 
more speciﬁc steps such as breaking things down, separating things, using 
logic (deductive reasoning), inductive reasoning, comparing, contrasting, 
and constructing things, as well as more general processes such as imag-
ining, making connections, and synthesizing. For example, when learning 
how a particular plant grows, the learner may try to think about what the 
plant needs in order to grow: water, sunlight, and nutrients. Te learner 
can then explore if these things are supplied to the plant in a sequence or 
simultaneously. Afer these initial speciﬁc thinking processes, the learner 
can then compare and contrast this plant with a plant that requires a diﬀer-
ent amount of water and sunlight and a diﬀerent kind of soil and nutrients, 
to generate fuller knowledge of the ﬁrst plant.
For achieving understanding, the learner needs not only to engage in 
the speciﬁc processes of thinking to master the knowledge under study, but 
also to go beyond. As David Perkins at Harvard Project Zero has advocated, 
learners must be able to explain a given concept or a theory learned from 
a lesson/lecture to themselves and to others with telling examples. Being 
able to explain something to someone else is a common way to demon-
strate understanding. But learners do not stop there; they further try to 
generate hypotheses in order to predict related phenomena. Finally, they 
continue to extend their knowledge to similar situations either to verify 
their knowledge or to generate new ways to think about the original topic 
under study.!7 For example, when an elementary school student has under-
stood how fractions work, he or she should be able to explain the concept 
of fraction and demonstrate to others how fractions are related to decimals 
and how the two can convert into each other. Moreover, when given new 
problems of fractions, the student can solve them and even use fractions to 
compute real-life problems such as comparing unit prices for products at a 
grocery store.
Many European-American respondents in my ideal learner study also 
wrote about these thinking processes. For instance, in the words of a respon-
dent who provided descriptions of his ideal learner, a great learner recog-
nizes “situations where information theory is an appropriate method and 
where it is not; [he] . . . performs calculations and knows why the speciﬁc 
steps of such theoretic calculations are as they are; [and he] understands 
how information theory can be applied to various issues.”
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!!8
Te third level of thinking in which learners engage is critical thinking. 
As stated in Chapter 2, critical thinking is a highly valued learning pro-
cess as well as outcome in the West. Many educational psychologists regard 
critical thinking as the cultivated personal disposition that marks the piv-
otal achievement of a learner. Although this educational goal has not been 
widely realized for all learners, it remains as a high ideal in the Western 
educational agenda, which continues to inspire Western parents, schools, 
and faculty in higher education in their eﬀort to instill this ideal in their 
learners.!8
Critical thinking is deﬁned generally as “reasonable and reﬂective think-
ing that is focused on deciding what to believe or do.”!C More recent dis-
cussions point to the four key components that are of particular relevance 
to critical thinking for our purposes. Te ﬁrst is truth seeking, a process 
that leads the learner to seek the best knowledge in a given context. When 
engaged in this process, the learner casts doubts about existing knowledge 
and asks questions. Typical of Western learners is their much admired act of 
challenging authority. In the pursuit of truth and in exercising intellectual 
honesty and objectivity, the learner is encouraged to pose pointed questions 
and demand like responses. Similarly, the learners themselves also embrace, 
ideally, others’ challenges to their own thoughts even when the results do 
not support their self-interests or preconceived ideas.
Te second component is open-mindedness, which is the process that 
keeps the learner tolerant toward diﬀerent views and propels the learner 
to examine his or her own possible bias. Te third component is analyt-
ical process that engages the learner in examining rigorously available 
information that is obtained from seeking truth (e.g., gathering empirical 
data). A key step is using the skill and exercising the disposition of weigh-
ing the evidence against competing information and personal preferences. 
Te learner must control his or her personal likes and dislikes and honor 
facts. Tis process is ofen linked to the process of problem solving, where 
the learner is sensitized to conceptual and practical pitfalls and to the need 
to revise his or her solution proposals. Te fourth component is the same 
inquiring process as noted previously where the learner pursues personal 
curiosity, taking steps to explore the unknown and to ﬁnd out the answers 
to his or her questions.20
Tese processes are frequently echoed in the descriptions of the ideal 
learners. For example, one respondent wrote that her ideal learner would 
“openly question society . . . why things are the way they are,” and another 
stated that his ideal learner learns by “thinking critically about everything” 
(emphasis in the original). Te best examples, however, are again found 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!!C
in the Western icons of scientists. From the Nobel Museum, we read that 
Leland H. Hartwell, who won the Nobel Prize in physiology/medicine in 
200! for his co-discoveries of key regulators of the cell cycle, recalled his 
burgeoning skepticism in his childhood: “I was an avid collector of bugs, 
butterﬂies, lizards, snakes, and spiders. I remember on one of these adven-
tures learning to be skeptical of everything one reads in books. I had read 
that lizards do not have teeth. I had grabbed a very big lizard and stared in 
disbelief as it turned its head, displayed a ﬁne set of teeth and sank them 
into my thumb.”2!
Similarly, Craig C. Mello, another recent Nobel laureate in physiology/
medicine in 2006 for his co-discovery of RNA interference-gene silenc-
ing by double-stranded RNA, wrote on his critical thinking about a much 
larger topic:
By the time I was in middle school, I had decided to reject religious 
dogma altogether. Te “absolute knowledge” oﬀered, was in my view, 
inadequate to explain the world around me. Furthermore, it seemed 
wrong to claim knowledge based on one’s culture or upbringing. I saw 
the leap of faith involved in religion as smothering dialogue, closing the 
door on non-believers and walling them out of one’s society. In contrast, 
the scientiﬁc method with its focus on asking questions and admitting no 
absolutes, was and continues to be refreshing to me. Science is grounded 
on, and values, dialogue. It is a human enterprise that breaks down walls 
and challenges its practitioners to admit ignorance and to question all 
ideas.22
It is important to point out that critical thinking in the West is not a val-
ue-neutral but a value-laden act. Unlike the more pure mental processes, 
critical thinking presumes a stance the person takes toward the world of 
knowledge and learning. Tis stance is also a direct manifestation of the 
Western notion of individual rights to question and to investigate anything, 
in any context. Te only originating force is the questioner him- or herself 
having a desire to question. Critical thinking as learned and practiced in 
the West is only possible when such individual rights are granted and sup-
ported. As discussed in Chapter 2, Socrates, as a trying case, a pioneer in 
Western history, took as his life’s purpose to question everything. During 
his own time, he was not celebrated by authority, although he amused many, 
particularly young people. His method of “eternal questioning,”2: his great 
legacy, was retroactively admired and reiﬁed only by later generations. But 
because he was not guaranteed the right to do so by anyone, he was con-
demned to death for “poisoning youth” and for not believing in the gods 
of his city-state. Similarly, Western history is replete with persecutions of 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!20
heretics (e.g., Bruno and Galileo) who dared to voice diﬀerent interpret-
ations and ideas of religious dogma.
Self-Expression and Communication
Self-expression and one’s ability to communicate with others is another 
hallmark of the intellectual achievement of a learner in the West. All the 
active learning, exploration and inquiry, and critical thinking need to be 
expressed and communicated both as an integral part of the learning pro-
cess and as the outcome of learning. Te great emphasis in communication 
lies in the oral/verbal expression foremost, even more so than the written 
expression, although the latter is also of central importance.
Tere is a long tradition of oral eloquence that dates back to Greek antiq-
uity through the Roman era and Christian tradition of delivering sermons 
to congregations (Chapter 8 is devoted to this topic). Modern democratic, 
academic, and business life all require the ability to speak publicly. Oral 
expressivity is not only taken as a sign of individual intelligence, but a skill 
that enables one to achieve just about any goal in life.2; Accordingly, one 
needs to express one’s thoughts and feelings in order to make friends, to 
date, to do well in school, to rise up the corporate ladder as a manager/
leader, to articulate one’s concerns in community living, to participate in 
democratic life, and to defend oneself in court or other oﬃcial proceedings 
should one face such situations. Given the essential role of communication 
in the West, there is little wonder why learning how to self-express and to 
communicate is an essential task of any learner.
My lexicon study on European-American learning concepts yielded 
these terms of communication: expression, communication, discussion, dia-
log, participation, interactive, listening, connection, engaging, collaborate, 
involving, illustrate, diagrams, essays, debate, and critique. Te descriptions 
of ideal learners images that I collected also showed that 70 percent of the 
respondents mentioned that these learners engaged in talking to others, 
discussion with professors and peers, and otherwise interacted with all 
kinds of people in all kinds of contexts (compared to only :0 percent of the 
Chinese respondents who referred to communication and discussion as a 
process of learning).
Te socialization of self-expression begins early in Western  learners’ 
lives. Research on early mother–child communication indicates that 
European-American children, for example, talk more than their Chinese 
peers about their own qualities, thoughts, and feelings. European-
American children’s self-oriented talk is longer even when their total talk 
volume is less than that of Chinese children for the same controlled studies 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!2!
(in comparison, Chinese talk more about social relations and activities 
rather than themselves). When recounting past experiences, European-
American mothers ask their children signiﬁcantly more probing ques-
tions about how they lived through the experience, how they felt, what 
ideas they thought about, and how their individual selves were aﬀected. 
As a result, as shown in research, these children express a great deal more 
of these aspects of their life experiences.25 Within the family, a commonly 
documented opportunity to involve children in talking and discussion is 
dinnertime when family members sit together. Many children and par-
ents attest that this is a very important social context in which parents 
and children engage in free exchange of their daily experiences. Children 
are encouraged to interrupt adults and to ask questions; children also chat 
with their siblings. Again, these repeated occasions serve to promote chil-
dren’s oral self-expressions.
Preschools in the West also make a great eﬀort to develop children’s 
speaking and expressive ability. Reggio Emilia schools as an exemplar, 
but Western preschools in general, very commonly encourage children to 
express themselves. When a child utters an idea, that idea will be recorded, 
listened and responded to, commented on, and followed up by a teacher in 
Reggio Emilia. Frequently a budding idea by the innocent child will evolve 
into a drawing, a sculpture, a poem, or a scientiﬁc project to engage the 
child.26 Tis kind of attention to expressed ideas makes children value self-
expression and motivate children to express more.
Across Western preschools, teachers frequently ask children how they 
feel, if they like a given activity, and what ideas and suggestions they have 
about a topic, which echoes home socialization as noted previously. Te 
emphasis is on both the act of talking and on self-oriented talk. To achieve 
this goal, it is very common for teachers to tell children that there is no 
right or wrong answers and anything they say is ﬁne. Since the notion of 
emotional intelligence was introduced in the !CC0s,27 Western preschools 
endeavor to help children articulate their emotions, particularly negative 
emotions, into words rather than acting on such emotions. For example, if a 
child feels angry about a toy that he or she cannot get from a peer, the child 
is encouraged to say what bothers him or her and how the situation makes 
him or her feel, instead of taking direct action such as ﬁghting, grabbing, 
kicking, or punching the peer in order to achieve the goal of getting the toy. 
When a child has committed a transgression, the child is likely to be asked 
to apologize verbally to the teacher or peer. Similarly, when a child receives 
a nice act from another child or an adult, the child is also highly encour-
aged to say “thank you” to the other (rather than to return a kind act to the 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!22
other such as giving the peer a toy or candy – the latter is a more common 
nonverbal expression of gratitude in Asian socialization).
In grade school, while continuing their learning in verbal self- expression, 
children begin learning how to express themselves in writing. As soon as 
they learn how to use words and make sentences, they are encouraged to 
write about their qualities, thoughts, relationships, and feelings. Tey are 
asked to write their own stories, describe their own families, and present 
their own ideas. When they advance into middle and high school, chil-
dren are taught writing skills for argumentation. One important format for 
developing such skills is essay writing, where children are taught to come 
up with a thesis to support, gather evidence, present counterarguments, and 
substantiate the merit of their thesis.
In middle school, and even more in high school, children also learn how 
to debate. In class, one teaching method is to divide the class into groups, 
each of which takes a diﬀerent side of the topic/issue being taught. Afer the 
groups have mustered counterarguments against the other group’s position 
or issues, the class meets again to start an open debate. Not only do students 
enjoy this form of oral argumentation, but they also learn an essential skill. 
In all public and private schools, there are debate teams for children to join. 
Children are also taken to tour through the towns and states in order to 
experience diﬀerent audiences. Local, state, and national competitions are 
held. Te winners are much admired and celebrated.
In higher education, particularly in the liberal arts, students engage in 
formal training in public speaking. Every university oﬀers such courses, 
with many as requirements for graduation. Where no such requirement 
exists, students stand in line to enroll, attesting to the unabating popular-
ity of such training. Such courses provide students with the opportunity to 
analyze great orators in history, such as Martin Luther King, and to write 
their own speeches to deliver to the class. Teachers and classmates critique 
each speech to help students improve their craf of public speaking. Other 
than such formal courses, most liberal arts courses require that students 
give oral presentations of their projects in addition to writing papers. 
Finally, Western learners are also encouraged to use all visual forms such 
as diagrams, illustration, videos, and sound to enhance their presentational 
impact.
Tese four key components of the Western learning process are also res-
onated in the descriptions of the ideal learners in my study. Taking these 
elements together, European-American respondents almost unanimously 
(C6 percent) made references to such mind-oriented learning processes. In 
comparison, only 68 percent of their Chinese peers did so.
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!2:
Virtue-Oriented Learning Process in China/East Asia
In describing the virtue-oriented learning process in China/East Asia, I 
focus on the ﬁve key virtues of earnestness/sincerity, diligence/self-exertion, 
endurance of hardship, perseverance, and concentration (see Figure ;.2. 
Respect and humility are treated in Chapter 5).
Earnestness/Sincerity (如持/恆经)
As noted in Chapters 2 and :, sincerity has been regarded as the ﬁrst virtue in 
order to dedicate oneself to learning in the Chinese tradition. Sincerity was 
already clearly expressed in the Analects when Confucius discussed learn-
ing with his students. In Mencius and the writings by Xun Zi, sincerity was 
Active engagement
Exploration/inquiry
Thinking/critical thinking
Self-expression/communication
Understand
the World 
,ig.re ;.!. Diagram for mind-oriented learning processes in the West.
Earnestness/sincerity
Diligence/self-exertion
Concentration
Endurance of hardship
Perseverance
Self-
Perfection
,ig.re ;.2. Diagram for virtue-oriented learning processes in China/East Asia.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!2;
emphasized, but it was more centrally and clearly articulated as a required 
virtue for self-cultivation by the Neo-Confucians. Earnestness is the more 
modern term used to describe this initial commitment to learning that can 
also be applied to young children (sincerity as a term would be too abstract 
for them). Earnestness/sincerity means to take one’s learning to heart and 
to be serious about learning. In other words, this virtue aims at making one 
instructable, teachable, receptive, and open to learning while putting one’s 
ego out of the way.
How, then, do Chinese/East Asian learners demonstrate earnestness/
sincerity in their learning? My learning lexicon study28 produced the fol-
lowing six terms/expressions from daily usage that give a ﬁrst account of 
the process: earnestness (如持), learn earnestly and make daily progress 
(字字是的,薪薪光偷), one shall not fear one’s ability to learn; one shall fear 
one’s lack of desire to learn (壁,是壁鑿,股,壁/是), a cause is perfected 
with diligence and neglected by frivolity (逆水行進,則行退), eﬀort never lets 
down the resolute person (所金壁石孜錐梁), and there is no diﬃculty on 
earth for the resolute person (懸偷頭來礪,股,孜錐梁). What these expres-
sions have in common is their emphasis on earnest and sincere dedication as 
contrasted to lack of such (e.g., frivolity, neglect, and lack of resolution).
From observational research on Chinese/East Asian classrooms, it is 
clear that the learner, even a very young child in preschool, needs to coop-
erate with the teacher in the classroom. If asked to sit down, to listen, to look 
at the board, to take notes, to respond, and to do homework, the learner 
should do so without resisting such instructions. Learners need to give the 
instructions and learning activities their full attention. In this kind of coop-
eration, learners should not interrupt/disturb teaching and other children’s 
learning, such as chatting with peers, laughing, moving out of a seat, or 
leaving the classroom while the teacher is teaching. Students’ earnestness/
sincerity is needed not merely for their own learning, but also for respecting 
other children’s learning.2C
In such a setting, learning is taken not just seriously but also sacredly. It 
is not exaggerating to say that this seriousness is analogous to other chil-
dren’s “right to learn” and is imbued with all the moral meanings noted in 
Chapter 2. Tis “right” cannot be violated or taken away by anyone, even 
though there is no law to enforce this “right.” But for the student inclined 
to disturb, it is his or her obligation to respect that right in others. Likewise, 
his or her own learning is also regarded as sacred and inviolable by other 
children. But because it is part of a strong cultural norm, there is no need 
to have written law for its protection. To use another analogy, this kind 
of commitment and seriousness in regard to learning is also similar to a 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!25
Western orchestra being conducted by the conductor who demands and 
actually receives the full cooperation and earnestness from the players. Te 
mutually understood roles and responsibilities/obligations between the 
conductor and the players are guaranteed by everyone to such an extent 
that the whole orchestra would collapse if even one player no longer wanted 
to honor this cooperation. Tis resemblance probably made American edu-
cation researcher Lynn Paine call Chinese classroom teachers virtuosos of 
performance. Te kind of teaching described in her research was possi-
ble only when the learners exercised their virtue of earnestness/sincerity. 
Understood as such, there is no wonder why disturbing teaching and other 
children’s learning by any student is regarded as a serious learning problem 
in East Asia.:0
It is erroneous to assume that Chinese/Asian children must not enjoy 
such learning or that they must suﬀer from lack of freedom or creativ-
ity. Research indicates that they derive happiness and satisfaction and 
show enthusiasm even when they have to demonstrate their mistakes on 
the board and respond in chorus (a uniform learning activity instead of 
individualist activities).:! Teir joy and satisfaction are probably similar to 
the emotions of orchestra players when they produce a great performance 
under the direction of a conductor.
If homework is assigned and the student fails to do it for no legitimate 
reason, that behavior is regarded as lack of earnestness/sincerity. Further, 
even when the student does the homework but rushes through it, show-
ing impatience (e.g., illegible handwriting) and carelessness, that behavior 
is also regarded as lack of earnestness/sincerity. Terefore, any learning 
behavior that is just going through the motions without the dedication of 
the heart, the aﬀectively charged receptivity to learning, is interpreted as the 
learner not having earnestness/sincerity and consequently not being ready 
to learn.
An earnest/sincere learner does not stop at just following these basic 
expectations; he or she goes a step further. Ideally, he or she also takes ini-
tiative and seeks out ways to exceed such expectations. For example, such 
a learner may make a great eﬀort to take good notes. To learn the material, 
he or she may visit a peer to ensure that his or her original notes are com-
plete. He or she may seek out the teacher to clarify unclear concepts or 
resolve confusion. When learning that a peer may have deeper or clearer 
insights into the material, the learner may make an extra eﬀort to learn 
from the peer. Whenever a learner endeavors to make sure that he or she 
acquires the skill or material in question and whenever the learner actu-
ally takes the various steps needed to achieve the goal, he or she is believed 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!26
to show earnestness/sincerity in learning. As recounted in Chapter 2, the 
two students traveling from south to north across China to seek out Master 
Cheng’s teaching and forced to stand in the snow during the Song time 
(從倦秉燭) were taken as a good example of displaying sincerity and dedi-
cation to learning (in addition to respect for the teacher). Tus, a great deal 
is expected of the learner in the ways of taking learning seriously as an ini-
tial engagement in learning anything from anyone.
Diligence/Self-Exertion (進明/懈明)
Tere are several terms in Chinese (鍥舍/進明/鏤所) that are used very 
commonly and interchangeably to refer to the notion of hard work or eﬀort 
(with the ﬁrst term also commonly used in Japanese and Korean). Recall 
that the nearly 500 English learning terms I collected in my lexicon study 
did not contain either hard work or eﬀort, but the Chinese lexicon con-
tained ;6 such terms that entered the core list (many more such terms were 
not included because of lower group ratings). Te phenomenon of showing 
elaborations of a given conceptual domain in one culture but not in another 
was conceptualized as hypercognition versus hypocognition by Robert Levy 
who studied emotion terms in Tahiti.:2 Clearly, the conceptual domain of 
hard work/eﬀort is hypercognized in Chinese culture (and other East Asian 
cultures) and hypocognized in the West (at least as captured and nominated 
in the learning terms of English). However, English hard work/eﬀort hardly 
do justice to the many terms that refer to ﬁnely diﬀerentiated and detailed 
virtue-oriented learning processes of Chinese learners. To highlight this 
diﬀerence, I use the terms diligence/self-exertion instead of hard work/eﬀort 
to discuss the various learning processes involving this virtue.
Upon careful inspection, the virtue of diligence/self-exertion describes 
at least three learning processes leading to three connected goals: (!) famil-
iarizing oneself with the learning material (shu, 交), (2) practicing (lianxi, 
方的), and (:) achieving reﬁned/perfected mastery (jing, 水). In the follow-
ing subsections, I detail each of these processes.
Familiarizing Oneself (shu, 交)
Familiarizing oneself is the ﬁrst step to take whenever Chinese learners 
encounter new material, a new concept, or a new skill. Familiarizing oneself 
with the new material is necessary to ensure that the learner recognizes all 
the pieces, components, and details of a given task. For example, if a learner is 
introduced to a new song, a new poem, a new list of English words, or a new 
math proof, he or she usually begins to look at/read/sing each component. 
Next, the learner may begin chanting the poem, reading aloud each English 
word, or writing each math step to him- or herself, and he or she is likely to 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!27
do so over and over again. Tus, we have the terms from my lexicon study: 
one’s mouth won’t be ﬂuent without chanting for three days; one’s hand gets out 
of practice without writing for three days (專薪壁潛埋齋,專薪壁鑽研齋), 
well-versed in three hundred Tang poems, one will be able to chant if not 
compose poems (交兩耳聞專外聖,壁鑿賢聞廢鑿寢), familiarity leads to 
skillfulness (交忘齋食). Familiarity shu is juxtaposed with its opposite state 
sheng (齋/齋梅), meaning rusted, unfamiliar, or out of practice.
Te process of familiarizing oneself is believed to be the necessary ﬁrst 
step of learning anything because it ensures ﬂuency and ﬁrst-level knowl-
edge of the material. If one is to make any progress upon encountering 
the new material, the measure of it would be a step beyond unfamiliarity. 
Otherwise, one might as well not have encountered the new material at all. 
Te idea of familiarity is not foreign to Western learners. It is the same idea 
as expressed in the common English phrase having it at my ﬁngertips. Te 
purpose is to make oneself familiar with all the “surface” details of a given 
learning task, not necessarily – or ofen even deliberately not – to aim for 
any deeper understanding of the material. Te end result of familiarizing 
oneself is ofen a measurable achievement: memorization, or learning the 
material by heart.
Practicing (lianxi, 方的)
Practice is the absolutely central behavioral manifestation of the learning 
virtue of diligence/self-exertion in Chinese/East Asian learning. Based on 
what I can gather from available research, the notion of practice has four 
further processes aiming at four respective goals: (!) ensuring the length 
of time for practice that is perceived as necessary to accomplish the goal 
(e.g., the ten years in “ten years oﬀ the stage practice,” 花香寶劍所), (2) 
reaching the desired cumulating achievement (e.g., the one minute in “one 
minute on stage performance,” 花偷鋒全貫), (:) reviewing old material to 
gain new insight (wengu zhixin, 注地知新), and (;) oﬀsetting one’s lack of 
talent and ability (buzhuo, 補拙).
Ensuring the required length of time for practice. Afer the learner has 
achieved some familiarity with the new material, he or she is likely to sub-
mit him- or herself to the rather prolonged and ofen arduous process of 
practice.:: Again, my lexicon study revealed a glimpse into the nature of 
this part of practice: lay down eﬀort (香所金); one minute on stage perfor-
mance, but ten years oﬀ stage practice (花偷鋒全貫,花香寶劍所); ten years 
of cold windows (studying) (寶劍寒窗); always have a book in one’s hand  
(研壁釋卷); never stop punching (practicing martial arts) and never stop 
singing (practicing opera) (拳壁離研, 曲壁離埋); if you work at it hard 
enough, you can grind an iron rod into a needle (股要所金深,鐵杵磨成針); 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!28
without accumulating small steps, one cannot reach a thousand miles/without 
gathering little streams, there cannot be rivers and seas (壁積跬步頭以今得
哪,壁積骨程頭以成用門); it takes more than one cold day for the river to 
freeze three feet deep (熟練專三, 念鋒口生寒); long-term diligence is the 
road to the mount of knowledge (寫手孜讀進唐詩); eﬀort never lets down 
the resolute person (孜錐梁); do one’s utmost to self-study (進立百是); and 
Wang Xizhi practiced calligraphy (his clothes were damaged by his ﬁngers 
practicing on them) (雪奮生方寫首). All of these expressions highlight the 
key meaning of practice: Te learner must recognize the importance of the 
long, dedicated process required for learning anything to which one has 
given earnestness/sincerity. Learning is not just a serious matter; it is a long 
endeavor. Tere are no shortcuts in learning.
Some of these expressions came from Chinese intellectuals such as Xun 
Zi and exemplary cultural icons of talent and learning such as Wang Xizhi. 
Most of these expressions reference ancient skill and artistic learning such 
as painting, calligraphy, martial art, dancing, and opera. Admittedly, such 
skill learning requires long-term practice regardless of time and space. A 
musician learning how to play the piano now would need to practice just 
as much as someone 200 years ago if he or she wants to achieve any level 
of mastery. Tere is also a shared view that any worthwhile knowledge/skill 
needs a solid foundation without which deep understanding is not likely 
to occur. Furthermore, such a foundation cannot be established overnight, 
but requires a long time. Te most commonly recognized approach to such 
a foundation is long-term practice.:; However, the impact of these expres-
sions does not lie in actual skill or knowledge being learned, but a general 
adherence to diligence/self-exertion of practice as a virtue. As such, the 
learner needs to truly engage in the actual process of practice.
Keeping this long-term process in mind, Chinese learners work at each 
component, each key step repeatedly, over and over again, until they feel 
that they have achieved desired understanding or mastery. Ten they move 
to the next component or step where they are likely to repeat the cycle of 
practice. Although there is much such recycled practice, it is not approached 
mindlessly, but carefully and attentively. Attentiveness and mindfulness are 
encouraged and admired.:5 With each practice, the learner needs to observe 
their own progress, although progress may be incremental depending on 
the actual skill or knowledge under study. Tolerance toward incremental 
progress is also important. A “great leap forward” in achievement without 
dedicated work is not believed real. Likewise, looking for tricks or shortcuts 
to circumvent this long practice is taken as a sign of lacking diligence/self-
exertion. Moreover, the previously exercised earnestness/sincerity is not 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!2C
only expected to continue, but also to intensify. Because practice requires 
much more eﬀort, earnestness/sincerity is assumed as an integral part of 
diligence/self-exertion.
Indeed, research on Chinese/East Asian learners in learning modern 
school subjects such as math and science documents that learners not only 
view the learning process as requiring eﬀort over a long time, but they also 
engage in prolonged and repeated practice (with math and other science 
problems). For example, the well-researched topic of time spent on learning 
provides ample evidence that Asian learners spend much more time doing 
homework, reviewing covered material, and preparing for new material 
and assessment than their Western peers. Tey also spend much more time 
on practicing skills and materials outside class, that is, they practice above 
and beyond completion of assigned homework.:6
Reaching the desired culminating achievement. All that practice is geared 
toward one goal: achieving understanding and mastery of the desired 
skill or knowledge under study. As the research by Dahlin and Watkins 
shows, Chinese learners, unlike their Western peers, do not believe that 
deep understanding or mastery comes from a sudden “ah-ha” moment,:7 
although Chinese learners also experience such moments, as the term sud-
denly see the light afer being stuck (做也吟能) indicates (which also entered 
my lexicon study). By looking at the terms in the preceding section, it seems 
that Chinese learners engage in long practice in order to get very deep and 
solid in their understanding and mastery. Consequently, one aims at reach-
ing the condensed one minute on stage out of the ten years of practice, all 
accumulated knowledge from the ten years of cold windows, the deeply fro-
zen water from many days, and the thousand miles from all the small steps 
as well as the river/sea from all the streams of water. Apparently, it is the 
breadth and depth of this result that they desire, not any small understand-
ing or mastery. And breadth with depth is indeed a key goal for achieve-
ment in the Chinese learning conceptual map (see Figure :.2).
But the question remains as to whether Chinese learners can really achieve 
this type of deep understanding and mastery. Afer all, the stated goals are 
rather vague; they seem more metaphorical and aesthetically worded than 
any real benchmark for achievement. If these goals are not obtainable, then 
why do Chinese learners still engage in this type of diligence/self-exertion? 
Two responses to this question can be given. First, it is quite possible that 
such learning goals can indeed be achieved, even though they may remain 
vague in the mind of the learner. Take the well-known case of practicing 
martial arts as an example. Even though one may not know for sure if one 
will achieve a high level of the skill, one still has a clear idea of what that 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!:0
end goal looks like, because the teacher embodies the skill. Moreover, one 
can see high levels of mastery in other highly accomplished martial artists. 
Tus, so long as the learner continues to practice, especially when he or she 
has been told that such practice was how the teacher and others achieved 
their mastery, that learner may indeed see that he or she can achieve the 
goal eventually. Tis is very similar to Western learners desiring to learn 
golf, gymnastics, ﬁgure skating, ballet, classical music, and instruments. 
Such learners exert eﬀort not necessarily knowing that they will achieve a 
given goal. But they do know what to aim for because they know the accom-
plished musicians and athletes. Tey, too, are likely to engage in this kind of 
long, arduous practice if they are told that this kind of practice is needed for 
achieving anything in these domains. Learning other subjects such as math 
and science may also lead the learners to engage in long practice, because 
Chinese children are always given the causal link between long and hard 
practice and later achievement (whether such causality is true is beside the 
point). Tey receive this kind of deliberate socialization regardless of the 
discipline and regardless of how much talent a domain of work requires 
(see Chapter 7 for a focused discussion). Even great scientiﬁc discoveries 
are introduced to children as possible only when the scientists know the 
details of the topic and are deeply engrossed in their daily work.:8
Second, in keeping with the Confucian learning ethos, the learner may 
not care much about the end goal because it is vague, and perhaps kept 
deliberately so (one wonders why Chinese have not made their learning 
goals measurably explicit for millennia). In all likelihood, learners may be 
quite clear that they will not achieve a high level of mastery just as they 
know that not all students will get an A in school. But as research shows, 
Chinese learners are still very willing and quite possibly happy to engage in 
diligent practice. For one thing, they know that they cannot get worse; they 
can only get better with practice. For the other – and most importantly – 
displaying learning virtues, as I have argued elsewhere, may be a highly 
motivating goal by itself regardless of whether the end goal of mastery will 
be reached. A learner’s behavior is not judged retroactively positive or neg-
ative afer his or her achievement has been determined, but as he or she 
engages in learning from the very beginning. Outcome cannot play a role 
because there is no outcome yet. Tus, showing earnestness/sincerity and 
diligence/self-exertion alone is inherent goodness and therefore reason for 
social reward and admiration. Tis indeed happens in Chinese schools. I 
personally witnessed the following scenario of honoring virtues despite low 
achievement:
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!:!
In middle school, my class took a math test. I had one of the highest 
scores in my 60-student class. Te teacher told the class that he wanted 
to honor a great student for this exam. I thought it was me whom he was 
going to honor. But instead, he asked a quiet girl sitting in a corner to 
stand up. Everyone knew that she was not the highest achieving student 
in class. But the teacher said “Class, let’s give Yulin a round of applause 
for her great diligence for this exam. Although she did not do very well, 
her spirit is honorable. We all can learn from her.”
Te message from the teacher was very clear: It is not the outcome of one’s 
achievement that calls for admiration, but one’s diligence/self-exertion. Te 
fact that one has given one’s complete eﬀort even without achieving stel-
lar results in the process is cause for respect. In fact, high achievement or 
high intelligence without virtues is not admired very much. When asked to 
respond how their ideal learners would learn if they achieve highly or pos-
sess high intelligence, Chinese respondents wrote that they will continue to 
work hard to aim at even higher goals. High achievers would not feel full of 
themselves because their goal is to self-perfect for life.:C
Ngai-Ying Wong provided a description of the Chinese approach to 
practice that further explains the point of practicing for Chinese learn-
ers. Accordingly, Chinese learners ﬁrst try to “enter the way” (巧首). For 
example, when learning calligraphy, a learner hopes to get a feel of the skill, 
that is, how to apply ink, force, attention, movement of one’s arms, and so 
forth to produce similar work to that of the master that the learner admires 
(this is very similar to, say, Western golf learners trying to imitate a master). 
One will not stop one’s practice until one can produce the desired result. 
However, this imitative perfection is only half of learning, not the end goal. 
Once satisﬁed with one’s practice, one moves on to a higher level called 
“existing the way” (疏首), retaining but transcending the imitative achieve-
ment.;0 A learner who has gone through both processes is said not only to 
have mastered the skill, but also to have developed a personal style. Te 
latter is similar to Western classical painting. A novice painter, too, had to 
practice for a long time in order to imitate the master; it was only through 
rigorous practice that the painter could go beyond the original style to cre-
ate something new. But this new style is also deeply grounded in the original 
master’s techniques and skill. Tus, it seems that Chinese learners are quite 
methodical in their learning with the virtue of diligence/self-exertion.
Reviewing old material to gain new insight. Chinese learners inherit a 
strong principle, as taught by Confucius himself, that learning is a cumu-
lative process. Anything one has learned in the past is actually not gone 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!:2
factually, but the learner may not beneﬁt from that past learning experience 
if he/she does not reﬂect on it anymore. However, just thinking or reﬂect-
ing on it may not lead to the best learning either because reﬂection is a 
pure mental exercise. Given that Confucian learning strongly emphasizes 
moral learning and practice, pure mental exercise is not regarded as the 
best learning; the learner needs to go a step further, reviewing the old to 
gain new insight. Tus, “reviewing the old as a means of realizing the new” 
as stated by Confucius is regarded as an important learning principle that 
virtually all Chinese children are taught to say and to use for their own 
learning.
Tis principle focuses on two related aspects. First is the review part. 
Accordingly, it is one’s responsibility to ensure mastery and related further 
learning of whatever one has been taught or has learned. Review of learned 
material enhances familiarity, memory, understanding of the material itself, 
seeing the need to practice, and other related elements. By reviewing, one 
also engages in reﬂection, checking one’s understanding, making connec-
tions, and synthesizing. Te process of review necessarily leads to deepened 
understanding, hence the notion of “new insight.” New insight as a concept 
cannot be anything else but deeper understanding. In fact, new insight is the 
real purpose of learning by review. Tus, from the very beginning, Chinese 
learning has been to aim at understanding and insight. Te diﬀerence may 
lie in their focus. Unlike their Western counterparts who are likely to delve 
into mental understanding, Chinese learners focus on moral insight into 
self-perfection and other related learning. Confucius himself regarded this 
learning-by-review as such an important process that he considered those 
who could gain new insight by reviewing as those who could be or become 
teachers (注地台知新, 下以唐十年).;!
Review is thus a part of practice with the virtue of diligence/self- exertion. 
Furthermore, it should not be surprising that Chinese learners assume 
autonomy and personal agency in achieving this very high goal of learn-
ing. Teachers and parents openly emphasize review and provide opportu-
nities for children to do so. In every Mainland Chinese school (and in most 
schools in other Chinese regions), there are scheduled self-study classes 
(百的一) every day, where students sit quietly in class, doing homework 
and reviewing what they have learned. Outside school, students also engage 
in review on their own. Research has consistently found that Asian students 
spend more time studying outside class and school than their Western 
counterparts. A recent study of Vietnamese and German students’ learn-
ing activities also showed that Vietnamese students spent much more time 
reviewing material they learned in class than their German peers.;2
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!::
Oﬀsetting one’s lack of talent and ability. In their informative research 
on why Asian students achieve better than American students, Stevenson 
and Stigler;: found two key concepts. Whereas Western children believe in 
inborn ability, Asian children believe in eﬀort. Research on Japanese educa-
tion also indicates that they downplay inborn ability and emphasize eﬀort.;; 
Te questions that I have heard people in the West ask ofen are: Do Asian 
people not know that individuals are actually born with diﬀerent levels 
of intelligence? Or do they not care? If so, why not? Tese questions were 
indeed lef unanswered in previous research.
As it turned out, Chinese learners are keenly aware of such individ-
ual diﬀerences, and they also know that these diﬀerences may give  people 
advantages in learning. No one doubts that one needs talent to be a great 
athlete, artist, poet, writer, musician, or scientist. Few also deny that there 
are prodigies and wiz kids, and that some people have better memory, faster 
mental processing speed, more energy, ability to achieve higher work eﬃ-
ciency, and other superior abilities. It is also not the case that Chinese learn-
ers do not care about these important diﬀerences. Tey do care, particularly 
with regard to their need to know where they stand in their learning pro-
gress when they are grouped with high-talent individuals. However, they do 
not believe that just because they are not prodigies or lack apparent talent, 
they cannot learn much. In fact, they believe that they can learn very much 
if they apply diligence/self-exertion. Tey do not aim at becoming the next 
Einstein, but they can still achieve much scientiﬁc learning if they work 
hard. If, however, they do not work hard, then they can surely bear the con-
sequence of not knowing much.;5
In sum, Chinese learners are not oblivious to individual diﬀerences, and 
they actually care about these diﬀerences. Tey do not, however, care about 
them to the point where it has a debilitating eﬀect on their process of learn-
ing. Tey do not lament their own lack of inborn ability, and they disagree 
that only talent can lead to great achievement. From childhood on, Chinese 
learners are exposed to many exemplars throughout history who have 
achieved great learning with personal virtues. Many of these exemplars had 
disabilities such as blindness, deafness, and other physical handicaps. Tese 
role models are contrasted with people who have “normal” intelligence, or 
even superior talent, but have not studied hard. What distinguishes the two 
kinds of people in their learning achievement is the level of exercising their 
learning virtues.;6
Tus the fourth goal of practice is to oﬀset one’s perceived lack of tal-
ent or ability. Tere were two phrases in my studies that refer to this pur-
pose of practice: Diligence can oﬀset one’s clumsiness (進忘補拙) and the 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!:;
clumsy bird ﬂies early (發分鐘努). Tese phrases are told to children again 
and again, along with examples of real learners. If a person lacks talent or 
suﬃcient ability, that person will increase diligence. In my study on ideal 
learners, I asked the respondents to describe how their ideal learners would 
learn if they were not very bright naturally. Teir descriptions indicated 
that their ideal learners would double or triple – and in some cases increase 
a hundredfold – their diligence (外溫鍥舍). Te respondents unambigu-
ously expressed respect and admiration for those who perceived lacking 
ability or talent and decided to increase their diligence in order to achieve 
their learning goals.;7
Achieving Reﬁned/Perfected Mastery (jing, 水)
All that familiarizing and practice are not even the end goal. Tere is the 
ultimate goal toward which the ﬁrst two processes are directed: reﬁned 
and perfected mastery (jing, 水). Tus we have a set of Chinese expres-
sions about this ultimate height of achievement that entered my lexicon 
core list. Te ﬁrst is familiarity leads to skillfulness (交忘齋食) and skillful-
ness leads to eventual perfection (食忘齋水). While the ﬁrst part has been 
written about quite a bit, the second part of the expression has not been 
discussed much. Reﬁned/perfected mastery, jing, is a state that does not 
lend itself to clear deﬁnition or articulation because it is a state only the 
greatest masters can reach and display. Tis kind of virtuosity is found in 
every domain of human pursuit whether it is in Western, Asian, or any 
other culture. Other expressions show various aspects of this type of reﬁned 
and perfected learning: thorough understanding (故知新補); reﬁned under-
standing (水拙); know something inside out (寒窗釋交); profundity (水深); 
striving for perfection (水卷拳水); superb achievement (疏離巧力); and 
reach the highest degree of reﬁnement (曲要深鐵). Te goal is not just any 
understanding, but lucid and thorough understanding; not just mastery of 
the skill, but the reﬁned/perfected skill; not just knowing something, but 
knowing it profoundly.;8
However, the highest jing is knowing something inside out and using 
it eﬀortlessly and at the same time perfectly. Tis way of working and per-
forming has become the second nature of the person; it is the merging with 
the Way in both Confucian and Taoist persuasion. Te best illustration is 
the story Chef Ting Carves Bulls (杵磨補成) by Chung Tzu (:6C–286 BCE), 
Taoist philosopher and a contemporary of Mencius:
King Hui of Wei had a chef named Ting. When Chef Ting was carv-
ing a bull for the king, every touch of the hand, every inclination of the 
shoulder, every step he trod, every pressure of the knee, while swifly 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!:5
and lightly he wielded his carving-knife, was as carefully timed as the 
movements of a dancer. . . . “Wonderful,” said the king. “I could never 
have believed that the art of carving could reach such a point as this.”  
“I am a lover of Tao,” replied Ting, putting away his knife, “and have suc-
ceeded in applying it to the art of carving. When I ﬁrst begin to carve I 
ﬁxed my gaze on the animal in front of me. Afer three years I no longer 
saw it as a whole bull, but as a thing already divided into parts. Nowadays 
I no longer see it with the eye; I merely apprehend it with the soul. My 
sense-organs are in abeyance, but my soul still works. Unerringly my 
knife follows the natural markings, slips into the natural cleavages, ﬁnds 
its way into the natural cavities. And so by conforming my work to the 
structure with which I am dealing, I have arrived at a point at which my 
knife never touches even the smallest ligament or tendon, let alone the 
main gristle.
A good carver changes his knife once a year; by which time the blade is 
dented. An ordinary carver changes it once a month; by which time it 
is broken. I have used my present knife for nineteen years, and during 
that time have carved several thousand bulls. But the blade still looks as 
though it had just come out of the mould. Where part meets part there 
is always space, and a knife-blade has no thickness. Insert an instrument 
that has no thickness into a structure that is amply spaced, and surely it 
cannot fail to have plenty of room. Tat is why I can use a blade for nine-
teen years, and yet it still looks as though it were fresh from the forger’s 
mould.
However, one has only to look at an ordinary carver to see what a diﬃcult 
business he ﬁnds it. One sees how nervous he is while making his prepa-
rations, how long he looks, how slowly he moves. Ten afer some small, 
niggling strokes of the knife, when he has done no more than detach a 
few stray fragments from the whole, and even that by dint of continually 
twisting and turning like a worm burrowing through the earth, he stands 
back, with his knife in his hand, helplessly gazing this way and that, and 
afer hovering for a long time ﬁnally curses a perfectly good knife.”;C
Te phrase “the knife can surely ﬁnd plenty of room” (針積孜跬, i.e., 
accomplishing a task with ease), still used widely in daily Chinese, comes 
from this story. As can be seen, this level of knowing something and using 
it freely and eﬀortlessly indeed requires much practice, much mindfulness, 
and much dedication. Tere is little chance that blind practice without 
engaging in careful study, attention to details, contemplation, and self-
 exertion would ever reach the level of jing. Moreover, chances are that this 
carver derived no less personal and intrinsic enjoyment and satisfaction, as 
well as admiration and acclaim, from his social world than did our contem-
porary masters such as Yo-yo Ma, Ben Kingsley, or Michael Jordan.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!:6
Having presented the intricate learning processes under the virtue of dil-
igence/self-exertion, I wish to address the of-condemned Asian rote learn-
ing. When Westerners visit Chinese schools and observe how Chinese/
Asian children learn, they can clearly see the familiarizing and practicing 
process: Behaviorally, it is nothing more than repeating, reciting, and copy-
ing things – that is, acts of committing the material to memory.50 On the 
surface, such learning behaviors do not show any breakthrough in thinking 
and discovery. If the observer does not know that there is still a very long 
list of learning virtues and steps to follow, he or she is likely to conclude 
that Chinese learning is all rote learning. Together with the also observable 
teacher-dominated classroom and parent-dominated home learning envi-
ronment, it is even easier to feel sad and indignant for Chinese/Asian chil-
dren. Tere are no apparent freedom, creativity, exploration, inquiry, and 
self-expression – that is, forms that indicate personal agency in learning. 
Chinese/Asian learning appears indeed pathetic.
However, there are some major ﬂaws in the reliance on such observa-
tions (both empirical and passing impressions) alone. If what is observ-
able is taken as mirroring what is going on inside the learner, then these 
observers commit the same error for which behaviorism has been crit-
icized. Interpreting what is observed without checking with the learners’ 
own experience, aspirations, and interpretations is a highly subjective act 
that is colored by one’s own cultural and personal lens.5! Here we have 
the perennial problem of substituting etic (outsider’s) for emic (insid-
er’s) meanings. When I ﬁrst encountered Western interpretations of 
Chinese/Asian learning, the prevalence of this problem was overwhelming. 
Tere was a complete disconnect between these observations and interpre-
tations and my own experience of learning in China. Yet, such research has 
persisted to date.
Te second fallacy in condemning Chinese learning is that researchers 
forget that much of valued Western learning is also similar to Chinese learn-
ing, and such learning is foundational because it is necessary. As alluded to 
earlier, Western learners of piano (and other instruments), ballet, sports, 
phonics, many math problems for a given concept, introductory biology 
learning, and the notorious medical school beginner courses do just as 
much of this “blind” and “meaningless” rote learning and repetitive acts. 
Tere is likewise just as little freedom, exploration, inquiry, discovery, and 
creativity. And there just does not seem to be any way to avoid such learn-
ing or to transform it into more creative and exploratory learning. Are we to 
claim that these learners are also stripped of their personal agency, or that 
they too must suﬀer from their teachers’ authoritarianism? It is peculiar that 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!:7
once a genius arises, even afer much of this type of foundational learning 
took place, the hard work of geniuses is usually edited out of the discourse 
of the accolades in the West (but not in East Asia). Sergei Bertensson, Jay 
Leyda, and Sophia Satina provide a telling biography on Rachmaninoﬀ’s 
early training for piano under Nicholai Zverev:
Rachmaninoﬀ and his peers, Leonid Maximov and Matvei Pressman, 
had to get up at 6 to practice piano for several hours. Te schedule was 
not allowed to change even when a boy had gone to bed at 2:00 am the 
night before. Tese boys took turns facing the ordeal for the one piano in 
the house. When a note was mishit by any boy, the teacher would storm 
out shouting. And when he was out of town, his strict wife continued 
the drill.52
As illustrated by this story, hard practice is ofen a necessity at the begin-
ning. Te longer a given discipline such as philosophy, history, math, biol-
ogy, or medicine has been in existence, the greater the accumulated body 
of knowledge that the discipline has, and, consequently, the more founda-
tional learning is required. Learners eventually reach more sophisticated 
levels of mastery and excellence if they continue the so-called rote learning 
over time.
Te third fallacy that such observers commit is to assume that what one 
observes does not change. When a Chinese learner is at the familiarizing 
stage, the learner is likely to show acts replete with repetition and memori-
zation. Several days later, however, this learner may be able to explain what 
a given poem means and how the words and sounds are put together, which 
is a level of understanding and insight. In another few weeks, the same 
learner may have learned several diﬀerent forms of poetry and may be able 
to compare and contrast the variations. Finally, afer the whole semester, 
this learner may be able to compose his or her own poems. Whereas some 
early trials may resemble the masters’ styles, later trials may be quite unique 
and creative. None of this later learning is the same as the ﬁrst phrase of 
familiarizing and practice. Yet, the observer takes the one observed inci-
dence in the beginning and falsely assumes that the learner is a perpetual 
repeater and memorization robot for the rest of his or her learning, not just 
for the given skill but for all learning throughout the learner’s life.
Te fourth fallacy that such observers commit is to assume that under-
standing must be immediate, either achieved immediately during the learn-
ing activity or displayed verbally or behaviorally, or both, by the learner. 
As stated earlier, understanding can have many stages and facets, some of 
which may even require cycles of thinking, reﬂection, practice, application, 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!:8
thinking again, revising the original understanding,5: and so forth, which 
is the essence of reviewing as a means to gain new insight. Understanding 
depends on the nature of the knowledge, concept, or skill under study. I 
would argue that the understanding that is observable within a class or 
a given activity in a limited time (e.g., a class period of ﬁfy minutes) is 
a low level of understanding that is quite possibly not very worth pursu-
ing because it does not require deep thinking and dedication over time. 
Te kind of understanding that Chef Ting displayed cannot be achieved 
and therefore observed within a short period of time. Rushing to label and 
condemn Chinese/Asian learners as lacking understanding during a stage 
when their teachers or they themselves do not even expect to achieve any 
worthy level of understanding is simply invalid.
Some researchers have tried to distinguish memorization for the sake 
of memorization from repetitive learning. Whereas the ﬁrst kind is truly 
rote learning, the second type can be meaningful and can lead to under-
standing and skill reﬁnement. Tese researchers further demonstrate that 
Chinese learners use memorization for creating a deep impression as their 
ﬁrst step. Ten they seek deeper understanding of the material. Ference 
Marton’s team pioneered this line of research with phenomenological meth-
ods and collected learners’ own thoughts and experiences. Tey found that 
Chinese learners indeed engaged in memorization, but memorization was 
not an end in itself, but rather the ﬁrst step. With information committed 
to memory, they sought to understand the material. One student in Hong 
Kong attested to such a process: “[B]ecause each time I repeat, I would have 
some new idea of understanding, that is to say I can understand better.”5; 
Another recent study comparing Vietnamese and German students shows 
that repetitive learning is strongly correlated with deep learning strategies 
for Vietnamese students, but hardly so for German students. Te research-
ers concluded that repetitive learning is not a mechanical and thoughtless 
activity for Asian students.55
It was a relief that researchers actually found evidence that Chinese/
Asian learners were not just mindless learners, but actually were inclined 
to and did in fact understand what they studied. Of course, the need to ﬁnd 
such evidence only came from the apparent paradox of the independent 
and repeated demonstration of Asian children’s achievement in interna-
tional assessments. In all of this eﬀort, the worry that perhaps we would not 
ﬁnd such deep learning that would vindicate the Chinese/Asian learners’ 
methods also showed the power of the fallacious but unfortunately widely 
accepted condemnation that has been directed at Chinese/Asian learning for 
so long. Te irony is that the learners themselves, teachers, and parents do 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!:C
not seem bothered by it. Why should they? Afer all, who would not admire 
Chef Ting in Chuang Tzu’s story? And who would remain untouched by 
the young Rachmaninoﬀ and his peers when they practiced piano in cold 
Russian winters with such discipline?
Te virtue of diligence/self-exertion is the utmost learning process in 
Chinese learning that aﬀords the learner a chance to be like Chef Ting and 
other masters. It is also clear that this process aims at a very long time-span 
for a very high level of understanding and mastery. Such a time-span and 
aim obviate passing observations of a class period or a child murmuring a 
poem. Practice understood as such may appear rote and boring, but to the 
learners it may be uplifing and gratifying.
Endurance of Hardship (步以)
Te idea that learning is fun or should be a fun process can be diﬃcult for 
Chinese/Asian learners to absorb.56 Based on the research I have reviewed 
and done myself, very few Chinese talk about learning in this way, even 
afer so many Western children’s TV and online fun-orientated programs 
have been running in China for several decades (longer in Taiwan, Hong 
Kong, and Singapore). Chinese may accept some fun for young children’s 
learning, but probably not for older children. Why would they not feel that 
learning should be fun? In my opinion, this stems from two related con-
victions. First, as discussed in the preceding chapters, learning is not just 
academic for Chinese/Asians; it is, more centrally, a personal moral obli-
gation and commitment. It is a very serious endeavor. It would be odd to 
say that striving to be moral, to become a better person, or to take on the 
obligation for life is fun. Given this ultimate purpose, Chinese, in my view, 
rightfully regard learning not as a lighthearted process but as a weighty per-
sonal matter.
Second, this weighty matter has always been conceptualized and prac-
ticed as an ordeal that learners need to accept and to overcome, as expressed 
in the following quote from Mencius that a Taiwanese father gave to his 
college-attending daughter who wanted to quit her physics assignment: 
“When heaven is about to confer a great responsibility on one, it will ﬁrst 
test one’s resolution, subject one’s sinews and bones to hard work, expose 
one’s body to hunger, put one to poverty, and place obstacles in the path 
of one’s deeds, so as to stimulate one’s mind [and heart], strengthen one’s 
nature, and improve wherever one is incompetent.”57
However, this ordeal is not conceived of as a punitive, draconian mea-
sure, intended to harm the learner; rather, it is to guide the learner along 
the learning path. Te ordeal is not supposed to deter the learner; it serves 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;0
instead to summon and to test the learner’s resolve and commitment. In 
stepping up to the ordeal, the learner forges personal strength and dis-
plays it to his or her family and community. Tis commitment also helps 
the learner accomplish the actual learning. Tus, Chinese learners are 
expected to engage in learning with the anticipation and readiness to face 
challenges.
Challenges, or any situation that makes learning diﬃcult for the learner, 
are expressed in Chinese as hardship, ku (以). In Chinese, this term also 
means bitterness. But bitterness is not something that overwhelms the per-
son. Learning is the ultimate good, but the process is wrought with endless 
challenges. To achieve the ultimate good, one must face and overcome any 
challenge and hardship. Te virtue that enables one to face up to and com-
bat each challenge is endurance of hardship (步以).
To gain a sense of the kind of challenges that loom in the learning pro-
cess, we can look at the expressions I collected from my lexicon study: 
Endurance of hardship (步以); study assiduously (步以是的); study dili-
gently and practice hard (進是以方); take great pains to study (以錐致兩); 
endurance of hardship is the boat to the boundless sea of learning (是門頭千
以裡小); without bitter coldness, where does the fragrance of the plum ﬂower 
come from? (流孜鋒江寒海冰, 凍尺非口日之書); the sharp blade of the 
sword comes from constant grinding, the fragrance of plum ﬂowers comes 
only afer bitter coldness (山路為經磨勉疏, 日之書百以寒自); there is no 
diﬃculty on earth for the resolute person (懸偷頭來礪, 股,孜錐梁); a 
ten-year cold window (study ten years) (寶劍寒窗); Sun Jing hung his hair 
on a beam overhead (to keep himself awake for studying) (王羲法); Su Qin 
stung his thighs with an awl (to keep himself awake for studying) (茅海塞); 
digging a hole in the wall to borrow the neighbor’s light (for studying at night) 
(頓開入出); Zhu Maicheng studied while wood-cutting (石而兩寫).
Tis set of expressions contains two kinds of hardship. Te ﬁrst one is 
the learning process itself, which has two further challenges. One is the 
length of time required to learn anything well, as discussed under diligence/
self-exertion. Te other challenge is the routine encounter of inherently dif-
ﬁcult knowledge or skill that is worth pursuing. For example, learners face 
not understanding a concept or a math proof, or not being able to perform 
a speciﬁc artistic act. Giving up is not an option, so the learner has to accept 
the challenge. Te learner will either spend more time on a given concept 
or performance, or seek out the teacher and peers for help. If such extra 
work will not lead to desired results, the learner will endure more hard-
ship to double his or her eﬀort. Each time the learner has to do that, he or 
she will take time away from leisure and likely experience such learning as 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!;!
overcoming hardship. In my interviews with Chinese college students about 
what hardship meant to them in school, one student shared a common sce-
nario of enduring hardship: “I ofen force myself not to go to dance parties 
at weekends. I, too, want to have fun, and I, too, want to join my friends. 
But I have to let that go because I have to study. It’s really hard, really hard 
(持可師以, 持以)!” But when asked if he felt regret, he said no; he was 
instead proud of himself for being able to endure such hardship.
As noted earlier, Chinese learners exert themselves also to oﬀset their 
perceived lack of natural ability/talent. In my ideal learner study, lack of 
inherent ability was identiﬁed as another common form of hardship that 
such learners must face and overcome. Instead of giving up, one will spend 
more time, seek more help, and practice more. Tey believe that for a given 
amount of knowledge or skill, one can learn quickly if one is lucky enough 
to be born with superior intelligence/talent. But if one is not so bright, there 
is no use to lament over what one was not given at birth. Instead, one simply 
needs to increase the length of time and the amount of eﬀort. One should 
focus on what one can do and try to use that to oﬀset one’s weaknesses. 
With this kind of attitude and work, it is believed, everyone will reach the 
ﬁnish line eventually.58
However, the most prevalent hardship throughout Chinese history 
has been poverty that learners had to endure. Te subjects of the last four 
expressions on the aforementioned list are the cultural exemplars who 
endured great hardship of poverty in order to learn. Tere were numerous 
others who also belong to the pantheon of such cultural icons. But these 
four are representative. Every schoolchild knows these stories because they 
are in the textbook and are very popular readings for beginner schoolchil-
dren, such as the household book Tree Character Classic (專矣課). Tese 
stories are taught to children in order for them to emulate the very virtue 
of endurance of hardship as embodied by these exemplars. Te four expres-
sions that entered my lexicon list are the condensed forms of the speciﬁc 
ways of overcoming poverty that these people showed. Here are the highly 
abridged four stories found in Tree Character Classic5C:
Su Qin Stung His Tighs with an Awl (茅海塞). Some time during the 
period of the Warring States (;75–22! BCE), Su Qin was a very poor 
child. He had to do a lot of harsh labor to make a living. He had time only 
at night. But he kept falling asleep. One night he fell asleep at his desk but 
woke up by being accidentally scratched by an awl. He got this idea and 
used it to sting his leg whenever he got groggy. His family begged him 
not to do that again. But he said that he had to study. He studied all the 
books on politics and warfare and developed a new strategy for defense. 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;2
He persuaded six smaller states to form a union to defend themselves 
against the most powerful state, Qin. Su Qin became prime minister of 
the union that successfully deterred Qin’s invasion for many years.
Digging a Hole in the Wall to Borrow the Neighbor’s Light (頓開入出). 
Kuang Heng, who lived some time during the Han Dynasty (202 BCE–
220 CE), was also very poor. He learned the Chinese characters from a 
relative. During the day, he had to work in the ﬁelds. He studied only 
at night, but his family could not aﬀord light. However, he was deter-
mined to learn. So he chiseled a hole in the wall to borrow the neighbor’s 
light. Tis was how he read. Later he became prime minister of the Han 
Dynasty.
Zhu Maicheng Studied While Wood-Cutting (石而兩寫). Some time dur-
ing the Han Dynasty, the poor boy Zhu Maicheng had to cut wood for a 
living, but never gave up on learning. Whenever he had a few minutes, 
he would study under a tree. Later, he put the book on top of his wood 
carrier and read while carrying wood on his shoulders. Tis was how he 
got his knowledge. Later he became a high oﬃcial at the court.
Sun Jing Hung His Hair on a Beam Overhead (王羲法). Sun Jing, who 
lived some time during the Jin Dynasty (266–;20 CE), had no time to 
study during the day because he had to do hard labor for a living. He 
could study only at night. He was afraid of falling asleep while reading 
his books at night, so he tied his hair with a string to the beam. When he 
dozed away, the string would pull his hair to awake him. Tis was how 
he gained his knowledge. Later Sun Jing became a famous Confucian 
scholar.
Tese learners were ingenious in inventing creative ways to study despite 
poverty, with some even using means not most conducive to their own 
well-being. Interestingly, historical records show that many family mem-
bers could not bear this level of endurance of hardship and would rather 
that they not use such means. But these learners were determined and 
persisted. All of them had noted achievements in history. Te message is 
clear that although poverty is very diﬃcult to overcome, it is not a suﬃcient 
reason for giving up on learning. Additionally, endurance of hardship was 
indeed a strong theme in my ideal learner study. Tere was no reference to 
backing down because of poverty for any of the described ideal learners. 
Te respondents showed much admiration and respect for these learn-
ers. Tis kind of admiration and respect is also extended to any such 
learners from any culture, for example, the young Abraham Lincoln read-
ing by the candlelight and the courageous Frederick Douglass learning how 
to read as a slave boy.
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!;:
Perseverance (笨錐)
Perseverance and endurance of hardship are related virtues, but they have 
diﬀerent emphases and therefore serve somewhat diﬀerent psychological 
functions in the learning process, as noted in previous chapters. Endurance 
of hardship acknowledges the existence of hardship and the learner’s need 
to overcome it. Perseverance emphasizes the completion of the whole 
learning process from the very beginning to the very end. Tis virtue is 
used to remove any challenge including, but not limited to, hardship, inter-
ruption (which may not be hardship, e.g., friends’ invitation to have fun), 
disturbances, distractions, boredom, and setbacks. Perseverance is follow-
ing through one’s learning no matter what happens.
Te expressions I collected for my lexicon study contain these items: 
Perseverance (鳥生以笨); learning is like sailing against the current; it moves 
backward if not forward (是先飛倍透小, 壁徹理解); utmost sincerity can 
break stone (水恆通今, 滾瓜唐能); indefatigable (in learning) (爛爛壁益); 
study all night by the candlelight (求神薪化); unremitting eﬀort (壁爐鍥舍); 
and keep on carving unﬂaggingly, and metal and stone will be engraved 
(Xun Zi) (火台壁純, 滾瓜下青). Tese expressions point out that there 
are obstacles in learning, as captured in a metaphor, sailing against the 
current. One will not achieve much if small obstacles can deter one from 
continuing. No matter what happens, the learner shall keep on learning. 
With such persistence, one will achieve big things in the end, hence break-
ing stone. If, however, one aborts one’s eﬀort halfway, one will accomplish 
little in learning.
Long-term practice that was discussed in the practice section goes hand 
in hand with perseverance. Each time the learner is frustrated about not 
making suﬃcient progress, the voices from the self, teachers, parents, and 
peers remind one to keep learning and practicing. Tis process is identical 
to that of a marathon runner who may want to quit at moments but men-
tally pushes oneself to continue. Te cheering crowds also give the runner 
encouragement and strength to continue. As a result, the runner ﬁnishes. 
Here is an example of such learning displayed by a Taiwanese student study-
ing at one American university:
Shirley was doing her physics homework one night. Afer having worked 
hard for several hours, she could not continue any longer. Her father 
called from Taiwan asking how she was doing. “Dad,” said Shirley, “I 
have been working hard on my physics homework, but I can’t ﬁgure 
out this problem, and I am tired. I am done for the day.” Upon hearing 
that his daughter was going to quit, the father recited Mencius’ above-
quoted passage on how a person shall face challenges and persist if this 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;;
person is to assume great responsibilities in the future. Ten the father 
asked Shirley to persist a bit longer. She did, until she solved her physics 
problem.
When discussing with me her family’s support for her learning, Shirley 
expressed gratitude for her father’s unﬂagging teaching of perseverance. 
Apparently, her father gave this kind of encouragement to her throughout 
the four years of Shirley’s undergraduate education. Undoubtedly, Shirley 
understands what perseverance means.
One might ask what happens to children who quit. To be sure, learners 
quit all the time for all kinds of reasons. However, in school and at home, 
whenever a child shows signs of giving up, teachers, peers, and parents as 
well as the extended kin are mobilized to do what Shirley’s father did: to 
reason with the child and to help the child improve. If the child does not 
have illness or another good reason, teachers and parents will show the 
child exemplary role models who persisted, overcame their inclinations to 
quit, and achieved their goals. Some of these models are historical ﬁgures, 
but others may be just peers in the same class. Chinese schools frequently 
hold a special meeting called “Exchange Study Methods” (庖程是的丁首), 
where peers share how they study and exercise various learning virtues. 
Children share obstacles they have encountered, particularly their own 
frustrations and diﬃculties, and speciﬁc strategies they used to deal with 
such problems. Hearing that one’s peers also have these diﬃculties con-
ﬁrms that it is not unusual for one to experience similar problems. Children 
can learn from each other about how to improve one’s perseverance 
(other virtues). When teachers see a given child make progress, there is 
ofen public praise for such improvement of virtue. Not only do such learn-
ing opportunities echo the importance of virtues, but they also provide spe-
ciﬁc ways to acquire and to exercise them in learning. Tese approaches in 
school help perpetuate learning virtues from generation to generation.
Concentration (牛錐)
Te last, but of course not least, learning virtue is concentration. As noted 
in other chapters, concentration is particularly important in the actual 
learning process. If earnestness/sincerity is the overall virtue, diligence/self-
exertion the temporal virtue, endurance of hardship is the hardship virtue, 
and perseverance the follow-through virtue, concentration is the virtue of 
each moment for each learning activity.
My lexicon study obtained these expressions: Concentrate on learning 
(牛錐是的); devote oneself to studying (游錐是的); put one’s heart into one’s 
study (鏤錐兩寫); bury oneself in books (刃王寫余); make great eﬀort to 
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!;5
study and research (鍥舍刻苦); is engrossed in reading sacred books and obliv-
ious to what happening in the world (攻涯壁作窗舟礪, 鋒錐股兩沒番寫); 
(so absorbed as to) forget food and sleep (刺如持恆); and study with rapt 
attention (经離字是的是的). Tese expressions reveal a very high degree 
of concentration, attention, and wholehearted dedication to learning.
Chinese/East Asian cultures strongly emphasize contemplative learn-
ing – that is, the fact that the learner needs quiet time and space to study 
and to ponder. In classroom settings, children’s undivided attention is 
demanded by the common learning topic at hand. Side talking with each 
other is not encouraged. Noisy environments with unrelated talking where 
the teacher is teaching and students studying are regarded as detrimental 
to learning. Talking aloud to oneself while studying is also believed not to 
be conducive to one’s learning. In fact, the Neo-Confucians in the Song-
Ming times borrowed from the Buddhist meditative practice to clear one’s 
mind and promoted quiet sitting as a key method for concentration. Recent 
research by Kim60 provides support that quiet learning is valued by Asian 
learners, and speaking while learning interferes with Asian learners’ infor-
mation processing (but it does not seem to interfere with that of European-
American learners).
However, concentration is not an easy virtue to acquire. Chinese learn-
ers are keenly aware that much of anyone’s struggle in learning is lack of 
concentration. Tis problem applies even to people who do not lack any 
motivation and conviction about learning. Today, neuroscience tells us that 
attention/concentration/focus is a manifestation of our executive function-
ing in the prefrontal lobe, which does not fully mature until late adolescence 
and early adulthood. Concentration is a clearly observable problem among 
young, normally developing children. And it is a tremendous challenge for 
children with the attention deﬁcit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a 
common neurological disorder aﬀecting many children.
In order to help children, Chinese parents and teachers train children 
for concentration with a number of strategies. One of them is to create quiet 
space for children to sit down and to study without any disturbance. For 
example, teachers may ask a class of children to sit down and to count how 
long they can sit without ﬁdgeting or moving away.6! Tis training makes 
children sensitive not only to their own need for concentration, but also to 
how speciﬁcally they can monitor themselves. Another eﬀective strategy is 
to have children practice skills that require slowing down and exhibiting 
ﬁne motor control such as imitating Chinese calligraphy with exactitude 
(see Figure ;.: for how a grandfather demonstrates rapt attention to his 
grandson in writing Chinese calligraphy), training for holding chopsticks, 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;6
and producing disciplined movements of martial arts, dance steps, and 
other athletic forms. A commonly observed classroom ritual is for the class 
monitor, a peer, to call the class to stand up as the teacher steps into the 
classroom. Te class then greets the teacher in chorus: “Good day, Teacher!” 
Te teacher returns the greeting “Good day, Students! Please sit down!” 
and “Let’s begin class!” Tis ritual takes less than thirty seconds. Although 
short, it marks the end of the leisure time and the beginning of the seri-
ous and sacred class time to which all students’ attention is directed and 
demanded.62
Parents also use various strategies to help improve their children’s con-
centration. It is a common scenario in living compounds to hear parents 
instruct their children with the term concentration zhuanxi (牛錐) as 
“You need to be more zhuanxi in your studies” and “Are you not zhuanxi 
in school?” Our recent study with recorded mother–child conversations 
about learning in Taiwan indicates a much higher rate of exchanges about 
concentration than their European American mother–child pairs.6: In spite 
of their very small living space, parents ofen clear oﬀ the dinner table afer 
dinner and turn oﬀ the TV to ensure a quiet homework space and time 
for their children. When children are actually working, parents may stay 
nearby instead of leaving them to their own devices, engaging in a style of 
need-based intervention. When siblings distract each other, parents step in 
to remind them that they need to concentrate. Tis way, daily homework 
and review are done as expected because the time and space as well as the 
,ig.re ;.:. A Chinese grandfather teaching his ﬁve-year-old grandson how to 
concentrate on writing Chinese characters with a brush. Courtesy of Heidi Fung.
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!;7
concentration are all ensured.6; Some parents will even go a step further 
to help their children acquire and exercise the virtue of concentration. For 
example, when I was a child, our town had a semi-barter market system 
where farmers brought their produce and poultry to the market on a sched-
uled weekday to sell their goods and then to buy the goods they needed. 
When the day came, the whole town turned into a noisy, bustling market. 
My father used to put a stool on the street outside our courtyard and asked 
me to read a book without being disturbed by the market noise. I sat there 
and read my books until I was no longer distracted by the noise.
Tose who demonstrate good concentration are not believed to have 
an inherent superior temperament or personality trait for concentration. 
Chinese learners believe strongly that anyone can acquire the virtue of 
concentration and everyone should. Students with good concentration are 
asked to share their learning experience and are admired. Other children 
are encouraged to emulate these models as well as ﬁnding ways to improve 
their own concentration.
Te prominence of the Chinese virtue-oriented learning process received 
strong support from research conducted by others as well as myself. In my 
ideal learner study, for example, as many as 86 percent of the respondents 
mentioned one or more of these virtues. In comparison, only :8 percent of 
the European-American respondents wrote about virtue-oriented learning 
processes (but C6 percent mentioned mind-oriented learning processes). 
Another study on learning agency among current Chinese students from 
late elementary to high school also found that ordinary Chinese students 
in China endorse predominantly these learning virtues as underlying their 
daily learning processes.65 Moreover, Chinese children as young as four start 
to internalize these learning virtues. Te older children showed increas-
ingly more such orientation.66 Finally, the admiration that such displayed 
learning virtues engender in their teachers and peers is no less than the 
admiration expressed toward the exploratory, inquiring, critically thinking, 
and expressive spirit of Western learners.
(oBes
 !. See DeCasper, A. J., & Spence, M. J. (!C86). Prenatal maternal speech inﬂuences 
newborn’s perceptions of speech sounds. Infant Behavior and Development, 3, 
!::–!50 for a study on how fetal learning takes place. See also Brown, R. (!C7:). A 
ﬁrst language: Te early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press for the 
documentation of lack of adult instructions for child language acquisition. See 
Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008). Te sources of normativity: 
Young children’s awareness of the normative structure of games. Developmental 
Psychology, (((:), 875–88! for research on young children’s sense of social norms.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;8
 2. See Gardner, H. (!CC!). Te unschooled mind: How children think and how 
schools should teach. New York: Basic Books for a review of research on how 
children learn before formal schooling. Human capacity to learn is most evi-
dent at birth. Te fast mental growth in early infancy cannot be attributed to 
cultural inﬂuence because infants do not have enough time to acquire cultural 
knowledge. However, from the perspective of human evolutionary history, cul-
ture may have played an important role in its interaction with biology and thus 
may have jointly produced human learning capacity. See note 7 to Chapter ! for 
more discussion on this process.
 :. Smits, W., & Stromback, T. (200!). Te economics of the apprenticeship system. 
Cheltenham: Elgar.
 ;. See Olson, D. R. (!CC;). Te world on paper: Te conceptual and cognitive 
implications of writing and reading. New York: Cambridge University Press for 
human literacy development. See Damerow, P. (!CC8). Prehistory and cogni-
tive development. In J. Langer & M. Killen (Eds.), Piaget, evolution, and devel-
opment (pp. 227–270). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum for earliest formal schooling in 
the Middle East; and Siu, M. K. (200;). Oﬃcial curriculum in mathematics in 
ancient China: How did Candidates study for the examination? In L.-H. Fan, 
N.-Y. Wong, J.-F Cai, S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso (Eds.), How Chinese learn mathe-
matics: Perspectives from insiders (pp. !57–!85). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc for 
an account of early Chinese formal schooling. In the Chinese system, from the 
seventh century to !C05, all people in principle could participate in the Civil 
Service Examination. It is important to point out that only those who could 
aﬀord education beneﬁted from this system.
 5. To be sure, ample research shows that just because compulsory education exists 
in the world does not mean that all children receive equal education. Large 
inequity exists between middle-class and low-income populations across the 
globe. Te United States is a good example. Still, compulsory education is an 
important achievement in human history. See the ﬁrst reference of note ! to 
Chapter : for more discussions.
 6. All of the terms/expressions in English and Chinese that I present in this chap-
ter came from the study that is referenced in note 5; to Chapter :.
 7. Te statistical analysis of the sorted lexicon placed the most frequently grouped 
items to the far lef, the second most frequently grouped items next, and so 
forth. Tus, the order in which categories emerged indicates relative magnitude 
of group consensus of the category. Te further lef the cluster, the heavier the 
magnitude. See Figure :.! in Chapter :.
 8. Edwards, C., Gandini, L., & Forman, G. (Eds.). (!CC8). Te hundred languages of 
children: Te Reggio Emilia approach – advanced reﬂections. (2nd ed.). Westport, 
CT: Ablex.
 C. Pintrich, P. R., Smith, D. A. F., Garcia, T., & McKeachie, W. J. (!CC:). Reliability 
and predictive validity of the motivated strategies for learning questionnaire 
(MSLQ). Educational and Psychological Measurement, )3, 80!–8!:; and Purdie, 
N., & Hattie, J. (!CC6). Cultural diﬀerences in the use of strategies for self- 
regulated learning. American Educational Research Journal, 33, 8;5–87!.
 !0. See Hidi, S., & Renninger, K. A. (2006). Te four-phase model of interest devel-
opment. Educational Psychologist, (1(2), !!!–!27 for research on interest and its 
development in learning.
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!;C
 !!. See Cole, M., Cole, S. R., & Lightfoot, C. (2005). Te development of chil-
dren. (5th ed.). New York: Worth Publishers for basic knowledge on child 
development.
 !2. See the ﬁrst reference in note :: to Chapter :. Gardner and Winner did not 
appreciate Chinese adults’ interference with their son’s exploration and con-
cluded quite observantly that this Chinese adult behavior may reveal some fun-
damentally diﬀerent beliefs about child development and learning.
 !:. See note 8 to this chapter.
 !;. Kuhn, D. (!CC!). Education for thinking. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
 !5. Nobel Museum (n.d.). Retrieved October 5, 20!0 from http://nobelprize.org/
nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/
 !6. See note !5 to this chapter. Also see Gardner, H., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & 
Damon, W. (200!). Good work: When excellence and ethics meet. New York: 
Basic Books for the testimonies of current scientists in the biomedical ﬁeld and 
genetics on their “thrill of scientiﬁc inquiry” (p. 7:).
 !7. Perkins, D. N. (!CC5). Smart schools. New York: Free Press; also see the second 
reference in note !6 to this chapter for the essential role of “quality of thinking” 
(p. 7;) and “rational thinking” (p. 75) in scientiﬁc research.
 !8. See McBride, R. E., Xiang, P., Wittenburg, D., & Shen, J.-H. (2002). An analysis 
of preservice teachers’ dispositions toward critical thinking: A cross-cultural 
perspective. Asian-Paciﬁc Journal of Teacher Education, 30(2), !:!–!;0 for a 
review of the importance of critical thinking in the West.
 !C. Ennis, R. (!C87). A taxonomy of critical thinking dispositions and abilities. 
In J. Baron & R. Sternberg (Eds.), Teaching thinking skills: Teory and practice  
(pp. C–26). New York: Freeman, p. !0.
 20. Facione, P. (!CC0). Critical thinking: A statement of expert consensus for purposes 
of educational assessment and instruction. Executive summary of “Te Delphi 
Report.” Milbrae, CA: Te California Academic Press.
 2!. Nobel Museum (n.d.). Retrieved October 5, 20!0 from http://nobelprize.org/
nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/
 22. See note 2! to this chapter.
 2:. See note !8 to Chapter 2, p. !!.
 2;. A fuller account of this tradition will be presented in Chapter 8 in contrast to 
the reluctance to speak in East Asia. See Sternberg, R. J. (!C85). Implicit the-
ories of intelligence, creativity, and wisdom. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, (,, 607–627 for his research on verbal ability as an important com-
ponent of the Western conception of intelligence.
 25. See Wang, Q. (200;). Te emergence of cultural self-constructs: Autobiographical 
memory and self-description in European American and Chinese children. 
Developmental Psychology, (0(!), :–!5; and Wang, Q., & Leichtman, M. D. 
(2000). Same beginnings, diﬀerent stories: A comparison of American and 
Chinese children’s narratives. Child Development, -1, !:2C–!:;6; and also the 
ﬁrst reference in note 6 to Chapter : for diﬀerences in children’s narratives.
 26. See note 8 to this chapter.
 27. Goleman, D. (!CC5). Emotional intelligence: Why it can matter more than IQ. 
New York: Bantam.
 28. See note 5; to Chapter :.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!50
 2C. See notes 26 and 27 to Chapter : for detailed descriptions of Japanese preschool 
and elementary school classrooms. See Hsueh, Y. (!CCC). A day at Little Stars 
Preschool, Beijing, China. Unpublished video footage; Wang, T., & Murphy, J. 
(200;). An examination of coherence in a Chinese mathematics classroom. 
In L.-H. Fan, N.-Y. Wong, J.-F Cai, S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso (Eds.), How Chinese 
learn mathematics: Perspectives from insiders (pp. !07–!2:). Singapore: World 
Scientiﬁc; and Cortazzi, M., & Jin, L.-X. (200!). Large classes in China: “Good” 
teachers and interaction. In D. A. Watkins & J. B. Biggs (Eds.), Teaching the 
Chinese learner: Psychological and pedagogical perspectives (pp. !!5–!:;). Hong 
Kong: Comparative Education Research Centre for documentation of how chil-
dren show earnestness/sincerity in classroom learning.
 :0. Paine, L. W. (!CC0). Te teacher as virtuoso: A Chinese model for teaching. Te 
Teachers College Record, ,.(!), ;C–8!.
 :!. See notes 2!, 26, 27, and 50 to Chapter :.
 :2. Levy, R. I. (!C7:). Tahitians. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 ::. See notes ;: and ;; to Chapter :. Also see Marton, F., Dall’Alba, G., & Beaty, E. 
(!CC:). Conceptions of learning. International Journal of Educational Research, 
1,, 277–:00 for their research on the role of memorization and understanding 
among Chinese learners.
 :;. Zhang, D.-Z., Li, S.-Q., & Tang, R.-F. (200;). Te “two basics”: Mathematics 
teaching and learning in Mainland China. In L.-H. Fan, N.-Y. Wong, J.-F Cai, 
S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso (Eds.), How Chinese learn mathematics: Perspectives from 
insiders (pp. !8C–207). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
 :5. See the second reference in note 8 to Chapter :. Also see two new books pub-
lished recently: Colvin, G. (2008). Talent is overrated: What really separates 
world-class performers from everybody else. New York: Portfolio; and Coyle, D. 
(200C). Te talent code: Greatness isn’t born. It’s grown. Here’s how. New York: 
Bantam Dell for how great performances from the West also depend on this 
type of “deliberate” or “deep” practice.
 :6. Chen, C., & Stevenson, H. W. (!C8C). Homework: A cross-cultural examination. 
Child Development, /0, 55!–56!; Helmke, A., & Tuyet, V. T. A. (!CCC). Do Asian 
and Western students learn in a diﬀerent way? An empirical study on motiva-
tion, study time, and learning strategies of German and Vietnamese university 
students. Asian Paciﬁc Journal of Education, 1,(2), :0–;;; Peng, S. S., & Wright, 
D. (!CC;). Explanation of academic achievement of Asian American students. 
Journal of Educational Research, 8-(6), :;6–:52; third reference in note :! to this 
chapter; and Purdie, N., Hattie, J., & Douglas, G. (!CC6). Student conceptions 
of learning and their use of self-regulated learning strategies: A cross-cultural 
comparison. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 87–!00.
 :7. See note ;; to Chapter :.
 :8. Li, J. (!CC8). Te power of embedding learning beliefs in everyday learning: 
Language arts texts as a vehicle for enculturation. Unpublished manuscript. 
I tallied all content in China’s elementary school’s language arts curriculum 
published in !CC7. I found that :6E of all genres (e.g., stories, excerpts of nov-
els, essays, songs, poems, letters, etc.) contained learning beliefs (e.g., moral 
self-perfection and contribution to society) and learning virtues (e.g., Madam 
Currie worked long hours in the lab).
Mind and Virtue Learning Processes
!5!
 :C. See the ﬁrst reference in note 6! to Chapter :.
 ;0. See second reference in note 8 to Chapter :.
 ;!. See in note 5 to Chapter 2, 2.!!, p. 78.
 ;2. See the second reference in note :6 to this chapter.
 ;:. See note 2! to Chapter :.
 ;;. See notes 26 and 28 to Chapter :.
 ;5. See the ﬁrst reference in note 6! to Chapter :.
 ;6. See the ﬁrst reference in note 6! to Chapter :. See Huang, H.-M. (200;). Eﬀects 
of cram schools on children’s mathematics learning. In L.-H. Fan, N.-Y. Wong, 
J.-F Cai, S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso (Eds.), How Chinese learn mathematics: Perspectives 
from insiders (pp. 282–:06). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc for how, among other 
reasons, putting in more time and eﬀort by attending the so-called cram schools 
in Taiwan is believed to compensate for children’s lack of ability.
 ;7. See the ﬁrst reference in note 6! to Chapter :.
 ;8. See the third reference in note ; to this chapter, and Li, J.-H. (200;). Torough 
understanding of the textbook: A signiﬁcant feature of [the] Chinese teacher 
manual. In L.-H. Fan, N.-Y. Wong, J.-F Cai, S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso (Eds.), How 
Chinese learn mathematics: Perspectives from insiders (pp. 262–28!). Singapore: 
World Scientiﬁc.
 ;C. Anderson, G. I. A. (Ed.). (!C77). Masterpieces of the Orient (6th ed.). New York: 
Norton, pp. ;2!–;22.
 50. See references in note 75 to Chapter 2 and Kember, D. (2000). Misconceptions 
about the learning approaches, motivation, and study approaches of Asian stu-
dents. Higher Education, (0, CC–!2! for criticism of Chinese rote learning. Many 
Chinese educators themselves also join in this condemnation.
 5!. Geertz, C. (!C7:). Te interpretation of culture. New York: Basic Books.
 52. Bertensson, S., Leyda, J., & Satina, S. (2002). Sergei Rachmaninoﬀ: A lifetime in 
music. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. !0–!!.
 5:. Marcovitch, S., & Zelazo, P. D. (200C). A hierarchical competing systems model 
of the emergence and early development of executive function. Developmental 
Science, 1.(!), !–!8.
 5;. See note ;; to Chapter : and the second reference in note :: to this chapter, 
p. 8!.
 55. See the second reference in note :6 to this chapter.
 56. Chao, R. K. (!CC6). Chinese and European American mothers’ views about 
the role of parenting in children’s school success. Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology, .-, ;0:–;2:.
 57. See the second reference in note 7! to Chapter :, p. ::0. Te original transla-
tion by D. C. Lau (note 50 to Chapter 2) was done with the English mascu-
line pronouns he, his, and him for the Chinese term 梁, which is not gendered. 
Although before the twentieth century, few women were ever educated and 
involved in political life, I maintain that the pronouns for ancient texts should 
be translated with the gender-neutral pronouns one and one’s. Tis insistence is 
especially relevant given that the father quoted Mencius’ passage to encourage 
his daughter.
 58. Tis is probably why the Aesop’s fable Hare and Tortoise (from its hundreds of 
fables) enjoys eternal popularity in Chinese/Asian cultures. Te opportunity 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!52
to learn a skill over a very long period of time where these Chinese learning 
virtues are learned, applied, and preserved is likely to be a truer reason why 
so many Chinese/Asians parents enroll their children in learning how to play 
Western classical music instruments. Tis penchant of Asian parents stands in 
sharp contrast to Western classical music being viewed as “museum music” by 
pop musicians in the postmodern Era.
 5C. See note 77 to Chapter 2.
 60. Kim, H. S. (2002). We talk, therefore we think? A Cultural analysis of the 
eﬀect of talking on thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 
828–8;2.
 6!. See note 26 to Chapter :.
 62. See the ﬁfh reference in note 2C to this chapter and note :0 to this chapter.
 6:. Li, J., Fung, H., Liang, C.-H., Resch, J., Luo, L., & Lou, L. (2008, July). When 
my child doesn’t learn well: European American and Taiwanese mothers talk-
ing to their children about their children’s learning weaknesses. In J. Li & H. 
Fung (Chairs), Diverse paths and forms of family socialization: Cultural and 
ethnic inﬂuences. Symposium paper presented at a biannual conference of the 
International Society for the Study of Behavioral Development, Würzburg, 
Germany.
 6;. See the second reference in note ; to Chapter :.
 65. Li, J. (2006). Self in learning: Chinese adolescents’ goals and sense of agency. 
Child Development, --(2), ;82–50!.
 66. See the ﬁrst reference in note 6 to Chapter :.
