!53
5
Curiosity Begets Inquiry and Heart Begets Dedication
Aﬀect is involved in learning as in other domains of human life. Aﬀect is 
not just emotions but also feelings and attitudes, and it is part of our moti-
vational system. Because of its larger scope, I use the term aﬀect instead 
of emotion. Still, emotions make up the core of our aﬀective life in gen-
eral and are important in our learning. In this chapter, I ﬁrst introduce the 
general concept of emotion followed by a description of research on the 
kinds of emotions and other aﬀects that Western and Asian learners expe-
rience. &en I discuss how aﬀects may function in these learners’ respective 
learning.
e()ti), i, -e,e./l
Emotions are part of our response system to the environment. &ey have 
physiological responses such as heartbeat, perspiration, body temper-
ature (e.g., blushing), and involuntary facial expressions (e.g., crying for 
sadness and smiling for happiness); feelings and attitudes, however, may 
not have clear physiological responses. For example, we may feel strange 
in a place with which we are not familiar, or we may feel generally out of 
sorts, but such feelings are not necessarily accompanied by notable physi-
ological responses. As for an attitude, we may feel that we are entitled to a 
higher pay than we actually receive, but have no bodily manifestations of 
this attitude.!
An emotion is regarded as both a discrete and an episodic phenome-
non. It is discrete because when we experience a particular emotion, such 
as happiness, our happiness itself is not mixed with sadness or any other 
unrelated emotion, despite the fact that our happiness may be of a more or 
less subtle kind such as elation or relief. Sometimes we do realize that we 
have mixed emotions; for example, a warrior may win a great battle and feel 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!54
triumphant and in the same second he may feel sadness for the loss of his 
comrades. However, this so-called mixed emotion does not mean that our 
discrete emotions of triumphant happiness and the sadness for the fallen 
are truly mixed. Quite the contrary, our happiness in this instance has an 
entirely diﬀerent cause, namely winning. Our sadness has a diﬀerent cause, 
namely our consideration for the dead and wounded. &erefore, we still 
experience our happiness ﬁrst in the temporal sequence and our sadness 
later, no matter how closely the second emotion may follow the ﬁrst one. 
&e two emotions are thus still discrete.2
Emotions are also episodic because we experience our emotions tem-
porally. Simply put, emotions come and go. Ross Buck notes that we tend 
to notice our emotions (and are ofen noticed by others around us) when 
they become relatively strong even though our emotional system is always 
turned on under normal circumstances.3 &us, any emotional episode can 
be seen as having three basic components that unfold in time: a cause or 
antecedence, a response/reaction, and coping aferward.4 Nico Frijda 
advanced this basic understanding of emotions into a sequence of seven 
components, specifying how each phase happens: (!) antecedent events that 
generate emotions – for example, an event, a personal act (e.g., tasting good 
food), social interaction, or sometimes even a recollection or an image in 
our head can trigger an emotion in us; (2) event coding during which one 
characterizes the event in reference to event types as recognized by one’s 
culture (e.g., a kind gesture versus an insult); (3) appraisal in which one 
evaluates the implications of the event to the self (e.g., “am I responsible?”); 
(4) physiological reaction patterns where a given emotion is linked to a set 
of autonomic reactions (e.g., shame leads to blushing and looking away); 
(5) action readiness where the person selects the next course of actions from 
a repertoire of possible actions (e.g., fear prompts the impulse to run away); 
(6) emotional behavior where one takes action (e.g., actual running away in 
fear); and ﬁnally (7) regulation where the person selects ways to deal with 
the emotion and the action taken (e.g., staying engaged with the event when 
feeling happy).5
Traditionally, aﬀect is contrasted with cognition as two opposite ends 
in psychological research. However, recent research shows that aﬀect and 
cognition are inseparable in human functioning. In order for us to experi-
ence any emotion, we use our mind to appraise the event to determine its 
relevance and importance to ourselves before our emotions are generated. 
In fact, Frijda’s theory is called “appraisal theory” because it emphasizes 
how our mind perceives preceding causes, how we code such events and 
appraise them to determine to personal signiﬁcance to ourselves before our 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!55
emotions can be activated. Similarly, when we are engaged in mental work, 
our aﬀective system is turned on to generate motivation for the task at hand 
if we are to sustain our engagement.6
Positive and Negative Aﬀect in Learning
Aﬀect in learning, like aﬀect in general, has two valences: positive and neg-
ative. Because both aﬀect and learning are temporal processes, it is helpful 
to discuss aﬀect in learning as segmented in three phases that correspond 
to the three phases of emotion unfolding: prior to learning, during learn-
ing, and afer learning. Each of these phases can have positive or negative 
aﬀect.
We feel positive aﬀect in learning when we are interested, curious, won-
dering about the world, and desiring to know/understand more. Prior to 
learning, we may feel hopeful, excited, and uplifed about the idea that we 
can learn new things.7 Such positive aﬀect motivates us to take action to 
engage in the actual learning, such as reading about the topic, seeking more 
information, and trying things. When we succeed in our eﬀort, we may feel 
encouraged by, satisﬁed with, and proud of our learning. As a result, we are 
likely to seek such learning again.
On the other hand, we may experience negative aﬀect if we are not 
interested and curious about the material, but rather are forced to learn 
by someone else. We may feel unmotivated and even anxious and dread-
ful about learning a particular piece of knowledge/skill. For example, if a 
person desires to learn how to swim but fails to learn the skill, that person’s 
anticipatory excitement may diminish quickly, and he or she may feel lack 
of self-conﬁdence. At this point, the person may either give up or attempt 
to try again. But if he or she is forced to learn swimming again against 
his or her will, the person may become fearful of it. Repeated failure may 
result in lower self-conﬁdence, and depending on the importance of learn-
ing attached to the self, the person may develop the more global negative 
aﬀect of low self-estimate or temporary frustration. Whenever we have such 
learning experiences, we are likely to have negative aﬀect and consequently 
try to avoid such learning.
cultu./l v/.i/ti), i, le/.,i,--.el/ted /::ect
Although there are common human aﬀective responses to learning, cul-
ture, as it turns out, is a source of signiﬁcant variations in the aﬀect we 
experience in learning. Batjia Mesquita and Frijda maintain that culture 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!56
is involved in all the seven phases of an emotion episode, because human 
emotional experience is a result of the combination of autonomic responses 
and regulated responses according to speciﬁc cultural models.; As dis-
cussed in Chapter 4, Robert Levy studied Tahitians and found that some 
emotions in that culture were elaborated and fully expressed whereas others 
were almost absent. Anger in Tahitian culture is the former and sadness is 
the latter, resulting from the norms concerning the function of these emo-
tions in Tahitian social life. Levy proposed the terms hypercognized versus 
hypocognized emotions to capture culturally shaped emotional  experiences.9 
Drawing on this framework, Mesquita argues that cultures can diﬀer in the 
frequency of appraisals, action readiness, expression and behavior, and regu-
latory processes. Although humans across cultures may have similar physi-
ological responses to a given emotion, such as smiling while happy, the high 
or low frequencies of the culturally framed processes indicate consistency 
or inconsistency with a given cultural model.!0 In other words, if pride in 
learning achievement is emphasized in a culture, the learners will likely feel 
pride, express it, and behave accordingly. If pride in learning is devalued in 
another culture, then we can expect to encounter a less frequent occurrence 
of pride in learning.
Learning-Related Aﬀect in Western Learners
In order to proceed with learning-related aﬀect in both Western and Asian 
learners, I follow the three distinct phases of prior to, during, and post-
learning rather than Frijda’s seven steps in the process of emotion activa-
tion. I do so because many aﬀects in learning may not be clearly emotional 
in the strict sense, even though they overlap with emotions, as noted earlier. 
In addition, discussing the three-phase learning-related aﬀect corresponds 
well with the process of our learning behavior and activities. However, it is 
also important to point out that any aﬀect that is associated with a given 
phase of the learning process is not truly isolated, even though each emo-
tion is discrete. Because learning (formal or informal) is an integral part of 
continuous human existence, a particular aﬀective response at the moment 
may have been formed and strengthened with many repeated prior experi-
ences. &ere is, thus, likely a loop of learning and feeling following each 
other and intertwined with each other. One’s aﬀective reaction to a partic-
ular outcome of learning may have everything to do with how that person 
may feel toward the next learning task. &erefore, the following discussions 
of prior to, during, and post-learning are not treated as separate phases per 
se but as a heuristic strategy to present research on learning-related aﬀects.
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!57
Prior to Learning
Most research that deals with learning-related aﬀect in Western learners is 
found in the large research body of achievement motivation. &is research 
focuses on what motivates people for a particular achievement task, such 
as completing an anagram or a math problem in experimental situations. 
It is assumed that people’s achievement motivation is a basic human need, 
and their beliefs about achievement are formed through their repeated life 
experiences with achievement outcomes. Accordingly, a person who faces 
any given achievement situation brings with him- or herself a set of prior 
beliefs and related evaluations that will inﬂuence the person’s aﬀective reac-
tions to the task and outcome. In the !960s, Western researchers discovered 
that people facing achievement tasks have two motives: the need to achieve 
success and the desire to avoid failure. Speciﬁc aﬀects were involved in 
these expectations. For the need to achieve, the person expects to succeed 
and therefore to feel proud. &is anticipated emotion motivates the person 
to take on the task. But if the person expects to fail, he/she is likely to antic-
ipate shame, and the resultant action is to avoid the task (failure).!!
At the core of achievement motivation research is the distinction of 
intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation. People experience intrinsic moti-
vation when they desire activities and make eﬀorts that are an end onto 
themselves rather than a means to some other goals. For example, we 
are intrinsically motivated when we enjoy reading a good book, but we 
are extrinsically motivated to go to a job that we would rather not do but 
we must do because we need the money. Needless to say, intrinsic motiva-
tion in learning is prized in the West and extrinsic motivation is shunned.
In general, researchers recognize three main areas that generate intrin-
sic motivation. &e ﬁrst is the aﬀect of curiosity, and curiosity-based moti-
vation is intrinsic by nature. Human beings are assumed to be naturally 
curious about novel events and activities that are incongruent with their 
expectations. As noted in Chapter 4, when learners are curious about a 
given topic, they tend to be motivated to seek such knowledge in order 
to satisfy their curiosity.!2 Again, curiosity is a highly valued trait in any 
learner in the West.
A related aﬀect is interest. Based on research, interest could be similar to 
curiosity. For example, a student may be interested in black holes and would 
like to learn more about them. If the student’s interest is in understanding 
black holes themselves rather than in the ability to impress people with his 
or her knowledge, then the student’s interest is intrinsic. However, interest 
may be geared toward extrinsic purposes. For example, a person sitting in 
a doctor’s waiting room happens to spot a magazine article about how a 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!5;
person can get an unconventional, high-paying job. Intrigued, this person 
picks up the magazine and reads the article, and aferward continues to 
seek additional information about this new job.!3 Although the person dis-
plays interest, this type of interest may not be intrinsic because it is serving 
another end (i.e., not the job itself, but the higher paycheck it oﬀers). &us, 
curiosity is a more pure form of intrinsic motivation, whereas interest by 
itself may not be exclusively intrinsic, depending on the end that a given 
interest serves.
&e second form of intrinsic motivation comes from the observa-
tion that human beings have innate tendencies to seek opportunities to 
develop competence; therefore, they are intrinsically motivated to achieve. 
Achievement is testimony to our competence. Being competent, then, is not 
motivated by external rewards, although such rewards do frequently fol-
low competent people. Even very young children display excitement about 
opportunities to develop and display their competence. For example, chil-
dren ofen announce eagerly, “I want to kick the ball!” and proudly, “I can 
write my name!”
&e best-known research on intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation empha-
sizes the notion that human beings have a natural need to feel autonomous 
and self-determining. Self-chosen tasks make people feel that they are in 
control of their own activities and work as directed by their own volition 
instead of by external rewards or avoidance of punishment. Research shows 
that when Western students can choose their own learning tasks – that is, 
when they have autonomy in learning – they feel motivated, happy, ener-
getic, and excited in anticipation of success and enjoyment.!4
An important part of research on achievement motivation is the notion 
of self-eﬃcacy that has been studied extensively. Albert Bandura is the main 
researcher and theorist on this topic. &e thrust of Bandura’s theory is his 
focus on individuals’ personal evaluation of their performance capabilities 
on a given task, not on their general sense of ability or their actual capability 
of succeeding. Bandura stresses that if a person lacks the skill, that person 
is motivated toward getting the skill.!5 &erefore, feeling e?cacious moves 
people toward learning and mastery.
During Learning
Aﬀect plays a key role in whether a person will continue learning once 
started. Several lines of research provide clues to how aﬀect functions dur-
ing learning. Carole Dweck’s early research examined the notion of learned 
helplessness in learners. In her study, when children believed that they lacked 
the ability to succeed in a task, they gave up easily in the face of challenging 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!59
tasks. &ose who believed that they could increase their ability by learning 
persisted even when they failed. &e former group of children exhibited low 
self-esteem and fear of failure, which was captured with the general notion of 
learned helplessness. But the latter group of children showed resilience and 
tenacity in the face of setbacks. &ese observations led Dweck to develop 
the theory of entity versus incremental intelligence. Accordingly, the entity-
minded learners view intelligence as something that one either has or does 
not have. In contrast, the increment-oriented learners view intelligence as 
something that they can increase with learning and mastery.!6
&e decade-long research in this area shows that Western learners in 
general are particularly sensitive to the feedback on their ongoing learn-
ing and performance, which aﬀects whether they will continue their eﬀort. 
Two kinds of information are especially important. First, learners need the 
learning information that is relevant to the speciﬁc task because it is needed 
in order to understand the problem or issue at hand.!7 Second, they need 
feedback that informs them that they are doing well. However, if the feed-
back tells them that they are not doing well, they are likely to feel less moti-
vated and ultimately may even give up.!; &is general pattern of Western 
learners’ motivation in learning as a need to receive ongoing positive feed-
back corresponds to the general emphasis on self-esteem in the West and 
a deeper sense that the self is more or less ﬁxed, and thus needs ongoing 
a?rmation.!9 Learners, particularly young children, are believed to be in 
need of high self-esteem to facilitate learning. Parental and teacher praise is 
therefore widely used as a strategy to keep children motivated.20
&e most signiﬁcant research on aﬀect during learning engagement was 
done by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and associates.2! &eir research began in 
the !970s with an innovative empirical approach called “experience  sampling 
method.” &e research participants were given a beeper and a booklet con-
taining questions about where the person was, what the person was doing, 
what emotions they were feelings (both positive and negative), and if the 
person would rather be somewhere else or rather be doing something else. 
&e beeper was programmed to beep randomly during the day and eve-
nings. When the beeper beeped, the participant was asked to answer the 
questions in the booklet. Csikszentmihalyi’s team collected a large body of 
such daily experiences from students, particularly adolescents.
&ey discovered a signiﬁcant psychological phenomenon, which 
Csikszentmihalyi termed ﬂow. Flow is a state of which any human being 
is capable. It is a state of human personal engagement in an activity, be it 
work, learning, performance, or just playing. Four key factors are at play, 
with two input factors and two resultant aﬀective responses. &e two input 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!60
factors are one’s skill and the task that one is tackling/performing. If one’s 
skill exceeds that demanded by the task, such as a skilled violin virtuoso 
being asked to play a beginner piece, the person is likely to feel bored, which 
is one aﬀective response. Although boredom is common in our daily lives, 
it is a state that most human beings would rather avoid. However, if the 
task’s skill demand exceeds one’s current skill level, such as a beginner vio-
lin learner being asked to perform a complicated piece of music, that per-
son is likely to experience anxiety, which is the second aﬀective response. 
Based on Csikszentmihalyi’s extensive data, the best state is when one’s skill 
matches that demanded by the task. In this situation, the person feels nei-
ther boredom nor anxiety. Instead, the person feels happy, lost in the task, 
enjoying it, frequently oblivious to time passage, and not self-conscious of 
his or her performance. &is very state is the ﬂow state.
What Csikszentmihalyi’s research has revealed is intrinsic motivation at 
its best. Other related research on Western children in learning also sup-
ports the view that when learners can choose their own learning tasks and 
control their own learning directions and pace – that is, have a sense of 
autonomy – they enjoy the task more and do actually achieve better learn-
ing results.22 Learners are thus likely to have stronger positive feelings about 
their learning and seek ways to engage in such learning further.
Post-Learning
Much research on achievement-related aﬀect has been done to assess how 
people respond to their performance on tasks – that is, afer learning has 
occurred. Following Atkinson’s initial ﬁnding that aﬀect is generated with 
regard to expectation of pride for success and fear of failure, researchers 
examined several related areas and provided more sophisticated views of 
the processes. Julian Rotter proposed a theory on people’s locus of  control, 
positing that individuals’ expectations of success or failure depend on 
whether they perceive causes of success or failure to be internally or exter-
nally located.23 &us, if a person believes that his or her ability is the cause of 
his or her success, and given that ability is an internal attribute, that person 
will be more conﬁdent that he or she will succeed in the task. By contrast, 
if a person believes that luck will determine the outcome, then given that 
luck lies outside the person’s ability to control, he or she will expect a low 
certainty of success. A person’s sense of locus of control is therefore a key 
determinant to how he or she feels about an achievement outcome.
As it turned out, there was more to how Western students’ expectation 
of success and failure operates. Bernard Weiner advanced Rotter’s basic for-
mulation into a new theory called attribution theory.24 Weiner posited that 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!6!
human beings are naturally inclined to search for a causal understanding 
of events, thus making causal attributions, especially about events that are 
important to them (e.g., an academic performance). Such causal attribu-
tions in turn inﬂuence people’s behavior and emotional reactions in later 
achievement situations. &e theory speciﬁes three factors and their inter-
actions: locus, stability, and control. Locus here refers to where individuals 
believe the cause of their achievement outcome is located, again either the 
internal or the external being the two possible sources. Stability addresses 
the individual’s belief in the duration of the cause, which is deﬁned as either 
stable or unstable. Finally, control, originally within the concept of locus in 
Rotter’s conception, now denotes only the degree of control the person per-
ceives to have over the cause, which is postulated to be either controllable or 
uncontrollable. Using these factors, researchers can analyze important con-
cepts in achievement motivation. For example, ability and eﬀort, the two 
most frequently identiﬁed attributions, were now found to diﬀer in their 
stability and controllability in addition to their common internal source. 
Whereas eﬀort is usually perceived as controllable, it is ofen unstable from 
task to task. However, ability, viewed as a capacity, is generally perceived as 
a stable but relatively uncontrollable cause.
Weiner’s theory has generated research that documents the speciﬁc 
aﬀects associated with these three attributional factors. Accordingly, indi-
viduals reported feeling surprised when attributing their success or failure 
to luck, and guilty when attributing their failure to lack of eﬀort. Gratitude 
is felt for receiving others’ help. Pride and shame occur only in attribution 
to internal causes. Whereas individuals feel proud when ascribing their suc-
cess to their ability and hard work, they feel shame when attributing their 
failure to lack of eﬀort. Furthermore, pride is more likely to be experienced 
when success is believed to be a result of ability or hard work rather than of 
receiving help from others.25
Parallel to the attribution theory is another theory, the self-worth the-
ory, that has important aﬀective implications. Advanced by Covington and 
associates, this theory argues that human beings have the need to perceive 
competence as their self-worth – that is, the individual’s appraisal of his 
or her own value. As a natural consequence, individuals are assumed to 
strive to protect their sense of self-worth when they feel it is threatened, 
for example by school failure.26 Studies based on this theory concentrated 
on strategies individuals use to maintain their self-worth. In support of 
the attribution theory, research based on the self-worth theory also found 
that individuals took personal credit (usually attributing it to their abil-
ity) for their successes and attributed failures to external causes such as 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!62
di?culty of task. Moreover, individuals will try to avoid negative implica-
tions of failure resulting from low ability by minimizing participation in 
performance activities.27 Fearing revealing low ability, many students sim-
ply do not try, especially when faced with less challenging tasks (moderate 
 di?culty), because failure with no eﬀort could not be ascertained to result 
from lack of ability, thereby keeping their self-worth intact. Most striking 
is the analysis of eﬀort likened to a “double-edged sword” by Covington 
and Omelich.2; When they anticipate a threat of revealing their low abil-
ity associated with failure despite their high eﬀort, students are unwilling 
to try, even if it means subjecting themselves to reprimand for not trying. 
Many more strategies for not trying have been identiﬁed, ranging from 
publicly downgrading the importance of studying, to using excuses for not 
trying, to choosing unattainable goals (guaranteed failure but no implica-
tion of low ability).
My own research on Western model learners indicated aﬀects mentioned 
by a majority (62 percent) of the participants for being knowledgeable are 
happiness, joy, satisfaction, excitement, and fulﬁllment. Pride was the sec-
ond most frequently mentioned emotion (53 percent). However, when not 
being knowledgeable, the set of aﬀects most frequently mentioned by par-
ticipants (47 percent) included frustration, discouragement, disappoint-
ment, and general unhappiness. Finally, !9 percent of these respondents 
mentioned feeling inferiority, low self-esteem, shame, embarrassment, 
humiliation, guilt, and low self-worth.29
&e aforementioned research provides a consistent picture of a spe-
ciﬁc set of aﬀects that Western learners experience in the learning process. 
&eir curiosity and interest direct them to explore the world with personal 
initiative and autonomy. Such motivation is intrinsic by nature and gen-
erates excitement, enjoyment, and fun within the individual learner. For 
other tasks that are not necessarily self-generated and driven by curiosity/
interest (e.g., typical school learning tasks that are more imposed by the 
social world), Western learners are likely to feel motivated if they expect a 
positive outcome of an upcoming achievement/learning task. &e speciﬁc 
aﬀect is pride as well as other related positive feelings such as happiness. 
During learning, learners are ﬁne-tuned to the ongoing feedback of their 
own task performance. If they continue to do well, they are likely to be 
more motivated in the task engagement, continuing their eﬀort. However, 
if the feedback is not positive, learners may become frustrated and discour-
aged, causing their eﬀort to diminish, eventually causing them to give up. 
It appears that their aferthought – that is, determining the causes of their 
performance – may be a key factor in what kind of aﬀect they feel vis-à-vis 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!63
a given outcome. When attributing success to one’s internal qualities such 
as high ability, the learner is likely to feel proud of him- or herself. When 
attributing failure to one’s internal quality, the learner is likely to feel dev-
astated (shame and low self-esteem) because it is a painful realization of a 
negative quality of the seemingly unalterable self. Although Western learn-
ers may also attribute their success to their eﬀort, thereby feeling proud of 
themselves, they are likely to feel more proud and more self-worth with 
high ability. If an achievement situation is about protecting the self-worth, 
ability matters more than eﬀort. &us, Western learners’ aﬀects are part and 
parcel of their learning beliefs, and such aﬀect-laden beliefs are formed in 
the loop of prior to, during, and post-learning over time.
Learning-Related Aﬀect in Chinese/East Asian Learners
Unlike Western learning aﬀect, Chinese/East Asian learning aﬀect is largely 
based on personal conviction, not on personal curiosity about, interest in, 
or enjoyment of a particular subject of study or activity. It is conviction-
based because of its moral and virtue focus as noted in previous chapters. 
However, just because it is conviction-based does not mean that Chinese/
East Asian learners do not have very deep and powerful aﬀects that propel 
their learning.
Prior to Learning
Because learning in Chinese/East Asian world is geared toward a life-long 
process of self-transformation, people’s learning aﬀect is also oriented 
toward this long-term goal rather than speciﬁc tasks that can change from 
situation to situation. As noted in Chapter 3, the Chinese cultural learn-
ing model indicates that dedication and commitment, rather than personal 
curiosity about, interest in, and fun with a speciﬁc subject, are the general 
aﬀective focus. Because of this life-orientation, “prior to learning” as a con-
cept and empirical strategy to segment the learning process does not quite 
apply to Chinese learners in the strict sense. Nevertheless, children must be 
brought on this learning path; therefore, there must be a beginning of the 
process, and there is one.
As found in my model learner study (see Chapter 3), the starting point for 
Chinese people’s learning aﬀect is the so-called establishing one’s will (lizhi, 
立志), a commitment to learning. Traditionally, when children entered 
the age of “understanding things” (dongshi, 懂事) around age six or seven, 
they were deemed cognitively and socially capable of engaging in dedicated 
studies.30 To the extent that it could aﬀord formal learning, a family usually 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!64
found a private tutor in the local town, who taught Confucian texts to chil-
dren, and held a ceremony to o?cially “acknowledge the teacher” (baishi, 
拜師). Whether or not the child himself liked this parent-decided path and 
commitment was unimportant because every child (i.e., every male child 
throughout most of Chinese history, but now all children) has to learn to 
self-perfect in the Confucian learning tradition. Every eﬀort was made to 
guide the child to understand this learning path, and backing out of this 
path was not an option. Some children never got very far on this path, but 
many did. Tutors and families continued to work with children so that the 
latter would embrace learning with their whole heart and mind. When the 
moment came, the child would “establish his will.” &ere was no o?cial 
rite for this moment of intellectual enlightenment, but it was still a personal 
coming to terms with learning for life. &e child might share his will with 
family and friends, which served as a process of witnessing the commit-
ment. &e psychological function is very similar to a Western child who 
knew early on that he wanted to be, for example, a veterinarian and moved 
on to pursue that career for life. &e diﬀerence lies in that the Western 
child’s “will” or volition is purely based on his or her personal curiosity, 
interest, and sentiment; the family may have very little to do with what he 
might pursue for life. In the Chinese case, family was the key force for putt-
ing the child on the path in the ﬁrst place.3!
&is long tradition of establishing one’s will remains strong in the 
 present-day Chinese societies. Families, schools, and society at large make 
a concerted eﬀort to emphasize the importance of establishing one’s will. 
State media and school discourse are replete with ongoing discussions about 
how children need to have a long-term purpose for learning so that they 
can contribute to society. &ere has been much research converging on the 
consistent ﬁnding that Chinese/East Asian parents monitor their children’s 
learning much more intensively and enroll them in extra learning more 
frequently relative to other cultural groups.32 &is general research ﬁnd-
ing corresponds quite well with the very tradition that on the surface may 
have been jettisoned but deep down still operates strongly, albeit in modern 
forms (e.g., learning extracurricular artistic skills that require much dedi-
cation and commitment).
While the child is socialized toward establishing his/her will, parents 
and teachers on the one hand and the learner him- or herself on the other 
use this long-term goal as the motivator for each concrete learning activity. 
In my study on model learners, participants described how these learners 
felt uplifed, energized, empowered, and deeply grounded to pursue learn-
ing goals, regardless of how uninteresting a given subject was and regardless 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!65
of how di?cult the particular piece of knowledge a learner had to acquire. 
&ey used terms such as love, passion, and thirst to describe the general 
aﬀect of learning motivation based on an established will.
My lexicon study also revealed a number of aﬀect terms that indicate 
this type of orientation: make a ﬁrm resolution to study (發奮讀書); if 
you don’t learn when you are young, what will you do when you are old? 
(幼不學, 老何為?); devote oneself to studying (潛心學習); the best approach 
to learning is single-hearted devotion (學貴以專); desire to seek knowledge 
(求知欲); eager to learn (好學); and heart and mind for wanting to learn 
(好學心).33 &ese terms describe a general aﬀective orientation toward 
learning in the long run rather than for speciﬁc learning tasks. In this 
regard, it is in sharp contrast to Western learners who may project success 
or failure on a particular achievement outcome and related aﬀect. Chinese 
learners appear to orient themselves toward a longer and larger goal with 
commitment and devotion. As a result, the speciﬁc learning tasks and 
achievement outcomes may be less of the focus in their aﬀect prior to 
learning any particular skill.
During Learning
Given their long-term goals, Chinese/East Asian learners may experience 
diﬀerent aﬀect during learning than their Western peers. My lexicon study 
yielded a number of terms that give some clues of their aﬀect: having studied, 
to then repeatedly apply what you have learned – is this not a source of plea-
sure (Confucius)? (學而時習之, 不亦說乎?); put one’s heart into one’s study 
(用心讀書); study as if thirsting or hungering (如飢似渴地學習); and (so 
absorbed as to) forget food and sleep (廢寢忘食). Pursuing life-long learn-
ing to morally transform oneself with a personal commitment was con-
ceived of as a pleasure by Confucius; it should not be a dread. &is phrase 
by Confucius is in fact the very ﬁrst question recorded in the Analects, rhe-
torical in nature but inviting his students to think about the aﬀect that such 
learning brings. &roughout Chinese history, learning/studying has been 
viewed as a serious personal endeavor, as discussed in previous chapters. 
&erefore, having a will established, it is only natural to study wholeheart-
edly (as a manifestation of sincerity). &en delving deeply into one’s learn-
ing is likened to such a desire as feeling thirsty and hungry. &e last phrase 
is reminiscent of Csikszentmihalyi’s aﬀective state of ﬂow where the learner 
is so engrossed in study as to forget food and sleep (not even conscious of 
one’s own physical needs). Indeed, many participants in my model learner 
study used these expressions to describe their model learners in the process 
of learning.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!66
Empirical research on the actual aﬀective experience during learning 
among East Asian learners is scant. But there are a few studies that shed 
some light on that experience. To begin with, a study completed most 
recently examined what types of goals motivated East Asian and European-
American college students who were not interested in math. &e researcher 
provided three types of goals: proximal (short-term, relevant to the learn-
ing task at hand), distal (long-term goals, not immediately relevant to the 
learning task at hand, e.g., career),34 and self-discovered goals (regardless 
of proximal and distal reference). It was found that European-American 
students’ motivation did not increase when they were told (therefore not 
self-chosen but externally provided) about the importance of a new math 
technique. In comparison, East Asian students worked harder and showed 
more interest in the new technique afer being told that it could help them 
reach their distal goals. Moreover, when proximal and distal goals were 
examined side by side, it was found that European-American students were 
more motivated when told that learning the math technique could help 
them reach their proximal goals (e.g., tips for calculating math problems 
quickly). But East Asian students again showed higher interest and worked 
harder when they were told that the new technique could help them reach 
their distal goals in life.35
My own research on model learners also indicated that they did not 
focus on aﬀect such as curiosity, interest, enjoyment, and fun – that is, the 
traditionally deﬁned intrinsic motivation. Instead, they experienced per-
sonal striving, charging up to anticipated di?culties (enduring hardship), 
overcoming their natural tendency to relax, or to use their own term, “to 
be lazy” – in other words, challenging themselves. Two sets of open-ended 
responses were particularly revealing. &e ﬁrst contained responses to the 
question “How would your model learner learn if he/she has made great 
eﬀorts but still couldn’t learn?” Recall that research on Western learn-
ers shows that their continuous motivation is contingent on the ongoing 
feedback on how well they are doing. If the feedback is positive – that is, 
conﬁrming the positive and able self – they are more likely to continue. 
In contrast, Japanese students persisted longer afer being told that they 
did not do well.36 Similar to Japanese responses, 50 percent of the Chinese 
participants in my study wrote “change study methods.” Other statements 
were “persist” (32 percent) and “humbly ask others to teach oneself” (30 
percent). &e second set of responses was to the question “How would 
your model learner learn if he/she found a subject uninteresting or even 
 boring?” Sixty percent of the participants wrote “force oneself to persist.” 
&e remaining expressions were “force oneself to persist if the knowledge is 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!67
deemed important/useful” (2; percent) and “ﬁnding ways to make oneself 
interested” (24 percent).
Juxtaposing the two sets of responses of the two cultural groups, it seems 
that Chinese learners did indeed not focus on the negative emotions (no 
participants mentioned them regarding the ﬁrst question, whereas 42 per-
cent of European-American participants spontaneously did so). But half 
of the Chinese participants believed that the learner who could not learn 
despite great eﬀorts will succeed with diﬀerent methods. Only !3 percent 
indicated that the learner should give up (compared to 42 percent European-
American respondents). Similarly, regarding the boredom question, the 
majority of Chinese participants wrote “forcing oneself to persist” (強迫自
己學) as an antidote to combat boredom. Except one, no other European-
American respondents used the language “force oneself to learn” to describe 
their model learners. Moreover, fewer Chinese participants oﬀered study 
with less enthusiasm (!7 percent) and not pursuing the subject anymore (!7 
percent) as solutions to the boredom problem (compared to 32 percent and 
26 percent, respectively, by their European-American peers). European-
American participants repeatedly expressed the belief that a learner cannot 
learn well without interest and should not have to spend time and energy 
learning things that he or she ﬁnds boring. Examples of actual responses 
are: “you have to follow your interest, and you can only learn well when the 
interest is there”; “he learns to enjoy”; and “the acquisition of knowledge 
must be an interesting and fulﬁlling process for him to want to pursue it.” 
Such comments were far less frequent among Chinese participants.
To examine to what extent the ideal learner image is reﬂected in ordinary 
Chinese learners, I conducted another study on how Chinese adolescents 
viewed themselves in the learning process by asking them to complete ten 
identical sentences that began with “In learning, I . . .”37 A total of 259 ado-
lescents (twelve to nineteen years of age) from two large regions of China 
gave open-ended responses. &e most frequent self-descriptions were the 
various learning virtues. In comparison, there were few references to pos-
itive emotions such as enjoyment and excitement or negative emotions 
such as frustration and disappointment, as well as interest/disinterest, and 
 conﬁdence/lack of it. It seems clear that aﬀect, either positive or negative, 
does not play a strong role in their views of themselves as learners.
In support of this basic ﬁnding on aﬀective orientation of Chinese learner, 
Hsin Mei Huang provides a telling report on how children in Taiwan ﬁnd 
the infamous “cram schools” actually motivating, beyond their parents’ 
desire to continue their attendance.3; For those who are unfamiliar with this 
unique Asian schooling phenomenon, “cram schools” are common in East 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!6;
Asian countries like Taiwan, Japan, Korea, Hong Kong, China, Singapore, 
and Vietnam. &ey are private enterprises that oﬀer additional academic and 
extracurricular enrichment programs to school-aged children for a fee, and 
according to popular belief, all are built to feed the academic pressure 
and hype in those countries (not surprisingly, such schools also exist in the 
American cities where large Asian populations reside39).
&ere are many critics of this Asian educational phenomenon, both 
within and outside Asia. &ey condemn these schools as a consequence 
of the idea of “examination hell” and point out that children go to regular 
school for the day and then have to attend extra school aferward. &eir lei-
sure and other meaningful, fun childhood activities are stolen, according 
to popular discourse.40 As a response to such criticisms, Asian countries 
have issued policies to reduce a six-day school week to a ﬁve-day school 
week and to scale back homework assignments in order to allow children 
to have a childhood. Even the English term cram school for a rather neu-
tral native term Buxiban (tutoring or supplementary classes, 補習班) in 
Chinese has been accepted as the o?cial translation. &e ease of Asian 
scholars’ usage of the English term (without quotation marks) also shows 
the Asian acceptance of the disapproval and ridicule connoted in the term 
“cram.” As such, it does not require a stretch of imagination to assume 
that Asian children should hate “cram schools.” But research, surprisingly, 
indicates otherwise.
Despite mounting criticisms, “cram schools” continue to boom and 
ﬂourish. Huang’s research investigated reasons given by parents as well as 
children. In Taiwan, half of all school-aged children – a very high num-
ber – attend “cram schools.” From parents’ perspective, “cram schools” 
help prevent juvenile delinquency, enable children to put their precious 
time in young age to learning more, and provide a chance to make up for 
children’s inadequacies in their formal schooling so as to increase their 
chances of getting into better schools. &is is predicated on the belief 
that learning well in school is the most important task for children. It is 
not surprising that these are parents’ reasons for sending their children 
to “cram school.” What is counterintuitive is that the children themselves 
have positive things to say about their “cram schools.” Children appear to 
accept the fact that there is widespread peer pressure to achieve better for 
everyone. High academic achievers are liked and accepted more by peers, 
and these children are not labeled as nerds as they may be in the United 
States and other Western societies. (see focused discussion on this topic in 
Chapter 6) By contrast, poor academic achievement can lead to peer rejec-
tion. &us, even though children may not like the fact that they have to go 
to more school, they view such extra learning as important and necessary. 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!69
&ey therefore are motivated to continue “cram school” and try their best 
there.
Research on Japanese adolescents attending their “cram schools” (Juku, 
塾) and extracurricular training schools (Bukatsu, 活部) shows the same 
pattern. Although youth did not have very positive emotions to report dur-
ing these school hours, they nevertheless indicated that they wanted to go 
to Juku and to train hard at Bukatsu.4! Such unique extracurricular activity 
reﬂects their culture’s value of the concept gambaru, a value of the intrinsic 
beneﬁts of persistence, which the Japanese culture desires in their children 
(as noted in Chapter 3).42 Another related study also showed that Vietnamese 
students reported higher motivation for study than their German peers, 
despite their acknowledged higher pressure to study hard from home.
Taken together, the previously reviewed research indicates two important 
diﬀerences in aﬀect during learning between the two cultural groups. First, 
it provides support for the idea that the East Asian learners’ motivation may 
not be anchored in the curiosity about and interest in the speciﬁc learning 
task at hand – that is, in the self-based, task-speciﬁc aﬀect. Neither do they 
seek enjoyment and fun as a primary condition under which to engage in 
learning. As noted previously, learning in Confucian heritage cultures is not 
conceptualized as a fun and purely enjoyable process, but one that is wrought 
with hardship that must be overcome. &e Confucian conceptualization of 
moral self-perfection as a source of pleasure is not the kind learners may 
experience spontaneously, but one that comes only afer a person has done 
much seeking and contemplation. It is a path that one walks willingly, know-
ing that it requires determination, commitment, and endurance of hardship, 
and with such personal dedication and enlightenment one may achieve a 
further goal: the transformation of the pain of self-exertion into a pleasure.
&us, East Asian learning-related aﬀect seems to be based more on the 
conviction and commitment to life-long goals. &e speciﬁc learning tasks 
that may ﬂuctuate from moment to moment may not impact (excite or 
frustrate) the East Asian learners as strongly as they sometimes do their 
Western peers. Instead, their self-striving and work toward longer-term 
goals may serve to tone down the excessively positive or negative emotions 
(which may well be perceived as disturbances and diversions from their 
ultimate goals).43 &eir attention is on how to master the current learning in 
order to move forward toward their longer-term goals. In other words, their 
overall emphasis on persistence may result in diﬀerent aﬀect than Western 
learners’ experiences of curiosity, interest, fun, and intrinsic enjoyment in 
learning, as found by research.
Researchers’ understanding of this tendency of East Asian learners 
received further conﬁrmation in a recent study conducted by Hsiao d’Ailly, 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!70
who used Western measures of autonomy and intrinsic motivation to 
study schoolchildren in Taiwan.44 Although these measures were found to 
have validity and reliability, parental involvement and support of auton-
omy (encouraging their children to exercise autonomy) as well as  teachers’ 
modeling and instruction regarding autonomy (encouraging it or being 
more controlling toward children) did not make a diﬀerence in children’s 
intrinsic motivation. Neither did children’s level of autonomy impact how 
much eﬀort they made in their studies. &e most interesting ﬁnding in this 
research was that when children’s own sense of control regarding their own 
ability and learning strategy was put aside, their so-called external moti-
vation, surprisingly, had a positive eﬀect on their achievement. &e author 
thus concluded that
for children in Taiwan, interest and fun . . . may not be as strong a moti-
vator for hard work as rules (external) and values [for learning]. . . . 
Although . . . children [may be] motivated by intrinsic interest in their 
learning, it is also logical to infer that students with a higher sense of 
autonomy, who study mainly for fun and interest and do not yield much 
to external pressures, are more likely to decide not to study when they 
cannot ﬁnd fun and interest in their learning.
Another conclusion one may draw is that it may not matter to East Asian 
students where the source of their motivation stems from. In other words, 
the dichotomy of intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation may not be drawn 
as sharply among East Asian learners as among their Western peers. As 
noted in Chapter 3, research conducted by Iyengar and Lepper as well as 
by Xuehua Bao and Shui-fong Lam showed clearly that Asian-American 
children learned equally well and enjoyed their learning when their learn-
ing task was chosen by the trusted members of their social world (i.e., in 
good relationships), but European-American children learned better and 
enjoyed the learning when they themselves chose their tasks.45 &is is to say 
that the external world may give East Asian learners a stronger motivation 
and aﬀect for learning than their Western peers. However, it may not be 
appropriate to assume that socially shaped motivation is the same as extrin-
sic motivation, as Maarten Vansteenkiste and associates have convincingly 
argued.46 Children accepting parental and teacher’s guidance on learning 
for their ultimate moral self-perfection, particularly afer they themselves 
have established their will, is unlikely to be extrinsic because moral and vir-
tue goals are ends in themselves.
Perhaps deﬁning intrinsic motivation solely as interest and fun (which 
is sometimes couched as the best type of motivation there is in the whole 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!7!
human world) may need rethinking. Consider the case of the dedication 
and passion that deeply spiritual and religious people display in pursuing 
their goals. I would argue that this type of motivation is more intrinsic than 
the interest and fun-based intrinsic motivation because the latter is subject 
to situational, task, and mood changes, and therefore can be short-lived. 
A short-lived motivation, no matter how intrinsic, is not as desirable as a 
long-lasting and passionate intrinsic motivation for learning. For example, 
a child may ﬁnd a particular book fun, but he or she may not ﬁnd many 
other books fun, and hence may lose interest in reading these other books. 
But a person who is determined to read as many books as possible because 
he or she ﬁnds learning through books important and fulﬁlling for life has 
a passionate conviction about reading books for life. &e kind of conviction 
and passion at which Confucian learning aims is the latter, not the former. 
And East Asian cultures believe that children have a better chance of devel-
oping long-term passionate motivation with the concerted social support 
from families, schools, and communities at large.
Respect – An Important Aﬀect in East Asian Learners
Another important but hitherto not well-understood aﬀect of East Asian 
learners is respect toward teachers. In Chapter 3, I discussed the basic idea 
of respect in Chinese learners. I focus here on the emotionality of respect 
that Asian learners may experience during learning. Elsewhere I have 
reviewed research on respect in the West and in East Asia and advanced 
the theoretical distinction between two kinds of respect – ought-respect and 
aﬀect-respect – that may exist in both the West and in East Asia.47 Ought-
respect refers to the kind of respect everyone deserves based on political, 
moral, and legal considerations. As such, ought-respect is not generated in 
a speciﬁc social context or relationship because it is for everyone. &is kind 
of respect does not vary based on temporal or contextual particularities that 
underlie the occurrences of emotions. Given that it is tied to a rights-based 
moral principle and mandated by law, and it is not person- or relationship-
speciﬁc, ought-respect is unlikely to be a prototypical emotion, but a more 
reason-based social, moral, and attitudinal construct. Research indicates 
that ought-respect may be more prevalent in the West than in Asia.
Quite diﬀerently, aﬀect-respect is mostly an emotion that is generated in 
a speciﬁc social context or relationship. &is kind of respect occurs when 
an individual genuinely recognizes, acknowledges, and admires another 
for his or her merit, achievement, moral qualities, and/or status/position/
role/power. Aﬀect-respect necessarily rests on the awareness that the self is 
either of lesser quality than or shares a similar quality with the other. &is 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!72
self-awareness, particularly of the gap between oneself and the other, neces-
sarily presupposes that the self values and desires the qualities of the other. 
&e realization that one values/desires the quality, which the self should 
and can acquire but has not yet achieved, may be the very foundation of 
aﬀect-respect.
Aﬀect-respect may have important and positive implications for the 
self. First, it may be a key part of the process of ﬁnding role models. A role 
model is necessarily someone whom the self admires and desires to emu-
late, and it is one positive possible self.4; When a person has identiﬁed a 
role model, that person has a clear, concrete, tangible, real human ﬁgure in 
mind to seek to emulate. &e fact that a person is identiﬁed as a role model 
for the self indicates that the self has some understanding of the basic qual-
ity, merit, and achievement that the role model has. &e identiﬁcation of 
a role model also indicates at least some self-awareness of the discrepancy 
between the self and the role model and quite possibly also awareness of 
ways to narrow this discrepancy. Second, each time the self is made aware 
of the role model, the self may experience aﬀect-respect, a highly posi-
tive emotion that also makes the self feel good about him- or herself, as 
discussed earlier. Finally, aﬀect-respect may generate strong motivation 
for behavior that propels the self toward acquiring the qualities that the 
respected person possesses. In sum, feeling aﬀect-respect for a person may 
make the self eventually become such a person. &is may be called the 
“self-Pygmalion process” (named afer the sculptor in Greek mythology 
whose sculpture came to life). Research shows that aﬀect-respect may be 
more widely experienced by Asian people because their cultures empha-
size learning from exemplary models.
Research on who receives aﬀect-respect in the West found four cate-
gories of people: (!) those displaying moral and virtuous qualities (e.g., 
honest, trustworthy, just), (2) those who possess admirable talents/skills, 
(3) those who are sensitive toward others (e.g., considerate, accepting oth-
ers, understanding, and empathic), and (4) members of a respect-worthy 
social category.49 A study I conducted on Chinese conceptions of respect 
found two additional categories of people who receive aﬀect-respect: 
(!) parents/elders/kin and (2) teachers/mentors/scholars.50
In terms of learning, the last category is of particular relevance to Chinese 
learners. Respect for teachers/mentors/scholars indicates that one has role 
models in the classroom to draw on. In addition, these role models are 
charged to teach the students. One needs to emulate the models and to self-
improve continuously. At the same time, one needs to remain humble and 
receptive to teaching of these respected learning models. Hence, respect as 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!73
an aﬀect toward teachers is highly positive for Chinese learners because it 
may likely help them become like their teachers who, afer all, are supposed 
to embody the Confucian image of self-perfection through learning.
Having clariﬁed the meaning of Chinese learners’ respect toward their 
teachers, I hope to say a few words on learners’ aﬀect under the inﬂuence 
of the Asian so-called authoritarian teachers. &ere is no doubt that how 
teachers conduct themselves in their instruction and interactions with stu-
dents can directly impact children’s aﬀective experience. If Chinese teachers 
were truly authoritarian, then Chinese children should feel fear, instead of 
respect, for teachers.5! Unfortunately, there is scarce research on students’ 
aﬀective responses to Asian authoritarian teachers. Nevertheless, available 
research may hint at unexpected aﬀective experience when Chinese learn-
ers view their supposedly “authoritarian” teachers.
Hsueh and colleagues52 asked European-American and Chinese elemen-
tary school and middle school children to indicate, from the following list, 
the reasons for which they might show respect toward teachers:
Do what your teacher tells you to do (obedience)
• 
Work hard on your schoolwork (learning virtues)
• 
Help your teacher when she needs help (social approval)
• 
Don’t cause trouble in class (avoidance of punishment)
• 
Treat your teacher like you would treat your parent (parent–teacher 
• 
similarity).
&ese reasons were derived from interviews conducted with open-ended 
questions to which similarly aged children from both cultures responded. 
&e research team found that similar numbers of children of the two 
groups – but in each instance representing the minority of children in their 
respective group – chose social approval, avoidance of punishment, and 
parent–teacher similarity. At the same time, obedience was chosen by sig-
niﬁcantly more European-American children (37 percent), whereas learn-
ing virtues were chosen by the smallest number of European-American 
children (; percent). Chinese children showed the opposite pattern; sig-
niﬁcantly more of them (33.4 percent) chose learning virtues whereas the 
smallest number chose obedience (6 percent). &ese ﬁndings suggest that 
for Chinese children, showing respect for teachers is tied to how they them-
selves are motivated to learn with their learning virtues. For European-
American children, on the other hand, respect for teachers is more about 
following the rules of authority, which is not closely tied to personal eﬀort 
as applied to learning itself. &ese ﬁndings provide support that a signiﬁ-
cant number of East Asian learners’ respect for teachers is primarily not a 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!74
result of obedience, seeking teacher approval, and avoidance of punishment 
(fear), but of virtue-oriented learning.
Post-Learning
Because learning is a continuous process throughout life, Chinese learners 
may not put as much emphasis on the dichotomy of success versus fail-
ure of a particular learning task or activity. In other words, their aﬀective 
responses may not zero in on the impact of success or failure in any given 
learning situation. &is tendency of theirs may also stem from Asian Taoist 
worldview that there are no absolutes, ﬁxed opposites, or true dichotomies 
in the world.53 One state can change into the other, and the whole world is in 
constant ﬂux. Human learning is no exception. If one does not learn well in 
one point of time on one task, it does not mean that that person will not 
learn well the next time. However, a learner cannot sit there, waiting for 
miracles to change his or her fate. Instead, the learner needs to understand 
what he or she did not know or did not do well and to ﬁnd ways to change 
his or her learning approach. Likewise, if one learns well at one point in 
time and on one task, this does not mean that one will be guaranteed to do 
as well the next time. Again, one needs to continue one’s eﬀort and remain 
humble to seek further learning regardless of how well one learns at any 
given moment.
In fact, this is how many respondents of my model learner study 
responded to the question of how the learner would learn when facing fail-
ure or when achieving highly. As a result, their aﬀective responses to this 
ongoing learning perspective may be less dramatically high for good learn-
ing and dramatically low for poor learning as discussed previously. &e fol-
lowing are excerpts on failure (e.g., not getting a good grade on an exam 
or receiving unfavorable remarks from a teacher) that suggest the general 
response pattern:
He would not be discouraged at all. On the contrary, he would be more 
invigorated and defeat di?culties eventually. He believes that failure is 
not to be feared. One needs only to learn from one’s mistakes, and suc-
cess is guaranteed.
First, she would feel dejected for a short while. But then she would start 
looking for the cause of the failure by reﬂection. She does this because 
she thinks that nothing about falling down itself is a big deal; the key is 
that one can stand up where one has fallen down before.
In the face of failure, he would think cool-headedly. &en he would know 
what to do next. He believes that only afer reﬂection, one would not act on 
undue impulses. It’s not necessary to be depressed about one failing exam.
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!75
For high achievement, these responses complement their expressions on 
failure:
He would continue to study hard, aiming at the next success because he 
knows one-time success is only a mark on the road, but not the end of 
the whole course of learning.
He would not be arrogant; instead he would have the right attitude. 
Achievement can only say something about one’s past, and cannot indi-
cate anything about one’s future. If one is complacent about one-time 
success and stops making progress, one would fall backwards.
To obtain direct aﬀective responses, I asked Chinese and European-
American college students in the same study to describe how their model 
learners would feel emotionally about being knowledgeable as a general 
sense of learning achievement. Forty two percent of Chinese (and 62 per-
cent European-American) respondents acknowledged that their model 
learners would feel generally happy and fulﬁlled (including other similar 
positive aﬀects such as joyful, excited, satisﬁed, and pleased). However, only 
22 percent of Chinese (but 53 percent of European-American, more than 
twice as many) respondents mentioned pride as the other distinct aﬀect. In 
addition, 2; percent of Chinese (compared to only 9 percent of European-
American – three times fewer than Chinese) respondents also expressed 
humility/calmness in the face of being knowledgeable and well-learned. 
Finally, 2; percent of Chinese (but only 2 percent of European-American) 
respondents stated that their model learners were not satisﬁed with their 
achievement and would be motivated to learn more.
When not being knowledgeable and not well-learned, 30 percent of 
Chinese (!9 percent of European-American) respondents mentioned 
shame/guilt, but these Chinese respondents also included an expression of 
self-reproach. In comparison, no European-American respondents men-
tioned self-reproach. Instead, 47 percent of them (but no Chinese respon-
dents) acknowledged frustration, discouragement, disappointment, and 
anger. However, 27 percent of them – a higher number than European-
American respondents (!9 percent) – wrote about these model learners 
feeling sadness and depression. Nevertheless, their sadness/depression 
did not appear to be related to a sense of inferiority and low self-esteem, 
because no one mentioned this kind of aﬀect (but !9 percent of European-
American respondents describe such feelings). Instead, 40 percent of 
them (but 2; percent of European-American respondents) wrote that 
these learners were motivated to learn more in order to make up for their 
inadequacies.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!76
Lower Pride but Higher Humility
At this point, it is important to discuss two signiﬁcant but related aﬀects – 
pride and humility – that are experienced by East Asian learners. For East 
Asians, pride is a controversial emotion in empirical research, and humil-
ity as a virtue has been promoted in East Asia for millennia, although for 
some reason it has garnered little research attention. Because of the peculiar 
statuses of these two aﬀects in research, I hope to discuss them together in 
order to shed some analytical light on these important aﬀects in East Asian 
learners.
As noted in the section on Western learners, pride is a highly positive 
aﬀect. Because the self is centrally implicated, pride is also regarded as a 
positive self-conscious emotion.54 Pride arises when a person accomplishes 
a task of some di?culty or challenge. It could be any task or performance 
that requires a comparably signiﬁcant level of ability/competence/skill/
knowledge, artistic or athletic talent or other physical prowess, quality of 
work, and standards of judgment or evaluation. For example, a dancer feels 
pride when she wins a competition, or simply is admired by others, or a 
child feels pride when he ﬁnally learns how to tie his or her own shoe-
laces. Even though individuals can self-impose any level of competence 
or standard of performance, their awareness of these levels and standards 
points to the sociocultural origin of such levels and standards, regardless 
of whether others are watching, or whether a particular level or standard 
is internalized. &us, pride is unlikely to occur without some sort of social 
comparison – that is, an awareness of how one measures up to others in 
achievement and performance of similar tasks/skills. Because learning 
achievement, particularly in the formal setting, is directly evaluated based 
on social comparison, learners feel pride when they achieve well, in com-
parison with others.55
In the West, the opposite of pride is shame/embarrassment/inferior-
ity/low self-esteem/low self-worth. Shame in the West is mostly a negative 
emotion, a disgrace that is believed to be harmful to people and is to be 
rid of. By contrast, in Confucian persuasion, feeling shame is regarded as a 
moral guide or inner voice that people need to exercise in order to examine 
their own wrongdoing as well as to summon their courage to admit wrong 
on the one hand and to desire to self-improve on the other. Shame therefore 
is one of the four cardinal Confucian moral sensibilities to be developed in 
people. &ese moral principles are carved on the Boston Chinatown Gate.56 
Michael Lewis’s extensive research has demonstrated that pride and shame 
in the West are likely to be the opposite, particularly in individuals who 
feel globally low self-worth (that has presumably developed as a result of 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!77
repeated failure). Such Western individuals show stronger pride when they 
succeed in a task, but they also show higher levels of shame when they fail 
a task.57
Pride in East Asian learners does not mean the same and is not experi-
enced in the same way. First, there is no equivalent Chinese term into which 
the English term pride can be translated as a wholly positive term. Based 
on an empirical procedure I used to translate the English and Chinese 
terms, the closest term is jiao-ao (驕傲).5; Accordingly, thirteen of four-
teen (93 percent) fully bilingual and college-educated people (either born/
raised or having spent at least ten years in the United States) translated the 
English pride or feeling proud into jiao-ao, with only one person translating 
it into the Chinese term zihao (自豪) (a related term that is probably bet-
ter captured in the English term honor rather than pride). But 3! percent 
among these translators stated that jiao-ao also has a negative connotation 
of arrogant and conceited. &en another group of eighteen of twenty (90 
percent) bilingual people from similar backgrounds translated the Chinese 
jiao-ao into English pride/proud. Out of these eighteen, two people trans-
lated jiao-ao as stuck-up, overconﬁdent, boastful, conceited, and arrogant, 
and seven additional people (nine overall, or 45 percent of the entire group) 
mentioned that jiao-ao has a negative connotation indicating arrogance in 
general. &ey stated that which connotation to use depends on the context. 
&ese thirty-four bilingual people’s translations led to the conclusion that 
jiao-ao and pride are the closest equivalent. It is also clear that jiao-ao and 
pride have very diﬀerent meanings, even though they may share some core 
positive meaning.
Second, other empirical research documents that pride in Asian people 
is a paradoxical emotion.59 &is means that it is both positive and nega-
tive. For example, Chinese, compared to their European-American coun-
terparts, were found less likely to judge pride as an emotion that they would 
like to experience.60 By using a questionnaire method with college students, 
Deborah Stipek found that Chinese, unlike their European-American 
peers (who would feel and express pride for themselves), would feel pride 
more readily when their family members achieve well (e.g., getting into a 
prestigious university) than when they themselves achieve well.6! Chinese 
respondents revealed that pride should only be experienced when the 
achievement beneﬁts others – a research result that others have encoun-
tered as well. Other researchers used the experience sampling method 
to collect randomly sampled real emotional experiences for a week and 
found that Chinese and Taiwanese rated pride less desirable and appropri-
ate than European-Americans and Australians. Moreover, although Asian 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!7;
Americans and Japanese experienced pride as a positive emotion, they (but 
not European-Americans) also felt a host of unpleasant emotions (guilt, 
irritation, sadness, and worry) when they experienced pride. Statistical 
analysis shows that pride has both positive and negative valences (in factor 
loading).62 Finally, my colleague and I conducted a study on how preschool 
children perceive their achieving peers. We found that Chinese children 
as young as ﬁve expressed what we called an “arrogance concern” about 
high achievers, believing that they might grow too proud of themselves to 
continue to self-improve. &is tendency was signiﬁcantly more prevalent 
among Chinese children than among their European-American peers.63
Further explication of the mixed nature of pride in East Asian learning is 
warranted. As my translation procedure and Stipek’s research indicate, this 
double-valenced aﬀect is context-speciﬁc. When an East Asian experiences 
good learning, for example, his or her initial response is likely to be posi-
tive – that is, similar to the pride of European-Americans. However, this 
ﬁrst appraisal and related aﬀective experience may be short-lived.64 What 
ensues is the self-reﬂection with a preventive focus owing to the cultural 
orientation that inﬂuences how people regulate their own emotions.65 &e 
actual process may be something like the following: “I did it! I am happy 
that I worked hard at it and that I was able to succeed. But beware, don’t 
be too full of yourself; there is more to achieve. If I express my happiness 
openly and publicly, people may think that I am arrogant. Besides, show-
ing pride publicly will make others feel bad about not doing so well. So I 
should stay humble. It’s good for me and for others.” However, if the person 
feels pride as a result of a collective achievement, the negative feeling may 
not occur, even though Chinese people may still have preventive feelings 
to some extent.66 For example, people may still say to each other: “Okay, 
our Olympic math team did well, but they need to work harder to achieve 
more.”
It would be erroneous to assume that this negative valence of pride is 
debilitating and harmful to East Asian learners. Recent research documents 
that as a style of their self-regulation in life, East Asians tend to focus more 
on what has been termed as “prevention.” Prevention focus serves to warn 
oneself against potential mistakes and wrongdoing in order to avoid such 
actions and consequences (instead of promotion focus on the positive gains 
and achievement).67 Recent research shows that, compared to Westerners, 
Chinese people are more prevention-focused.6; People with either focus 
can feel very positive about their style. &us, the negative side of pride may 
serve Chinese learners well in their eﬀort to strive to fulﬁll their moral and 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!79
social duties. &e duality of pride in East Asians compliments rather than 
contradicts.
&e opposite of pride in Chinese people is humility, not shame as may 
be the case in the West. In general, humility is regarded as a disposition, 
an enduring quality of a person, as Tangney and others have theorized 
 recently.69 &is dispositional view may be quite accurate. However, because 
in East Asia humility is the opposite of the clear self-conscious emotion 
that is pride, there may also be an aﬀective component yet to be studied 
in humility. As an aﬀect, individuals may experience humble feelings as 
they engage in learning (and other domains of life), particularly in their 
responses to learning outcomes.
Humility has been an integral part of Confucian teaching since ancient 
times. It appears to be more highly valued in Asia than in the West, although 
there is very little research on the subject. Humility is highly valued and 
actively promoted as a personal quality as well as an aﬀective expression 
in East Asia. Recent research on Western notions of humility documents 
some positive views of humility in people who are religious or are involved 
in close relationships; however, it is evident that humility is not desirable in 
leaders and entertainers.70 Contrary to the West, humility in the Confucian 
persuasion has never been conceived of as a personal weakness or lowly 
self-regard, but only as a strength one must have if one desires to self-
cultivate.7! In Chinese Taoist philosophy, the notion of fullness (滿) is also 
conceived of as a psychological dynamic in a person (or nature) that turns 
against oneself, impeding the self from achieving one’s full humanity and 
greatness.72 Both Confucian and Taoist schools of thought share the view 
that having a full sense of self (e.g., knowing all, being perfect, having all 
wealth, controlling all) is one true personal weakness (similar to the noted 
problems of narcissism in the West73). &erefore, self’s fullness (自滿) is a 
serious impediment in learning.
&e antidote against self’s fullness is humility. &is personal strength is 
not military force, wealth, dominant personality, or even persuasive power, 
but inner strength that interestingly results in a gentle, sof, and nonag-
gressive style.74 Everyone is believed to possess this potential. Once devel-
oped, such strength is also believed to be inexhaustible and unbendable 
by any external force, enabling the person to seek self-improvement with 
tenacity and persistence. People with such inner strength can truly examine 
themselves, see their own inadequacies, and seek ways to self-improve. &is 
kind of inner strength and agency has nothing to do with low self-regard, 
because the power in humility lies in the belief that the self has the capacity 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;0
to grow and needs to grow. It generates hope, optimism, and motivation for 
reﬂective personal striving.
Humility in East Asia is especially desired and revered in the domain of 
learning. Most learning is accompanied by achievement; individuals who 
achieve well are believed particularly vulnerable to an inﬂated sense of self. 
Because learning in Confucian thought is not just academic but moral and 
social for life, humility is regarded as the single most important means to 
guard oneself against falling prey to arrogance and conceitedness afer high 
achievement. &is emphasis on humility has also been noted recently by 
Western scholars who attempt to address the neglected research on humil-
ity in the West. Accordingly, humility is characterized as:
an ability to acknowledge one’s mistakes, imperfections, gaps in knowl-
• 
edge, and limitations;
keeping one’s abilities and accomplishments – one’s place in the 
• 
world – in perspective;
leaving oneself more open to learn from others.
• 
75
Research indeed shows this Asian tendency vis-à-vis one’s own high 
achievement as well as others’ attitude toward individuals of high achieve-
ment. In my model learner study, respondents were asked to describe 
how their model learners would respond to high achievement. Fify four 
percent of them acknowledged humility (in comparison, !6 percent of 
European-American respondents did so). Only 5 percent acknowledged 
feeling proud. In fact, 22 percent (but no European-American respon-
dent) speciﬁcally noted that their model learners would not feel proud 
(不驕傲/不自滿) despite their happy feelings. In addition, when asked 
how their model learners would act for not understanding learning 
materials, 62 percent of Chinese respondents wrote that they would seek 
others’ teaching humbly (虛心請教); in comparison, only !0 percent of 
European-American respondents mentioned a similar behavior. More evi-
dence comes from my study examining Chinese and European-American 
preschool children’s perceptions of achieving peers. We found signiﬁcantly 
more expressions among Chinese children about their need to emulate 
the learning models so that they can learn from the high achievers. By 
contrast, European-American children revealed signiﬁcantly more social 
isolation and rejection toward high achievers.76 Research in general psy-
chology that has repeatedly found the so-called modesty bias among East 
Asians but self-enhancing bias among Western people77 supports the idea 
that East Asians value and express more humility in learning (as well as 
across other domains of life).7;
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!;!
&e aforementioned review of research on East Asian learners’ aﬀect 
also provides a general picture. Prior to learning, their aﬀect may be less 
driven by curiosity about and personal interest in a given subject or topic, 
and more by a longer-term goal, a will to establish for life-long dedication. 
Aﬀects such as commitment, dedication, and passion matter more than 
situationally generated aﬀects such as enjoyment and excitement. During 
learning, they show less oscillation between high and low arousal of aﬀect 
(i.e., neither highly excited nor strongly frustrated). Instead, their attention 
seems to be geared toward how to move along with their learning toward 
their longer-term goals. &e predominant aﬀects are those learning vir-
tues of self-exertion, diligence, endurance of hardship, perseverance, and 
concentration. A signiﬁcant aﬀect among East Asians is that they experi-
ence aﬀect-respect toward teachers who not only are regarded as author-
ity for teaching, but also viewed as role models for students to emulate. 
East Asian learners’ respect toward their teachers appears not to stem from 
fear of the commonly labeled teacher authoritarianism, but a sense of the 
shared common goal of learning by exercising their virtues. Afer good 
learning, East Asian learners feel happy, as their European-American peers 
do. Afer poor learning, they feel shame/guilt and self-reproach; they also 
feel sad/depressed (to a lesser extent than European-American learners). 
Nevertheless, they seem to gravitate toward a less extreme aﬀective state for 
either learning outcome. Furthermore, unlike their European-American 
counterparts, they tend to feel little pride because pride is a sign of one’s 
complacency, which their cultures discourage. Such fullness of the self is 
regarded as a hindrance to their continuous self-striving through learning. 
Pride is discouraged, whereas humility is valued and encouraged. Humility 
as both an inner personal strength and an aﬀective response, particularly 
to high achievement, is believed to be important in guiding the learners in 
learning.
,)tes
 !. See note 66 to Chapter 3.
 2. See Davidson, N., Scherer, K., & Goldsmith, H. (Eds.) (2003). Handbook of 
aﬀective science. New York: Oxford University Press for basic descriptions of 
human emotions.
 3. See note 67 to Chapter 3.
 4. Fischer, K. W., & Tangney, J. P. (!995). Self-conscious emotions and the aﬀect 
revolution: Framework and overview. In J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), 
Self-conscious emotions: Te psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and 
pride (pp. 3–22). New York: Guilford.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;2
 5. Frijda, N. H. (!9;6). Te emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 6. See Damasio, A. (2005). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain. 
New York: Penguin; note 66 to Chapter 3; and note 4 to this chapter for research 
on the inseparability between cognition and aﬀect.
 7. See note !0 to Chapter 4.
 ;. Mesquita, B., & Frijda, N. H. (!992). Cultural variations in emotions: A review. 
Psychological Bulletin, &&2, !79–204; and Mesquita, B. (2003). Emotions as 
dynamic cultural phenomena. In N. Davidson, K. Scherer, & H. Goldsmith 
(Eds.), Handbook of aﬀective science (pp. ;7!–;90). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
 9. See note 32 to Chapter 4.
 !0. See the second reference in note ; to this chapter.
 !!. Atkinson, J. W. (!964). An introduction to motivation. Princeton, NJ: Van 
Nostrand.
 !2. Berlyne, D. (!966). Curiosity and exploration. Science, &(), 25–33; and Litman, 
J. A, & Silvia, Paul J. (2006). &e latent structure of trait curiosity: Evidence for 
interest and deprivation curiosity dimensions. Journal of Personality Assessment, 
86(3), 3!;–32;.
 !3. See note !0 to Chapter 4.
 !4. deCharms, R. (!9;4). Motivation enhancement in educational settings. In R. 
Ames & C. Ames (Eds.), Research on motivation in education: Student motiva-
tion (pp. 275–309). New York: Academic Press; and Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. 
(2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, 
social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, (((!), 6;–7;.
 !5. Bandura, A. (!993). Perceived self-e?cacy in cognitive development and func-
tioning. Educational Psychologist, 28(2), !!7–!4;.
 !6. Dweck, C. !975. &e role of expectations and attributions in the alleviation of 
learned helplessness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, )&, 674–6;5; 
and Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. (!9;;). A social-cognitive approach to motiva-
tion and personality. Psychological Review, ,(, 256–273.
 !7. See Godes, O. (2009). Te eﬀects of utility value on achievement behavior of two 
cultures. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Wisconsin, Madison 
for her research on the diﬀerent motivational patterns of European-American 
and Asian students.
 !;. Heine, S. J., Kitayama, S., Lehman, D. R., Takata, T., Ide, E., Leung, C., et al. 
(200!). Divergent consequences of success and failure in Japan and North 
America: An investigation of self-improving motivations and malleable selves. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8&, 599–6!5.
 !9. Rothbaum, F., & Wang, Y. Z. (20!!). Cultural and developmental pathways to 
acceptance of self and acceptance of the world. In L. A. Jensen (Ed.), Bridging 
cultural and developmental approaches to psychology: New syntheses in theory, 
research, and policy (pp. !;7–2!!). New York: Oxford University Press.
 20. Ng, F. F.-Y., Pomerantz, E., & Lam, S.-F. (2007). European American and 
Chinese parents’ responses to children’s success and failure: Implications for 
children’s responses. Developmental Psychology, -)(5), !239–!255; and Miller, P. 
J., Wang, S-. H., Sandel, T., & Cho, G. E. (2002). Self-esteem as folk theory: A 
comparison of European American and Taiwanese mothers’ beliefs. Parenting: 
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!;3
Science and Practice, 2(3), 209–239. Also see &omaes, S., Reijntjes, A., de Castro, 
B. O., & Bushman, B. J. (2009). Reality bites-or does it? Realistic self-views 
buﬀer negative mood following social threat. Psychological Science, )(2), !–2 for 
recent research showing that both inﬂated and deﬂated sense of self is maladap-
tive for people’s coping with real negative social feedback. &is means that a 
sense of self that is close to reality is more desirable.
 2!. Csikszentmihalyi, M. (!990). Flow: Te psychology of optimal experience. New 
York: Harper & Row.
 22. See note 50 to Chapter 3; and Grolnick, W. S., Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (!99!). 
Inner sources for school achievement: Motivational mediators of children’s per-
ceptions of their parents. Journal of Educational Psychology, 8), 50;–5!7.
 23. Rotter, J. (!966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control 
of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, General & Applied, 8.(!), (Whole 
No. 609).
 24. Weiner, B. (!9;6). An attributional theory of motivation and emotion. New York: 
Springer.
 25. See note 24 to this chapter.
 26. Covington, M. V., & Beery, R. (!976). Self-worth and school learning. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
 27. See note 26 to this chapter.
 2;. Covington, M. V., & Omelich, C. L. (!979). Eﬀort: &e double-edged sword in 
school achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, /&, !69–!;2.
 29. See the ﬁrst reference in note 6! to Chapter 3.
 30. Wu, D. Y. H. (!996). Chinese childhood socialization. In M. Bond (Ed.), Te 
handbook of Chinese psychology (pp. !43–!54). Hong Kong: Oxford University 
Press.
 3!. Although the Western child may appear to have come up with the idea on his 
own, the inspiration is unlikely the child’s own, but rather from the common 
discourse in Western culture about the value of treating animals with human-
ity. &e child is the one who endorses and therefore internalizes an otherwise 
cultural idea as his own, which is the essence of the sociocultural origin of 
Vygotsky’s developmental theory.
 32. See the last reference in note 3! to Chapter 3; and the third reference in note 34 
to Chapter 4.
 33. See note 54 to Chapter 3.
 34. See Bandura, A., & Schunk, D. (!9;!). Cultivating competence, self-e?cacy, and 
intrinsic interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, -&, 5;6–59; for their concepts of proximal versus distal goals 
in learning.
 35. See note !7 to this chapter.
 36. See note !; to this chapter.
 37. Li, J. (2006). Self in learning: Chinese adolescents’ goals and sense of agency. 
Child Development, //(2), 4;2–50!.
 3;. See the second reference in note 46 to Chapter 4.
 39. See the last reference in note 9 to Chapter 3.
 40. See Berliner, D. C., & Biddle, B. J. (!995). Te manufactured crisis. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley; and Hishino, H. J., & Larson, R. (2003). Japanese adolescents’ 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;4
free time: Juku, Bukatsu, and government eﬀorts to create more meaningful lei-
sure. In S. Verma & R. Larson (Eds.). Examining adolescent leisure time across 
cultures: developmental opportunities and risks (New Directions for Child and 
Adolescent Development, No. 99). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass for examples of 
criticisms of Asian schooling.
 4!. See the second reference in note 40 to this chapter.
 42. See the second reference in note 23 to Chapter 3.
 43. See Tsai, J. L., Knutson, B., & Fung, H. H. (2006). Cultural variation in aﬀect val-
uation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, ,.(2), 2;;–307 for empir-
ical evidence that Chinese prefer less high-arousal positive aﬀect (excitement) 
but more low-arousal positive aﬀect (calm) than European Americans.
 44. d’Ailly, H. (2003). Children’s autonomy and perceived control in learning: 
A model of motivation and achievement in Taiwan. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, ,((!), ;4–96, p. 94.
 45. See note 50 to Chapter 3.
 46. Vansteenkiste, M., Zhou, M.-M., Lens, W., & Soenens, B. (2005). Experiences 
of autonomy and control among Chinese learners: Vitalizing or immobilizing? 
Journal of Educational Psychology, ,/(3), 46;–4;3.
 47. See the reference in note 47 to Chapter 2.
 4;. Markus, H. R., & Nurius, P. (!9;6). Possible selves. American Psychologist, -&, 
954–969.
 49. Frei, J. R., & Shaver, P. R. (2002). Respect in close relationships: Prototype def-
inition, self-report assessment, and initial correlates. Personal Relationships, ,, 
!2!–!39.
 50. See note 47 to Chapter 2.
 5!. Additional discussion can be found in Chapter 3.
 52. Hsueh, Y., Zhou, Z.-K., Cohen, R., Hundley, R. J., & Deptula, D. P. (2005). 
Knowing and showing respect: Chinese and U.S. children’s understanding of 
respect and its association to their friendships. Journal of Psychology in Chinese 
Societies, 6(2), ;9–!20.
 53. Peng, K.-P., & Nisbett, R. E. (!999). Culture, dialects, and reasoning about con-
tradiction. American Psychologist, (-, 74!–754.
 54. Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2007). &e nature of pride. In J. L. Tracy, R. W. 
Robins, & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Te self-conscious emotions: Teory and research 
(pp. 263–2;2). New York: Guilford. Although the authors distinguish two kinds 
of pride in the West – authentic pride and hubristic pride – the everyday con-
cept of pride is mostly the positive authentic type.
 55. Lewis, M. (2007). Self-conscious emotional development. In J. L. Tracy, R. W. 
Robins, & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Te self-conscious emotions: Teory and research 
(pp. !34–!52). New York: Guilford.
 56. See the ﬁrst reference in note ;; to Chapter 3.
 57. Lewis, M., & Wolan-Sullivan, M. (2005). &e development of self-conscious 
emotions. In A. Elliot & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and moti-
vation (pp. !;5–20!). New York: Guilford.
 5;. Li, J., Fung, H., Liang, C.-H., Resch, J., & Luo, L. (2009). Is the glass half-empty 
or half-full? Emotional responses to children’s learning among European 
American and Taiwanese parents. Manuscript under review.
Curiosity, Inquiry, Heart, and Dedication
!;5
 59. Eid, M., & Diener, E. (200!). Norms for experiencing emotions in diﬀerent 
cultures: Inter- and intranational diﬀerences. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 8&(5), ;69–;;5; Ross, M., Heine, S. J., Wilson, A. E., & Sugimori, S. 
(2005). Cross-cultural discrepancies in self-appraisals. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, )&(9), !!75–!!;;; and Scollon, C. N., Diener, E., Oishi, S., 
& Biswas-Diener, R. (2005). An experience sampling and cross-cultural inves-
tigation of the relation between pleasant and unpleasant aﬀect. Cognition and 
Emotion, &,(!), 27–52.
 60. Sommers, S. (!9;4). Adults evaluating their emotions: A cross-cultural per-
spective. In C. Z. Malatesta & C. E. Izard (Eds.), Emotion in adult development 
(pp. 3!9–33;). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
 6!. See the second reference in note ;4 to Chapter 3.
 62. See the ﬁrst and third references in note 59 to this chapter.
 63. See the second reference in note 6 to Chapter 3.
 64. See the ﬁrst reference in note 6! to Chapter 3 for proﬁles of model learners 
who feel either a brief duration of happiness or do not make a big deal of high 
achievement. Instead, they warn themselves against arrogance and strive to 
focus on further learning.
 65. Ayduk, O., May, D., Downey, G., & Higgins, E. T. (2003). Tactical diﬀerences 
in coping with rejection sensitivity: &e role of prevention pride. Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2,(4), 435–44;; and Grant, H., & Higgens, 
E. T. (2003). Optimism, promotion pride, and prevention pride as predictors of 
qualify of life. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2,(!2), !52!–!523.
 66. See the ﬁrst and third references in note 59 to this chapter.
 67. See note 65 to this chapter.
 6;. Lee, A. Y., Aaker, J. L., & Gardner, W. L. (2000). &e pleasures and pains of dis-
tinct self-construals: &e role of interdependence in regulatory focus. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, /8(6), !!22–!!34.
 69. Tangney, J. P. (2000). Humility: &eoretical perspectives, empirical ﬁndings and 
directions for future research. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, &,(!), 
70–;2; and Morris, J. A., Brotheridge, C. M., & Urbanski, J. C. (2005). Bringing 
humility to leadership: Antecedents and consequences of leader humility. 
Human Relations, (8(!0), !323–!350.
 70. See the third reference in note ;2 to Chapter 3.
 7!. See note 5 to Chapter 2.
 72. See reference in note 74 to Chapter 2.
 73. See the third reference in note ;2 to Chapter 3.
 74. In sharp contrast to the Western view, humility is strongly desirable in leaders 
at any level in any organization. For example, the Yellow Emperor (c. 27!;–2597, 
legend has it; he lived !2! years), the acknowledged legendary chiefain of tribes 
who united China, is known not only for his achievement of uniting Chinese 
tribes, but also for his humble leadership style. He is said to have created an 
eﬀective and innovative administrative system and many inventions of tech-
nology such as the lunar calendar, medicine, and twelve-tone music. But he 
also taught people how to sow and how to harvest by personally working in 
the ﬁelds (also clearly symbolizing the virtue of diligence and endurance of 
hardship). &roughout history, leaders who were admired by people were those 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!;6
who displayed humility in spite of their great power and achievements. Current 
Asian political leaders that win support from people seem to show this quality 
as well. Chinese premier Wen Jiabao is a prime example. Similarly, Ma Ying-
jeou, the president of Taiwan, along with other Asian leaders, also conveys an 
unequivocal sense of humility in his style.
 75. See the second reference in note ;2 to Chapter 3, pp. 73–74.
 76. See the second reference in note 6 to Chapter 3, and Li, J. (2005). Mind or virtue: 
Western and Chinese beliefs about learning. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, &-(4), !90–!94.
 77. Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (!999). Is there a uni-
versal need for positive self-regard? Psychological Review, &.6, 766–794. June 
Tangney and others distinguish humility from modesty by pointing out that 
humility is a personal inner strength whereas modesty is more about external 
aspects such as clothing and gender-related behavior (e.g., female modesty, see 
the third reference in note ;2 to Chapter 3). However, research on Asian modesty 
bias versus Western self-enhancing bias uses the two terms interchangeably.
 7;. Because so little attention has been paid to the construct of humility, research 
trying to measure low self-esteem in Asian learners needs to take the notion of 
humility into consideration, distinguishing true low self-esteem from humility 
as distinguished by Tangney and others. It has been a consistent ﬁnding that 
Asian learners rank low on self-esteem measures despite their high achieve-
ment. For example, in the 2006 PISA international education assessment, East 
Asian students had low self-esteem in both math and science (South Korea 
ranked thirty-second in mathematics and twenty-ﬁrst in science; Japan ranked 
thirty-fourth and sixteenth, respectively; and Taiwan ranked thirtieth and eigh-
teenth, respectively). In contrast, U.S. students scored highest on self-esteem for 
science and fourth in math. Yet, their achievement in TIMSS was nineteenth 
in math and eighteenth in science, and in 2006, PISA ranked them fourteenth 
in science, ﬁfeenth in reading, and nineteenth in math (see the ﬁrst reference 
in note 7 to Chapter 3 for a more detailed discussion on the data). In light of 
the important distinction between humility and true low self-esteem, I urge 
researchers to rethink their measures of self-esteem intended for East Asian 
students, which may have mistaken a strength for a weakness, thus producing 
these puzzling results about East Asian students.
