!87
6
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
Modern formal learning takes place with age-graded peers. Peers, therefore, 
are a signiﬁcant social context for child development. When children depart 
early childhood and enter middle childhood (approximately between ages 
six and twelve), they become more oriented toward the social world beyond 
their family. However, in the modern world, the beginning of middle child-
hood coincides with the onset of schooling. Terefore, the major shi& in 
children’s social world is from home to school. Although they have less 
parental supervision, they continue to be supervised by schoolteachers and 
other school staﬀ. What is dramatically changed is that children now spend 
much of their daily time with same-age peers.
Much developmental research documents the signiﬁcant role peer con-
text plays in child development.! Middle childhood is a period during which 
children’s mental capacity increases (in addition to their increased physical 
capacity), particularly in the area of social cognition.( Whereas they are 
less able to appreciate how other people’s minds work, they now are more 
sophisticated in their understanding. Tey now realize that what they know 
may not be known by others and what they see may not be seen by others; 
that is, other people have their own minds and do their own thinking. Tey 
become increasingly sophisticated in their ability to take new perspectives. 
Tey can anticipate, interpret, and explain others’ desires, thoughts, and 
actions more accurately, independent of what they themselves desire, think, 
and do. Socially, they experience intensive peer interactions. Tey become 
interested in peer relationships, friendship, and their own social standing 
among peers, but at the same time, they care about their own quality, com-
petence, and independence.)
Along with all of these developmental changes, children attend school 
and are under pressure to achieve. It is therefore important to understand 
how children’s social experience with peers inﬂuences their learning and 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!88
achievement in school. Tere is much more research on how Western 
children navigate and fare through these processes than how children 
in other cultures do so. Research involving Western children shows that 
when they have good peer relations and higher social standing, they 
tend to achieve higher.4 Tis general ﬁnding is not surprising given the 
importance of children’s social needs. It is not hard to see that a well-liked 
child feels safe and free of peer-related worry and can therefore focus on 
intellectual tasks in school. Tis positive social support from peers can 
also boost the child’s self-esteem and self-conﬁdence, which can generate 
higher learning motivation. But when a child is not well liked, is ignored, 
rejected, or even bullied, that child may fear school and may not be able 
to learn well.,
Despite all this informative research, there has been relatively less research 
on how peers regard each other as learners. In other words, how do children 
view each other as a result of the inevitable disparities in achievement? In 
this chapter, I thread pieces of research together in order to shed light on 
this neglected but important research topic. I make three claims. First, how 
children regard each other as learners/achievers has a signiﬁcant impact on 
how they respond to, interact with, relate to, and treat each other. Second, 
the particular attitude children have toward their learning and achieving 
peers has serious consequences to children’s further learning (in addition to 
their general social development and well-being). Tird, children’s attitudes 
toward their learning and achieving peers are profoundly shaped by the 
values of their respective cultures. Western and East Asian cultures oﬀer an 
excellent contrastive perspective on these processes and outcomes.
-./ w/s-/rn l/arn/r in -./ /y/ of -./ ://rs
In the West, if one is incredibly lucky, one’s peer in middle school and high 
school may become one’s friend.; More o&en, a peer in school is a compet-
itor, a stressor, and – with surprising commonality – a harasser.7 Desire to 
excel, or at least not to come below their peers, makes school a competi-
tive setting.8 A peer is a stressor because one frequently worries about how 
one is viewed by peers, and how one might run the risk of not being liked 
and consequently being excluded from peer groups.9 A peer can become a 
harasser if one is singled out as a target to be picked on, ridiculed, or bul-
lied.!= Moreover, a peer can also be someone to ignore or to neglect, leaving 
peers in social isolation.!! In Western school culture, peer harassment and 
victimization, based on extensive research, is quite prevalent.!(
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
!89
Nerd’s Hell
Most striking and unbelievable (to me, who came from an entirely diﬀerent 
culture) is the research ﬁnding that those who try to learn and to achieve 
are tormented with most peer harassment.!) In fact, there are terms reserved 
for students in middle school and high school who are interested, moti-
vated, and make an eﬀort to pursue knowledge. Tey are infamously called 
“nerds,” “geeks,” “dorks,” and a host of other derogatory names. Tis type 
of peer harassment occurs not only in the United States, but apparently 
in many Western cultures. In the English-speaking countries of Canada, 
Australia, and New Zealand, the terms popular in the United States also 
enjoy popularity. In Britain, the equivalent term for nerd is swot,!4 in 
Germany – Schreber, in France – bouttoneux,!, in Holland – stuud,!; and in 
Israel – hnun.!7
What is a nerd? Te term!8 is considered to be homegrown in the United 
States, perhaps with the initial invention by Dr. Seuss for his playful chil-
dren’s rhyme, “a Nerkle, a Nerd, and a Seersucker too,” in his book If I Ran 
the Zoo.!9 Soon the term caught the attention of the popular media in the 
ensuing decades, as exempliﬁed by the sitcom Happy Days. By !9;=s and 
!97=s, the term was widespread across the United States and other Western 
cultures. It is typically used to label a student, more o&en a boy, during 
middle school or high school, who is socially and physically awkward. Tis 
alone does not earn the boy the title of a “nerd,” however. Te key deﬁning 
attribute is that the boy is intellectually curious and makes an eﬀort to pursue 
his interests (especially science, math, and technology, or else subjects that 
the rest of the peers ﬁnd too complex and diﬃcult to comprehend); above 
all, he is a high achiever in those subjects.(= American Heritage Dictionary 
of the English Language now deﬁnes nerd as a “person who is single-minded 
or accomplished in scientiﬁc or technical pursuits but is felt to be socially 
inept.”(! It is this combination of characteristics that gives birth to labeling 
someone a nerd. Current research indicates that not only boys continue to 
be labeled as such; girls who show intellectual interest and achieve well are 
also subject to such labeling. Moreover, the term now extends to children 
from all ethnicities that ﬁt the image of a nerd, whereas it was initial used 
exclusively for white boys.((
If this were just a game of labeling without any serious consequences, 
it would not be worth anyone’s attention. But as Sheldon White() cogently 
argued, a newborn term in a culture signiﬁes an important social real-
ity, such as the term adolescence occurring in the Western culture in the 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!9=
late nineteenth century. Te emergence of nerd and similar terms across 
Western cultures is no exception. As it turns out, labeling a peer as a nerd is 
a major daily form of peer harassment against those who actually do what 
schooling is intended for children to do by society, schools, teachers, par-
ents, and children themselves. Unfortunately, any child, once stigmatized as 
a nerd, becomes the target of open ridicule, verbal taunts, social exclusion, 
and even physical attacks from peers.(4
Research documents that such peer harassment is prevalent. In !989, 
N. T. Feather(, asked more than ,== high school students and )== college 
students in Australia to respond to scenarios in which either a high achiever 
or an average achiever experienced failure, in addition to some general atti-
tude toward these two kinds of achievers. He found that these respondents 
were more pleased to see a high achiever fail than to see an average achiever 
fail. He also found that high school students were happier with and friend-
lier toward a high achiever who fell to the average position than toward 
an average achiever who fell to the bottom. Feather used the apt meta-
phor of the “fall of the tall poppy” to capture the attitude students express 
toward high achievers. Moreover, Feather found that the high achiever was 
viewed as “less sociable and more of a loner than the average achiever.”(; 
In a follow-up study, Feather used his Tall Polly Scale with some (== ordi-
nary adults and found that those who had lower self-esteem and attached 
less importance to the value of achievement expressed more such negative 
attitudes.
John and Michael Bishop(7 recently conducted a large study on how such 
a peer norm functions in American students’ school engagement and study 
eﬀort. Tey interviewed tenth-graders from eight public schools located in 
predominantly white upper-middle-class suburban towns. Tis qualitative 
study enabled them to develop a comprehensive survey, which they admin-
istered to more than !!=,=== middle-school and high-school students 
across )(, schools.
What they found was consistent with the studies by Feather and oth-
ers but with more nuanced insights: students who are average in academic 
ability, pro-learning attitude, and achievement receive the least peer harass-
ment (4=–!== incidents per year). Students who fall either at the low end 
or the high end of the scale – that is, those out of the norm – receive the 
most peer harassment (!(=–((= incidents per year). At the lower end, peers 
harass two very diﬀerent groups of students: those who are least motivated 
and are themselves disruptors and slackers (falling below the norm) and 
those who are perceived as low in ability but try to study hard to raise their 
achievement (striving to beat the odds, again attempting to go above the 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
!9!
norm). Te researchers used the phrase “try but not too hard”(8 to describe 
the peer norm that is strongly enforced in American public schools.
Against this cultural backdrop, students who want to do well in school 
are afraid of displaying their eﬀort and their achievement. Te researchers 
state: “Typically they are code switchers who aﬃrm the ‘try but not too 
hard’ norm at school but hit their books when they get home. . . . O&en high 
levels of eﬀort are kept secret and academic accomplishments down played 
in order to ﬁt in and to avoid jealousy.”(9 Te researchers further explain 
that getting good grades in and of itself is not the probable reason for invit-
ing peer harassment; rather, it is one’s intention, motivation, and behavior 
that accompany the good grades. If eﬀort is seen by peers as “sucking up” or 
studying harder in order to get ahead, the eﬀort is likely to be regarded as 
unfair and thus sanctioned. However,
getting good grades because of a high IQ is not viewed as intentional 
and is seldom sanctioned. Indeed top grades achieved eﬀortlessly sig-
nal high ability – something that peers and parents value a great deal.)= 
Consequently, high GPA students o&en avoid peer harassment by claim-
ing not to study, eschewing public displays of interest in academic learn-
ing and keeping their grades secret. Many high achieving students gain 
popularity by pursuing this strategy.)!
Unless a student possesses an eﬀortless, natural mental gi&, he or she would 
be better oﬀ not to try hard. In a study comparing fourth-, sixth-, and 
eighth-grade students, researchers also found that eighth-graders (four-
teen-year-olds), but not the younger children, were reluctant to disclose 
their diligence (amount of work they did) to their popular peers despite 
their willingness to disclose their eﬀort to teachers. By eighth grade, chil-
dren who were once regarded as popular as a result of high ability and hard 
work dropped lower in popularity. Tose who did not work hard regardless 
of their ability enjoyed the highest peer popularity.)( Another recent study 
comparing eighth- and ninth-graders in Canada, Germany, and Israel found 
that fear of peer rejection and ostracism takes a toll on students’ motivation 
and achievement. Te more students buy into this kind of peer culture, the 
greater the toll. Furthermore, the more prevalently such peer norms exist 
within the larger culture, the greater this negative impact.))
Tese studies compel us to draw the conclusion that in the West there 
exists a forceful peer culture (at least in public school) that pits academic 
excellence against peer acceptance; that is, high academic achievement 
comes at a high social cost. Given that social acceptance by peers is a mat-
ter of high concern for children, particularly adolescents, they are forced 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!9(
to choose between their need to learn well and their need for peer support. 
Tey cannot have both unless they possess inborn high intelligence and 
the ability to do well without trying. Te eﬀortful tall poppy is vehemently 
hacked down by peers initially but eventually by children’s diminished 
motivation for learning. Tis force, as many researchers acknowledge, is the 
tyranny of mediocrity. It is quite amazing that this peer culture enjoys lon-
gevity and perpetuation even in the face of the concerted eﬀort of parents 
and schools to motivate children for higher achievement. It is obvious that, 
as lamented by John and Michael Bishop,)4 these adult eﬀorts are canceled 
out by peer culture to a large extent. Tis culture makes so much student 
eﬀort and educational reform utterly futile, much like Sisyphus’ pushing his 
rock up the hill only to watch it roll back down again (according to Greek 
mythology, Sisyphus was a king who was eternally punished for his mis-
takes by being made to push a large rock uphill only to watch it roll down 
again and again).
Sadly, most children do not possess top intelligence and cannot be 
schooled with “eﬀortless perfection.” Te Lake Woebegone myth where 
all children achieve above average, as aptly told by the comedian Garrison 
Keillor, is just that – a myth. Teachers, parents, and children themselves are 
keenly aware of the reality. Many children also concur with their parents and 
teachers that they should learn well, and that the only way to achieve that is 
to make an eﬀort. For such children, school is hell. Extensive research look-
ing at schoolchildren under peer attack shows that they suﬀer, among other 
things, from anxiety, low self-esteem, and depression, not to mention low 
achievement.), Such psychological problems can have long-term negative 
impact on these children well into adulthood.); It may take years for these 
people to regain self-conﬁdence. Some need to seek out clinical therapy to 
restore their mental health. Some may never heal. Parents also are fearful 
that such misfortune may befall their own children and feel hopeless if this 
indeed happens. To reduce the risk, parents encourage their children to 
engage in hobbies, extracurricular activities, and sports, which can increase 
their children’s standing among peers.
My own son attended a public middle school with virtually no diversity 
in the student body. He happened to be somewhat shy, with below-average 
athletic prowess. But he was interested in and good at math and did well in 
school. His name was on the honor roll and adorned the school hallways. 
His experience was that of a typical nerd, and he was harassed by his peers 
on a daily basis. Not only did some of the peers verbally taunt and exclude 
him from peer groups and activities; one big boy once tried to throw him in 
a trash can. We managed to collect some twelve insulting terms addressed 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
!9)
to him. Each day was an ordeal for both our son and us. If our son came 
back from school and reported no harassment, it was a day of blessing for 
him, and my husband and I would feel relief. But the problem became so 
severe that one day our son refused to go to school, demanding that we 
either home-school him or send him to a diﬀerent school.
Unfortunately, this peer culture is fully present and well-functioning 
much earlier than middle school and high school. Available research indi-
cates that children as young as kindergarteners and ﬁrst-graders become 
aware of the double-edged sword of high achievement in the West. As 
alluded to in Chapter ), my own research)7 using children’s story comple-
tions shows that at as young as age ﬁve, European-American children are 
cognizant of the social cost of high academic achievement. Tey are fully 
aware that while the high-achieving child is very happy for him- or herself 
(and so are his or her parents and teachers), the peers are “unhappy,” “sad,” 
“mad,” and “jealous” because the achieving child did better than the peers. 
Some children reported actual actions taken against high achievers, such as 
peers not wanting to play with them or saying hurtful words to them. Such 
peer isolation and rejection make the high achievers scared and worried.
Is It Human Nature to Harass Nerds?
When my husband and I went to see our son’s principal and guidance coun-
selor, we proposed to help the school launch a program called “respect for 
your peers.” But our hope was shattered by the school leaders’ attribution 
of such peer problems to human nature – that is, a universal claim that this 
type of nerd harassment is in the human genes. “Kids are just like that” was 
what they said. Teir belief was that because it is human nature, the school 
could do nothing to change it.
We could not endure the situation any longer and enrolled our son in 
a private school where children suddenly were no longer “just like that,” 
and the nature claim crumbled right there. Because his new school did not 
believe in the nature argument for nerd harassment, or perhaps because 
most children who enrolled in this new school were nerds themselves, no 
one was called or harassed as a nerd.)8 Luckily, our son made friends and 
experienced much better school life. Te intellectual and the social were 
ﬁnally integrated for him.
For the longest time, psychologists, particularly developmental psychol-
ogists, treated this kind of peer culture and harassment as more or less a 
given. Tis universal argument found backing from research on animal hier-
archy and the pan-cultural existence of social dominance and submission.)9 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!94
Te second support for the view of universality is actually a consequence 
of research relying on one cultural group, namely that of the West.4= Tis is 
limitation mistaken as support. Research ﬁndings based on Western theor-
ies and people were believed to be applicable to people across all cultures, 
without actually studying these people or these cultures. However, in recent 
decades, researchers studying other cultural groups have produced evi-
dence that peer culture in school diﬀers from culture to culture,4! as will be 
seen in the section on East Asian peer culture. Te once held universal peer 
norm is just one norm of one particular type of culture (even within the 
West, this norm is not universal, as in the case of my son’s new school, and 
as reportedly observable across the gymnasiums of Europe). It is therefore 
important to examine the norm of Western peer culture from the perspec-
tive of the West as a speciﬁc case rather than a universal human norm.
Inescapable Dooming of Nerds in the West
Why are motivated, interested, and serious learners so pejoratively regarded, 
and why do so many Western peers feel it legitimate to harass their peers 
for doing what they themselves also would like to do and to achieve? Tese 
questions become even more pressing when we consider the West as the 
culture that introduced and continues to uphold personal rights, human 
rights, equality, and democratic social order for all. It is a truism that every-
one desires safety, respect, and a chance to receive a good education, yet 
Western school peer culture does not seem to grant it to everyone. In fact, 
it seems to do the opposite, to undermine these lo&y human moral aspira-
tions of the culture.
Based on my review of research and theoretical discussions, there are 
some plausible reasons for why this peer culture exists and functions the 
way it does. As discussed in previous chapters, the ﬁrst and foremost rea-
son has to do with how the individual and the self are deﬁned. Extensive 
research in psychology shows quite convincingly4( that Western people 
hold a ﬁxed view of the self. Accordingly, the self is born with a unique 
set of characteristics such as temperamental diﬀerences that are present at 
birth and not shared with other individuals. Such unique characteristics are 
believed to be foundational to the person’s eventual personality develop-
ment. In the sphere of academic learning, many researchers have demon-
strated and argued that Western people believe in the existence and validity 
of ability/intelligence, particularly the inborn nature of it, as well as related 
personal qualities such as talent, creativity, and style. Te uniqueness of 
these individual qualities is the source of self-esteem and personal pride.4) 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
!9,
Terefore, people feel positive about themselves when they achieve well 
in school because this conﬁrms their sense of self-worth. However, when 
not achieving well, the self is inevitably implicated as lacking something 
inherent, usually intelligence, which is regarded as the underlying power 
for achievement. Tis realization can be devastating to the person’s self-
worth.44 No one likes to face this personal devastation.
Yet, the schooling process serves to do nothing except to counter this 
very cultural ethos that celebrates each individual’s uniqueness and self-
worth. Schooling is a process that is heavily dependent on evaluation of 
individuals’ learning outcomes. All schools, public or private, proceed with 
frequent assessment of pupils’ learning process and achievement. Tis eval-
uation-dependent schooling process inevitably leads children to engage in 
increasing social comparison of who is smart, who is average, who is doing 
well, who is not, and above all where children themselves stand. Every 
time a teacher asks a question for children to answer, social comparison 
of this sort is occurring. Te child who answers the question becomes the 
target for peers’ self-other evaluation. And this takes place in addition to 
the teacher’s formal and informal evaluation of children, which lies at the 
heart of schooling. When the evaluative outcome is favorable, the child is 
likely to feel good about him- or herself. But when the evaluative outcome 
is not favorable, the child may feel not only negative about the self, but also 
resentful toward the target child who is the very cause of the negative self-
realization of the evaluating child.4,
Hence, it is not exaggerating to say that the schooling process is one that 
breaks most children’s sense of self as a unique and great person. Te harsh 
reality is that only a handful of children in any school can ever be truly 
unique and great in this impersonal process of schooling and may emerge 
out of the process unscarred. Such children may truly be those who master 
academic learning with “eﬀortless perfection.” Schooling is intended to give 
most children needed competence, knowledge, and skills for a common life. 
As such, schooling makes children realize, unavoidably, that they are just 
ordinary. Tis is to say that as few children become the redeﬁned unique 
and great individuals, the rest are likely to experience personal downgrad-
ing. In a culture that holds a ﬁxed view of the self, it would be dubious if 
high achievers would be welcome by peers. Why would they be kind and 
respectful toward those who are seen as, and probably are, the very cause of 
their downgrading?
Te second reason is that the West, particularly the United States, is 
an intensely competitive culture. Márta Fülöp, a Hungarian psychologist, 
studied U.S., Japanese, and Hungarian high school children’s understanding 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!9;
of competition.4; She found that all three groups of children acknowledged 
the prevalence of competition in their school life. However, American chil-
dren found it most unpleasant and disliked it most. Tey viewed competi-
tion as a zero-sum game, meaning that if one child gets ahead and wins, the 
rest are necessarily behind and lose. Te conceptual importance lies in the 
idea that competition cannot make both parties winners. Japanese children 
liked competition most, but they viewed it very diﬀerently from their U.S. 
counterparts. Instead of regarding it as a zero-sum game, Japanese children 
saw competition as a chance to catch up with their peers, and peers help 
each other so that all end up doing better in school. Children enjoy this 
type of competition because both parties are winners in the end. Hungarian 
children were in the middle, focusing on getting to the top ranks but not 
necessarily regarding competition as a zero-sum game. Based on her stud-
ies, Fülöp concludes that although competition is observed in nature and 
across the human world, it takes diﬀerent forms, meanings, and processes 
depending on the culture and the goals of competition. Competition is thus 
a culturally constructed concept that guides human action.
Perhaps there is a connection between U.S. children’s view of compe-
tition as a zero-sum game and the general ﬁxed view of the self. Winning 
among competitors is the ultimate testimony of self-worth. So long as the 
individual’s self-worth is prized above everyone else, such competition is 
likely to persist and ﬂourish. Tese two processes function to feed oﬀ each 
other, making the dynamics reach new heights. Winning validates and 
solidiﬁes the self that is likely to engage in competition to win. Tis process 
can continue as long as one is always the winner. But for those who experi-
ence more losing than winning, the assurance of self-worth cannot be sus-
tained. Losing casts doubt on the self, weakens it, and discourages it from 
making an eﬀort. In other domains of life, people could just abandon the 
activity at which they do not excel and move on to pursue other activities 
where they may shine. However, because compulsory education does not 
allow children to divert their learning time to other activities, they cannot 
escape academic learning and must face up to the challenges whether or 
not they personally like them. In academic learning, children become more 
vulnerable to the zero-sum style of competition and may become indiﬀer-
ent, give up, or, quite likely, turn to harass those who are seen as the cause 
of their loss.
Te third reason is that Western culture seems to hold a talent assump-
tion for intellectual achievement. Talent, as the term suggests, is something 
that one is born with. Tis view has deep roots dating back to antiquity.47 
Again, this idea is consistent with the ﬁxed view of the self. However, this 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
!97
assumption is not easily refuted when we look at the fact that not all chil-
dren are born with the same intelligence proﬁle, with some apparently more 
talented than others in just about any domain of performance. Te easily 
identiﬁable geniuses such as Mozart, Picasso, Einstein, and Marie Curie, 
as well as the existence of precocious children in math, science, reading, 
and writing, all lend support to the talent assumption.48 Carol Dweck has 
studied this assumption for decades.49 She uses the terms entity theory ver-
sus incremental theory of intelligence that children and adults hold about 
school learning. Accordingly, entity theorists believe that one’s intelligence 
is ﬁxed at birth, whereas incremental theorists believe that one’s intelligence 
grows as one learns. Interestingly, Western kindergarteners think that smart 
people work hard and hardworking people are also smart. Unfortunately, as 
they reach middle childhood, they begin to realize that eﬀort alone may 
not lead to great achievement; one also needs ability. Adolescents are clear 
that eﬀort is actually an indication of one’s low ability. Smart people do not 
need to work hard. Tose who do must not be very smart.,= Middle-school 
and high-school children have been widely documented to use all sorts of 
strategies to hide their eﬀort (not just to fend oﬀ peer harassment) in order 
to avoid being viewed as low in ability (mostly likely by teachers).,! Given 
the deep-seated nature of the talent assumption in the West, it is not hard 
to see how those who try to work hard to improve their achievement may 
be regarded as trying futilely to alter their “unalterable” lot. Tis is probably 
why the low-ability children were the ﬁrst to take the brunt of their peers’ 
harassment in Bishops’ study. But it is also undeniable that the term nerd, 
along with its image, projects a pathetic air and consequent laughter in the 
listener. Tis is also likely the reason why those who manage to impress 
peers with “eﬀortless perfection” are le& alone.
I happen to know a boy who, in my view, oﬀers an excellent illustration 
of how this talent assumption operates in school. In each of his high school 
English classes, his ﬁrst essays would receive a B. His teachers were all highly 
qualiﬁed and caring and were always willing to help the boy. In ninth grade, 
this boy actually tried to do everything his teacher asked him to do such as 
writing an outline, dra&ing, and revising based on the teacher’s suggestions. 
He still received a B. Being the inquisitive person he was, he began an exper-
iment on himself. He deliberately did not submit his next essays on time, 
ﬁrst just a few hours late, then one day late, and eventually several weeks 
late. When he did submit all of his work, he still received a B. In his sopho-
more and junior year, the same process repeated. Tis boy concluded that 
there was an unspoken ordinance at work here: once a student was labeled 
as a B-writer, there was no amount of good that he or she could do to change 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!98
the teacher’s view. Te most bizarre ﬁnding of his self- experimentation was 
that there was also no amount of bad that the B-writer could do to reduce 
him/her to a C-writer either. He was held in his slot, so to speak! Of course, 
most readers would agree that his boy was foolish to experiment with his 
own academic performance. Tat aside, it behooves us to look at how deep-
rooted the ﬁxed view of talent is on school ground. Needless to say, this boy 
no longer enjoys writing, even though he writes, in my judgment, quite well, 
certainly much better than I began writing in English.
On the scholarly front, Heyman, Fu, and Lee,( in a recent study explored 
European-American and Chinese late elementary school children’s willing-
ness or reluctance to disclose their achievement or failure to their peers. 
Tey found that European-American children disclosed their achievement 
only to peers who had similar achievement levels. Tey would not disclose 
their achievement to peers with higher or lower levels in fear that they 
would be regarded as bragging (if disclosed to lower achiever) or revealing 
their low ability (if disclosed to higher achiever, presumably fearing being 
viewed as stuck in their unalterably low slot).
Jeannie Oakes, a leading researcher on the American education sys-
tem, conducted long and thorough investigations on the well-known high 
school tracking system. Her research provides the clear conclusion that 
high school education is not about improving children’s learning but about 
conﬁrming their exhibited ability. Oakes and Guiton write:
What made these recommendations and initial judgments [from junior 
high school teachers for placing ninth grades] so powerful was the wide-
spread belief that a student’s educational prospects are virtually set by 
the time he or she gets to high school. Many considered motivation and 
intellectual ability to be ﬁxed attributes over which educators have little 
control. We found little evidence that educators at any of the schools 
thought that high schools courses could (or should even try to) increase 
students’ intellectual capacities or raise their expectations. Tis theme 
echoed in the words of many administrators, teachers, and counsel-
ors. . . . Some told us directly that they felt that it was “all over” by high 
school. For example, [a] principal . . . said that he could tell by the end of 
kindergarten which children would be successful in high school. . . . One 
counselor reported that high school teachers generally believe that, once 
a student gets to high school, he or she is either intrinsically motivated 
or not and this cannot be changed.,)
Given “the prevailing view that high school students’ abilities are 
intractable,”,4 the purpose of curriculum and pedagogy is thus to accom-
modate what characteristics children already possess, but not to alter or 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
!99
improve them. Although the researchers studied high school teachers and 
administrators’ beliefs that underlay the tracking philosophy and practice, 
the researchers’ report suggests that this kind of view is not limited to high 
school; kindergarten teachers can also cast the same kind of judgment on 
much younger children’s ability.
Finally, there seems to be an assumption of the intellectual-social divide. 
If a child is interested in intellectual pursuits, something must be amiss with 
that child. Te missing and hence wrong part is that the child must lack 
social competence and may not ever acquire it, as Feather’s tall poppies were 
viewed. Putting aside the serious moral problem of harassing someone who 
lacks some competence (this is similar to the moral problem of harassing 
a handicapped person), this assumption of the intellectual-social divide is 
ﬂat out wrong. Developmental research as well as the fast-advancing ﬁeld of 
neuroscience tells us that all human beings (even those who are born with 
congenital challenges) possess the capacity to develop all human compe-
tence to a very high, albeit varying, degree. Every human being, if given the 
opportunity and support, can ﬂourish with just about any skill.,, Not only 
are we not doomed at birth; we have potentials that are rarely fully realized. 
A child who lacks any competence initially – be it intellectual, social, or 
even athletic – can acquire them when put in the right nurturing environ-
ment. But if the ﬁxed-self/ﬁxed-ability view (contrary to what is scientiﬁ-
cally known) reigns in the school yard, the so-called nerds are bound to be 
created, who are, sadly, doomed to suﬀer cruel peer harassment.
-./ /as- asian l/arn/r in -./ /y/ of -./ ://rs
Te school peer culture is quite diﬀerent in East Asia. In Chinese culture, the 
strongest inﬂuence came, undoubtedly, from the Confucian learning tradi-
tion. Japan and Korea may be similar to Chinese culture in this regard, owing 
to the same inﬂuence. To begin with, the very term “school peer” in Chinese 
is tongxue (同學), made of two characters. Te ﬁrst means “together” and 
the second “learning”; “peers” are thus literally “those who learn together.” 
In Japanese, a more formal term 學友, also still used in Chinese written 
language, means “learning friends.” Douryou (同僚) or nakama (仲間) are 
more everyday terms but also used for peers at workplace. 同 in 同僚 is 
the same character as the ﬁrst one in the Chinese common term 同學, and 
仲間 means people in the same group who do activities together. In Korean, 
the term peer is kyo-woo (校友), meaning “school friends.” All of the terms 
in these three cultures have the shared characters, either “together” (同), 
“learn” (學), or “friend” (友).
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(==
Te distinction between the Western concept of “peer” and East Asian 
terms is not trivial. According to Webster’s English dictionary, a “peer” 
is “one that is of equal standing with another, one belonging to the same 
societal group especially based on age, grade, or status.”,; Te key deﬁning 
attribute is equal standing of age, grade, or status. Most highlighted is the 
idea of status in a group. Te Chinese term tongxue is deﬁned in the New 
Dictionary of Modern Chinese Language as “one that learns/studies with the 
same teacher and/or at the same school.”,7 Status such as age, grade, and 
standing is not part of the deﬁnition. What is highlighted is learning/study-
ing together at the same place from the same teacher(s), and the relation-
ship is that of friends. For the Western peer, the key importance is placed 
on the status/standing in a group of school-aged children, whereas in the 
East Asian terms, it is friends learning from the same teacher(s) or at the 
same place.,8
Signiﬁcance of Learning Peers
How do Chinese tongxues (hereina&er the English term “peer” is used 
for convenience) regard and treat each other? From the very beginning, 
when Confucius ﬁrst took his students, a peer is someone one studied with. 
Peers have the same goal of learning. As discussed in previous chapters, in 
Confucian persuasion, the goal is to follow a path to cultivate oneself mor-
ally. Despite a personal commitment to this process, the actual learning is 
not best achieved by oneself, contemplating and practicing self- cultivation 
alone. Peers are seen as essential in this learning process. Confucius’ 
Analects opens with the ﬁrst sentence: “Having studied, to then repeatedly 
apply what you have learned – is this not a source of pleasure?” Te very 
next sentence, also cast in the same delightful question, is “To have [like-
minded] friends come from distant quarters [to study with oneself] – is this 
not a source of enjoyment?”,9 Tus, learning with peers who are pursuing 
the same moral goals was conceived of by Confucius as an enjoyment.
One’s peers are then not just strangers who happen to learn/study at the 
same time under the same mentor, but like-minded friends who pursue 
the same life goals. Tey are supporters of each other. Te Analects records 
the following exchange between Confucius and Zigong, a pupil from a 
wealthy background who felt a need to show (oﬀ) his insight into human 
virtue when he no longer felt superior to the poor:
?igong saiA: “What do you think of the saying: ‘Poor but not inferior; rich 
but not superior’?” Te Master replied: “Not bad, but not as good as: ‘Poor 
but enjoying the way (dao, 道), rich but loving ritual propriety (li, 禮)’ ”
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(=!
?igong saiA: “Te Book of Songs states:
Like bone carved and polished,
Like jade cut and ground.
Is this not what you have in mind?”
-./ Bas-/r saiA: “Zigong, it is only with the likes of you then that I can 
discuss the Songs! On the basis of what has been said, you know what is 
yet to come.”;=
“Like bone carved and polished, like jade cut and ground” (qiecuo zhuomo, 
切磋琢磨) is a verse of a poem in the Book of Songs ;! from which Confucius 
and his pupils drew wisdom and aesthetic guidance. Tis poetic verse 
through Confucius’ teaching of Zigong has come to epitomize what learn-
ing peers do with each other in East Asia: studying, wondering, and dis-
cussing, helping, correcting, and above all, learning from and improving 
each other. Tere is no wonder why one’s learning peers are the major part 
of one’s life-long social circles beyond the family. One’s shared learning is 
also one’s shared living and shared growth, which is treasured dearly. Tus, 
the term tongxue in higher learning becomes tongchuang, shared study hall, 
and eventually may become tongchuang haoyou, good friends of a shared 
study hall. Tis basic regard of one’s learning peers has lasted through mil-
lennia to the present (as will be seen in late sections on research from East 
Asia). “Friends” are part of the formal Japanese and Chinese term 學友 
and the Korean term 校友. In this cultural ethos, calling a learning friend 
a derogatory name and harassing such a friend is, to put it bluntly, quite 
unthinkable.
Nerd’s Haven
Te reader may be wondering if there are no peer problems in this kind 
of cultural context. To be sure, there is also a term bookworm (書呆子) 
to describe someone who does nothing but study books. However, this 
term is not o&en used for and by schoolchildren, but rather for and by 
adults. Tere may be other terms in these cultures to refer to unusual 
behaviors and styles. Certainly, peer isolation and rejection also occur 
in East Asia. Recently, there have been reports about increasing peer 
bullying in East Asian schools.;( But the important diﬀerence here is that 
peer unkindness has little to do with the target peer pursuing intellec-
tual interests or being an excellent student. According to Xinyin Chen, 
an expert in Chinese children’s social development, there are only two 
peer groups in Chinese school yard, at least within Mainland China: 
the good student group and the antisocial/delinquent group. Nerd as a 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(=(
type or a classiﬁcation does not seem to exist (yet, there are many more 
peer groups in the West such as the jocks, geeks, brainies, goths, stoners, 
druggies, etc.).;)
Quite the contrary, those who achieve highly are generally admired, 
popular, emulated, and sought a&er as friends regardless of whether these 
high achievers are “uncool” otherwise (e.g., appearance, athletic ability, 
and purely social prowess). Good learning alone is reason for peer respect 
and admiration. In my study on Chinese ideal learners, the respondents 
were asked to describe how the learners’ peers would regard them; 87 per-
cent wrote respect and admiration and 4( percent acknowledging them 
as role models and desiring their friendship.;4 Huang’s research on why 
Taiwanese children are willing to attend the so-called cram schools also 
found that gaining peer respect was one of the top reasons.;, Te study 
my colleague and I conducted on kindergartners’ perceptions of high-
achieving peers also showed that Chinese children desired to be like the 
high achievers and to emulate them (but European-American children 
perceived more peer rejection and isolation toward the high achievers).;; 
Most recent research;7 on how peer groups function in Chinese schools 
found that elementary school and middle-school children belonging to 
high-achieving groups become more socially competent two years later. 
On the other hand, high social competence alone did not have the reverse 
eﬀect – that is, it did not make children achieve better academically during 
the same period of time – countering the theory and research on Western 
children’s group functions.;8 Furthermore, even academically weaker stu-
dents who belonged to high-achieving groups developed fewer social prob-
lems than children who belonged to low-achieving groups. Associating 
oneself with high-achieving peers in China has protective power against 
developing negative social behaviors. Tese studies conﬁrm that in China, 
good learning does indeed bring peer respect and liking and other pos-
itive beneﬁts. Te otherwise persecuted “nerds” may ﬂourish in such a 
protective haven.
In the domain of learning, the peer culture in China, unlike that in the 
West, is more or less in harmony with the culture of school, family, and 
society at large. In other words, although youth in East Asia also have their 
own music, fashion, group activities, and online sites, and generational 
gaps and clashes also exist, their culture seems to have less conﬂict between 
school and family when it comes to school learning. How does such a peer 
culture operate? Tere are at least three discernable levels that interact with 
each other to produce such a peer culture: school/community, family, and 
children themselves.
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(=)
Peer Supported Learning in School and Community
Within school, students who achieve highly are o&en identiﬁed by the 
school as the leaders of their classes, and such leaders obtain this role 
not necessarily because of their marvelous personality traits (e.g., out-
going, gregarious, friendly, physically attractive), but serve the central 
role of modeling for the rest of children. Tat is, these students are held 
as model students for others to emulate. In China, for example, schools 
annually select the so-called Students with Tree Excellences (三好生): in 
moral conduct, academic achievement, and artistic/athletic achievement. 
Teachers and peers nominate and vote for such students. Te idea behind 
setting up model students is that everyone should learn and is capable of 
learning from the exemplars and achieving the same level as them. At the 
present time, schools adopt a more democratic process as a method to 
select student leaders. For example, nominees conduct campaigns where 
they engage in debates with their opponents and present their ideas for 
how they would like to work for their classes and grades. Peers then cast 
their votes, and the votes are announced and counted publicly. Regardless 
of the selecting methods, no student is likely to be chosen as a model 
student without academic excellence. Excellence in social relations and 
extracurricular achievements alone is not admired as much as academic 
excellence.;9
Once chosen, it is regarded a high honor in school. To achieve a posi-
tive eﬀect on the peers, schools may routinely organize workshops where 
high-achieving students share their personal challenges and strategies they 
used to overcome such diﬃculties. Tey oﬀer tips on how to approach var-
ious school subjects, how they balance social and other extracurricular 
activities with learning tasks, and how they approach studying. Peers ask 
questions and exchange ideas. When such workshops are held, all children 
attend them. As discussed previously, high achievers do not necessarily feel 
uncomfortable in the spotlight because they are not believed to possess 
some inherent ability and special talent at birth, but rather skills that they 
have acquired. Likewise, those who do not achieve highly are not regarded 
as lacking inherent ability either. All children stand to beneﬁt from learning 
how to achieve better from those model students. Indeed, diﬀerent students 
may be put on the pedestal in diﬀerent years.
Other than these kinds of workshops, higher-achieving students are 
openly “charged” by teachers to help their peers. For each subject, there is 
one subject representative (科代表). Teachers urge students to seek such 
subject representatives and other high-achieving students. Meanwhile, 
lower-achieving students are encouraged to seek help from their peers. 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(=4
Te helpers and help seekers work quite seamlessly in class. Teachers even 
pair high-achieving students with low-achieving students one on one in 
order to raise achievement for everyone (teachers have an incentive to do 
so given that their promotion depends, in part, on how their entire classes 
achieve). A teacher in Beijing gives a vivid illustration of how this kind or 
peer- supported learning takes place:
An 8th grade student was very shy and quiet in class. Every time the 
teacher called on him to answer a question, he would not say anything, 
hanging his head and blushing. His classmates would mumble to the 
teacher to not bother him because “he didn’t know.” But the teacher soon 
discovered that the boy was very good at math. She told the class that 
whoever could make this boy talk would get extra credit for the course. 
Many peers approached the boy. . . . Now he is not afraid of talking in 
class, and he interacts well with his peers.7=
It is quite clear that both the helpers and the help recipient have a mutual 
understanding that a student can improve, and nothing is shameful about 
getting help and nothing is inappropriate about oﬀering help in this cultural 
context.
Recent research on how older elementary school children disclosed 
their achievement to peers provides a good glimpse into this process. As 
cited previously, Heyman and colleagues7! found that European-American 
schoolchildren would only disclose their achievement to peers who have 
similar achievement levels, but they would not disclose their achievement 
to peers with higher or lower levels in fear that they would be regarded 
as bragging (if disclosed to lower achievers, likely fearing peer sanction 
for high achievement) or revealing their low ability (if disclosed to higher 
achievers). However, Chinese schoolchildren would disclose their own 
achievement to all peers regardless of their levels. If disclosed to a higher 
achiever, the disclosing peer is regarded as eliciting help from the higher 
achiever, and help is on the way. If it is disclosed to a lower achiever, the 
disclosing peer is regarded as oﬀering help, and the lower achiever would be 
grateful for such help. Tese ﬁndings make good sense given how common 
peer-supported learning is in Chinese schools.
A more routine way to ensure such peer-supported learning is through 
the so-called small groups (小组). Chinese schools have large classes (forty 
for elementary school and sixty or more students per class for middle 
school and high school). However, each class is organized into small groups 
by seating arrangement. A sixty-student class may have six or fewer small 
groups. O&en, small-group leaders are elected by group members, but 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(=,
many schools encourage students to take turns assuming the role of small-
group leaders so that all children get a chance to develop leadership skills. 
Small-group leaders help teachers with their teaching such as distributing 
and collecting student work and quizzes, organizing group extracurricu-
lar activities, communicating on behalf of the class, and assigning cleaning 
jobs (Chinese children clean their own schools).
Other than these organizational tasks, small-group leaders ensure learn-
ing among group members. For example, they work together to complete 
their homework. Chinese and other East Asian children are assigned a much 
heavier load of homework each day than Western children.7( Homework 
completion is required and checked by teachers carefully, with feedback. 
However, unlike in the West, homework is not graded as part of the stu-
dent achievement record. Ten why is homework assigned at all? And why 
so much? Homework is meant to serve the purpose of practicing, review-
ing, and gaining new insight into the material taught during the day, not 
to demonstrate mastery per se, because mastery is believed to be acquired 
over time, as detailed in Chapter 4. Again, this design and use of homework 
is reﬂective of the Confucian principal of deeper learning through review 
and gaining new insight. Tus, homework is a learning process, not time 
and opportunity to show one’s mastery.7)
Frequently, the members of small groups may take turns to organize 
homework times at school or to invite peers to their homes. As a middle-
school student, I brought in peers (not my personal friends) to my home. 
A&er dinner, my parents would clean the dinner table, and the children 
would do homework together. Group homework serves two signiﬁcant 
learning goals: (!) ensuring that everyone completes homework and (() 
helping each other digest what was taught during the day. Tose who under-
stood, say, a math concept would explain it to those who were struggling 
with it. At the end of the study group, all group members had something to 
gain. Tere are two important additional beneﬁts of group homework: ()) 
reducing the otherwise impossible teaching load of the teachers and (4) fos-
tering positive peer relationships. Finally, parents may not need to be highly 
knowledgeable of subject matter and intensively involved in the day-to-day 
learning and peer interactions of their children (as is the case in the West, 
where parents need to make play dates, drive children to diﬀerent extra-
curricular programs, and help them do homework). Children are naturally 
involved with and for each other.
High-achieving students are not kept secret inside school but publi-
cized across local communities through the media, as is done in the West. 
Tere are diﬀerent levels of honor students – school, district, city, and 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(=;
provincial – with the three excellences. Te higher the level, the greater the 
honor.74 Communities take great pride in having highly achieving students. 
In (==,, I visited several cities and local towns in China and saw banners 
hanging across the roads and streets of towns, proudly announcing the top 
students in that year’s college entrance examination. In the town’s centers, 
businesses posted boards on the street, stating their donation levels to stu-
dents for various ranks of college admissions. Apparently, this tradition 
continues abroad. In America, for example, Chinese-language newspa-
pers also routinely print the proﬁles of winners of national, state, and local 
scholastic competitions.7, It would be diﬃcult, if not nearly impossible, to 
counter such a cultural ethos.
Peers as Role Models through Parents
Parents play a major role in further strengthening positive attitudes 
toward high-achieving peers. Parents in any culture are the key bearers 
of their cultural values because they socialize their children accordingly. 
Although parents are active promoters of their cultural values, they do 
so o&en without awareness of their own role. Tis interesting process is 
understood as enculturation by which people acquire the values of their 
cultures through participation in daily life. Te power and success of 
enculturation lies, as anthropologists have long recognized, in the very 
mundane living in the culture, which does not require formal education. 
Chinese children’s positive attitude toward their high-achieving peers has 
much to do with this kind of parenting process. Apparently, Chinese (and 
other East Asian) parents routinely engage in identifying model students 
for their own children and in ensuring that their children actually learn 
from them.
First, as noted in Chapter 4, Chinese culture has a long tradition of using 
models for teaching the young. All great scholars and learning models 
throughout Chinese history continue to live in oral tales, with many noted 
in the village records, the town’s public monuments, as well as rendered in 
movies and dramas.7; In school, children read these stories as part of learn-
ing the Chinese language. I examined the Chinese-language curriculum for 
China’s nine-year compulsory education, which is still largely centralized in 
China, and found that ); percent of the learning material contained these 
learner models.77 Because the current students’ parents learned these sto-
ries in their own childhood, these role models are equally alive for parents 
and students. To motivate their children, parents routinely cite these mod-
els (in concert with teachers’ citations) and urge their children to emulate 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(=7
these models. Hence, children are familiar with and used to this style of 
parenting.
But parents do more than just rely on historical ﬁgures and distant high 
achievers. Parents are also active seekers of good students in the neigh-
borhood. Tey frequently talk to their children’s friends to ﬁnd out who 
among their peers does better at school. Tese good students include rela-
tives, children of their friends and coworkers, and otherwise acknowledged 
good students in the community. Once parents discover such models, they 
refer their own children to them o&en, in clear comparative terms, urg-
ing their children to emulate these models. My personal example is a case 
in point. When I received my doctoral degree from my university in the 
United States, my mother sent the photos of my robing ceremony to rela-
tives in China. Unbeknownst to me, several of my relatives in China had 
the photos framed and hung them on their living rooms’ walls. Teir fam-
ily pride aside, I became, apparently, a role model in their eyes. Tey used 
this model to motivate their own children to learn better. In our study on 
Chinese immigrant high school students, 77 percent of them reported that 
their parents used good students from their neighborhood as role models. 
Surprisingly, despite the fact that many found their parents’ eﬀort annoying, 
these Chinese immigrant adolescents acknowledged that their parents’ cita-
tions of higher-achieving students made them motivated to work harder. 
Te following excerpt from an interview with a student illustrates this par-
enting eﬀort: “[M]y mother, she likes to brag about me for some reason, 
and then she . . . sees someone else’s report card for some reason . . . and then 
she’s like, look at this kid, she got all A’s. And look at you, you got one B . . . 
you’re supposed to have more A’s. And I’m like, isn’t that enough? . . . Well, 
I wouldn’t say demoralize, I would say that it would motivate me a little bit 
more . . . to work harder.”78 Whereas it is common among Chinese parents, 
this kind of model use as a motivational strategy for their children is rarely 
observed among European-American and other ethnic parents.
Children Seek Peer-Supported Learning on Teir Own
Given the general attitude toward high-achieving peers, it is only natural for 
Chinese children to have similar attitudes toward such peers. In my study 
on model learners, I also asked college students to respond to the question 
“how would your model learner feel toward those who have a strong heart 
and mind for learning (好學心)?” Te majority (77 percent) wrote that the 
model learner would respect, admire, revere, esteem, and appreciate those 
who have such love for learning. Forty-two percent stated that the model 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(=8
learner would humbly learn from, be motivated to catch up with, take the 
model learner as his/her own example, and strive to improve themselves 
further. Forty-three percent acknowledged that model learners would ﬁnd 
such people to be their soul mates, to share the same life goals, to desire to 
become like, or to be friends with.79 Recent research on ordinary Chinese 
elementary school children, not ideal learners, by Heyman and associates 
and Chen and associates provide support for this very awareness of peer 
paragons.8=
Tus, peers seek each other out even without the nudging from teachers 
and parents. In a study that my colleagues and I conducted, we found that 
Chinese immigrant high school students from low-income backgrounds 
continued to use this peer-supported learning to help each other in school. 
When we asked them who helps them with their homework, one-third said 
that they do homework with their friends either at school or at each other’s 
places, because their parents had neither English proﬁciency nor American 
curricular knowledge to help them. Tese children had to depend on them-
selves, but they chose to use peer-supported learning rather than individ-
ual learning. For example, one peer might be better at math, and he would 
explain math concepts to the group. Another peer might have a better 
understanding of history, and she would look up the information online 
and help the group. Because of the advent of instant messaging technol-
ogy, sometimes the group may not gather in one physical location but work 
online, doing homework together in real time. Such peer-supported learn-
ing was rarely mentioned by the other ethnic groups, including those from 
European-American background.
Deep Roots for Honoring High Achievers in East Asia
Te preceding sections present a clear picture: Not only do high-achieving 
students suﬀer little peer harassment, but they are actually honored and 
upheld as role models in East Asia. What schools, communities, parents, 
and children themselves do to create a haven for learning in school is the 
ﬁrst-order examination. However, the description of the reality and how 
it operates does not get to the question of why the culture is so diﬀerent. 
In what follows, I attempt to outline, based on research, some underlying 
values and beliefs that are important for understanding the existence and 
continuation of such a peer culture for learning in East Asia.
First, as discussed previously, East Asian students inherit a cultural 
learning tradition that has been shaping children’s lives and their educa-
tion systems for millennia. Troughout history, there has been very little 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(=9
interruption of this tradition except for the ten years of Mainland Chinese 
oﬃcial denunciation of learning from !9;; to !97;.8! Ironically, even that 
unfortunate political downturn did not altogether eradicate Chinese peo-
ple’s desire for learning (although intellectuals were persecuted). What was 
truly denounced was particular knowledge, namely Confucian learning 
along with learning of science and other “bourgeois” material. Soon a&er 
the “catastrophe of ten years” (十年浩劫), learning of everything resumed 
with renewed energy and dedication. Except for China, other East Asian 
cultures have not experienced any notable discontinuity. Tus, it is not 
overstating that this tradition has been deeply entrenched in East Asia, with 
no sign of abating. Such a value system is not easily subject to any peer 
counterculture.
Second, a peer counterculture against high achieving has to have a clear 
cause. Tere is none, however, in my judgment. Why would children revolt 
against something that their parents and they themselves desire and regard 
as important? Besides, schools, communities, and families create conditions 
under which low- and average-achieving students have frequent interac-
tions with high-achieving students to receive help and to self-improve. It 
makes little sense for peers to invent derogatory names to torment their 
helpers.
But a deeper reason for high achievers’ haven is that East Asia does not 
hold the view that the self is ﬁxed and likewise that one’s ability is more or 
less determined at birth. Unlike in the West, the self in East Asia is regarded 
as malleable8( through personal eﬀort and social inﬂuence. As discussed 
before, personal commitment (along with the learning virtues) holds the 
key to personal development including the growth of one’s ability and intel-
ligence. Hence, if a person does well on a task, the self is not implicated as 
wholly positive; rather, the self is regarded as still changeable in any direc-
tion. Likewise, if the person fails, it does not implicate anything inherently 
negative in the person. Because life-long learning is taken as a fundamen-
tal life course for anyone, the self is expected and encouraged to improve 
regardless of how much one has achieved or failed. Of utmost importance is 
that the person is willing and actually makes an eﬀort to self-improve.8)
Belief in social inﬂuence is the second part of how the self may be sub-
ject to considerable change, which is an extension of the view that the self 
is malleable. Chinese culture strongly emphasizes the inﬂuence of the envi-
ronment in child development.84 Teachers, parents, and children use a com-
mon expression that epitomizes the general belief about one’s potential to 
be inﬂuenced by others: “near cinnabar, one becomes red; near pitch, one 
becomes black” (近朱者赤,近墨者黑). Te younger the child, the more 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(!=
changeable he or she is by the environment. Parents and teachers urge 
their children to be near good inﬂuence and stay away from not-so-good 
 inﬂuence. Tat children are encouraged by teachers and parents to seek 
high-achieving students out for help is a direct reﬂection of this cultural 
belief. Upon discovery that their children have friends who display ques-
tionable behaviors such as not wanting to learn or delinquency, parents dis-
courage their children from interactions with such peers. Given that good 
learning also signals good virtues and morals in Chinese culture, it is sen-
sible for Chinese parents to promote their children’s friendship with high 
achievers.8,
Recent research on cultural variations between Western and East Asian 
people shows that East Asians perceive and think about objects very diﬀer-
ently.8; Whereas Western people focus on the object itself, East Asian peo-
ple attend to a larger purview of the environment, the background. When 
given a group of the same objects, such as a number of identical red pen-
cils and a single object that is diﬀerent from the group, say, a green pencil, 
or a big ﬁsh in a group of small ﬁsh, Western people see the single object 
as standing out, unique, and so forth. But East Asians attend to the group 
of objects more. Tis tendency is taken by some researchers as indicative 
of their culturally inﬂuenced focus, awareness, and information process-
ing. Most recent research87 also documents that Asian children as young as 
three years of age are more likely to be inﬂuenced by adult consensus than 
their European-American peers. Although these lab experiments focus 
purportedly on cognitive diﬀerences between the two cultural groups, I 
would argue that East Asian people’s attentiveness to the environment (i.e., 
factors other than oneself) provides support for their fundamental belief 
in “near cinnabar, one becomes red; near pitch, one becomes black,” which 
underlies their eﬀort to socialize their children toward desirable develop-
mental outcomes.
A related explanation of the cultural diﬀerences in peer culture comes 
from Márta Fülöp’s research on cultural diﬀerence in competition, as 
noted previously.88 Fülöp started with the assumption that competition 
and cooperation are conceptualized in the West as the mutually exclusive 
dichotomy in people’s behavior. According to this view, if a culture is high 
on competition, it is necessarily low on cooperation. Te United States is 
a highly competitive culture, low on cooperation, because of its emphasis 
on individualism; by contrast, formerly socialist Hungary was a case of 
high cooperation but low competition (presumably because of their social-
ist rule). Yet, Japan poses challenges to this Western dichotomous view 
because Japan is both high in competition and cooperation. To ﬁnd out 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(!!
how high competition and cooperation could coexist, Fülöp studied more 
than 7== high school students in these three cultures. She asked each stu-
dent to describe how prevalent competition was in their school, how they 
viewed competition, and how they engaged in competition themselves.
She found that Japanese students reported the most competition in 
school, followed by the American students. Hungarian students reported 
the least competition. Examples students gave ranged from trying to get 
better grades, to win contests, to excel on entrance exams, to try to get into 
better colleges in academics, as well as to engage in extracurricular activ-
ities. However, despite the greatest prevalence of competition reported 
by Japanese students, they experienced competition most positively. 
American students had the lowest positive experience, with Hungarian 
students in the middle. More Japanese students regarded competition as 
a process of self-improvement, motivation, personal eﬀort, achievement, 
exercising their willpower, self-evaluation, and joy. Te category that 
American students acknowledged most was that competition enabled them 
to push themselves to be their best. Hungarian students mentioned rank-
ing among students most frequently. On the negative side of competition, 
American students reported the highest levels of stress, losing, and feeling 
selﬁsh. Both American and Hungarian students also experienced a higher 
level of conﬂict with peers than Japanese students. Fülöp concludes that 
Japanese students’ experience with competition in school is most positive, 
American most negative, and Hungarian falling in the middle. Japanese 
students engage in competition to motivate each other and to help each 
other improve. Hungarian students seek to raise their rank among their 
peers, and American students try to be the best. For Japanese students, 
rivals are friends, and the degree of cooperation is high, which results in 
improved achievement for everyone. Teir relationships are strengthened. 
For Hungarian students, rivals are enemies, and the degree of cooperation 
is low,89 which results in winners versus losers and consequently deterio-
rated relationships. For American students, rivals are opponents to win 
against, and the degree of cooperation is also low, but relationships may 
not matter to begin with.
Most recently, Watkins and his graduate students adopted Fülöp’s 
method to study high school students’ perception and engagement in com-
petition in Hong Kong (in both high-ability and low/average-ability schools 
as tracked in Hong Kong).9= Similar to Fülöp’s ﬁndings, the majority of the 
participants in both kinds of schools reported that their schools encouraged 
them to compete with other students (8! percent and ;7 percent among the 
two respective groups of students). However, students felt more positive 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(!(
than negative or neutral about competition. Positive examples of student 
experience include:
 
!. Competition encourages me to improve myself; the feeling is quite 
good.
 
(. Competition motivates us to actively participate.
 
). Trough competition, our school encourages us to learn from each 
other.
 
4. I feel very happy because in competition all of us improve.
Some statements about negative experiences are:
 
!. Competition is hard work. I am unable to breathe and want to give up.
 
(. Very hard, very great pressure. I do not want to compete with others.
 
). I feel nervous and I am desperate to win.
Furthermore, the researchers also asked students speciﬁcally whether they 
respected their opponents in study and sports. Tey found that the great 
majority (more than 9= percent) said yes, and the predominant reason was 
that their opponents were their “friends or classmates” and that the com-
petitors should “respect everyone all the time.”
Tese studies compel us to conclude that learning and achieving are for 
everyone. Tese ﬁndings cohere with the basic Confucian tenet that peers 
in learning are people for one to learn from, to work with, to respect, and, 
most important of all, to enhance each other. In such a culture, “nerd” 
harassment has, so to speak, no home.
Ten how do we explain the common observation that those who 
emerge on the top are the “nails that will be hammered down,” a common 
phenomenon in East Asia, much like the tall poppies?9! I would argue that 
the observation is not wrong, but it is an observation blindly and inappro-
priately applied to all domains of life. In East Asian social life, particularly 
in the domains where socioeconomic resource distribution is at stake, those 
who claim more resources may be subject to the hammering-down des-
tiny. But improving oneself in learning with the goal of cultivating one’s 
virtuous and moral self is an entirely diﬀerent thing. Self-striving to be 
virtuous and moral is not claiming more resources because virtuous and 
moral achievement is within reach of each person. And the more people in 
a society achieve the virtuous and moral goals, the better the society is as a 
whole. In this domain, the tall poppy is not only not a problem, but actually 
becomes a goal for everyone, especially when everyone is believed capable 
of becoming a tall poppy.
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(!)
Te ﬁnal cultural value that explains the East Asian peer culture in learn-
ing, I would argue, has to do with the way social relationships are formed and 
maintained. Again, based on Confucianism, the most signiﬁcant social rela-
tionships are formed at home. Te family model serves as the lens through 
which the social world for the Chinese (and other East Asians) is concep-
tualized, classiﬁed, approached, and lived. Accordingly, children are taught 
at home to call their older siblings as either “older brother” (gege, 哥哥) 
or “older sister” (jiejie, 姐姐) and likewise to call their younger siblings 
“younger brother” (didi, 弟弟) and “younger sister” (meimei, 妹妹). Siblings 
are not usually called by their ﬁrst names. All kin members have designated 
addresses by paternal or maternal (male/female) division, generation, and 
age. Tis model is also used to classify strangers, and children are taught 
this classiﬁcation and approach social relations accordingly. For example, 
when meeting a neighborhood peer, the child needs to know if the peer is 
older or younger. If he is older, then the child will call him “older brother”; 
if the peer is younger, he will be called “younger brother.” Similarly, when 
meeting an unfamiliar male adult, the child also needs to know if the adult 
is older or younger than his or her father. If he is older, then the child will 
call him “older uncle” (bobo, 伯伯), and if he is younger, then “younger 
uncle” (shushu, 叔叔), or if dealing with females (ayi, 阿姨).9(
Te most important purpose of this type of family extension to strang-
ers is that all these roles by diﬀerent addresses come with well-deﬁned 
responsibilities/duties as well as care/privileges. For example, anyone that 
is addressed with “older” assumes a responsibility to care for, to instruct, to 
model, and to guide anyone addressed with “younger” by generation and 
by age. Even a slightly older sibling is asked by parents to show her younger 
sibling better behavior (e.g., yielding a candy to the younger), and this type 
of socialization can be observed by children from diﬀerent families playing 
together, where the mother will reason with an older child by appealing to 
the age diﬀerential (e.g., “you are the older sister, and she is the younger 
sister, so please give your toy for her to play with”). Anyone addressed with 
“younger” also accepts the stance to respect/honor, to listen to, and to fol-
low the “older” person’s care, teaching, and guidance (e.g., a four-year-old 
child may be asked to look at what her six-year-old brother did in spelling 
and to emulate him). By the time they enter school, most Chinese children 
are familiar with this complex and ﬁnely diﬀerentiating system of address 
(at least for their immediate kin). Most children also have some sense of the 
responsibility/charge of those “older” people versus their own role as the 
“younger.”9)
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(!4
Tus, children in Taiwan still address their peers with “learning older 
brother” (xuezhang, 學長), “learning younger brother” (xuedi, 學弟), 
“learning older sister” (xuejie, 學姐 ), and “learning younger sister” 
(xuemei, 學妹). When a younger peer comes to ask a question about a math 
problem, for example, the older learning peer will bear the responsibility to 
help the younger one. Likewise, when an older learning sister oﬀers help or 
instructs the younger peer, the younger will accept this older peer’s guid-
ance. Tis cultural system lends itself to the teacher and parental requests 
for high-achieving students to assume more responsibility for helping the 
low- and average-achieving students. Likewise, it is the duty expected of the 
low- and average-achieving students to seek help from the high-achieving 
students. No shame and contempt are involved in this learning system. 
Tose who seek help are regarded as displaying the virtue of humility, and 
those who oﬀer help are regarded as displaying the virtue of generosity and 
responsibility, as discussed in previous chapters. Tis type of social rela-
tionship based on the family model makes it harder for peers to engage in 
“nerd” harassment.94
Asian-American Children as the “Nerd” Group
At least among Asian Americans, it has been widely known that their chil-
dren have been called nerds and harassed routinely in school. Tis is not 
surprising given the cultural background they come from, the open empha-
sis on school learning, and the generally higher achievement associated 
with them. What makes matters worse is that Asian children have a smaller 
physique and are sometimes less impressive in the athletic prowess than 
their counterparts from other ethnic groups. Both physically and behavior-
ally they ﬁt the image of a “nerd.” Whereas other groups may have individ-
ual children suﬀering from the nerd-calling peer culture, Asian-American 
children as a whole are America’s default “nerd” group.
As such, they bear the brunt of peer harassment from all sides. My son’s 
experience is a case in point. On the national scene, the current lawsuit 
in Philadelphia ﬁled by the Asian American Legal Defense and Education 
Fund against the school district for not protecting Asian-American stu-
dents attests to the new height of peer harassment against the Asian “nerds.” 
According to NBC news, twenty-six students were attacked by their non-
Asian peers (beaten up, with thirteen students sent to the hospital, one with 
a broken nose).9,
Te best-documented peer harassment against Asian-American 
 students came from the research done by Niobe Way and associates 
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(!,
at New York University. In (==4, Susan Rosenbloom and Niobe Way9; 
conducted an in-depth qualitative study over a two-year period. Tey 
interviewed Chinese immigrant youth attending diverse public schools 
in New York City. Tey also conducted school observations. Tey found 
widespread peer discrimination and peer victimization as experienced 
by Chinese adolescents from their non-Asian peers (twenty-six incidents 
of physical and verbal attacks against Chinese, but only one and three 
against African-American and Latino peers, respectively, during the 
same period). Te following excerpts from their report provide details of 
such peer attacks:
A Chinese girl reported “Te people in the school, they call me chino, 
stupid, or geek, or anything like that because I’m Chinese.”
Participant observation and the interviews revealed numerous inci-
dences of physical harassment of the Asian American students by the 
non-Asian American students in school. Students reported random 
“slappings” by male and female peers as they walked through the hall-
ways. Slappings are quick, pop shots o&en to the head or body as stu-
dents passed one another in the hall or anywhere else. Asian American 
students described them as unnerving, randomly occurring, and humil-
iating violations that are particularly harrowing for the boys when girls 
slap them.
Along with slappings, Asian American students were observed and 
reported being pushed, punched, teased, and mocked by their non-
Asian American peers. Te racial slur “chino” or “geek” was o&en heard 
as Asian American students passed by. Te physical and verbal harass-
ment of the Asian American students occurred when adults were present 
and when they were not.
Kit Wah told the interviewer that a male Asian American friend was 
held up with a knife in the gym locker room by a student in his class. His 
friend was robbed of several items.
Incidents such as these that included having money, jewelry, and jack-
ets stolen are typical events that Asian American students described 
when discussing how they were victimized for being Asian American 
in school. . . . Asian American students appeared to be more frequently 
targeted for robbery. Tese events seemed to be a part of the normalized 
landscape of behaviors that Asian American students endured in this 
school.
Niobe Way97 in a subsequent paper states that such peer harassment against 
Asian-American children by non-Asian peers is not limited to New York 
City, but is a common problem across the United States.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(!;
In a recent study, Desirée Qin, Niobe Way, and Preetika Mukherjee98 
interviewed Chinese immigrant youth aged from nine to fourteen in both 
New York City and Boston. Tey reported a similar ﬁnding but also clear 
reasons for such peer discrimination from non-Asian peers: the perception 
that Chinese children were high achievers and that teachers give Asian-
American students preferential treatment.
Finally, Deborah Rivas-Drake, Diane Hughes, and Niobe Way used stan-
dard measures of peer discrimination to study how that predicts early ado-
lescents’ psychological well-being. Tey found that compared to African 
Americans, Chinese-American students reported nearly twice as many peer 
harassment incidents, higher depressive symptoms, and lower self-esteem. 
All of these diﬀerences were statistically signiﬁcant. Te researchers con-
cluded that “Chinese American early adolescents . . . reported feeling that 
they are treated badly, unfairly, teased, harassed, and called names by peers, 
who are individuals whom they encounter on a regular basis.”99
Asian-American children who try to do what they are supposed to do 
in American school – that is, learning and achieving well – face very harsh 
peer problems regularly. I hope this chapter has provided some insights into 
the cultural roots of this harassment. But regardless of the root causes, this 
reality is truly hell for many Asian-American children.
no-/s
 !. See note !! to Chapter 4.
 (. See Perner, J., Leekam, S. R., & Wimmer, H. (!987). Tree year olds diﬃ-
culty with false belief: Te case for a conceptual deﬁcit. British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology, 5((), !(,–!)7; Astington, J. W. (!99)). Te child’s dis-
covery of the mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; and Wellman, 
H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. ((==!). Meta-analysis of theory of mind develop-
ment: Te truth about false beliefs. Child Development, 72, ;,,–;84 for research 
on children’s social cognitive development.
 ). See note !! to Chapter 4.
 4. Wentzel, K. R., & Caldwell, K. (!997). Friendships, peer acceptance, and group 
membership: Relations to academic achievement in middle school. Child 
Development, &8, !!98–!(=9; Wentzel, K. R., & Wigﬁeld, A. (!998). Academic and 
social motivational inﬂuence on students’ academic performance. Educational 
Psychology Review, 10((), !,,–!7,; Uguroglu, M. E., & Walberg, H. J. (!98;). 
Predicting achievement and motivation. Journal of Research and Development 
in Education, 19, !–!(; and Kindermann, T. (!99)). Natural peer groups as con-
texts for individual development: Te case of children’s motivation in school. 
Developmental Psychology, 29, 97=–977.
 ,. Wentzel, K. R., & Asher, S. R. (!99,). Te academic lives of neglected, rejected, 
popular, and controversial children. Child Development, &&, 7,4–7;).
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(!7
 ;. Ladd, G. W., & Troop-Gordon, W. ((==)). Te role of chronic peer diﬃcul-
ties in the development of children’s psychological adjustment problems. Child 
Development, 74(,), !)44–!);7.
 7. Feather, N. T. (!989). Attitudes towards the high achiever: Te fall of the tall 
poppy. Australian Journal of Psychology, 41()), ()9–(;7; Boehnke, K. ((==8). 
Peer pressure: a cause of scholastic underachievement? A cross-cultural study 
of mathematical achievement among German, Canadian, and Israeli middle-
school students. Social Psychology of Education, 11((), !49–!;=; and Bishop, J. H., 
& Bishop, M. M. ((==8). An economic theory of academic engagement norms: 
Te struggle for popularity and normative hegemony in secondary schools. 
Unpublished manuscript.
 8. Fülöp, M. (!999). Students’ perception of the role of competition in their 
respective countries: Hungary, Japan, and the USA. In A. Ross, Young citizens 
in Europe (pp. !9,–(!9). London: University of North London.
 9. Asher, S. R., & Coie, J. D. (Eds.) (!99=). Peer rejection in childhood. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
 !=. Pellegrini, A. D., & Long, J. D. ((==)). A longitudinal study of bullying, domi-
nance, and victimization during the transition from primary through second-
ary school. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 20, (,9–(8=.
 !!. See note , to this chapter.
 !(. See note !! to Chapter 4, and Nishina, A., & Juvonen, J. ((==,). Daily reports 
of witnessing and experiencing peer harassment in middle school. Child 
Development, 7&((), 4),–4,=.
 !). See the third reference in note 7 to this chapter.
 !4. See Elliott, J. G., Hu&on, N. R., Illushin, L., & Willis, W. ((==,). Motivation, 
engagement, and educational performance: International perspectives on the 
contexts of learning. New York: Palgrave Macmillan for discussion of swot (pp. 
!((–!()); see the second reference in note 7 to this chapter for German Schreber 
and Hebrew hnun.
 !,. Personal communication with Marie Suizzo for French bouttoneux.
 !;. Personal communication with Marieke van Egmond for Dutch stuud.
 !7. See note !4 to this chapter.
 !8. For convenience, I use nerd or nerds instead of naming all other similar terms 
to discuss this phenomenon.
 !9. Seuss, G. T. (!9,=). If I ran the zoo. New York: Random House.
 (=. Nugent, B. ((==7, July (9). Who’s a nerd, anyway? New York Times Magazine. 
Retrieved 
July 
(8, 
(==7 
from 
http://www.nytimes.com/(==7/=7/(9/
magazine/(9wwln-idealab-t.html?_r=!&ref=magazine&oref=slogin
 (!. American heritage dictionary of the English language ()rd ed.). (!99(). New York: 
Houghton MiCin, p. !(!(.
 ((. See Fordham, S., & Ogbu, J. U. (!98;). Black students’ school success: Coping 
with the “Burden of ‘Acting White.’” Te Urban Review, 18, !7;–(=; for similar 
problems with African-American schoolchildren.
 (). White, S. H. (!998). What do we have to do to create a better social design for 
adolescence? Paper read in honor of Teodore Sizer at Brown University.
 (4. See the third reference in note 7 to this chapter; and Juvonen, J., & Gross, 
E. F. ((==,). Te rejected and the bullied: Lessons about social misﬁts from 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(!8
developmental psychology. In W. D. Kipling, J. P. Forgas, & W. von Hippel 
(Eds.), Te social outcast: Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bullying (pp. 
!,,–!7=). New York: Psychology Press.
 (,. See the ﬁrst reference in note 7 to this chapter.
 (;. See the ﬁrst reference in note 7 to this chapter, p. (,;.
 (7. See the third reference in note 7 to this chapter.
 (8. See the third reference in note 7 to this chapter, p. ((.
 (9. See the third reference in note 7 to this chapter, p. !(.
 )=. See Nicholls, J. G. (!978). Te development of the concepts of eﬀort and ability, 
perception of academic attainment, and the understanding that diﬃcult tasks 
require more ability. Child Development, 49, 8==–8!4 for research on how New 
Zealand children’s view of ability and eﬀort changes from kindergarten to ado-
lescence. Also see the second reference in note !; to Chapter , for Dweck and 
Leggett’s review of research on this topic.
 )!. See the third reference in note 7 to this chapter, pp. !4–!,.
 )(. Juvonen, J., & Murdock, T. B. (!99,). Grade-level diﬀerences in the social value 
of eﬀort: Implications for self-presentation tactics of early adolescents. Child 
Development, &&(;), !;94–!7=,.
 )). See the second reference in note 7 to this chapter.
 )4. See the third reference in note 7 to this chapter.
 ),. Fisher, C. B., Wallace, S. A., & Fenton, R. E. ((===). Discrimination distress 
during adolescence. Journal of Youth & Adolescence, 29, ;79–;9,; Greene, M. 
L., Way, N., & Pahl, K. ((==;). Trajectories of perceived adult and peer discrim-
ination among Black, Latino, and Asian American adolescents: Patterns and 
psychological correlates. Developmental Psychology, 42((), (!8–()8; La Greca, 
A. M., & Harrison, H. M. ((==,). Adolescent peer relations, friendships, and 
romantic relationships: Do they predict social anxiety and depression? Journal 
of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, ,4, 49–;!; Storch, E. A., & Masia-
Warner, C. ((==4). Te relationship of peer victimization to social anxiety and 
loneliness in adolescent females. Journal of Adolescence, 27, ),!–);(; and Rivas-
Drake, D., Hughes, D., & Way, N. ((==8). A closer look at peer discrimination, 
ethnic identity, and psychological well-being among urban Chinese American 
sixth graders. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, ,7, !(–(!.
 );. See note !! to Chapter 4.
 )7. See the second reference in note ; to Chapter ).
 )8. Indeed, his new school, the Wheeler School in Providence in Rhode Island, 
was attended mostly by children who were motivated, serious learners. High 
achievement was expected and celebrated and was a school pride. Both our son 
and we are grateful to the school for promoting the right values and for creating 
a safe learning environment for children.
 )9. Strayer, F. F. (!99!). Te development of agonistic and aﬃliative structures 
in preschool play groups. In J. Silverberg & P. Gray (Eds.), To ﬁght or not to 
ﬁght: Violence and peacefulness in humans and other primates. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press; and Fiske, A. P., & Haslam, N. ((==,). Te four basic social 
bonds: Structures for coordinating interaction. In M. W. Baldwin (Ed.), 
Interpersonal cognition (pp. (;7–(98). New York: Guilford.
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
(!9
 4=. See Arnett, J. J. ((==8). Te neglected 9,D: Why American psychology needs to 
become less American. American Psychologist, &,(7), ;=(–;!4 for discussion of 
this problem.
 4!. See Chen, X.-Y., & French, D. C. ((==8). Children’s social competence in cul-
tural context. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, ,9!–;!; for a review of cross-
cultural research.
 4(. See note 8! to Chapter ) and note !9 to Chapter ,.
 4). See Fischer, H. A., Manstead, A. S. R., & Rodriguez Mosquera, P. M. (!999). Te 
role of honor-related vs. individualist values in conceptualizing pride, shame, 
and anger: Spanish and Dutch cultural prototypes. Cognition & Emotion, 1,((), 
!49–!79 for an example.
 44. See notes (; and (8 to Chapter ,.
 4,. Tesser, A., Campbell, J., & Smith, M. (!984). Friendship choice and perfor-
mance: Self-evaluation maintenance in children. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 4&()), ,;!–,74; and Ruble, D. N., Frey, K. S., & Greulich, F. 
(!99,). Meeting goals and confronting conﬂicts: Children’s changing percep-
tions of social comparison. Child Development, &&, 7()–7)8.
 4;. See note 8 to this chapter.
 47. See the classic Galton, F. (!8;9/(==;). Hereditary genius: An inquiry into its 
laws and consequences. Amherst, NY: Prometheus and its recent reincarnation; 
Hernstein, R. J., & Murray, C. (!994). Te bell curve. Chicago: Free Press.
 48. See Steenbergen-Hu, S.-Y., & Moon, S. M. ((=!!). Te eﬀects of acceleration on 
high-ability learners: A meta-analysis. Gi-ed Child Quarterly, 55(!), )9–,) for 
an example of research on this topic. Te fact that the West has the term gi-ed 
children and a whole journal devoted to research on such children indicates 
the importance of the concept “talent” and born intellectual “gi&” in children. 
Also see Winner, E. (!99;). Gi-ed children: Myths and realities. New York: Basic 
Books for more discussions.
 49. See the second reference in note !; to Chapter ,; and Dweck, C. S. (!999). Self-
theories. Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
 ,=. See the ﬁrst reference in note )= to this chapter and note )( to this chapter.
 ,!. See Covington, M. V. ((===). Goal theory, motivation, and school achievement: 
An integrative review. Annual Review of Psychology, 51, !7!–(== for a compre-
hensive review.
 ,(. Heyman, G. D., Fu, G.-Y., & Lee, K. ((==8). Reasoning about the disclosure of 
success and failure to friends among children in the United States and China. 
Developmental Psychology, 44(4), 9=8–9!8.
 ,). Oakes, J., & Guiton, G. (!99,). Matchmaking: Te dynamics of high school 
tracking decisions. American Educational Research Journal, ,2(!), )–)), pp. 
!=–!!.
 ,4. See note ,) to this chapter, p. !(.
 ,,. Doidge, N. ((==7). Te brain that changes itself: Stories of personal triumph from 
the frontiers of brain science. New York: Penguin.
 ,;. Webster’s new collegiate dictionary. (!97)). Springﬁeld, MA: Merriam, p. 84,.
 ,7. Wang, Y.-T. (Ed.). (!99(). 新現代漢語詞典 [A new dictionary of modern 
Chinese language]. Hainan: Hainan Publishing House, p. !;);.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
((=
 ,8. It is important to point out that when scholars use the English term peer to 
describe Chinese, Japanese, and Korean tongxue, douryou, and kyo-woo, impor-
tant cultural meanings are lost.
 ,9. See note , to Chapter (, p. 7!.
 ;=. See note , to Chapter (, p. 7,.
 ;!. Legge, J. (Trans.). (!9;=). Te Chinese Classics, 5 volumes. Hong Kong: University 
of Hong Kong. Songs ,,, vol. IV.
 ;(. See Child Welfare League Foundation (n.d.). Report on school bullying. 
Retrieved March !,, (=!= from http://www.children.org.tw/database_report.
php?typeid=)4 for increased bullying in Taiwanese schools as an example.
 ;). Chen, X.-Y. ((==8, October) at the conference, Bridging developmental and cul-
tural psychology: New syntheses in theory, research, and policy, Worcester, MA, 
Clark University. Although I am aware of no research on “nerds” in East Asian 
schools, all my personal inquiries with scholars across East Asian conﬁrms 
that nerd harassment is virtually nonexistent in Hong Kong, China, Singapore, 
Japan, and Korea.
 ;4. See the ﬁrst reference in note ;! to Chapter ).
 ;,. See the second reference in note 4; to Chapter 4.
 ;;. See the second reference in note ; to Chapter ).
 ;7. Chen, X.-Y, Lei, C., Liu, H.-Y., & He, Y.-F. ((==8). Eﬀects of the peer group on 
the development of social functioning and academic achievement: A longitudi-
nal study in Chinese children. Child Development, 79((), (),–(,!.
 ;8. See note 4 to this chapter.
 ;9. Private communication with Yongmei Wang (March !4, (=!=), a former lead 
teacher at Beijing 4th Secondary School for ten years. According to her, stu-
dents at her school who did not achieve 8, out of !== for all subjects including 
music, athletics, and art are automatically disqualiﬁed as nominees (as well as 
those who have too many absences). Anyone who qualiﬁes can put him-/herself 
forward as a candidate for peers to vote for.
 7=. Private communication with Xiaoling Wang (March !4, (=!=), a middle-school 
teacher in Beijing.
 7!. See note ,( to this chapter.
 7(. See the ﬁrst reference in note ); to Chapter 4 for an example. However, home-
work overload has been a controversial issue in East Asian education. A decade 
ago, China’s Education Ministry even passed regulations to set limits on how 
many hours of homework are permitted per day and to forbid schools and 
teachers to push children to take a&erschool and weekend academic classes. 
However, this kind of policy did not meet with great success because parents 
still hire tutors and enroll their children in “cram” schools in order to help their 
children achieve even better.
 7). Honor students at diﬀerent levels receive diﬀerent extra scores for entering 
more competitive middle schools, high schools, and colleges.
 74. Periodical quizzes, midterms, and ﬁnal exams are the means to determine 
student mastery. Homework in Russia is used for the same purposes. See 
Hu&on, N., & Elloitt, J. ((===). Motivation to learn: Te pedagogical nexus in 
the Russian school: Some implications for transnational research and policy 
 borrowing. Educational Studies, 2&, !!,–!((.
 7,. See the third reference in note 9 to Chapter ).
Nerd’s Hell and Nerd’s Haven
((!
 7;. Wilson, R. (!98=). Conformity and deviance regarding moral rules in Chinese 
society: A socialization perspective. In A. Kleinman & T. Lin (Eds.), Moral and 
abnormal behavior in Chinese culture (pp. !!7–!);). Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
 77. See note )8 to Chapter 4.
 78. See the second reference in note 4 to Chapter ), p. !9.
 79. See the ﬁrst reference in note ;! to Chapter ).
 8=. See notes ,( and ;7 to this chapter.
 8!. See note ) to Chapter !.
 8(. See note !; to Chapter ,.
 8). As discussed in Chapter ), my lexicon study on learning terms showed that 
ability is placed as a consequence of learning on the Chinese conceptual map, 
but intelligence and ability for European Americans are placed as an internal 
learner characteristic that enables learning.
 84. See the ﬁrst reference in note (; to Chapter ).
 8,. See research ﬁndings on the susceptibility of Western adolescents to peer inﬂu-
ence despite their stronger belief in the ﬁxed self: Gardner, M., & Steinberg, 
L. ((==,). Peer inﬂuence on risk taking, risk preference, and risky decision 
making in adolescence and adulthood: an experimental study. Developmental 
Psychology, 41(4), ;(,–;),.
 8;. See the ﬁrst reference in note (9 to Chapter (.
 87. Corriveau, K. H., & Harris, P. L. ((=!=). Preschoolers (sometimes) defer to the 
majority in making simple perceptual judgments. Developmental Psychology, 
4&((), 4)7–44,. Also see Hess, R. D., Azuma, H., Kashiwagi, K., Holloway, 
S. D., & Wenegrat, A. (!987). Cultural variations in socialization for school 
achievement: Contrasts between Japan and the United States. Journal of 
Applied Developmental Psychology, 8, 4(!–44=; and Hess, R. D., Kashiwagi, K., 
Azuma, H., Price, G. G., & Dickson, W. P. (!98=). Maternal expectations for 
mastery of developmental tasks in Japan and the United States. International 
Journal of Psychology, 15, (,9–(7! for Japanese mothers’ greater expectation 
of their children’s mastery of social courtesy, self-control, and compliance 
with authority, and how such maternal socialization predicts school achieve-
ment but is associated with negative outcomes among European-American 
children.
 88. See note 8 to this chapter.
 89. Presumably because Hungary is now a democracy and market economy. Fülöp’s 
ﬁndings might have tapped increasing competition and decreasing cooperation 
in Hungary.
 9=. Watkins, D. A. ((==9). Motivation and competition in Hong Kong secondary 
schools: Te students’ perspective. In C. Chan & N. Rao (Eds.), Revisiting the 
Chinese learner: Psychological and pedagogical perspectives (pp. 7!–88). Hong 
Kong: Comparative Education Research Centre (CERC), University of Hong 
Kong and Springer Press, pp. 8(–84.
 9!. Kwan, V. S. Y., Bond, M. H., Boucher, H. C., Maslach, C., & Gan, Y. Q. ((==(). 
Te construct of individuation: More complex in collectivist than in individu-
alist cultures. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, )==–)!=.
 9(. Please note that for older or younger female adults (than their mothers), chil-
dren just call them ayi, which is still a deferential address, despite the fact that 
ayi is undiﬀerentiated by age as their male counterparts.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
(((
 9). See Liang, C.-H. ((==7). Shame and pride: Age, kinship terms and socializa-
tion practice in a middle-class Taiwanese preschool. Poster presented at the 
Biannual Meetings of Society for Research in Child Development, Boston, MA; 
and Fung, H., & Liang, C. H. ((==8). 越南媽媽,台灣囡仔: 台灣跨國婚姻家
庭幼兒社會化之初探 [Vietnamese mothers, Taiwanese children: Socializing 
practices with young children in Sino-Vietnamese cross-border marriage fam-
ilies in Taipei, Taiwan]. 台灣人類學刊 [Taiwan Journal of Anthropology], &, 
47–88 for research on this topic. It is important to point out that cultural misun-
derstanding is common when Asian immigrant children attend host countries’ 
schools. One of the Chinese ﬁrst-graders in our current study lived in a subur-
ban town with predominantly middle-class European-American residents. One 
day, this boy told his European-American peers that he had a sister. Surprised, 
the teacher called his mother and learned that this so-called sister was the boy’s 
cousin and lived in China. Not knowing the signiﬁcance of the Chinese family 
system and social relationships, this teacher proceeded to “correct” the boy by 
asking him to stand up and tell his class that he had no sister. Needless to say, 
this boy burst into tears because he was treated as an idiot and a liar. Tis is 
a sad but telling example of cultural insensitivity and misunderstanding (and 
poor teaching).
 94. Tere is evidence that peer bullying is also on the rise in East Asia (see note ;( to 
this chapter). Some researchers report the Internet being a conduit that permits 
peer harassment without consequences. In Japan, social isolation and rejection 
have been reported; see, for example, Mishima, K. (!99;). Bullying amongst 
close friends in elementary school. Japanese Journal of Social Psychology, 19(!), 
4!–,=; and Masataka, N. (!999). Nihonteki ijime no seiritsu to ikuji [Te for-
mation of Japanese bullying and child-rearing]. Japanese Journal of Addiction 
and Family, 1&(4), 4)8–444. As mentioned before, peer unkindness also exists in 
East Asia, and those who are perceived as lacking eﬀort or being antisocial may 
face peer sanction. Research does need to pay attention to such peer problems. 
However, it is rare that high-achieving students suﬀer from peer harassment.
 9,. Johnson, D. ((==9, Dec 7). Attacked Asian students afraid to go to school: (; 
Asian students were attacked last week. Retrieved from November (=, (=!= from 
http://www.nbcphiladelphia.com/news/local-beat/Attacked-Asian-Students-
Fear-Returning-to-Class-78;,(997.html
 9;. Rosenbloom, S. R., & Way, N. ((==4). Experiences of discrimination among 
African American, Asian American, and Latino adolescents in an urban high 
school. Youth & Society, ,5(4), 4(=–4,!, pp. 4))–)4).
 97. Way, N. ((==,). Seeking engagement: Reﬂections from a qualitative researcher. 
Journal of Adolescent Research, 20, ,)!–,)7.
 98. Qin, D. B., Way, N., & Mukherjee, P. ((==8). Te other side of the model minor-
ity story the familial and peer challenges faced by Chinese American adoles-
cents. Youth & Society, ,9(4), 48=–,=;.
 99. See the last reference in note ), to this chapter, pp. !8–!9.
