!76
8
Te Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
Speaking – this biologically endowed capacity – is the hallmark of human 
intelligence. Although humans with various impairments can still fare well 
with soundless communication, thanks to the advent of the human inven-
tion of written symbols, text, and sign languages, speaking with sound from 
the vocal cord undeniably represents a remarkable achievement of human 
evolution.
Despite this unique human capacity, speaking is far from being a mere 
biological phenomenon. When looked at from the perspective of brain sci-
ence, speaking is an outer manifestation of our inner brain connectivity. 
When looked at from a psychological perspective, speaking is a function 
of our immense mental world. When looked at from the perspective of a 
social function, speaking is a human communicative act. When looked at 
from political, legal, and other systems, speaking is the means to achieve 
our greater ambitions. As complex and vast as it is, for most people, the 
sound of speaking is, without exaggeration, the sound of life.
Relevant to this chapter is speaking’s role in learning and education. 
Speaking obviously has much to do with human learning and education. 
From learning how to utter words, to how to count, to ask and answer ques-
tions in class, and all the way to how to express thoughts and advance posi-
tions in public, speaking is generally involved in all aspects of learning. To 
the extent that education is delivered face to face (or even in today’s online 
style) to students in school, speaking in teaching and learning is the pri-
mary means to achieve educational ends.
However, available observations and research indicate that the role of 
speaking diﬀers considerably from individual learner to individual  learner.& 
And individual variation, as it turns out, is not solely explained by the 
diﬀerences in individual learners’ temperaments (or associated later per-
sonality traits), a factor thought of as more genetically determined. Tere 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!77
is evidence that the cultural values and norms of learners matter more 
crucially.!
Te West and East Asia oﬀer a telling case in point. Surely, we observe 
that East Asian learners are quiet and reluctant to speak in class, whereas 
Western learners are more talkative and eager to express themselves,3 fre-
quently even turning into devil’s advocates. It is unquestionable that there 
are expressive and even pugnacious learners in East Asia, and likewise, 
quiet and timid learners in the West. Terefore, any attempt to take the 
observation of the quiet Asian learner or the expressive Western learner 
to (t any random individual learner in any place is doomed and cause for 
intellectual obscurity. Nevertheless, the preponderance of research evidence 
shows that there are more quiet East Asian learners than Western learners. 
Moreover, this o)-noted characteristic transcends time and space; that is, it 
is seen regardless of when the observations were made, and either in Asia 
or among the East Asian diaspora across the world.4 With this research evi-
dence in mind, I argue that it is not very helpful to be stuck on the irrita-
tion caused by the stereotypical view of the quiet Asian learner. A more 
productive eﬀort is to try to understand why East Asian learners tend to be 
reluctant to speak in class and why Western students are characteristically 
eager to self-express. To my mind, it is even more bene(cial to analyze how 
speaking – or, for that matter, not speaking – serves learners from diﬀerent 
cultural backgrounds. In what follows, I intend to review Western and East 
Asian traditions regarding speaking and not speaking, and speaking styles; 
I then discuss Western and East Asian learners.
l,-. /ester- traditi,- ,f verbal el,:;e-ce
Speaking in the West is a highly regarded skill. Tis high regard for speak-
ing dates back to the long political, religious, and intellectual tradition of 
the West. Four emphases are particularly noteworthy: speaking as distinct 
personal quality, as a right, as a leadership trait, and as art.
Speaking as Distinct Personal Quality
Speaking in the West is regarded as a personal quality, an expression of self.5 
It signals a person’s individuality and distinctness (as well as well-being6). 
Troughout history, many individuals achieved fame or notoriety because 
of their speaking ability. Verbal performance is a marker of one’s intelli-
gence and cognitive brilliance,7 which are believed to underlie much of 
what humans do and accomplish in life.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!78
It seems that the high regard for verbal ?uency in the West projects 
a halo eﬀect on how people perceive and evaluate each other. Research 
shows that verbally ?uent and articulate people are viewed as more intel-
ligent, more creative, and wiser than shy, quiet, and less talkative people.8 
However, measured objectively, these two groups of people do not show 
any diﬀerence. Even more surprising is the research (nding that this basic 
perception of speaking being associated with higher intelligence is not only 
endorsed by people who evaluate others, but also by those evaluated. In 
other words, those who are quiet, shy, and inarticulate concede to the view 
that they themselves are not as intelligent as those who are expressive, talka-
tive, and articulate. Tese very intriguing research (ndings point to another 
possible fundamental psychological error of attributing a characteristic to a 
person when in fact that person should not be ascribed this characteristic. 
Apparently, the shaping power of Western culture in people’s perceptions of 
others and self cannot be underestimated.
Speaking in the West is also an act by which the authorship and own-
ership of ideas is ascertained and admired in communication.9 When 
speaking in public or in organized social settings such as a classroom or a 
meeting at the workplace, people’s ideas, suggestions, or strategies are taken 
as important contributions to the group goal, as in most other cultures. 
In the West, however, more emphasis is placed on the identi(cation and 
acknowledgment of the individual’s ownership and authorship of expressed 
ideas and suggestions (see more discussion in the section on classroom dis-
course in this chapter). For example, the chair of the meeting or teacher of 
the class is o)en inclined to comment as part of the ?ow of communication 
that “Person A proposed a change of X, but person B disagrees with person 
A.” Here persons A and B are named and highlighted; thereby, the owner-
ship/authorship, not just the contrastive ideas, is acknowledged. A chair or 
teacher in a similar Chinese setting is likely to contrast the ideas without 
naming the speakers such as “what do you all think about idea X and idea 
Y?” As Agnes He’s insightful analysis of American Chinese-heritage lan-
guage classrooms shows,&A this distinction between the West and Chinese 
is nontrivial.
Speaking is further testimony of personal character and moral strength. 
Tose who speak up about an issue or speak up to challenge questionable 
authority are respected and admired by others for having personal courage 
and integrity. Many well-known whistle blowers in the West are treated as 
heroes, such as Bethany McLean who revealed (in writing but also speaking)&& 
the wrongdoing of the Enron Corporation, a Texas-based energy company 
that was brought down by fraudulent accounting. “Speaking one’s mind” is 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!79
the phrase used in English to refer to someone who is upright, honest, not 
willing to compromise principles of morality and ethics. Such a person will 
express his or her true opinions without regard to intimidation by authority, 
concern for personal gains, or even fear for personal safety.
Finally, speaking well manifests personal charisma in leadership more 
than any other behavior. Personal charisma is found not only among peo-
ple who hold leadership positions, but also among people in simple, daily 
social life. Tose who speak well emerge as natural leaders who attract fol-
lowers. Charisma as a psychological perception of individuals is de(ned in 
the dictionary&! as “a personal magic of leadership arousing special popular 
loyalty or enthusiasm for a public (gure” or “a special magnetic charm or 
appeal” of a person. Te terms “magic” or “magnetic charm” are not very 
precise for scienti(c research. Yet, most people recognize charisma in oth-
ers when they see it. In the West, speaking well in front of an audience or 
in a social setting is probably the most identi(able feature of charisma. It 
would be unthinkable for a person to be viewed as charismatic if that per-
son is an indiscriminately quiet, shy, timid, and inarticulate (e.g., stammer-
ing or stuttering in speech).
Speaking as a Right
Among the great legacies that Greek antiquity le) to the Western civiliza-
tion is the due process of trial by jury that was, purportedly, introduced by 
the goddess Athena, the patron of Athens. According to mythology and 
dramatization in Aeschylus’ trilogy Oresteia,&3 Athena declared that a trial 
was necessary in Orestes’ case (for killing his mother Clytemnestra, who 
in turn had killed her husband Agamemnon for sacri(cing their daughter 
Iphigenia for the success in the Trojan War). Te Furies (deities of ven-
geance and supernatural personi(cations of anger or death) were pursuing 
and condemning Orestes, but it was Athena who stepped in to give each 
party equal voice. Apollo argued Orestes’ case against the Furies in front 
of the jurors, who then cast a tie vote. Athena’s own vote broke the tie and 
acquitted Orestes in the end.
Undoubtedly, the greatness of this Greek democratic invention for judg-
ing disputes between the parties lies in establishing a process that ensures 
the fairness owed to each party involved.&4 Because of the fairness inherent 
in this due process, the outcome of judgment is usually regarded as fair and 
acceptable to both parties. Te jurors act on the principle of impartiality, lis-
tening and considering each side’s argument. To proceed, this very process 
encourages reason and demands evidence rather than rage and suspicion. 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!8A
As a result, all sides resort to what is the best mental power available to 
humans: rational thinking.
Although other cultures may not have invented such as a reason-
 dependent system, fairness is nevertheless the central and common crite-
rion for judging and ending disputes as well.&5 Some cultures rely on tribal 
elders for such judgment because they are known to be fair and wise by 
the community. Other cultures may depend on the judge in the court 
to hear both sides and cast his or her vote without a jury. For example, 
the well-known court case as presented in the variety play Chalk Circle  
(灰闌記) by Chinese playwright Li Xingdao (李行道, during Yuan Dynasty 
&!A6–&368),&6 portrayed two women who claimed to be the birthmother of 
the same child. Judge Bao (999–&A6!) drew a chalk circle on the ?oor and 
ordered the child to be place in the middle. Te two women were asked to 
use their strength to pull the child to their sides. Whoever succeeded in 
pulling the child to her side would be declared the birthmother. Of course, 
the one who loved the child could not bring herself to hurt the child and let 
him go. Judge Bao declared this mother to be the real mother. Te drama-
tized court case still captures readers’ interest in the judge because he, like 
his Western predecessor King Solomon, employed the humanistic ruling in 
addition to fairness (pulling the child from equal distance).
What sets the Greek system apart from these other systems is that the 
former required verbal argumentation from both sides as it unfolded in real 
time. Te parties had to speak in order to present and argue for or against 
their case in front of the jury and the judge. In Classical Athens, there were 
no legal experts – that is, prosecution and defense attorneys – as we have 
today. Instead, the litigants had to deliver their own speeches in court.&7 
Te essential role of speech was apparent. Tus, it was not just reason, but 
verbalized reason, that mattered in the Athenian system. In contrast, the 
revered Chinese Judge Bao did not depend on verbalized argument to rule. 
Instead, he acted out his argument by drawing the circle and by having 
the two women act as well. In fact, no reference was given to whether the 
judge even explained his reasoning and his humanistic act to anyone at 
the court. It is quite conceivable that the attendants of the case, including 
the plaintiﬀ and the defendant, were kept mysti(ed each step of the way 
until the judge delivered his verdict at the very end. Te entire process 
unfolded without much need to speak. When the (nal judgment was made, 
everyone understood it. But it was not possible for the Athenian court to 
proceed without the verbal give and take, presentation, refuting, challeng-
ing, and conclusion.
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!8&
Te Athenian trial court laid the foundation for the subsequent Western 
legal system. Te direct lineage of present-day Western trial system to the 
Athenian trial court is clear. All Western courts since Greek time have 
been accusing and defending via oral argumentation, presentation, cross-
 examination, and building and challenging each other’s credibility to per-
suade the jury and the judge for a fair ruling.
But what is more signi(cant in the West is that speaking is not only a 
granted legal right, but, more importantly, a political right that all peo-
ple enjoy. In the U.S. Constitution as in every other Western nation’ con-
stitution, freedom of speech is a right that is guaranteed to every citizen. 
Speaking – that is, voicing one’s political, social, and personal views – has 
become part and parcel of Western democracy and much of daily work, 
education, and social life. Te right to speak is a right that cannot be chal-
lenged and denied by anyone, any organization, or any institution. As such, 
the public demands and is encouraged to participate in debates, by radio, 
TV, town hall meetings, and calling their political representatives and lead-
ers about any issue that concerns the nation, the state/providence, the local 
community, and the person himself or herself. Any attempt by anyone to 
silence people is shunned and cause for legal action.
Speaking as Leadership
Te role of speaking has also been an important shining beam that pene-
trated across the temporality and complexity of the history of Western civ-
ilization. Te power of speaking is, unequivocally, linked to the power of 
leadership. In Greek antiquity, delivering speeches was a primary means to 
achieve legal and political goals. Like all litigants, politicians had to rely on 
oration to persuade each other and the people of their intentions and ambi-
tions. Oration was thus essential to propose ideas, to form political factions 
and alliances, to mobilize the military, to attack one’s political enemies, and 
to clear one’s name. Tose who emerged on top were revered as master ora-
tors and sought a)er as teachers for youth. Te “Ten Attic Orators” were 
upheld on the pedestal, not only during the classical era (5AA–4AA BCE), 
but remained in?uential in subsequent millennia.&8 One of these orators, 
Demosthenes (384–3!! BCE), has come down through the ages as the great-
est orator. His oratory achievement enabled him to become an accomplished 
statesman who defended Athens’ liberty against the encroaching power of 
Macedon.&9 Likewise, during the Roman time, Cicero (&A6–43 CE), among 
many other eloquent men, was regarded as the second greatest orator a)er 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!8!
Demosthenes. As a statesman, philosopher, political theorist, and lawyer, 
Cicero, too, used his oratory prowess to achieve his political goals.!A
Tese masters of oration from the ancient times have served as inspira-
tion for later generations of leaders. Delivering speeches has been an inte-
gral part of public life in the West. From Robespierre and Danton’s zeal of 
the French Revolution to Hitler’s ability to arouse people’s support, from 
Churchill to Roosevelt during World War II, from Kennedy to Clinton to 
Blair in recent decades, and from Martin Luther King of the American civil 
rights movement to the history-changing Obama, the West has a long and 
impressive list of political leaders who distinguished themselves as eloquent 
speakers. A triumphant example is the British King George VI who over-
came a great personal challenge, his stammer, and succeeded in delivering 
a key speech to his people at the dawn of World War II. He was revered and 
followed then and is still celebrated today.
In democratic societies, such oratorical skill is of utmost importance for 
running campaigns, directing movements, and managing crises in order 
to galvanize voters’ support. Within the legislature of the government, oral 
debates are the primary means to deliberate on any legislative issue and pro-
cess. And the entire process is watched, analyzed, and responded to, via media 
commentaries, publicly. Senators and members of Congress engage routinely 
in oral argumentation for or against a given bill. In light of the fundamental 
role of speech, it is simply unthinkable how Western-style democracy could 
possibly proceed and function without verbal procedure and performance.
Beyond the political scene, Western religious leaders are the back-
bone of holding communities together for spiritual and moral guidance. 
Christianity with its many denominations as well as Judaism are practiced 
with sermons and exhortations, with the priest, minister, reverend, and the 
rabbi delivering a speech to arouse or enlighten the congregation. Anyone 
who aspires to become a religious leader in a community needs to mas-
ter the skill of delivering speeches that resonate with profundity and ele-
gance. Tis very skill may hold the key to whether the church can retain the 
 congregation. Indeed, for many people, the decision to continue or not to 
continue to attend a given church in a particular town hinges on whether 
one likes the quality of the sermons.
In the secular life aside from politics, such as industry, business, or 
school, the speaking ability of a leader is equally important. Leaders have 
frequent need to address the whole organization or teams to report the 
organization’s operations, performance, and plans. Leaders’ speaking skill 
matters even more when the organization faces uncertainties, challenges, 
and crises. Almost without exception, those leaders who can convey the 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!83
organization’s vision and articulate the important issues to its people eﬀec-
tively are likely to succeed in leading their organization.
Speaking as Art
In the West, speaking is not only a distinct personal quality, a right, and a 
leadership trait, but also an art. Tis very conception also dates back again 
to Greek antiquity. Signi(cantly, oratory, the art of speaking, was not purely 
thought of as a personal talent or intelligence,!& unlike our current under-
standing, but a skill that one can learn, practice, and perfect. An inspira-
tional model is Demosthenes’ self-training with pebbles in his mouth to 
control his stuttering and practicing against the roaring sea to improve his 
articulation.
Te earliest experts who made oratory a profession were the sophists in 
ancient Greece. Sophists were the itinerant intellectuals who taught youth 
rhetoric and oratory – that is, how to use language well in order to persuade 
or convince others (given that Greek litigants had to give personal speeches 
to present and argue their cases in court). Socrates was thought by some of 
his contemporaries a sophist because he, too, parsed words and posed many 
questions in order to force his interlocutors to examine their own thoughts 
and beliefs. He, too, taught youth and had many followers. However, there 
was a large diﬀerence between Socrates and the sophists: Socrates oﬀered 
free teaching whereas sophists charged a fee for teaching oratory and rhe-
toric. It was said that sophists’ teaching was a lucrative profession. Despite 
the criticisms levied against sophism (they might have comprised moral 
principles by manipulating language for personal gain), sophists attracted 
many students and followers.!! Sophists took on this specialized intellec-
tual terrain and made a cra) out of language and speaking itself, rather 
than exercising mental prowess per se as exempli(ed by Socrates. Tey le) 
a uniquely Western legacy that has not only lasted millennia, but is also 
more ?ourishing now and highly likely to continue to blossom owing to the 
importance of media in our present world.
Tere have been many notable (gures who contributed to this Western 
legacy, but three stand out for advancing the theory, standard, and edu-
cation of oratory in the West: Aristotle, Cicero, and Quintilian. Aristotle 
proposed in his the Art of Rhetoric!3 the three core components of any per-
suasive speech: ethos, pathos, and logos.!4 Ethos is the moral character that 
the speaker needs to convey in order to have credibility before the audi-
ence. From our current time, moral character and credibility can be estab-
lished by drawing on authority of knowledge such as scienti(c evidence, the 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!84
position the speaker holds that is publicly honored, such as a court judge or 
a CEO of a reputable company, or proven accuracy of information such as a 
journalist’s investigation. Pathos is the use of emotional appeal to in?uence 
the audience’s perception and judgment. Speakers can use all contents and 
forms such as stories, anecdotes, tragedies, comedies, jokes, and metaphors, 
to arouse the audience’s emotion in order to win over their support for the 
speech.
Logos is the employment of reasoning, which, as stated in other chap-
ters, is a central concept in the Western intellectual tradition. Speakers can 
establish objectivity by presenting information in an unbiased fashion, such 
as stating the facts without personal commentaries and judgment. Speakers 
can also give evenhanded treatment of a given topic or issue and let the 
audience draw its own conclusion. Inductive and deductive reasoning are 
key strategies. Using examples to support an argument is an eﬀective strat-
egy of inductive reasoning. Using proofs – that is, logical steps without the 
interference from unrelated and extraneous information – is deductive rea-
soning. Take an example from our current public issues, the speaker can 
present a commonly known fact as a starting point, such as “every day, X 
number of animal species are extinguished, and the cause of such a pace of 
extinction is human destruction of animal habitats.” Cutting down trees is 
an incidence of such human destruction. Terefore, preserving trees is nec-
essary, and everyone should do so.
Cicero’s in?uence on oratory is through his book On the Orator,!5 in 
addition to his own well-known speeches. Cicero considered oratory the 
“divine art” in the voice of one of the debating characters in his book. In this 
book, he treated a great many topics of oratory, ranging from the education 
of the orator and the responsibility of the orator to the scope of oration and 
the technical elements of oratory. Cicero emphasized the importance of all 
forms of appeal such as emotion, humor, irony, digression, and pure rea-
soning. He also outlined the method of oratory into (ve sequential parts 
called the “fundamentals of rhetoric.”
Invention (inventio) is the process that leads the orator to the develop-
ment and re(nement of an argument. A)er the argument is formed, the 
orator uses arrangement (dispositio) to determine how it should be struc-
tured eﬀectively, usually in a logical order by importance. With the speech 
content developed and structure laid out, the orator focuses next on style 
(elocutio) and presentation (pronuntiatio). Te orator then retains all these 
elements in memory (memoria) by recalling each of the elements during 
the speech. Finally, the orator delivers (actio) to the audience the speech 
with grace, dignity, gesture, and modulation of voice and face.
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!85
But the most signi(cant argument that Cicero made was that an ora-
tor needed a broad education, studying not just the techniques of giving 
a speech, but addressing the general and broader questions. For exam-
ple, if a person was wrongfully accused of treachery, the orator should not 
just speak about the speci(cs of the accusation, but also on the signi(cant 
harm done to the culture, society, and citizenry as a whole. Tus, an orator 
needed to study law, politics, history, literature, ethics, warfare, medicine, 
and mathematics. In fact, only a)er the person had studied these and other 
subjects suBciently could he become a good orator. He introduced the idea 
of the “ideal orator” who is well versed and well rounded in all branches of 
human learning. Tis very idea of a well-educated person being able to use 
his or her broad knowledge to express thoughts and opinions is the essence 
of what is known today as Western liberal arts education. Owing its origin 
to Cicero, this very Western core of higher education has enjoyed the test-
ing of time and now embraced by other cultures.
Building on Cicero’s ideas and works of other in?uential orators before 
him, Quintilian (35–&AA CE) wrote his treatise, Te Orator’s Education, on 
the education of the “perfect” orator from birth to old age.!6 He detailed the 
whole process of how to select a nurse for the orator in the beginning, how 
to train in reading, writing, grammar, and literary criticism, how to exercise 
oratory composition, and how to cra) full legal and political speeches in the 
end. Like Cicero, Quintilian emphasized the usage of many materials such 
as fables, narratives, humor, and comparisons. His training curriculum 
became the standard component of education for subsequent centuries.
Of the Western traditions, Judaism places a very high, if not the highest, 
value on education. Most fundamentally, the practice of traditional Judaism 
has a high barrier to entry: Any serious Jew must be able to read and under-
stand biblical Hebrew, for that is the language of the liturgy and the sacred 
texts. Beyond the basic texts, the most frequently studied and most impor-
tant of the Jewish law codes are written in Aramaic, which requires assidu-
ous, dedicated studies (if one page is studied each day, it takes seven and a 
half years to study the entire Talmud). Anyone who has completed the pro-
ject is held in extremely high regard. Furthermore, according to some rabbis, 
it is required that scholars study in a chavruta, or pair (it is highly discour-
aged to study Talmud and Torah on one’s own). A chavruta is considered 
to have major spiritual and social signi(cance, as it is written, “When two 
scholars of the Torah listen to one another, God hears their voices” (Talmud 
Shabbat 63a). Also as an integral part of the tradition, scholars are encour-
aged to debate and disagree about the text at hand, for the Talmud itself is 
not a listing of laws, but a record of conversations and debates between the 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!86
ancient rabbis themselves. Jewish children celebrate bar mitzvah (for the 
boys) and bat mitzvah (for the girls) as a rite of passage into adulthood at 
age thirteen and twelve, respectively, at which point they are considered 
competent to pass the Jewish tradition on to the next generation. A key part 
of this celebration is the required chanting of a portion from the Torah and 
delivering a commentary on the Torah portion of the week in front of the 
entire congregation. Te child spends much time studying with a teacher 
and preparing for the ceremony for the day.!7
To date, throughout Western university campuses, the basic art of pub-
lic speaking and training methods are taught commonly to students. Such 
courses enjoy enduring popularity!8; o)en students have to be put on long 
waiting lists to get a place in such a course. While in the course, students 
study many speeches as models, such as Martin Luther King’s famous speech 
I Have a Dream as a video or audio recording. Students then dra) their own 
speeches on a topic of their interest. Tey work with the professor to perfect 
their speeches and then deliver them to their fellow students as an audi-
ence. Frequently, the audience peers critique each other’s speeches accord-
ing to the models, formats, and standards they study. As a result, students 
improved their speaking skills and become informed consumers or even 
connoisseurs of the verbal art of public speaking. As mentioned previously, 
Western students are encouraged to master the skill of debating, from mid-
dle school onward. Tey participate in both intra-school and inter-school 
competitions, and the winners arise to the city, state, and national levels. 
Tose who won recognition are highly sought a)er for college admissions 
by selective universities.
In present-day universities, communication and modern media stud-
ies are common majors for undergraduate students and specialized gradu-
ate programs. In addition, every high school and university teaches drama 
on stage. Students receive training on how to project their voice, how to 
act with words, and how to deliver their ideas and emotions eﬀectively on 
stage. Tese opportunities undoubtedly indicate the importance of such 
skills on the one hand and provide students with actual skill development 
on the other. Finally, professional speechwriters are also in high demand 
by political, business, and other organizational leaders. Tose who master 
the art of public speaking and those who can help leaders deliver successful 
speeches are respected, admired, and sought a)er.
Given the importance speaking assumes in the West, it seems that the 
default mode of Western communication is to speak whenever one is faced 
with a choice of speaking or not speaking. Te West thus privileges speak-
ing and speakership. By doing so, it devalues, or values much less than other 
cultures, not speaking, silence, and listenership.
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!87
/ester- sCeaDi-. stEle
Tus far, I have discussed the overarching importance of speaking through-
out Western history. In this section, I turn to the topic of speaking style as it 
pertains to communication both in organized settings and in daily life.
In the &97As, the philosopher H. P. Grice proposed his well-known 
 conversational rules that govern how people talk to each other in daily com-
munication.!9 His four maxims of “cooperative principles” have become the 
guidepost for understanding what in human communication underlies the 
content of people’s speech. As will be seen, these conversational rules, or 
talking grammar, initially conceived of as universal human conversational 
patterns, may not be that universal a)er all. Nevertheless, they are more 
commonly observed and therefore more particular to Western people’s 
speech than in other cultures.
Te Maxim of Quantity: Speak No More and No Less
Grice noticed that when speaking, people in general are quite conscious 
of the notion of quantity – that is, the amount of speech as required in a 
conversational context. For example, when asked by a friend “where are 
you going?” on a campus street, the reply is usually “the gym.” Few people 
would take the trouble to utter the full sentence, “I am going to the gym.” 
Te (rst part is unnecessary in the context because it is well understood by 
the (rst party. If instead the speaker said the full sentence, it would likely 
lead the interlocutor to form a number of undesirable impressions about 
the speaker, such as: (&) the speaker is not attentive; (!) the speaker is inap-
propriate or quirky because he/she would take the trouble to say something 
unnecessary; (3) the speaker is joking or being sarcastic, but for no apparent 
cause; (4) something may be bothering this speaker so as to make him/her 
behave strangely.
Although speaking is highly valued, sheer verbosity and jabber without 
providing the requested information is regarded as a waste of time even 
in this kind of mundane communication between people. Put in another 
way, the idea of “necessity” in speech quantity re?ects quite clearly the 
concern of economy or eﬃciency, a sensitivity to quantity in life that is an 
integral part of the West since Greek time (which is the foundation for sci-
enti(c thinking).3A Speaking in this manner con(rms and continues how 
the West parses and construes the world in the domain of human verbal 
interaction.
It is important to point out that maintaining the eBciency of speaking 
is not just a task for isolated speakers to attend, but a joint, cooperative 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!88
process for everyone as mandated by the culture. As such, interlocutors 
share this understanding and talk accordingly. As will be seen in the sec-
tion on the Chinese speaking style, this type of speech driven by a concern 
and calculation of necessity, economy, and eBciency may be a speech faux 
pas that is likely to lead to the breakdown of the conversation rather than 
cooperation and continuation of the conversation.
Te Maxim of Quality: Speak Truth and Avoid Falsehood
Tis Gricean maxim is of high importance in speaking. In general, it is 
unlikely that people in any culture intentionally speak falsehood without 
any reason. Grice is correct in his analysis about this universal human ten-
dency. However, the extreme premium placed on speaking truth is, I would 
argue, characteristically Western. Tis tendency re?ects Western emphasis 
on the moral standard of honesty that weighs heavily in judging each oth-
er’s character and moral integrity. Tose who are perceived as less straight-
forward in their speaking are suspected of dishonesty and consequently 
distrusted by others. Research indeed shows that Western people express 
aversion toward circumlocution – that is, indirect and beat-around-the-
bush kind of talking. People who are identi(ed as speaking circumlocution 
are viewed as manipulative because they have something to hide. Truth tell-
ing is preferred regardless of circumstances, even when truth may hurt.3& 
Even though hurtful truth may be hard to swallow, its tellers are o)en seen 
as courageous and heroic and therefore are extended greater admiration 
and trust in a workplace and even in intimate relationships. It was not an 
accident that Al Gore’s celebrated documentary (lm on human responsi-
bility for our deteriorating planet, which won him the Nobel Peace Prize, is 
called “An Inconvenient Truth.”
Whereas other cultures may diﬀerentiate certain areas of life, or some 
areas to a greater degree, as oﬀ limit or improper for truth telling (out of 
concern for the listener’s well-being, emotional distress, or social awkward-
ness), the West may insist on fewer such areas, or a narrower range of areas. 
For example, if a parent is terminally ill, the adult child and even a younger 
child may be viewed as entitled to the truth about the parent’s condition, 
even though telling this truth may be very distressful and hurtful. But in 
Chinese culture, family members may conceal the information about a ter-
minally ill parent from a daughter who lives afar and without any means to 
travel to pay a visit to her parent. Te daughter may not be told about the 
parent’s death until the parent has been buried and the bereavement cere-
mony over, at a time when the family ascertains the daughter’s better ability 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!89
to travel. Telling the truth to the daughter beforehand may be regarded as 
an inhumane act on the part of the family, knowing that the daughter would 
be grieving alone without any family support. Tus, speaking such truth 
may indeed be curtailed, and not speaking such truth may be regarded as 
more appropriate.3!
Consistent with the Gricean maxim, it is common to hear Western peo-
ple preempt their speech relaying accuracy of the information or account-
ability of the opinion as follows:
Tis is just my opinion . . .; this is my two cents . . .;
I am not an expert, but I . . .;
As I recall . . .; it appears to be . . .; it seems to be . . .; I may be . . .; it might 
have been . . .;
I don’t suppose we . . .; I assume that this . . .;
But it is rare to hear Western people preempt their speech with “from 
my stupid opinion, I would say . . .,” “in my humble view, I think . . .,” and 
“apologizing for my ignorance, I . . .” – a style quite commonly observed 
among Asian speakers. Te Western style of preempting speech is anchored 
on truth or assumed truth in question or fending oﬀ any potential charge 
against the speaker’s untrue statement – that is, the quality of the informa-
tion about to be presented. Te Asian style, on the other hand, is not about 
the quality of information, but about humility – that is, a virtuous quality of 
the speaker him- or herself.
Te Maxim of Relevance: Speak to the Point
Grice’s maxim of relevance is related to his notion of quantity. Tis maxim 
requires sensitivity to logic and privileges its use as a guide in communica-
tion. Te idea of “to the point” or “make a point,” so commonly encountered 
in Western people’s speaking, emphasizes the precision and conciseness of 
information or opinion expressed. Tose judged as sharp usually are those 
able to identify the relevant and the essential from the irrelevant and unes-
sential and speak with precision about the matters. Much of the speaker’s 
persuasive power lies in this maxim.
If speaking has a clear goal such as political, social, religious, commer-
cial, and work-related, Western speakers show a heightened sense of the 
message and message delivery in their speech. Tis message orientation is 
described as sender-centered,33 which is re?ective of the great Western ora-
torical and rhetorical tradition. Te speaker’s focus is mainly on how to 
formulate the best message to convey to the audience. Topics that concern 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!9A
the speaker are how to frame the issue, how to set the tone, how to improve 
the source of credibility, and how to increase the signi(cance of the mes-
sage. As a matter of cultural cooperation, Western audience also expects a 
“signi(cant message” from the speaker.34
Convoluted speaking – the opposite of relevant speaking – long-wind-
edness, or inability to speak to the point is regarded as a sign of lack of 
intelligence and a disappointment. Listeners lose interest and patience with 
people who mumble on without any point to make.35 At meetings in the 
workplace, we frequently hear Western people say “we’ve already talked 
about that, can we move on?” “can you clarify the relevance of X?” or “you 
talked about X, but what is the issue you came to talk about?” Tese ques-
tions are not taken as anything oﬀensive to the speaker, but as a signal that 
the audience has no more patience or need to listen to the speaker and that 
the speaker should either speak to the relevant point, or the conversation 
needs to turn to another topic.
But even when speaking does not have a clear goal as previously dis-
cussed, speakers in daily conversations are also cognizant of the elements of 
relevance. At dinner table, if a husband asks his wife to share how her day 
was, she is also attentive to the relevance of the information she is provid-
ing. Her husband, likewise, may remind her that she may have taken too 
long to (nish her story or even tell her to “cut to the chase.” When friends 
see each other, they share their life stories. But such sharing also needs to 
be carried out in a manner consistent with the maxim of relevance under 
discussion or sharing.
As will be discussed in the Asian section, this type of to-the-point talk-
ing can o)en be oﬀensive to people, and not uncommonly even lead to a 
breakdown of relationships. Frequently, speaking with precision is regarded 
as inappropriate in hierarchical relationships either at home, work, or in 
class, and as ?at-out rude, impatient, and disrespectful in a variety of Asian 
contexts.
Te Maxim of Clarity: Speak Directly
Tis maxim (rst concerns the need for clarity when speaking in any con-
text. Te idea is to avoid obscurity, making clear what one intends to convey 
without the risk of the listener misconstruing the speaker’s information. 
Again, the burden is on the speaker to make his or her message unambigu-
ous so as to ease the reception of the message. Any kind of unclear speech 
ranging from utterances to articulation and arguments should be avoided. 
Prime examples of speech successes and failures are found in political 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!9&
campaigns. Without exemption, political consultants, analysts, and news 
commentators focus on the clarity or lack of clarity of important political 
speeches whenever they provide any post-speech analysis. Interestingly, by 
characterizing the level of clarity of a speech, these professionals, in a way, 
either help increase or reduce the eﬀect of a given message.
In daily communication, family members, friends, and school peers 
also share the view that if one wants other people to know what one wants, 
one needs to speak up and make one’s desire clear. Te idiom “the squeaky 
wheel gets the grease” is actually not just about the loudness of speaking, 
but loudness of speaking one’s desire clearly and unambiguously so that oth-
ers will hear the squeaky sound but not some other sound and be likely to 
respond to one’s expressed need. Similarly, a husband may say to his wife, 
“Please do not ask me to read your mind; please tell me what you want.” 
Romantic partners succeed more when they are able to express their desires 
and needs clearly and appropriately to each other. Undoubtedly, friendship 
making also depends on involved parties having the social competence to 
express their desires, likes, dislikes, shared interests, and issues clearly to 
each other. Waiting for the other to construe one’s needs and preferences is 
likely to lead one to be friendless.36
Te maxim of clarity does not concern only clarity in daily conversation, 
but also a large cultural mandate of speaking directly and  unambiguously.37 
As noted previously, speaking directly rests (rst on the moral standard of 
honesty and transparency in personal conduct. Accordingly, one should 
speak one’s mind without withholding information. Ten one strives to 
present, explain, or argue clearly so that the audience will understand one’s 
information, reasoning, and position. Muddying the water, obscuring an 
otherwise clear issue, or making confusing statements is considered less 
desirable or even unethical if the speaker is known to purposely create 
obscurity and confusion.
/ester- classr,,F disc,;rse  
a-d s,cialiGati,-
With little doubt, children are not born possessing a particular speaking 
style. Teir style is a result of socialization and personal development. 
Because speaking in the West is not just a private activity but a desired 
skill for citizens, social participants, and contributors at work and school, 
much of the training and socialization of speaking in the way previously 
described takes place in school. Te large research literature that focuses on 
speaking in school concerns classroom discourse. Although this section of 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!9!
the chapter cannot do full justice to this research literature, it is still helpful 
to highlight some key aspects of classroom discourse in the West.
Classroom discourse in the West covers the whole scope of verbal inter-
action between teachers and students. It ranges from teacher talk, stu-
dent talk, teacher–student talk, and student–student talk to how each of 
these talks unfolds, how each step functions in these talks, and what goal 
is achieved by each kind and each process. For example, by looking at 
teacher– student talk, researchers examine how much time each talk takes 
(time allocation), how each talk functions (e.g., presents/oﬀers informa-
tion, asks closed-ended versus open-ended questions), whether the talk 
aims at learning tasks or non-learning tasks (e.g., classroom logistics), how 
diﬀerent kinds of talk facilitate or impede learning, and what kinds of dis-
course lead to better student achievement.38 Research has found, to the dis-
appointment of many, that teacher talk remains predominant, despite much 
avowed belief in change and much teacher training to the contrary.39
As researchers acknowledge, classroom discourse in the West has under-
gone much change, from traditional training of oratory in the distant past, 
to the emphasis on the aesthetics of oral performance in the nineteenth and 
early twentieth century (“echo the voice of high culture”),4A to the current 
authenticity of popular oracy, the expressive forms of talking, as lived expe-
riences that children bring to school. Nevertheless, the classroom, where 
formal schooling is compulsory, still strongly adheres to the commitment 
to speaking as a cognitive, intellectual activity and skill to be mastered by 
schoolchildren. Starting from preschool, children are taught to verbalize 
their thoughts and feelings. “Use your words,” “tell me in your own words,” 
or “I can’t tell what you want to do if you don’t say it” are common instruc-
tions preschool teachers give to young children to urge them to verbalize 
their desires, intentions, and actions.4& For older children, although lived 
oracy is recognized and sometimes even embraced as an entry point for 
children to ground their talk training in school, their end goal is not to stay 
in their familiar community speech, but to reach a higher level of culture 
of the educated.4! Such classroom teaching still aims at helping children 
achieve communicative competence that stresses conveying information 
concisely, clearly, and ?uently. Children still need to learn how to pre-
sent a thesis backed with evidence, how to argue, and how to persuade the 
audience through the manipulation of language. Hewitt and Inghilleri43 
observed British classroom activities where children were taught how to 
deliver speeches to their class and how to engage in the ensuing discussion 
a)erward. Te researchers’ analysis indicated that children learned how to 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!93
disagree and how to argue despite the fact that they use much more coop-
eration-dominated speech outside of school.
A key characteristic in Western classroom discourse, as pointed out by 
Mary O’Connor and Sarah Michaels, is to help each student take him- or 
herself seriously as a learner.44 Te signi(cance of this teaching anchors in 
the notion that each student is the author/owner of his or her own ideas. 
Intellectual socialization is thus thought to lead students into the realm of 
their own ideas vis-à-vis others’ ideas and the take-on of each other’s ideas 
through verbal interaction.
O’Connor and Michaels drew on two related sociolinguistic theories 
as a lens to show how this type of teaching takes place in an American 
middle school. Te (rst theory, as advanced by Goodwin,45 addresses the 
speaking rights and responsibilities by students as structured in a classroom 
discourse. For example, when a student (A) asks another (B), “May I have 
that crayon?” another student, not participating in the dialogue (C), may 
interject, “No, he is giving it to me.” Te bystander (C) then denies the right 
of the student to whom the question was addressed (B) to answer Student 
A’s question. But Student A can also say, “Wait a minute, I was the (rst to 
ask for the crayon!” As such, classroom discourse aﬀords students oppor-
tunities to recognize, take, and negotiate their rights and responsibilities. 
Te second theory, by Goﬀman, delineates the roles of the “animator” and 
“author” in human communication.46 By the puppeteering metaphor, an 
animator is one who produces an utterance – that is, animating oneself or 
the other through talk. But an author is one from whom beliefs and senti-
ments originate, and the author’s beliefs and sentiments can be uttered by 
him- or herself or any animator. In classroom discourse, students and the 
teacher take on these roles in their academic learning.
As O’Connor and Michaels’ observational research shows, the (nely 
attuned teacher plays a unique role because he or she becomes the anima-
tor that does two essential things for students: (&) highlights the ownership/
authorship of students’ ideas and (!) links students’ own ideas to the greater 
sphere of their culture. Te researchers call this strategy “revoicing.” With 
regard to (&), they give an example of a routine verbal interaction between 
the teacher and the students where one student suggested a solution to a 
science task that was diﬀerent from another student’s idea. Te masterful 
teacher then interjected by saying: “So then, you don’t agree with Sarita 
that . . .”47 By doing so, as O’Connor and Michaels explain, the teacher refor-
mulated the original utterance as a disagreement, which is an intellectually 
more demanding level. Second, the teacher signaled the student to use her 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!94
speaking right to “validate her inference, and, thus, take on a position her-
self.” Tirdly, the teacher deliberately placed two students in opposition and 
primed them to evaluate the merits of their own and each other’s proposals. 
Te teacher eﬀectively led the students to the very notion that they were the 
authors/owners of their ideas and that they have the right to take a posi-
tion to validate, defend, challenge, or aBrm other people’s interpretations 
of their ideas. By doing so, the teacher alerts the students to the signi(cance 
of their intellectual contributions in the classroom.
Regarding the second way of “revoicing,” O’Connor and Michaels pre-
sented an example where the teacher elicited multiple suggestions from 
students for deciding what were the most popular mass transit trips people 
make. A)er students gave their ideas, the teacher asked how they made 
their personal guesses, prompting students to (nd evidence for their claims. 
One by one, students gave their reasons. One student said that she liked 
the way a terminal looked. Te teacher then revoiced the student’s reason 
as “So you chose . . . based on your own personal experience.” Another stu-
dent con(rmed that he, too, named the (rst student’s choice because “a 
lot of people like to ride on the train for a long time . . . some might just 
ride . . . just for the heck of it.” Te teacher then recast the utterance “So 
you made your guess based on what you know about human behavior?”48 
Both students concurred. Clearly, these student initial ideas were cruder, 
weaker, and less well formed. But the skillful teacher elevated their ideas 
to more standard knowledge and a larger intellectual scope without qual-
itatively altering the students’ original ideas. By doing so, the teacher pro-
vided a chance for students to claim full credit for the intellectual merit of 
their own, albeit elevated, ideas, thus recognizing their individual potential, 
growth, and greatness.
.r,/i-. ;C a devil’s adv,cate
While school plays an essential role in socializing children into the desired 
roles of speakers in the West, home also plays a compatible role. In fact, 
there is strong evidence that Western children are more encouraged to 
speak from an early age. When babies are born, Western mothers (as other 
caregivers) talk to them more than Asian mothers (and other Asian care-
givers) do to their infants. As soon as babies can vocalize, their caregivers 
engage them in talking as if they were real conversational partners. When 
caregivers hear their babies’ babbling, cooing, and jargoning, they respond 
with more talking and excitement. Compared to the rest of the world’s cul-
tures, Western caregivers talk most to their infants and toddlers.49
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!95
When children reach preschool age and beyond, parents engage them in 
more talking. Research shows that Western parents prefer a particular style 
called elaboration. Shirley Brice Heath’s landmark research on the diﬀer-
ences among European-American middle-class and working-class as well 
as African-American parents in home language socialization in the early 
&98As5A shows how similarly European-American middle-class parents talk 
to their children at home as in school. Children were asked questions to 
which parents already knew the answers. Children were encouraged to 
recount and re?ect on events in the past when they had been guided to 
intellectualize their lived experiences. Tis kind of talking style was fol-
lowed up with more extensive research in the areas of children’s autobio-
graphical memory development, which is a core component of the self and 
self-making.5& Accordingly, when reminiscing about a past experience, the 
mother will probe the child for what happened, how the event happened, 
and why it happened that way. Tis elaborative style provides the child with 
the opportunity to account for and to explain/interpret the past experience, 
or, if the talk is about a future event, about what will happen next. Here 
the child is aﬀorded the opportunity to predict future events based on the 
information at hand. Verbally accounting, explaining/interpreting, and 
predicting events in the world as children experience them emphasize the 
authorship and ownership of the child’s autobiography on the one hand and 
the analytical and narrative skill on the other. Undoubtedly, such a talking 
style prepares children for school where further training for speaking takes 
place.
As an important part of this early training for speaking, Western care-
givers oﬀer much modeling and room for children to elaborate on their 
feelings and emotions about the event, particularly when the experience 
and feelings are positive.5! For example, a mother may say to her four-year-
old daughter, “How did it make you feel when your friend Suzie invited 
you to swim together?” If the child just says “good,” the mother may probe 
further, “What’s good about that?” or “Did that not make you feel that Suzie 
likes you?” Tis emphasis enables the child to develop verbalization about 
his or her inner world, attitude, opinions, and emotional responses to her 
own experiences.
Noteworthy is a particular kind of speaking socialization that many 
well-educated Western parents oﬀer to their children: the practice of the 
devil’s advocate. Devil’s advocate – originally from the canonization process 
of the Roman Catholic Church – has come to refer to someone who takes 
a position with which he or she does not necessarily agree simply for the 
sake of argument. Te purpose of the devil’s advocate is to expose ?aws and 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!96
weaknesses of the argument. As a result, the original argument becomes 
stronger. For example, if one argues that bottled water is a waste of money 
because it is no cleaner than tap water, as research shows, the interlocutor 
can say, “Just to be a devil’s advocate, people may still buy bottled water 
because it makes them feel safer.” As a result, the (rst person can include 
this perspective in the argument by saying, “Although people may feel they 
are doing something to protect their health by buying bottled water, it does 
not give them any health bene(ts. In fact, they are just throwing money 
away.” Te revised argument is better because it juxtaposes the ?awed psy-
chological reason next to scienti(c evidence for people’s purchase of bottled 
water. In a similar vein, parents also model for children by using phrases 
such as “in fairness, I can see . . .,” “taking the other side’s perspective, I can 
sympathize with . . . although I disagree with them.” Indeed, socializing chil-
dren in practicing the devil’s advocate can foster children’s argumentation 
skill that is treasured in their culture.
distr;st i- sCeaDi-. i- east asia
Unlike the high value attached to verbal eloquence in the West, East Asia 
has an absence of such a value. We could easily name a long list of great 
speakers in the West, but we could name none in East Asia, not even a)er 
an ardent search through the triumphant democracies of Japan, Korea, and 
Taiwan where eloquence of public speaking is supposed to matter. Even the 
great Gandhi was not known for his words but for his nonviolent deeds: sit-
ting, marching, and (ghting quietly despite his unprecedented, monumen-
tal moral and political achievement. As it turns out, it is not an accident, or 
mere failure, or regrettable incompetence that East Asia does not have such 
a tradition. Te reason is that it actually devalues – or more appropriately 
put, distrusts – verbal eloquence as a means to achieve worthy ends.
To begin with, none of the three major spiritual traditions – Taoism, 
Buddhism, and Confucianism – emphasizes speaking. Taoism regards as 
in(nite wisdom human harmony with nature, (tting into the seamless unity 
without the need to speak, as expressed in the well-known phrase by Lao 
Tzu: “[T]hose who understand are not talkers; talkers don’t understand.”53 
Buddhism pursues meditation as a means to quiet down the mind and 
to be rid of worldly desires in order to achieve personal enlightenment. 
Furthermore, East Asia never had a comparable (to the Greek) political or 
legal system that promoted public speaking. Undoubtedly, these important 
historical forces played a role in the lack of an oratory tradition. However, 
the East Asian attitude toward speaking was not formed by chance but by a 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!97
serious intellectual, moral, political, and social discourse that took place at 
the time when their cultural foundation was laid down.54 Subsequent devel-
opment further solidi(ed this foundation into a long-lasting tradition.
Te most in?uential discourse was, undoubtedly, led by the Confucians. 
Because the core of his teaching emphasized learning to become fully 
humane – that is, to follow the path of moral self-cultivation through-
out life – Confucius saw the ultimate measure of this personal develop-
ment as lying in what a person does, not what a person says. From the 
very beginning, Confucius recognized that the greatest challenge of such 
a  personal moral project is anchored in the discrepancy between what a 
person can desire, will, and even resolve and what the person actually does 
and practices. Tus, Confucius, to use a modern term, problematized this 
personal life path as the constant struggle between one’s words and one’s 
deeds. Consistency between these two sides is the gauge of and feedback 
of one’s own moral self-cultivation. Terefore, a person’s speaking cannot 
be divorced from his or her moral character. Speaking is not just one’s cog-
nition and knowledge or any spontaneous, freestanding utterance, but a 
re?ection of one’s moral quality. For one to make real progress on this path, 
one needs to work at one’s deeds rather than one’s words. Tose who pur-
sue moral self-perfection must be cautious about their words. Clearly, the 
Confucian discussion about speaking is framed not to explore the cognitive 
and linguistic nature of human communication, but to compare what one 
chooses to talk about to what goals one tries to achieve.55
Inspection of the Analects reveals a rich discourse on the relationship 
between one’s speaking and moral/virtuous development. As far as I can 
discern, Confucius discussed mainly three kinds of problems with verbal 
cra)iness, all of which are potential impediments to one’s moral self-culti-
vation: (&) a glib tongue divorces the mind from heart, (!) ?attering speech 
undermines sincerity, and (3) boastful speech lacks humility.
Out of all kinds of problematic speaking, Confucius admitted him-
self that he regarded a glib tongue most diBcult to accept. A glib tongue 
(巧言 or 佞人), sometimes translated as “sharp tongue” or “clever talk,” is 
the kind that deceives, manipulates, and pretends, operating with ill inten-
tion, hypocrisy, and falsehood. Confucius commented “it is a rare thing for 
glib speech and an insinuating appearance to accompany authoritative con-
duct (ren 仁),”56 and “glib words corrupt virtue,”57 and glib talkers are sel-
dom trustworthy. As noted in previous chapters, ren is the ultimate humane 
quality that a person can achieve through life-long learning and practice of 
self-perfection. Confucius saw people who engage in glib talk as misusing 
the power of words that are put together by the able mind but apart from the 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
!98
feeling and caring heart. Such talkers give themselves permission to indulge 
in ends justifying means at any cost: “[W]hat the exemplary person (junzi 
君子) hates most is having to declare in favor of something that he has 
already rejected, and then to have to come up with some excuse for doing 
so.”58 Having witnessed the devastating chaos during the Warring States of 
his time, Confucius was also wary of the dangers of the glib tongue in caus-
ing states to fall apart: “glib people are dangerous” and “I detest the fact that 
glib-tongued talkers bring down states and families”59 because such people 
can distort and manipulate events and “confuse moral standards”6A so as to 
lead the kings and princes to take wrong actions.
Flattering speech, the second despised kind, undermines the speaker’s 
sincerity. When one engages in ?attery of others without believing in what 
one is saying, one moves away from sincerity. As noted previously, sincer-
ity occupies a central place in the ren conduct by Confucians throughout 
Chinese history. Ingratiating speech is usually directed toward someone 
who holds power or has access to resources that the speaker desires for 
him- or herself. Because the motive is self-serving by pleasing the other, like 
the ministers in Te Emperor Has No Clothes by Hans Christian Andersen, 
ingratiating speech also leads the recipient of ?attery to sink further into 
vanity. Both the speaker and the recipient are denied the opportunity to 
connect to the virtue of sincerity, thereby losing the opportunity for moral 
growth. Tis is why Confucius cautioned against association with “friends 
who ingratiate and feign compliance” in addition to glib talking.6& Confucius 
also regarded excessive, extravagant, and beautiful speech without substance 
as suﬀering from the same problem, related to the slyness of ingratiation.
Whereas ?attering speech harms the other (as well as the self), boast-
ful speech reveals the speaker’s own character ?aw. Boastful speech re?ects 
the self as being in need of arti(cial boosting, in?ating the sense of self. 
Tis kind of speaking lacks humility, which is another important quality in 
the ren conduct, particularly regarding learning. As discussed in Chapter 5, 
humility is conceived of by Confucians as a fundamental need and attitude 
for anyone in learning. When a person engages in self-boasting through 
speech, that person is not in touch with this very need. Te projected pos-
itive image is achieved through empty and o)en aggressive language, but 
it is not based on real knowledge, wisdom, and moral growth of the per-
son. Boastful speech is therefore more harmful to the self than to the audi-
ence because most of the time the audience can detect the overstatement 
and the weakness of the speaker’s character. In a vivid conversation where 
Confucius asked four of his students to express their ambitions, one, Zilu, 
“hastily replied, ‘give me a state of thousand charots6! to govern, set me 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
!99
in among powerful neighbors, harass me with foreign armies, and add to 
that widespread famine, and at the end of three years, I will have imbued 
the people with courage, and moreover, provided them with a secure 
direction.’”63 Confucius smiled at Zilu. When another student later inquired 
why he did so, Confucius responded, “[I]n governing a state you need to 
observe ritual propriety, and yet in what he said there was no deference at 
all.”64 Apparently, Confucius was unimpressed by Zilu’s boastful and aggres-
sive speech because it lacked humility irrespective of its eloquence (these 
words were quite eloquent in Chinese).
All three kinds of speech have in common the discrepancy between 
what is outwardly verbalized and what the internal state of the speaker is. 
Moreover, Confucius’ concerns focused on the lost opportunity for the 
speaker to grow further toward the ren conduct.
While addressing these three problems of speech, the Analects also pres-
ents three virtues to counter the three ?awed ways of talking: (&) heaven 
(tian, 天) is the speechless, but most virtuous, to be emulated; (!) deeds 
shall exceed words; and (3) attunement to social context and relationships 
is necessary for talking.
Confucius and his later followers, but also virtually all schools of thought 
during his era, revered Heaven, conceived of as an all-encompassing spir-
itual entity that is intimately involved in human aﬀairs. Great sages and 
ancestral spirits ascend to tian to join an ultimate power that cares, nur-
tures, watches, regulates, and judges (impartially) how humans operate 
on their own and with each other. According to Ames and Rosemont,65 
the Chinese tian is not the other world or the Creator as conceptualized 
in Judeo-Christian tradition, but the world as known to humans. Tian is 
thus the perfection that humans can see, feel, contemplate, emulate, and 
integrate with. Tian is the inspiration for humans as stated in Te Book of 
Change: “Tian cycles by itself emitting unending strength; the authoritative 
person shall likewise strive unremittingly (天行健, 君子以自强不息).”66
A signi(cant quality of tian, as pointed out by Confucius, is not speaking 
(wuyan, 無言), yet it nurtures the natural and human world, provides moral 
ordinances, and extols great human achievements as seen in the sages. In a 
conversation with his student Zigong, Confucius said that he would leave 
oﬀ speaking. Zigong pursued him further: “‘If you do not speak, how will 
we your followers (nd the proper way?’ Te Master responded ‘Does tian 
speak? And yet the four seasons turn and the myriad things are born and 
grow within it.’”67 Tis passage has come down to represent the articulation 
of “the highest ideal of virtuous behavior”68 for which humans are to strive: 
doing and showing one’s good deeds without the need to speak.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3AA
Te Analects unequivocally articulates the second way to counter our 
urge to speak: Deeds shall precede and exceed words. By ordering action 
before and exceeding speech, Confucius highlights the “worth of action.”69 
Confucius said that “the exemplary persons accomplish what they are going 
to say, and only then say it”; they want “to be slow to speak yet quick to act”; 
and “the ancients were loath to speak because they would be ashamed if they 
personally did not live up to what they said.”7A Tese expressions empha-
size the “desire for a speech true to the life and character of the speaker. . . . 
Te lived character of the [speaker] is more important than his speech.” 
Instead of delineating a “rhetorical silence” as commonly used in the West 
(e.g., pause for a greater eﬀect on the audience or recusal from speaking to 
ensure impartiality), the Confucian order of deeds and words “repudiates 
glibness and puts an emphasis on . . . action. Human character is revealed in 
our worldly acts, not in the articulation of ideas and plans, not in senseless 
shouting, ponti(cating, or manipulating of others.”7& Not speaking before 
one’s action or not in accordance to one’s action thus serves to “foreground” 
full ethical signi(cance of action in contrast to the insigni(cant, even irrel-
evant, role of speech.
As part of Confucian discourse on speaking, there is also an empha-
sis on attunement to social context and relationships, the third virtue for 
speaking. As noted in Chapter !, Confucian thought separates neither the 
moral nor the individual from the social. Te individual learns to cultivate 
self (修身), to regulate family (齊家), to order the state (治國), and ulti-
mately to bring peace to the world (平天下). One’s moral self-perfection is 
grounded in one’s most primary social realm: the family. Learning how to 
relate to people in the cosmos of family is learning to understand the world 
at large. In fact, successful learning in the home is requisite for greater 
social responsibility for the community. Terefore, learning to speak well 
is no doubt learning how to speak with attunement to the social contexts 
and relationships.
Confucius saw as essential the understanding of ritual propriety, li (禮) 
in helping people achieve the goal of speaking appropriately. As discussed 
in Chapter !, li covers social interactions at all levels ranging from the inti-
mate relationship between friends to ceremonial performance in the larger 
society. But the key to li is to attend to people’s feelings, emotions, and each 
other’s senses and sensibilities – in other words, attending to humanity. One 
speaks when the appropriate context calls for it and does not speak or speaks 
in a particular way so as to promote relationships rather than embarrass or 
cause distress in the other. Having articulated what li is and how it regulates 
human relationships and interactions, Confucius made many remarks about 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3A&
speaking with social attunement. When his student Yan Hui inquired about 
how to practice li in order to achieve ren in daily life, Confucius replied 
that not speaking about anything that violates the observance of li is one 
important way.7! Confucius remarked further that “by taking care in choice 
of language and mode of expression, exemplary persons keep vulgarity and 
impropriety at a distance,” and “speaking before the time to speak is called 
being rash; not speaking when it is time to speak is called holding back, 
and speaking without observing the person’s countenance is called being 
behind.” Confucius himself set a good example for such attunement when 
he was observed in his home village to speak  “deferentially, as though at a 
loss of words, and yet in the ancestral temple and at court, he spoke articu-
lately, though with deliberation.”73 Tis basic outline of speaking with social 
attunement has had a strong in?uence on Chinese and other East Asians in 
their daily social interactions.
Clearly, the virtues of speaking lean toward silence. However, silence in 
Chinese and East Asian cultures is not regarded as the absence or oppo-
site of speaking, but a virtue in its own right. As Arabella Lyon points out, 
silence in the West may be equated with “disengagement and disregard”74 
or inaction, which is a personal weakness. But Chinese/East Asians respect 
“chosen silence” as having a signi(cant role to play in human aﬀairs and 
relationship. For them, “it is a constitutive part of interactions, communica-
tion, and even making of ful(llment, knowledge, choice, and commitment. 
Silence can indicate questions, promises, denial, warning, threats, insult, 
request, command, deference, and intimacy.”75 Te Analects is a text that 
oﬀers a full discourse on how silence needs to be understood, valued, and 
practiced in service of one’s moral and virtuous development.
sCeaDer’s b;rde-
Unlike some other speci(c cultural practices in the past (e.g., foot-binding 
or low social status of women) that have been jettisoned in modern time, 
the tradition of distrust in speaking for anyone in East Asia does not seem 
to abate. Tis tenacious persistence can be observed in Japan and Korea 
despite a well-functioning democracy running for decades and in Hong 
Kong despite a century-long British colonial rule.76 Even though freedom 
of speech in those democracies is a constitutional right (as well as the right 
to defend oneself legally) for all, this political and legal right is not to be 
confused with the cultural norm of speaking. Te source of this cultural 
persistence, I suspect, lies in the Confucian persuasion for personal moral 
development. Even when eloquent speakers emerge as they do, people may 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3A!
not admire and trust them as much as they do in the West, resulting in less 
power granted to such speakers. Consequently, political, social, business, 
and education leaders may not be eager to develop or to display oratory skills 
either. None of the current Asian political leaders are distinguished speak-
ers. Instead, they project an image of speaking cautiously, slowly, so)ly, and 
hesitantly, as exempli(ed by the UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
Against this millennia-long cultural background, I would argue that 
present-day Chinese/East Asian speakers continue to carry three concerns/
burdens in weighing their choice of speaking or not speaking as well as how 
they speak: (&) moral, (!) social, and (3) personal. Tese sensitivities may 
dissuade them from speaking more, and more forcefully.
Moral Concern
Te notion of speaking versus action as an epistemological consideration 
weighs heavily on anyone before deciding to speak or not to speak, regard-
less of the social context and personal risks. Whenever a person is con-
fronted with and contemplates the choice of speaking, he or she is likely to 
think about whether or not the idea about to be expressed, particularly crit-
icisms and suggestions, can be backed up in action by the person him- or 
herself. To put this reasoning more simply, speaking in Chinese/East Asian 
cultures is regarded more as speaking up to voice a concern, to change the 
status quo, or to oﬀer a promise. Te standard of knowing (hence the source 
of expression), namely epistemology, is not merely cognitive but the practice 
of what one knows.77 Tus, words are not (nished when merely spoken, and 
the message alone is not enough until the words turn into practice. In East 
Asia, speaking commits the speaker to action and delivery of deeds. If one 
is unsure about this action-commitment and delivery, one would be better 
served to remain silent. Such chosen silence is understood, respected, and 
valued.
Research indeed shows this tendency of present-day Chinese. Kwan 
and colleagues78 used a common instrument for measuring individuation 
in the West and found that Hong Kong Chinese regarded this measure as 
consisting of two factors: (&) attention seeking for oneself and (!) taking 
the lead for the group. Whereas attention seeking for oneself is a negative 
characteristic, taking the lead on behalf of the group is a positive behavior. 
Statements indicating attention seeking include “raise your hand to ask a 
question in a meeting or lecture,” “publicly challenge a speaker whose posi-
tion clashes with your own,” “give an informal talk in front of a small group 
of classmates,” “speak up about your ideas even though you are uncertain of 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3A3
whether you are correct,” and “give your opinion on a controversial issue, 
even though no one has asked for it.” In contrast, taking the lead include 
“give a lecture to a large audience,” “volunteer to head a committee for a 
group of people you do not know very well,” “accept a nomination to be a 
leader of a group,” and “perform on a stage before a large audience.” As can 
be seen, the statements on attention seeking all involve public speaking. 
Given the moral burden for holding the speaker personally accountable 
for his or her opinions, it is not surprising that Chinese regard such pub-
lic speaking as more negative. However, European-American people in the 
study did not distinguish the two factors and viewed them as a single factor 
indicating a positive personal quality.
Relatedly, boastfulness is a sign of personal weakness and violates the 
cautious norm of speaking in East Asia. Learning in Confucian persuasion 
is geared to counter such personal ?aws. Boastfulness is also thought of as 
narcissistic in Western psychology, in spite of the strong cultural encour-
agement for self-enhancing speech. Asian-American students have been 
found less narcissistic and more modest than their European-American 
peers.79 Similarly, college students in Hong Kong are reluctant to ask their 
professors questions and seek ways to modify the knowledge until they 
have studied the material and applied it to real life (a)er practice).8A My 
most recent research also shows that a greater percentage of Chinese words 
referring to speaking are rated as negative (3.5 times more than positive 
words) by Chinese college students than English speaking terms referring 
to speaking are rated as such (&.5 times more) by European-American stu-
dents.8& Moreover, we contrasted speaking versus doing and asked Chinese 
and European-American adults to rate which kind of persons they liked 
more. Results show that Chinese liked the most a person who talks little but 
does more (but European-Americans liked the most a person who talks a 
lot but also does a lot).
Social Concern
Chinese/East Asians carry what might be called a social burden whenever 
they face speaking in a social setting. Clearly, there are many rules about 
such speaking in East Asia. In any culture, speaking in social context is a 
highly delicate social act. But for East Asians, the delicacy lies not in whether 
to speak, but in how to speak appropriately as it is one central teaching 
of Confucius. Terefore, Chinese/East Asians pay a great deal of attention 
to it. Such attention and care serve to reduce the amount of thoughtless 
and random speaking among Asians. Speaking appropriately is a life-long 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3A4
learning task that starts from childhood and continues through old age. It 
enables people to achieve their goals, but it can also destroy relationships 
and cause grave consequences.8! Appropriateness hinges on the following 
two discernable sensitivities: (&) to the particular relationship as part of the 
social context and (!) to con?ict.
Chinese/East Asians are socialized to attend to the speci(c social role 
and status of the listener. A set of guidelines for speaking or not speaking 
is enacted depending on whether the listener/interactant is an authority 
(gure, a family member, a friend, or a stranger. Tere is no such thing as a 
general audience, well-educated or not, or an average person on the street 
as one’s listener. Every social interaction is a particular relationship that 
demands a judgment of how one needs to respond in speaking.83
In general, there are three types of relationships to which one is highly 
attuned. Te (rst type, as discussed in Chapters ! and 5, includes the author-
ity (gures such as leaders, professors, teachers, parents, and elders toward 
whom East Asians show dereference and respect.84 Again, it is erroneous 
to assume that Asian deference toward authority (gures is equal to loss of 
personal agency to think independently and to challenge them. Te issue 
here is speaking in a way that is appropriate to a given social relationship as 
required by the culture. One can challenge authority (gures without being 
rude and abrasive. In Asian cultures, speaking appropriately may help one 
achieve one’s goals much better than making a lot of speaking blunders. 
Accordingly, one usually listens attentively to authority (gures, remains 
humble in posture and countenance, speaks – and especially interrupts – 
little, but answers questions earnestly. In such relationships, one takes in 
information and tries to digest well what was said.85 When one is asked 
to oﬀer opinions and suggestions, one is expected to do so readily. Tus, 
one cannot be unthinking or remain indiﬀerent in such settings. Instead, 
there is a high demand for one’s attentiveness and quick response on the 
spot. When speaking to a professor, a teacher, or someone who has noted 
accomplishments, the student or person at a lower level normally use a self-
eﬀacing and other-enhancing style such as “in my humble opinion” but “in 
your wise opinion . . .” and “in my unworthy work . . .” when preempting 
one’s speech.86
In the &98As, In-Mao Liu87 predicted that because Chinese children must 
learn rules for respect toward authority (gures, they are likely to under-
develop self-assertiveness and unlearn it even when they somehow learn 
it early on, because self-assertiveness clashes with respect. Tere is a large 
body of research that veri(es this Asian tendency.88 For example, Douglas 
Smith observed that elders in Taiwan spoke much more at the dinner table 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3A5
than children, while the latter remained attentive.89 In an experiment exam-
ining assertiveness, Chinese-American students showed a much lower score 
for the item “asking a professor to clarify a lecture” and ranked it much more 
diBcult than their European-American peers.9A Te interviews by Kenneth 
Lieberman showed that many East Asian students attending American uni-
versities thought American students disrespectful toward their professors.9& 
Finally, my most recent study compared Chinese and European-American 
college students’ responses to the appropriateness of challenging a professor 
in class.9! Te study found that although they approved of such inquisitive-
ness of students in class, Chinese students questioned the appropriateness of 
students challenging the professor directly in class. Tey quarreled with the 
style but not with students’ need to ask questions. Tey suggested a more 
acceptable style: seeking the professor out a)er class to discuss questions 
and issues face to face rather than making a public scene in class. In contrast, 
European-American students did not display such distinctions in speaking.
On the other hand, the relationship with the second type of people – 
peers and people of the same status (e.g., position, age, generation, even 
coethnicity) – is one that calls for mutuality in communication. In this kind 
of relationship, a)er familiarity has been achieved, one is encouraged to 
speak more freely, openly, and directly.93 Exchange and display of emotions 
and true feelings are treasured. In fact, Chinese people would (nd it strange 
not to engage in such verbal expression with same-status and familiar peers 
such as relatives, friends, and schoolmates. My own recent research shows 
that Chinese college students disapprove of peers and siblings who are 
non-talkative with each other, because there is “no reason for caution and 
reservation.”94
A related attunement for communication is to the context. Te most 
important distinction is inside-versus-outside context, o)en referred to 
as in-group versus out-group.95 Chinese people’s speaking is diﬀerentiated 
along the line of these two contexts. Te speaker needs to know which of the 
two contexts he or she faces. Within the inside context that includes one’s 
family, close friends, and social circles, one speaks more openly, freely, and 
assertively, except toward older generations. Te older they are, the more 
respect is extended toward them. Tus, to a grandmother, children must 
be deferential in speech (as well as in nonverbal interactions). For exam-
ple, children need to use the honori(c to address her in the second-person 
pronoun nin (您) instead of ni (你). Usually, children also address their 
parents and elders in their parents’ generation (uncles and aunts) with the 
same honori(c, which is audible when the dialect diﬀerentiates the sounds 
(e.g., northern dialects. However, many Chinese dialects do not distinguish 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3A6
the sounds, but such deference is evident in children’s writing). Despite 
this generational deference, one still talks more openly and assertively and 
expresses emotions more freely within the inside context including family 
elders. Tis is so because Chinese stress life-long ties with these inside peo-
ple, called “one’s own people” (自己人).96 One builds a lifelong, dependable, 
and mutual support system with these people.97 Speaking openly with and 
giving advice (frequently down-to-earth, even hurtful truth) to each other 
is a sign of the strength of this relationship. Avoidance of such speaking 
signals weakened ties.98 Finally, because coethnics among immigrants are 
considered an inside context, Paulhus and colleagues found that Asian-
heritage college students in Canada are not shy with other Asian-heritage 
peers (but are more shy when interacting with European-heritage peers, an 
outside group).99
With strangers, the third type of people, also in the outside context, 
Chinese/East Asians tend to be cautious, avoidant, and reserved, not easily 
displaying emotions and inner thoughts.&AA East Asians tend to be polite, 
agreeable, and respectful toward strangers but keep them at a distance. 
Hence, Chinese/East Asian people (nd it hard to believe that a stranger 
whom one just met at a bus stop or only a)er a brief meeting would call one 
“my friend” or even “my best friend.” Disclosure of personal information 
such as one’s marital status and relationships with parents to strangers is not 
done among Chinese. Such sharing of personal life only takes place among 
trusted people. While strangers are part of the outside context, this context 
includes many types of people who may not necessarily be strangers, such 
as coworkers and neighbors. To people one does not consider as one’s own 
(外人), one weighs carefully whether to speak or not to speak. Whenever 
possible, East Asians tend to lean toward silence if they do not have to speak. 
If they do, they are likely to choose their words with great care, speak more 
tentatively, less assertively, and even ambiguously on purpose. Te key con-
cern is not to make mistakes that can come back to haunt oneself, or to get 
oneself into a situation that can make oneself vulnerable.&A&
Beyond the concern for social relationships and contexts, East Asians 
are especially sensitive toward con?ict in communication. For a signif-
icant part, their social life is about avoiding con?ict. Con?ict is a high 
stress producer because it violates the basic life-orientation of harmony. 
Con?ict leads to embarrassment of the other and self and lingering dis-
tress.&A! Speaking up to challenge the other in public, particularly the one in 
authority and status (e.g., challenging the teacher or professor in class), may 
be considered deliberate sabotage of the other’s face and can result in seri-
ous interpersonal consequences. Yet the Chinese social system functions 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3A7
in such a way that makes it diBcult, if at all possible, for one to abandon 
family ties and other important relationships such as the teacher–student 
relationship. Terefore, direct confrontation is discouraged and avoided at 
all costs. When faced with a need to speak, the person is even more attuned 
to the notion of appropriateness in con?ict-laden situations.&A3 For example, 
when a subordinate disagrees with the supervisor at work, instead of saying 
something to the eﬀect of “I disagree with you,” “I am uncomfortable with 
you,” or even “I respectfully disagree with you,” a Chinese/East Asian per-
son is likely to say “I will try my best to see if a slightly diﬀerent way might 
work better,” “I heard from XX that this way might . . .,” or “It was my fault 
not to explain this well to you [even when it is apparent to both the boss and 
the speaker that the boss is at fault].” Display of strong negative emotions 
in con?ict situations is also discouraged. Tis is probably why East Asians 
tend to show no emotion on their face when they are found in con?ict.&A4 
Tese strategies are common and eﬀective and enable people to achieve 
their goals and at the same time avoid direct confrontation.
Personal Concern
In light of the preceding discussions of the sensitivities, it is logical that 
speaking in organized and public settings is also likely to result in greater 
personal concerns for East Asians. To be blunt, when forced to speak before 
they are ready, East Asians may experience psychological distress that can 
take a toll on their socioemotional as well as cognitive functioning.
Several studies have zeroed in on this very topic and have yielded impor-
tant (ndings. As noted previously, Chinese-American college students 
ranked the assertiveness-prone situation of “asking a professor to clarify a 
lecture” much more diBcult than their European-American peers.&A5 East 
Asian Canadian college students were found to feel signi(cantly more anx-
ious and guilty following assertive responding (e.g., telling a friend who 
calls frequently about her relationship issues not to call so o)en because 
one is too busy) than European Canadians. Tis Asian tendency is espe-
cially relevant to acquaintances but not to strangers.&A6 In another study, 
signi(cantly more recent East Asian immigrant Canadians reported to feel 
shy in class (9& percent) than European Canadians (5& percent). And the 
most frequent reason for their shyness was “fear of being wrong” for Asian 
Canadians (3A percent), compared to 5 percent for European Canadians.&A7 
Finally, Heejung Kim studied how East Asians and East Asian Americans 
view speaking as a cognitive function in comparison with European-
American college students.&A8 She found that whereas European-American 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3A8
students believed that speaking enhances thinking, East Asians believed the 
opposite eﬀect of speaking. Her experiments examining performing cogni-
tive tasks in silence versus talking aloud demonstrated that whereas speak-
ing did not interfere with and even enhanced European-American students’ 
performance, it did interfere with Asian students’ performance. Her further 
study shows that having to speak while trying to solve problems not only 
reduced Asian students’ performance (more recent immigrants), but also 
caused higher stress in them as measured in cortisol levels (but verbali-
zation bene(tted European-American students performance and relaxed 
instead of stressing them).
Tese research (ndings compel us to conclude that there are indeed very 
large diﬀerences in speaking between the two cultures. Te three important 
concerns that East Asians carry with them may serve to reduce the amount 
of speaking among East Asians and to shape how they speak in social set-
tings and in learning.
east asia- sCeaDi-. stEle
Te preceding sections discussed the Chinese/East Asian cultural tradition 
of speaking and concerns people may have when faced with the need to 
speak. In what follows, I discuss the speaking style of Chinese/East Asians. 
Similar to the four Gricean maxims governing Western people’s speaking 
style, there seem to be four diﬀerent maxims guiding Chinese/East Asians 
when they do speak.
Te Maxim of Paucity: Speak Little
As previously discussed, the default for the Chinese/East Asian mode is not 
to speak if there is no need. Volunteering to speak without a need may be 
regarded as inappropriate or insensitive to a setting, not to mention mak-
ing unnecessary promises when one is not prepared to back them up with 
action. Speaking little is very diﬀerent from the Western maxim, “Speak no 
more and no less,” which stresses the need for the speaker to calculate the 
right amount of speaking as required by the conversation. Tis maxim still 
presumes a speaking mode. It is just that the speaker needs to adhere to the 
right quantity. Unlike this Western maxim, paucity in speaking is a virtue, 
preferred and valued, for Chinese/East Asians as noted before.
Paucity in speaking may even be a sign of intelligence in Asia. Research 
conducted by Shih-Ying Yang and Robert Sternberg found that Taiwanese 
people regarded an intelligent person as one who knows “when to assert 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3A9
him/herself and when to draw back” beyond other common attributes of 
intelligence such as having a quick mind.&A9 However, verbal ?uency was one 
of the primary de(nitional attributes of intelligence in the West. Certainly, 
knowing when not to speak was not part of the de(nition.&&A In Japan, talk-
ativeness is considered super(cial and unintelligent.&&& Tis is probably why 
Judge Bao in court did not speak much either. Given the positive image of 
the reluctance to speak, there is little wonder why East Asians have been 
observed across time and space as more reserved in speaking.
When they do decide to speak, Chinese/East Asians do so more likely 
in two ways. Te (rst way is to speak slowly, cautiously, hesitantly, and 
self-eﬀacingly.&&! Such a style signals to the listener that the speaker is well 
aware of the liabilities of speaking, is willing to revise what he or she has 
spoken about, and is not ready to commit him- or herself to the expected 
action. Te second way is to speak with assurance and certainty but still 
with reservation and less assertiveness. Tis style indicates that the speaker 
has a responsibility for and command over the topic or the issue and is 
ready to back up the spoken ideas with action. Because such speech con-
veys assurance, the listener is likely to take the speaker up on the ideas and 
suggestions.
In learning, the student is also guided by these two ways of speaking. 
Because the student is supposed to seek the teacher’s guidance with a hum-
ble attitude and receptivity, the student may have a greater need to be hes-
itant, cautious, and self-eﬀacing. In East Asian cultures, such a speaking 
style, coupled with the need to show respect to teachers, makes Asian learn-
ers appear docile and passive to the non-Asian eye. Te following example 
illustrates the case in point well: several years ago, a European-American 
colleague and I went to a rural area in China to collect data on children’s 
conceptions of teaching and learning. Although these children had never 
seen a real European-American, they did interact with my colleague one 
on one, as requested and encouraged by us and their teachers. One by one, 
these children followed our instructions and completed the research tasks. 
But my colleague observed that these children did not initiate any contact 
with him, particularly did not verbalize much in front of him; they stood 
straight and just did what they were told. However, when they worked with 
each other, they whispered and gestured to each other rather than speak-
ing audibly. A)er being puzzled about these children for four weeks, my 
colleague (nally asked me why Chinese children were not talking and 
appeared not even very lively to him. I pointed out that the same speech-
less and “unlively” children would become loud and rambunctious in their 
own yards. Indeed, my colleague saw the diﬀerence of behavior and made 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3&A
an insightful comment about his discovery: “[T]hen this is a sign of intelli-
gence because these very young children are able to diﬀerentiate and con-
duct themselves according to diﬀerent social contexts!”
Te Maxim of Ambiguity: Speak Indeterminately
East Asians are known for speaking with circumlocution and vagueness. 
Ambiguity in communication is common.&&3 Tis stands in sharp contrast to 
the Western maxim of speaking clarity. Western people may (nd this style 
diBcult to deal with, but East Asians may (nd the Western style equally 
hard to adjust to. As Agnes He points out, the Asian style of ambiguity is 
not semantic or logical failure, but a preference.&&4 Hui-Ching Chang in her 
studies of Chinese daily communication also came to the same conclusion, 
namely that Chinese thrive on the style that (ts their need to maintain the 
social system with clearly de(ned roles, but at the same time that (ts their 
need to keep a space for communicative indeterminacy.&&5 Tis ?exible 
space between their (xed roles (e.g., parental or child role) and the vagaries 
of daily life allows them to be creative in achieving their goals. Mastery of 
this style may generate high regard from people and surely requires much 
learning and understanding.
Tis particular style may owe its origin to Taoism as a philosophy of 
dialectics. Taoism claims that the universe consists of two fundamental 
forces: yin and yang, the feminine for the former and the masculine for 
the latter. However, yin and yang complement each other and coexist at 
all times. Moreover, these two forces are never (xed and stable, but always 
in ?ux. Teir changing nature is the principle according to which the uni-
verse operates. As illustrated in the yin-yang symbol, the universe is one-
ness with in(nite dynamics for change (Figure 8.&). Te visual depiction of 
this dynamic oneness is diagrammed as a perfect circle divided into a white 
(sh next to the identically shaped but opposite-positioned black (sh. Te 
tail of the white (sh is adjacent to the head of the black (sh. Both the body 
contours and the lines of the two (sh are ?uid, indicating their potentiality 
of morphing into each other. Tus, the seeming opposite of the most basic 
forces of the universe, visualized as white and black, is not opposite at all. 
Each pole of existence in this philosophy is the beginning dynamic of the 
other. When the dynamic reaches the other pole, it becomes the other and 
at the same time begins to return to the original state. Life recycles cease-
lessly in yin and yang.
Such is the world in which East Asians have been living for millennia. 
Tis way of viewing and living the world is so natural to them that their 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3&&
food, music, dance, arts, sports, medicine, even science (e.g., agriculture 
and hydraulic engineering), and personal creativity are all in?uenced by 
this worldview. Because the world is believed to always change, there is no 
point of seeing any one thing as (xed eternally. Kaiping Peng and Richard 
Nisbett have investigated this topic in East Asian and Western thinking and 
have found large, consistent diﬀerences in their beliefs.&&6 Western people 
view the world by following three laws of logic: (&) identity (e.g., the state-
ment “a teacher is a teacher” is true because of the identical names of both 
sides), (!) noncontradiction (i.e., if something is A, it cannot be not-A), 
and (3) the excluded middle (i.e., if A is true, it cannot be false; there is no 
middle term to which these contradictions belong). But Taoism holds three 
diﬀerent principles: (&) constant changes (e.g., A is A only now, but A can 
become X and thus no longer be A), (!) contradiction (e.g., A can be not-A 
depending on the context and perspective of the viewer), and (3) holism 
or interconnectivity of all things (i.e., A, B, . . . n are all connected so that A 
can be part of B . . . n and vice versa). All three principles are clearly illus-
trated in the yin-yang diagram. Tese researchers have done many studies 
showing that East Asian and Western people perceive diﬀerently even the 
most basic objects such as a triangle made of wood or clay, as well as basic 
relationship such as a larger (sh among smaller (sh or a green pencil in a 
group of red pencils. Whereas Western people view things in sharp distinc-
tions, East Asians see more background as part of any single object or see 
all elements more relationally.
Living with such a perspective of life enables East Asians to be toler-
ant toward, comfortable with, expectant of, and even embracing change, 
contradiction, and interconnectivity of things in life. In other words, to 
fi.;re 8.&. Te yin-yang symbol.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3&!
them, ambiguity is but a norm in life. Speaking ambiguously is thus natu-
ral. Because speaking and listening require each other as cultural cooper-
ation, East Asians are equally adept at listening to ambiguity. Speaking too 
clearly and sharply may bewilder them and generate discomfort. It is not 
an exaggeration to say that (guring out ambiguity in communication is not 
merely socially necessary, but also intellectually challenging, highly moti-
vating, even fun at times.
East Asians use ambiguity in speech to accomplish many goals. I high-
light two common ones here. As many scholars have pointed out, East 
Asians’ speaking leaves much greater room for interpretation in order to 
achieve their goals.&&7 For example, in class, a teacher sees a student talk to 
a peer, not paying attention to her instruction. Instead of calling out the 
student’s name, which would embarrass the student, the teacher may say, 
“Tere are people seeking others out to talk” (有人找別人講話). In fact, 
in Chinese, the quantity in the phrase “there are people” (有人) is not lin-
guistically marked (owing to lack of morphology for quantity in Chinese). 
For the whole class, it is not clear whom the teacher is referring to – a par-
ticular peer, oneself, or everyone. Hearing this teacher comment, all chil-
dren become more attentive to the class. Te child who actually sought 
out another to chat is likely to stop. As observed by Agnes He in Chinese 
language classes, this strategy of speaking is commonly used by teachers 
to achieve disciplinary results.&&8 It is worth noting that no student would 
demand clarity in such a situation. Ambiguous speech is appropriately 
delivered by the teacher and accepted cooperatively by students.
When one is not sure about one’s response or if one’s response might 
usher in unwanted consequences, one may use ambiguous speech to manage 
the situation. For example, the chair of school department is asked when a 
decision will be made regarding the hiring of a new teacher. Instead of giving 
some reference to a time (e.g., a week or as soon as possible, which is a more 
typical response in the West), the chair can say, “We will let you know when 
we get to that point.” Tis kind of responding serves to create indeterminacy. 
It signals to the listener that the chair is working on the issue, no de(nite 
answer is available, and pressing the chair for a de(nite answer at this point 
may be inappropriate. An East Asian questioner is less likely to demand a 
de(nite answer again. Such a strategy is also used in the West and other cul-
tures, but in East Asia it represents a routine way of speaking.
Te Maxim of Indirectness: Speak Amicably
Tis maxim rests on the very high value of harmony in East Asian cultures. 
As discussed earlier, East Asians do not like confrontation and con?ict, 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3&3
particularly regarding interpersonal relationships.&&9 Teir interactive prin-
ciples are regulated by the role each person occupies. An authority role 
requires respect that comes with speci(c speech and behavior. A subordin-
ate or a person at a younger age or in a younger generation also needs to 
speak within the acceptable li (ritual propriety). Harmony happens when 
the speaker and the listener uphold the same principles and honor each 
other’s roles. Speaking out of one’s role and relationship is something that 
East Asians would like to avoid.&!A
However, disagreement and con?ict are unavoidable in life. When they 
happen, East Asians become highly sensitive to a principle to which they 
adhere: “give others face.”&!& Tis basic style is to watch out not to cause 
embarrassment or, worse, shame in the other. Speaking that manages to 
avoid embarrassment and to honor the other is considered an important 
interpersonal skill. Insensitive and malicious speaking that causes people 
to lose face is a serious oﬀense. Lost face or “broken face” (撕破脸) o)en 
results in termination of a relationship (e.g., friends turning into enemies), 
family feud, and even physical violence.
Tus, when speaking, Chinese/East Asians prefer an unassertive style. 
Tey use indirect speech to achieve many goals. For example, a student is 
not sure how her professor thinks of her, but she would like to ask for a rec-
ommendation letter. So, instead of saying directly to the professor, “Would 
you be willing to write a letter on my behalf?” she would say, “I wonder 
how professors write recommendations letters for students.” In the East 
Asian context, a professor is probably alerted to an upcoming request from 
the student. In reply, the professor can say, “Well, usually professors write 
letters for students who show good learning attitude, work hard, and do 
well.” Te student then can say, “I guess I need to improve myself in these 
regards.” If the professor thinks well of the student, he might oﬀer, “I think 
you were a good student in my class.” By speaking indirectly, the student 
avoided a potentially embarrassing situation for both her and the professor 
if the latter did not think well of her. But with her indirect approach, she 
obtained the desired information and is likely to succeed in getting a rec-
ommendation letter.
Chang studied how people in Taiwan use indirect speech to create space 
in their de(ned roles for negotiating their relational status.&!! She observed 
a mother-in-law who wanted her son to drive her and her husband to a 
department store. But she was not sure that she would succeed, given the 
diBcult relationship with her daughter-in-law. Te mother-in-law said: 
“We are going to the department store. We’d better take the bus and take 
our time getting there.” Upon hearing this nondemanding expression, the 
daughter-in-law, in trying to ful(ll her (lial duty, replied “Mom, why do 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3&4
you need to take a bus? We’ll take you there.” Te mother-in-law is mas-
terful in using indirect speech and managed to give the daughter-in-law a 
chance to be kind and at the same time to achieve her goal of being taken 
to the store.
On the negative side, I observed a bilingual research assistant who was 
caught between the two cultures’ communication styles. Tis assistant is of 
Chinese heritage but grew up in the United States. She is a straight-A student 
and a caring person. By Western standard, she is very sharp, speaks clearly, 
and gets her message across eBciently. Her task was to interview Chinese 
immigrant parents who were born and raised outside the United States. 
Terefore, she spoke Chinese to these parents. One of the areas that Chinese/
East Asian people consider to be private is their marital status. Typically, 
when experienced interviewers ask such a question about a mother’s marital 
status, they speak cautiously, interjecting many (llers such as “hm, hm. . ., 
uh, uh. . ., I apologize, I regrettably request for . . .” as if they were stuttering 
and stammering. Tese (llers serve to so)en the tone and show hesitation, 
making something direct sound indirect. Tey convey to the listener that 
the speaker is kind, caring, feels bad to have to ask such a question, in order 
to ensure smooth communication. Sharpness and directness are the wrong 
style, to be avoided at all costs. Because the assistant was interviewing these 
parents on the phone for the (rst time, she was a stranger to them (which 
demands even more indirect speech for such a private topic). Unfortunately, 
she asked the question sharply, directly, and eBciently (as written on the 
questionnaire). Quite a number of mothers were oﬀended by the manner in 
which she asked her questions. Tey questioned if she was with the police 
and told her that they were very uncomfortable with her way of speaking, 
despite the fact that she spoke linguistically perfect Chinese. Some even 
wanted to quit their participation in the research on the spot.
As these examples illustrate, indirect verbal interaction is of key impor-
tance in Chinese/East Asian lives. Direct speech stands to hurt and worsen 
relationships, but skillfully expressed indirect speech can help build and 
strengthen relationships as well as heal and repair strained ones.
Te Maxim of Listenership: Listening before Speaking
In their insightful analysis of the Taiwanese parent–child narratives, Heidi 
Fung and Peggy Miller showed how listening is not passive but active in 
parent–child communications.&!3 Unlike their European-American peers, 
Taiwanese children listen attentively; they do not use the typically Western 
style of argument to interact with their caregivers. Only a)er they listen 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3&5
carefully do Taiwanese children interject responses and even voice chal-
lenges to adults’ instructions and actions. Although other scholars have 
identi(ed the East Asian style as listener-centered as opposed to speaker-
centered,&!4 it was Fung and Miller who articulated the active nature of 
listening for East Asians and backed the observation with empirical data. 
Based on their and others’ research, it is clear that East Asia privileges lis-
tening (emphasizing listenership) whereas the West privileges speaking 
(emphasizing speakership) because it is a matter of choice and preference. 
Viewing the East Asian style as some kind of de(ciency or a problem is not 
conducive to our understanding.
East Asians’ need to listen well is a natural component of the other three 
maxims of speaking as discussed previously. Because the style of speaking 
emphasizes little talk, silence, ambiguity, and indirectness, the interlocutor 
has to do a lot more work in listening in order to decipher the full meaning 
of what is spoken about. From available analysis, it seems that Chinese/East 
Asian listeners make three kinds of eﬀort when following the maxim of lis-
tenership: (&) (gure out “(ne and hidden” meanings, (!) extend, if deeming 
desirable, the unexpressed but intended by the speaker, and (3) interject 
speaking at the right moment in the right context.
Gao observes that in communication, Chinese people need to (gure out 
“(ne and hidden meanings”&!5 from the speaker before they can respond. 
At least in Chinese, there are many sayings acknowledging the need and 
demand on the listener: for example, “not saying all that is felt” (言外之意), 
“more is meant than meets the ear” (只可會意, 不可言傳), “meaning lies 
beyond words” (意在言外), and “meaning lies in the unspoken” (意在不
言之中). It is expected that the listener will be sensitive to and endeavor 
to decipher the intended but unexpressed meanings. I would add that it is 
also the Chinese artistic and aesthetic philosophy to create art works (e.g., 
poems, paintings, architecture, and other visual forms) according to the 
same suggestive but not exhaustively expressive style. Aphorisms such as 
“words have ended, but meaning is in(nite” (言已盡, 而意無窮) and “at 
this moment, it’s better to have silence than sound” (此處無聲勝有聲) 
convey this principle.&!6
Tus, the listener needs to “examine a person’s words and observe 
his/her countenance” (察言觀色)&!7 by drawing meanings from linking 
“what is said to personal experiences (體會) and “to contemplate/ponder” 
(琢磨).&!8 Such work on listening is likely to lead the person to recover the 
fuller meaning of the spoken words and to respond more appropriately.
When the listener has gained a fuller understanding of the spoken words, 
he/she may engage in the second kind of eﬀort: extending the unexpressed 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3&6
but intended meaning by the speaker, if such an extension is deemed desir-
able and appropriate. Tis kind of extension is well illustrated by the stu-
dent Zigon’s conversation with Confucius (quoted already in Chapter 6 but 
repeated here for ease of reference):
Gi.,-. said: “What do you think of the saying: ‘Poor but not inferior; rich 
but not superior’?” Te Master replied: “Not bad, but not as good as: “Poor 
but enjoying the way (dao, 道), rich but loving ritual propriety (li, 禮)”
Gi.,-. said: “Te Book of Songs states:
Like bone carved and polished,
Like jade cut and ground.
Is this not what you have in mind?”
tHe Faster said: “Zigong, it is only with the likes of you then that I can 
discuss the Songs! On the basis of what has been said, you know what is 
yet to come.”&!9
Here, what impressed Confucius was that Zigong not only understood the 
teacher’s alerting him to be humble and urging him to strive further in 
his self-cultivation, but also extended the meaning implied by Confucius: 
Students need to bounce oﬀ each other’s ideas and understanding like bone 
being carved and polished, like jade being cut and ground. Only this way 
can students go deeper in their learning. Zigong’s connecting what his 
teacher said to the highly cherished Book of Songs adds further testimony 
of him being a very attentive listener and dedicated learner, thus earning 
Confucius’ praise.
Te third eﬀort of the listener is to interject speaking at the right 
moment in the right context. Learning how to time one’s interjection is key. 
Interjection in this manner includes comments, questioning, disagreements, 
even challenges. Here, Fung, Miller, and Lin provide a telling example&3A: 
Angu, a four-year-old Taiwanese girl, was being reprimanded by her aunt, 
the caregiver, for her misdeeds of spilling food, misbehaving at the table, 
and dashing into and kicking dishes (breaking them and endangering her-
self). As a common socializing eﬀort, Taiwanese parents routinely recount 
these daily mishaps to the child and other family members. In the process, 
the child is cast as the focal actor but also the listener of the story about her-
self (along with other listeners), with the misdeeds highlighted. Te child’s 
role is (rst to listen attentively and then to respond when questioned and 
taught for better future behavior. For the unfamiliar eye, East Asian parents 
are just authoritarian and disciplinarian, not allowing the child a chance 
to defend herself. Fung and colleagues’ data show a much more dynamic 
and nuanced picture. Angu listened to her aunt’s harangue for more than 
ten minutes, patiently waiting for her aunt to calm down. Ten she began 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3&7
her challenge by saying “I am asking you a question.” Angu asked why her 
aunt was unreasonable with her (yelling). When her aunt pressed her why 
she did not know how to walk carefully around the dishes, Angu replied, 
“because I fell.” Angu then threw the question at her aunt: “Why did you not 
reason with me nicely?” She went on to question her aunt if the latter made 
any mistakes when she herself was a child. When the aunt tried to fend oﬀ 
Angu by saying that she was a well-behaved child and never spilled food, 
Angu called her grandmother to verify her aunt’s claim of herself being a 
perfect child.
Tis example illustrates vividly how listening is not just an end in and of 
itself, but a requirement for further verbal (or nonverbal) social interaction. 
East Asian children indeed are expected to listen more than to speak in a 
situation where adults clearly have more authority (correcting the child’s 
transgressions). However, children also learn that they can interject at the 
right moment in the right context in order to express their own ideas, even 
to challenge the authority; they do so without engaging in the immediate 
verbal argument, but by listening fully (rst.
east asia- classr,,F disc,;rse a-d s,cialiGati,-
All the sensitivities to and the four maxims of speaking are taught and prac-
ticed in the classroom as the major socialization context outside of home. 
First, as Agnes He noted in her informative analysis, neither ideas – as in 
the case of correct answers and thoughtful comments by students – nor 
their wrong answers and less impressive expressions are attributed to chil-
dren as owners/authors by Chinese teachers.&3& Instead, teachers focus on 
the content of what needs to be learned. She gave several examples where 
the teacher elicited children’s responses on how to write Chinese characters 
or their opinions about a story. Tere was plenty of ambiguity regarding 
who made a better or weaker suggestion, who deserved the credit for an 
idea, who disagreed with whom, and so on to be cleared by the teacher. 
However, the teacher did not even attempt to do so, nor did the children 
request/demand such clari(cation. Instead, they discussed what the correct 
writing of Chinese characters was and then moved on to the next learning 
task. In the case of discussing responses to a story, the teacher collected 
the various responses from students but without singling out any individ-
ual student. Te same pattern has been found by many researchers in their 
observations of classrooms in China and Hong Kong.&3!
Another vivid example was captured by Yeh Hsueh in his video study 
on a day at the Chinese preschool in Beijing.&33 In the video, there is a scene 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3&8
where the teacher holds, as a daily routine, a reading session with every 
child looking at a book. Children’s reading is guided by the teacher’s ques-
tions. When she asked, “What is the elephant doing?” many hands went up. 
She picked a child, who stood up and answered the question correctly. Te 
teacher then asked her to sit down without a single word of aBrmation or 
praise and moved on to the next question.
Such focus on the learning content rather than on the ownership/author-
ship of individuals’ ideas practically eliminates the potentially adverse eﬀect 
of students’ social comparison on each other. Tis style may underlie the 
common practice of calling students to display their misunderstanding 
or weak skills publicly (on the blackboard or just sharing with the class 
verbally). According to recorded proceedings of classroom teaching, chil-
dren do not show discomfort with this display of their errors.&34 As noted in 
Chapter 3, when the self is regarded as malleable and improvable through 
learning, children know that a mistake does not indicate an inherent ?aw 
in themselves, but rather an opportunity to self-improve. Tis kind of class-
room teaching is based on the belief that asserting the self verbally is unim-
portant in the process of learning. What is important is the focus on the 
improvable nature of oneself. Since ascertaining the moment-to-moment 
quality of the self is not ever the focus, authoring oneself through speech 
becomes trivial, if not discouraged altogether.
Te preceding discussion may give the impression that Chinese class-
rooms are passive, which has been the indictment against East Asian educa-
tion.&35 However, the indictment may operate on the assumption that active 
engagement in learning has only one manifestation: verbalization. Not ver-
balizing then is passive learning. Tis may be a strong Western assumption 
and practice, but it may not hold true for East Asian learners.
Closer examination reveals that speaking little does not mean that 
Chinese/East Asians are uninvolved. Quite the contrary, East Asians’ little 
speaking/silence is evidence that they are highly sensitive and attentive to 
the situation. As alluded to previously, in settings where one (nds oneself 
in need of speaking little or remaining silent, one pays more, not less, atten-
tion to the speaker. For example, it is repeatedly observed that in East Asian 
classrooms, children show rapt attention even when the teacher does not 
seem, to the outside eye, that engaging.&36 Pupils o)en respond to the teach-
er’s question by responding in unison if the answer is de(nite or elicited by a 
rhetorical question such as “how much is 5 I 6?” For open-ended questions, 
pupils are called on to respond. Being ready to respond and respond well 
is taken as a sign of student engagement and a good learning attitude. Lack 
of such readiness is cause for concern for parents and teachers. Apparently, 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3&9
Chinese/East Asian children’s rapt attention and participation are not con-
ditioned by their need to speak very much.&37
Research on Japanese classrooms shows a very high level of partici-
pation and active thinking. Despite little verbalization, students’ journals 
and other written work were full of questions, puzzlements, even disputes 
with their peers who did speak. Such a form, common in Asian schools, is 
even dubbed as “silent participation” by Inagaki, Hatano, and Morita.&38 Te 
same pattern is also found in Chinese classrooms. Cortazzi and Jin give two 
responses by Chinese students, one from an elementary school child and 
the other from a Chinese student at a British university:
I may be listening but I am not passive. I am learning in my head. I learn 
from my teacher. I also learn from what my friends do. If they make a 
mistake, I learn from that too.
We are active in our minds. We are thinking all the time. Our minds 
follow the lecturer with questions and challenges. We are just not used 
to speaking out. But all of us know very well what is going on and we 
know the answers to the questions those lecturers asked or other stu-
dents raised.&39
Tese testimonies from students themselves, as well as independent obser-
vations, con(rm this active nature of learning, which does not depend on 
momentary verbalization, but rather on attentive listening. Such listening 
is likely to generate more thoughtful verbal responses at a later time. Tis 
focus on listening in Chinese classrooms led Cortazzi and Jin to dub the 
style as “listening-oriented learning.”&4A
.r,/i-. ;C a rel;cta-t sCeaDer
As already alluded to in the previous section, home is the fertile nurs-
ery for cultural transmission of values and norms pertaining to speak-
ing (along with other values). Values that parents uphold may be spoken 
about, enacted, and modeled frequently and forcefully. Ideas and behaviors 
that are not valued or even rejected by parents are handled with aversion, 
vagueness, or ignored altogether. In general, research (nds that early on, 
Japanese mothers are less verbal with their infants, and their children pro-
duce signi(cantly fewer utterances per turn than their European-American 
counterparts.&4& Likewise, Chinese babies vocalize less than European-
American babies to respond to laboratory tasks, and this trend continues 
in adulthood.&4! On a more ethnographic account, Douglas Smith observed 
Taiwanese children speaking little but listening very attentively to adults 
talking at a dinner table.&43
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3!A
To peek into the actual process of socialization for reluctant speaking, I 
provide two examples of my own research: My colleague and I asked rural 
Chinese mothers to teach their children a new household chore. A mother 
said very little but gestured to her preschool child (usually surrounded by 
a group of curious neighborhood children) to indicate a task such as peel-
ing vegetables. First, the mother demonstrated how to peel the vegetable 
in slow motion. Ten, she handed a half-peeled vegetable to the child for 
her to continue. A)er some hand-holding and a few gentle corrections, the 
child succeeded in learning the skill. When successful, the child smiled and 
the mother made some sound, indicating that the child could go out to 
play. Tere was no praise at all. Children seemed to carry out their daily 
routines without expectation of parental praise for anything they did. But 
we observed a boy who, a)er learning a similar skill, uttered, “Oh, that was 
too easy!” showing oﬀ his achievement. Upon hearing this reaction to his 
success, the mother broke her nonverbal mode: “You are so full of yourself!” 
and “Are you also like that in school?” Without any reply, but turning away, 
the boy ran out to play with other children.
Notice who talked and who did not in this exchange. Te one who was 
motivated to call attention to his achievement in front of the other chil-
dren – the boy and the learner – spoke (rst. By contrast, the one who actu-
ally had a skill to teach – the mother – spoke little. Instead, she acted her 
teaching out by demonstrating, simplifying, and correcting with gestures, 
much like Judge Bao in his court. When the mother chided her child for 
showing oﬀ his achievement (our post-teaching interview revealed that the 
mother regarded this learning too trivial for her boy to display such pride 
in public), the initially proud child became silent, exiting the scene quickly. 
Nonverbal teaching and learning proceeded smoothly and successfully 
until there was a need to speak. Unfortunately, the boy’s need to speak did 
not (t the cultural norm for humility when facing one’s own achievement 
(particularly trivial for household chores). Tis lack of virtue as cherished 
in Chinese culture was surely cause for the mother to speak to the child. 
By remaining silent and exiting the scene, the child showed receptivity 
to his mother’s teaching. By speaking as her parenting duty required, the 
mother achieved her goal of teaching humility. What is more interesting 
was that other children also stood there silently in this whole episode, with 
rapt attention. Tey also learned by watching this adult–child teaching and 
learning interaction attentively. Tey knew that it was not their place to 
speak either, as it was likely to be a repeated experience for them with their 
own parents at home.
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3!&
Nevertheless, the four-year-old Taiwanese girl who listened carefully 
and patiently and then seized the right moment to challenge her aunt is 
also responded to by adults with due respect. Her aunt did not shut her up – 
in fact, she did not even criticize her for speaking up. Instead, she became 
a defendant by claiming to be a good young child herself. Tese examples 
illustrate that Chinese/East Asians’ choice and preference to speak or not to 
speak are a matter of great sensitivity, sensibility, and skill to be cultivated 
in their culture. Unfortunately, in cross-cultural contexts of learning, the 
Chinese/East Asian reluctance to speak is o)en taken as lack of thought, 
disengagement, verbal ineptness, worse yet, inscrutableness, character ?aw, 
or point-blank dishonesty. Not only does this view miss the point, but it 
breeds mistrust and causes harm to children and students from East Asian 
cultural backgrounds.
-,tes
 &. See note && to Chapter 4.
 !. See note 6& to Chapter 3.
 3. Paulhus, D. L., Duncan, J. H., & Yik, M. S. M. (!AA!). Patterns of shyness in 
East-Asian and European-heritage students. Journal of Research in Personality, 
36, 44!–46!.
 4. See, for example, note 3 to this chapter; Fukuyama, M. A., & Green(eld, T. K. 
(&983). Dimensions of aggressiveness in an Asian-American student popula-
tion. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 30, 4!9–43!; Johnson, F. A., & Marsella, 
A. J. (&978). Diﬀerent attitudes toward verbal behavior in students of Japanese 
and European ancestry. Genetic Psychology Monographs, &7, 43–76; and Klopf, 
D. W., & Cambra, R. E. (&979). Communication apprehension among col-
lege students in American, Australia, Japan, and Korea. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, (02, !7–3&.
 5. Katriel, T., & Philipsen, G. (&98&). “What we need is communication:” 
“Communication” as a cultural category in some American speech. 
Communication Monographs, 48, 3A&–3&7.
 6. Te whole psychotherapy as a healing process is predicated on the assump-
tion that verbalizing one’s memories, experiences, thoughts, and emotions is 
a process from mental illness to mental health. See Petrie, K. J., Booth, R. J., 
Pennebaker, J. W., & Davison, K. P. (&995). Disclosure of trauma and immune 
response to a hepatitis B vaccination program. Journal of Counseling and 
Clinical Psychology, 63, 787–79!; and Frattaroli, J. (!AA6). Experimental dis-
closure and its moderators: A metaanalysis. Psychological Bulletin, (32, 8!3–865 
for research and review of this topic.
 7. See note !4 to Chapter 4.
 8. Paulhus, D. L., & Morgan, K. L. (&997). Perceptions of intelligence in leaderless 
groups: Dynamic eﬀects of shyness and acquaintance. Journal of Personality 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3!!
and Social Psychology, 72, 58&–59&; Cheek, J. M., & Buss, A. H. (&98&). Shyness 
and sociability. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4(, 33A–339; Jones, 
W. H., & Carpenter, B. N. (&986). Shyness, social behavior and relations. In W. 
H. Jones, J. M. Cheek, & S. R. Briggs (Eds.), Shyness: Perspectives on research 
and treatment (pp. !!7–!38). New York: Plenum; and Traub, G. S. (&983). 
Correlations of shyness with depression, anxiety, and academic performance. 
Psychological Reports, ,2, 849–85A.
 9. Goﬀman, E. (&98&). Frames of talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press.
 &A. He, A. W. (!A&A). Te language of ambiguity: Practices in Chinese heritage 
language classes. Discourse Studies, 3, 75–96.
 &&. McLean, B., & Elkind, P. (!AA4). Te smartest guys in the room: Te amazing 
rise and scandalous fall of Enron. New York: Portfolio Trade.
 &!. See note 56 to Chapter 6, p. &88.
 &3. Aeschylus (&996). Te Oresteia trilogy: Agamemnon, the Libation-Bearers and 
the Furies. Mineola, NY: Dover.
 &4. Cooper, C. (!AA4). Sights and sounds of the Athenian Court. New York: 
Routledge.
 &5. Gluckman, M. (!AA6). Politics, law and ritual in tribal society. Piscataway, NJ: 
Aldine Transaction.
 &6. Li, X.-D., Sun, W.-Q., & Luo, G.-Z. (!A&A). 李行道孙文卿罗贯中集 [Collection 
of Li Xingdao, Sun Wenqing, and Luo Guanzhong]. Shangxi: People’s Publishing 
House.
 &7. Todd, S. C. A. (!AA8). Commentary on Lysias: Speeches (–((. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
 &8. Smith, R. M. (&995). A new look at the canon of the Ten Attic Orators. Mnemosyne 
48.&.
 &9. Todd, S. C. A. (!AAA). Te Oratory of Classical Greece: Volume 2. Austin: 
University of Texas Press.
 !A. Cowell, F. R. (&973). Cicero and the Roman Republic (5th ed.). New York: 
Penguin.
 !&. Plutarch (!AA9). Plutarch’s lives of Pericles & Fabius Maximus, Demosthenes & 
Cicero. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Library.
 !!. Guthrie, W. K. C. (&969). History of Greek philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
 !3. Aristotle (&99!). Te art of rhetoric. New York: Penguin.
 !4. Four years ago, our son was a sophomore in college and took a course on public 
speaking. He came home very excited a)er the (rst few classes and shared with 
us the concepts of “ethos,” “pathos,” and “logos.” He showed us every speech he 
worked on that contained these three principles of persuasive speech.
 !5. Cicero (&986). Cicero on oratory and orators. [Trans. by J. S. Watson]. 
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
 !6. Quintilian (!AA!). Orator’s education, Volume I: Books (–2. [Trans. by D. A. 
Russell]. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 !7. I am grateful to Becca Goldstein for sharing the Jewish tradition with me and 
for pointing to the reference of Fox, S., ScheJer, I., & Marom, D. (Eds.). (!AA3). 
Visions of Jewish education. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3!3
 !8. For example, the university where I teach does not have enough course oﬀer-
ings to freshmen and sophomores, frequently even juniors. Students have to 
wait until their senior year to get into a public speaking course.
 !9. Grice, H. P. (&975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), 
Syntax and semantics: Vol. 3. Speech acts (p. 45). New York: Academic Press.
 3A. Lucy, J. A. (&99!). Language diversity and thought: A reformulation of the lin-
guistic relativity hypothesis. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 3&. Bilbow, G. T. (&997). Cross-cultural impression management in the multicul-
tural workplace: Te special case of Hong Kong. Journal of Pragmatics, 28, 46&–
487; Lewis, M. (&993). Te development of deception. In M. Lewis & C. Saarni 
(Eds.), Lying and deception in everyday life (pp. &A6–&!5). New York: Guilford; 
and Lee, K., Cameron, C. A., Xu, F., Fu, G.-Y., & Board, J. (&997). Chinese and 
Canadian children’s evaluations of lying and truth telling: Similarities and dif-
ferences in the context of pro- and antisocial behaviors. Child Development, 
68(5), 9!4–934.
 3!. See the third reference in note 3& to this chapter; and Lee, K., Xu, F., Fu, 
G., Cameron, C. A., & Chen, S. (!AA&). Taiwan and Mainland Chinese and 
Canadian children’s categorization and evaluation of lie- and truth-telling: A 
modest eﬀect. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, (&, 5!5–54!.
 33. Yum, J. O. (&99&). Te impact of Confucianism on interpersonal relationships 
and communication patterns in East Asia. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter 
(Eds.), Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 66–78). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth.
 34. See the (rst reference in note 3& to this chapter.
 35. See the (rst reference in note 3& to this chapter.
 36. Gottman, J. M. (&993). How children become friends. Monograph of the Society 
for Research in Child Development, 48(3, Serial No. !A&).
 37. See the (rst reference in note 3& to this chapter, and note 33 to this chapter.
 38. Lam, S.-F., Law, Y.-K., & Shum, M. S.-K. (!AA9). Classroom discourse analysis 
and educational outcomes in the era of education reform. British Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 7&, 6&7–64&; Gillies, R. M. (!AA6). Teachers’ and stu-
dents’ verbal behaviours during cooperative and small-group learning. British 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, !7&–!87; and Hogan, K., Nastasi, B. K., 
& Pressley, M. (!AAA). Discourse patterns collaborative scienti(c reasoning in 
peer and teacher-guided discussion. Cognition and Instruction, (7, 379–43!. 
Also see Alexander, R. (!AAA). Culture & pedagogy: International comparison 
in primary education. Oxford: Blackwell for his comprehensive research on 
classroom discourse across (ve cultures.
 39. See note 38 to this chapter; note &4 to Chapter 4; and Webb, N. M., Franke, 
M. L., Ing, M., Chan, A., De. T., Freund, D. et al. (!AA8). Te role of teacher 
instructional practices in student collaborations. Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, 33, 36A–38&.
 4A. Hewitt, R., & Inghilleri, M. (&993). Oracy in the Classroom: Policy, pedagogy, 
and group oral work. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 24(4), 3A8–3&7, 
p. 3&A. Also see Lisa Delpit calls this learning mastery of the “code of power” 
in Delpit, L. D. (&995). Other people’s children: Cultural con-ict in the classroom. 
New York: Te New Press.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3!4
 4&. See Tobin, J., Hsueh, Y., & Karasawa, M. (!AA9). Preschool in three cultures 
revisited: China, Japan, and United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 
for vivid examples in American preschools.
 4!. See the (rst reference in note 4A and the last reference in note 38 to this 
chapter.
 43. Interestingly, both White and Afro-Caribbean children were keenly aware 
that the kind of oracy they were learning in school requiring disagree-
ment and argumentation about a topic was separate from their real-life talk 
where cooperation and agreement reigned. Even a)er their formal debate in 
class, the children would try to “repair” their disagreement and resume the 
“cooperative” imperative that governed their verbal interaction outside of 
school.
 44. O’Connor, M. C., & Michaels, S. (&993). Aligning academic task and partic-
ipation status through revoicing: Analysis of a classroom discourse strategy. 
Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 24(4), 3&8–335.
 45. Goodwin, M. H. (&99A). He-said-she-said: Talk as social organization among 
Black children. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
 46. See note 9 to this chapter.
 47. See note 44 to this chapter, p. 3!!.
 48. See note 44 to this chapter, p. 3!7.
 49. Caudhill, W., & Weinstein, H. (&969). Maternal care and infant behavior in 
Japan and America. Psychiatry, 32, &!–43; Minami, M. (&994). English and 
Japanese: A cross-cultural comparison parental styles of narrative elicitation. 
Issues in Applies Linguistics, ,, 383–4A7; and Murase, T., Dale, P. S., Ogura, T., 
Yamashita, Y., & Mahieu, A. (!AA5). Mother–child conversation during joint 
picture book reading in Japan and the USA. First Language, 2,, &97–!&8.
 5A. Heath, S. B. (&983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities 
and classrooms. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 5&. See note 6 to Chapter 7.
 5!. See note 6 to Chapter 7; and the third and fourth references in note 7 to 
Chapter 7.
 53. See note 74 to Chapter !.
 54. Liu, Y.-M. (!AA4). “Nothing can be accomplished if the speech does not sound 
agreeable”: Rhetoric and the invention of classical Chinese discourse. In C. 
S. Lipson & R. A. Binkley (Eds.), Rhetoric before and beyond the Greeks (pp. 
&47–&64). Albany: State University of New York Press.
 55. See note 79 to Chapter !.
 56. See note 5 to Chapter !, &.3.
 57. Xu, G. Q. (!AA4). Te use of eloquence: Te Confucian perspective. In C. S. 
Lipson & R. A. Binkley (Eds.), Rhetoric before and beyond the Greeks (pp. &&5–
&3A). Albany: State University of New York Press, p. &&8.
 58. See note 5 to Chapter !, &6.& and &5.&&.
 59. See note 5 to Chapter !, &7.&8.
 6A. See note 79 to Chapter !, p. &6.
 6&. See note 5 to Chapter !, &6.5.
 6!. “Chariots” is a reference to the size of a state during the Spring and Autumn 
and Warring State periods (7!!–!!& BCE). A chariot is a military vehicle with 
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3!5
four horses and three soldiers. “A thousand chariots” indicates a midsize state. 
Retrieved November 5, !A&A from http://www.cxgjdq.com/cy/ZmZzZm8.html
 63. See note 5 to Chapter !, &&.!6.
 64. See note 5 to Chapter !, &&.!6.
 65. See note 5 to Chapter !, pp. 46–48. Te authors argue that Heaven as a tra-
ditional translation of tian is inaccurate because Heaven denotes the 
Judeo-Christian concept, but this is not the meaning by tian. Tey decided not 
to translate this term for the Analects. I concur with the authors but have cho-
sen to use Heaven here for convenience.
 66. See note 6! to Chapter !. Jin Li’s translation.
 67. See note 5 to Chapter !, &7.&9.
 68. See note 5 to Chapter !, p. &!!.
 69. Lyon, A. (!AA4). Confucian silence and remonstration: A basis for delibera-
tion? In C. S. Lipson & R. A. Binkley (Eds.), Rhetoric before and beyond the 
Greeks (pp. &3&–&45). Albany: State University of New York Press, p. &37.
 7A. See note 5 to Chapter !, !.&3, 4.!4, and 4.!!. Also see &4.!7, I.&4, &!.3, and &3.!A.
 7&. See note 69 to this chapter.
 7!. See note 5 to Chapter !, &!.&.
 73. See note 5 to Chapter !, 8.4, &6.6, and &A.&.
 74. See note 69 to this chapter, p. &36.
 75. See note 69 to this chapter, pp. &36–&37.
 76. See the (rst reference in note 75 to Chapter !; and Ishii, S., & Bruneau, T. 
(&994). Silence and silences in cross-cultural perspective: Japan and the United 
States. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural communication: A 
reader (7th ed.) (pp. !46–!5&). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth for valued silence in 
contemporary Japanese culture.
 77. Cheng, C.-Y. (&987). Chinese philosophy and contemporary human communi-
cation theory. In L. Kincaid (Ed.), Communication theory: Eastern and Western 
perspectives (pp. !3–43). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
 78. See note 9& to Chapter 6.
 79. Paulhus, D. L., Hendin, H., & Shaver, P. R. (!AA&). European vs. Asian her-
itage diﬀerences in personality: Narcissism, modesty, and self-construal. 
Unpublished manuscript; and McCrae, R. R., Yik, M. S. M., Trapnell, P. D., 
Bond, M. H., & Paulhus, D. L. (&998). Interpreting personality pro(les across 
cultures: Bilingual, acculturation, and peer-rating studies of Chinese under-
graduates. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, &A4&–&A55.
 8A. See the (rst reference in note 75 to Chapter !.
 8&. Li, J., & Sklar, S. (!A&&). To speak or not to speak: European American eager-
ness versus Chinese reluctance. Manuscript in preparation.
 8!. Gao, G. (&998a). “Don’t take my word for it:” Understanding Chinese speak-
ing practices. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 22, &63–&86; and 
Chang, H. C. (&999). Te “well-de(ned” is “ambiguous:” Indeterminacy in 
Chinese conversation. Journal of Pragmatics, 3(, 535–556.
 83. See the Introduction to the Analects of Confucius in note 5 to Chapter !.
 84. See reference in note 47 to Chapter !.
 85. More detailed discussion on Asian listenership in later sections.
 86. See note 8! to this chapter.
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3!6
 87. Liu, I.-M. (&986). Chinese cognition. In M. H. Bond (Ed.), Te psychology of 
Chinese people (pp. 73–&A5). Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
 88. See, for example, the second and third references in note 4 to this chapter.
 89. Smith, D. (&99&). Children of China: An inquiry into the relationship between 
Chinese family life and academic achievement in modern Taiwan. Asian 
Culture Quarterly, (4(&), &–!9.
 9A. Sue, D., Sue, D. M., & Ino, S. (&99A). Assertiveness and social anxiety in 
Chinese-American women. Journal of Psychology, (24, &55–&63.
 9&. Liberman, K. (&994). Asian student perspectives on American University 
instruction. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, (8, &73–&9!. Also see 
Liu, J. (!AA!). Negotiating silence in American classrooms: Tree Chinese cases. 
Language and intercultural communication, 2(&), 37–54 for Chinese graduate stu-
dents’ showing respect toward professors by not speaking in U.S. classrooms.
 9!. See note 8& to this chapter.
 93. Zane, N. W., Sue, S., Hu, L.-T., & Kwon, J.-H. (&99&). Asian-American asser-
tion: A social learning analysis of cultural diﬀerences. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 38, 63–7A.
 94. See note 8& to this chapter.
 95. Triandis, H. C. (&995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder, CO: Westview.
 96. See the (rst reference in note 8! to this chapter and Yang, Y.-Y. (!AA&). ‘自己人’: 
一項有關中國人關系分類的個案研究 [‘One of us’: A case study on the clas-
si(cation of Chinese guanxi]. Indigenous Psychological Research in Chinese 
Societies, (3, !77–3&6.
 97. See the third reference in note & to Chapter !.
 98. Yang, Y.-Y. (!AA&). 自己人: 從中國人情感格局看婆媳關系 [Zijiren: From 
Chinese aﬀection pattern to understanding the relation between mother-
in-laws and daughter-in-laws]. Indigenous Psychological Research in Chinese 
Societies, (6, &–39.
 99. See note 3 to this chapter.
 &AA. See note 93 to this chapter.
 &A&. See the (rst reference in note 8! to this chapter.
 &A!. See the second reference in note 5& to Chapter !; note 93 to this chapter; Ting-
Toomey, S. (Ed.) (&994). Te challenge of facework: Cross-cultural and interper-
sonal issues. Albany: State University of New York Press; and Gao, G. (&998b). 
An initial analysis of the eﬀects of face and concern for “other” in Chinese 
interpersonal communication. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 
22(4), 467–48!.
 &A3. See note 8A to Chapter !; and the second reference in note 8! to this chapter.
 &A4. See the (rst reference in note 8! to this chapter.
 &A5. See note 9A to this chapter.
 &A6. See note 93 to this chapter.
 &A7. See note 3 to this chapter.
 &A8. See note 6A to Chapter 4; and Kim, H. S. (!AA8). Culture and the cognitive 
and neuroendocrine responses to speech. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, &4 (&), 3!–47.
 &A9. Yang, S.-Y., & Sternberg, R. J. (&997). Taiwanese Chinese people’s conceptions 
of intelligence. Intelligence, 2,(&), !&–!9.
Devil’s Advocate and the Reluctant Speaker
3!7
 &&A. See note !4 to Chapter 4.
 &&&. See the second reference in note 76 to this chapter; the second reference in 
note 8A to Chapter !; and Azuma, H. (&986). Why study child development in 
Japan? In H. Stevenson, H. Azuma, & K. Hakuta (Eds.), Child development and 
education in Japan (pp. 3–&!). New York: Freeman.
 &&!. See note 8! to this chapter; Young, L. W. L. (&98!). Inscrutability revisited. 
In J. J. Cumpez (Ed.), Language and social identity (pp. 7!–84). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press; and Gudykunst, W. B., & Ting-Toomey, S. (&988). 
Culture and interpersonal communication. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
 &&3. See note &&! to this chapter.
 &&4. See note &A to this chapter.
 &&5. See the second reference in note 8! to this chapter.
 &&6. See the (rst reference in note !9 to Chapter !; and note 53 to Chapter 5.
 &&7. See notes 33 and 77 to this chapter.
 &&8. See note &A to this chapter.
 &&9. See the fourth references in note &A! to this chapter; the third reference in note 
&&! to this chapter; and Young, L. W. L. (&994). Crosstalk and culture in Sino-
American communication. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 &!A. See note 8! to this chapter.
 &!&. See the (rst reference in note 8! to this chapter, p. &8A. In the third reference in 
note &&& to this chapter, Azuma discusses that speaking directly and sharply is 
considered arrogant and rude in Japanese culture.
 &!!. See the second reference in note 8! to this chapter.
 &!3. Fung, H., Miller, P. J., & Lin, L. C. (!AA4). Listening is active: Lessons from the 
narrative practices of Taiwanese families. In M. W. Pratt & B. E. Fiese (Eds.), 
Family stories and the life course: Across time and generations (pp. 3A3–3!3). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; and Miller, P. J., Fung, H., Lin, S., Chen, E. C.-H., & 
Boldt, B. R. (!A&!). How socialization happens on the ground: Narrative prac-
tices as alternate socializing pathways in Taiwanese and European-American 
families. Monographs of the society for research in child development, 77(&, 
Serial No. 3A!). Boston, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
 &!4. See note 33 to this chapter; and the (rst reference in note 8! to this chapter.
 &!5. See the (rst reference in note 8! to this chapter, pp. &69–&7A.
 &!6. Li, J. (&997). Creativity in horizontal and vertical domains. Creativity Research 
Journal, (0, &A7–&3!.
 &!7. Tis phrase came from Confucius’ words from the Analects, providing testi-
mony for the enduring in?uence of Confucius.
 &!8. See the (rst reference in note 8! to this chapter, pp. &69–&7A.
 &!9. See note 5 to Chapter !, p. 75.
 &3A. See the (rst reference in note &!3 to this chapter, pp. &34–&35.
 &3&. See note &A to this chapter.
 &3!. See the second reference in note !9 to Chapter 4; Huang, R.-J., & Leung, K. S. F. 
(!AA4). Cracking the paradox of Chinese learners: Looking into the mathemat-
ics classrooms in Hong Kong and Shanghai. In L.-H. Fan, N.-Y. Wong, J.-F. Cai, 
S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso (Eds.), How Chinese learn mathematics: Perspectives from 
insiders (pp. 348–38&). Singapore: World Scienti(c; and Lopez-Real, F., Mok, 
A. C. I., Leung, K. S. F., & Marton, F. (!AA4). Identifying a pattern of teaching: 
Cultural Foundations of Learning
3!8
An analysis of a Shanghai teacher’s lessons. In L.-H. Fan, N.-Y. Wong, J.-F. Cai, 
S.-Q. Li, & T.-Y. Tso (Eds.), How Chinese learn mathematics: Perspectives from 
insiders (pp. 38!–4&!). Singapore: World Scienti(c.
 &33. See the second reference in note !9 to Chapter 4.
 &34. See note &3! to this chapter.
 &35. See this discussion in the (rst part of Chapter 3.
 &36. Winner, E. (&989). How can Chinese children draw so well? Journal of Aesthetic 
Education, 23(&), 65–84.
 &37. See note &3! to this chapter.
 &38. See the third reference in note !9 to Chapter 3.
 &39. See the ()h reference in note !9 to Chapter 4, p. &!5.
 &4A. See the ()h reference in note !9 to Chapter 4.
 &4&. See note 49 to this chapter.
 &4!. Kagan, J., Kearsley, R. B., & Zelazo, P. R. (&977). Te eﬀects of infant daycare 
on psychological development. Evaluation Quarterly, (, &A9–&4!; and Swann, 
Jr., W. B., & Rentfrow, P. J. (!AA&). Blirtatiousness: Cognitive, behavioral, and 
physiological consequences of rapid responding. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 8(, &&6A–&&75.
 &43. See note 89 to this chapter.
