                                       9

    Implications for the Changing Landscape of Learning




As the natural flux of human history proceeds, the current world is always
different from the one just passed, no matter how people may de&ne the
current world and past worlds. All signs indicate, however, that the very
current world is not only as much in flux as any prior world, but the pace
of change is unprecedentally fast. Change is taking place on many fronts,
affecting virtually every aspect of human life. No doubt, with the advent of
science and technology, particularly communication technology, the world
is experiencing accelerated and often unpredictable change. (e term that
is used to capture this large-scale change is globalization. Political change is
seen in the democratization of nations, social change in everyday life within
nations, economic change in the cross-nation interdependency, scienti&c/
technological change in the explosion of knowledge and digitization of
the world, and, pessimistically, environmental change in the direction of
destruction. It is not surprising that many &nd this kind of change disori-
enting and dizzying. (e fragility and ephemeral nature of life are felt more
than ever before.


                     )lo,-l .-//ive .i)r-tion
As a result of all these changes, the world is witnessing massive popula-
tion migration.1 Two trends of this migration have been observed in recent
decades. First is the within-nation migration owing to economic/social/
political development. For example, more than 100 million migrant work-
ers in China have been leaving farming to rush to cities to &nd work, which
is visible in all the new construction that has taken place in China over the
past thirty years. (ese migrant workers surely make better wages than they
did tilling the land their ancestors have tilled for millennia. Many not only
migrate to nearby cities, but travel afar to seek greater economic reward.2

                                      !29
!!0                   Cultural Foundations of Learning

(e second trend, much more massive, is the cross-nation migration and
immigration (the former may not seek to settle down in the new culture but
the latter may). (e motivation for such massive global migration is driven
by the same forces as those within nation.!
    As part of the second trend, for example, we are seeing a surge of inter-
national students coming from many countries, especially newly emerging
economies such as China and India, to the West,4 particularly the United
States. (ese students, now able to afford better education,5 not only seek
traditional graduate training; many forego their countries’ undergraduate
and even high school education and enroll abroad instead. At the same time,
and for the &rst time in history, an increasing number of students from
the West, South America, Africa, and Middle East go to countries such as
China to study. Many Western people now work in non-Western countries.
Without any doubt, these trends have led to unmatched cultural exchange.
As a case in point, the remote town where I took my European-American
colleague to study rural Chinese children’s cognitive development in late
December 2004 was, to our shock, inundated with Christmas decorations
and music all over their streets.
    Consequently, few children today grow up in a self-contained cultural
bubble, or in the same place, speaking the same local tongue and inter-
acting with familiar people. More and more, children are born in one
place and then are moved to another. Many reside in multiple places and
speak multiple languages before reaching adulthood.: Immigrant fam-
ilies represent the highest-growing population group in the United States
and Europe, for example. (e new U.S. census data show that the nation’s
Hispanic population has reached more than 50 million (1:.! percent of the
total population) – an increase of 4! percent from 2000 to 2010. Although
the Asian-American population remains relatively small (about 15 million,
or 4.; percent of the total population), it witnessed the fastest increase of
4!.! percent for the same period. (ese changes were primarily a result of
the influx of new immigrants, compared to increases among nonimmi-
grant European-American and other ethnic populations.7 Additionally, we
are observing new migration patterns such as “cyclical migrants,” including
Mexican labor migrants who move across borders between rural and urban
residences. Moreover, families may reside in their host culture for a number
of years and then return to their home culture, and to continue to alternate
their residence between the two cultures. For this reason, they have acquired
the label “transnational families.”; Likewise, adolescent-aged students who
“drop” from Asian airplanes to attend Western high schools are the new
“parachute children.”9 Of course, there are millions of undocumented,
                       Changing Landscape of Learning                      !!1

either being shipped into the target land without a legal status or remaining
in the land of immigration beyond their visa allowance.10


                  inevit-,le cultur-l .er)in)
(e more frequent and profound exchange among cultures is likely to
enable them to borrow ideas, linguistic expressions, aesthetics, strategies,
and more effective ways to work and to manage their own lives. Indeed,
we see these trends of cultural merging, or hybridization, for example, in
food production and consumption (e.g., sushi restaurants now have prolif-
erated across North America and Europe), fashion design (Asian motifs are
increasingly noticeable), and &tness programs (e.g., karate studios are just
around the corner in practically any U.S. town). Of course, as noted in pre-
vious chapters, East Asia for at least the past 150 years has sought with great
effort to adopt many aspects of the West. Science and democracy are two
main pursuits that not only have never subsided, but actually have inten-
si&ed. East Asian educational systems were initially eager but clumsy cop-
ies of the American and European education systems, which only gave the
appearance of Western practice. Today, they are mandating Western-style
practice (e.g., emulating Western children’s free exploration and creativity
on the school ground).11
    As cultural exchange deepens, we have reasons to believe that cultural
differences may one day disappear and that we all will reemerge as one cul-
ture under the sun. (is is not a far-fetched thought, but was in fact (still
is) one that guided the quick assimilation policy (e.g., English-only school
instruction for Native-American children and quick transitional bilingual
program in school so that children of non-English-speaking backgrounds
could be assimilated into American culture).12 Others have proposed
this idea from the perspective of social cohesion that is seen as central to
society.1! Yet, still others see a trend that the world’s diverse peoples may
soon strive to become all European- and European-American-like,14 or, to
borrow a recent catchy acronym, WEIRD (white, educated, industrialized,
rich, democratic) folks.15


             v-ri-tion/ re.-in ?e/pite ?eepenin)
                     cultur-l eAcB-n)e
Undeniably, all the broadening and deepening cultural exchange will lead
to more learning among peoples and cultures as a whole. Doing so is both
necessary and advantageous for everyone. However, I join many researchers
!!2                     Cultural Foundations of Learning

in believing that the cliché of the salad bowl analogy in the United States is
actually not that cliché after all. Perhaps the melting pot is also correct in
some way, but only super&cially and to the extent that people from different
cultures can acculturate quite successfully. But such acculturative success, I
venture to say, is acculturated change without fundamentally altering peo-
ple’s enculturated core if enculturation takes place before acculturation (e.g.,
adults relocate from one culture to another). Research evidence reviewed
in this book suggests that the basic patterns of cultural learning models are
tenacious and unlikely to melt in grand uni&cation.
    To my mind, the strongest support for this claim comes from two
related lines of research. First is the fact that basic values and beliefs are still
endorsed and behavior guided thereby in cultures that have gone through
much of their political, social, and economic transformation, for example,
Japan, Korea, and Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and now China. (ese
societies enjoy comparably high levels of education of their populace. (ey
are certainly industrialized and commercialized, frequently even more so
than the West (one needs only to go to Hong Kong to see the complete
dominance of commercial life!). Because they have strong economies, they
are consequentially rich, reaping expected bene&ts from their economic
achievement. And &nally, many of these societies are democratic, having
adopted the Western-style political system. (e existence of these societies
provides perfect testing sites for the enduring power of culture, because
researchers do not even need to worry about comparability. Any confound-
ing effects stemming from the differences in socioeconomic level, length
of education, and political systems are naturally controlled for. (is means
that if two groups share much of their background, but they still differ in
thinking, feeling, and behavior, then the shared background cannot be the
explanation of differences. Culture must be the explanation. Indeed, despite
all these melting characteristics, comparative research on Western and East
Asian psychology, child development, and education has overwhelmingly
demonstrated very large and persistent cultural variations that show no
signs of disappearing.1: (is evidence casts doubt directly on the forecast
that all culturally diverse people would one day become alike under one
culture, speci&cally more like Westerners. As a good example, we observe
that China now has a national award called the “Award for Moving China,”
which is granted to people who make great contributions to society, but also
to exemplars of &lial piety.17 Chinese applications to UNESCO designed to
preserve their tangible (temples, archeological sites) and intangible (dance,
music, philosophy) cultural heritage are at a record high. On a more per-
sonal level, we also see that more and more Chinese children express their
                       Changing Landscape of Learning                     !!!

&lial piety to their parents through more expensive means such as taking
them on Caribbean cruises instead of cooking meals for them. Having more
resources may enable people to express their culturally formed desires and
values more readily, conveniently, and frequently. Cultural values may, sur-
prisingly, be perpetuated in this fashion.
    (e second support for the persistence of fundamental cultural values
comes from the mosaic nature of societies with high levels of diversity. (e
United States and other traditional immigrant societies such as Canada and
Australia offer good examples. Although their original immigrant popu-
lation is from European heritage, and still the majority, the rest of their
population – particularly the fastest-increasing sector – consists of many
ethnicities. However, just because diverse people live together and acquire
the same nationality and common language does not mean that they cultur-
ally and ethnically identify themselves with the majority’s cultural heritage.
In fact, great effort is made by each mosaic group to retain their own unique
cultural heritage. For such people, a bicultural existence is the norm.1;
    Relatedly, research on immigrants also overwhelmingly documents the
persistence of home cultural heritage.19 (is pertains not only to the current
&rst and second generations, but to those of later generations as the case of
&fth and sixth generations of Chinese Americans demonstrate. Research on
the learning beliefs of third and fourth generations of Japanese Americans
shows strong endorsement of hard work and other related learning virtues
despite much acculturation into mainstream social norms (e.g., commu-
nication with school).20 Although most research on immigrant population
addresses non-European groups, the same pattern, with little doubt, applies
to European immigrants as well. For example, European-American people
are more extreme than Europeans in many domains of psychology such
as independence, freedom, patriotism, litigation, and philanthropy.21 (ese
converging research &ndings clearly show that the European-American
people who immigrated to America did not form an entirely different cul-
ture by merging with Native Americans, but instead retained much of their
European heritage, most emphatically.


              Cultural Values Live on in Individual Members
In light of the aforementioned evidence, one is compelled to ask why cul-
tures tend to endure more than to collapse into one another despite such
unprecedented and accelerated cultural exchange? As far as I can iden-
tify, there are two large, related reasons for cultural endurance. First, as
cultural psychologists have theorized and documented, cultural models
!!4                   Cultural Foundations of Learning

live on because they enter into the minds of individual cultural members
by the process of enculturation/socialization.22 (is process is the one of
upbringing. Because of the intense parent–child bonds, these interac-
tions result inevitably in the strong internalized beliefs that individual
cultural members hold.2! So long as cultural members continue to exist
from generation to generation, cultural models are likely to survive in the
collective.
    But the critical eCcacy enabling cultural endurance lies in the moment
when individual cultural members become parents. By assuming the paren-
tal role, cultural members gain culturally acknowledged and often explicitly
granted (and legally privileged) prerogative to guide/instruct their children.
But more importantly, as discussed in Chapter 7, these cultural members
become willing and tireless executors of their culture’s models. (ey do so
because of their own beliefs and convictions. Although parents are largely
unaware of their role in cultural transmission, they are the most effective
and successful promoters of their cultural models. In this fashion, cultural
reproduction is ensured and perpetuated.
    What happens when adults and children encounter different and com-
peting cultural values as globalization is surely to cause? Cultures that have
a long history of such challenges may have already built effective fences
and strategies to deal with such challenges.24 (ese cultures have essentially
found a way to retain their core values while accepting the nonthreaten-
ing values from the outside. When faced with threats, they may actively
reject the directly contradictory beliefs and ideas outright or ignore them
altogether. For example, when Western painting was &rst introduced to
China, it was rejected by Chinese ink-and-brush painters because Western
aesthetics was totally incommensurable with Chinese aesthetics (“crafty”
was the judgment cast on Western painting; thus, Giuseppe Castiglione,
1:;;–17:: – known in Chinese as 郎世寧 – an Italian missionary, later
Chinese court painter, faced rejection for his effort to combine both painting
styles).25 Now, Chinese painting continues to thrive as the traditional form
while Western paining is accepted in China as a separate realm of aesthet-
ics. However, the more compatible beliefs may be absorbed, adopted, and
modi&ed because they do not pose a threat to the existing cultural models.
For example, the Western concept of eCciency in industry sat well with
East Asian cultures because the latter have a similar history and inclination
to seek better ways to do things. In extreme cases, a culture may decide
to adopt life-altering ideas from the outside (e.g., democracy, Marxism).
Many East Asian cultures witnessed such transitions during the turn of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. (ese undoubtedly painful political
                       Changing Landscape of Learning                       !!5

and social struggles stood a chance of succeeding only if external influence
turned into internal forces that demanded change.2:
    Cultural change notwithstanding, if a foreign idea is only adopted by
assimilation (meaning super&cial change), it is unlikely to alter the existing
belief system fundamentally simply because the new idea is merely assim-
ilated into a large and more established system. Quite the contrary, such
absorption may even serve to strengthen the original culture, perfecting it
rather than altering it qualitatively. If so, such modi&cations end up being
more peripheral than central, more super&cial than profound. (ese adap-
tive strategies in the face of cultural exchange are also transmitted to chil-
dren along with cultural core values. As a result, children are also likely to
grow up with defensive capacity. (is explains why, despite the destructive
forces of Cultural Revolution, today’s Chinese children still learn Confucian
values because they receive day-to-day Confucian socialization at home.
(e process also helps explain why despite their long assimilation into
American culture, third and fourth generations of Japanese Americans still
hold on to their basic learning virtues.27


        Cultural Values Are Intertwined with Individuals’ Identity
(e second large reason for persisting cultural values is that individual
beliefs are intimately connected to their identity. In a fast-changing world,
we observe that some things are indeed shed more willingly and even pur-
posefully by people. Nonetheless, other things are gripped more tightly and
guarded well by the same people. Whereas the former is expected, the latter,
to many, is surprising. For example, when I &rst bumped into Amish peo-
ple in Western rural Pennsylvania in the 19;0s, I was in utter disbelief that
there are such people in the United States. I thought that I went back almost
1,:00 years and treaded into the Land of Peach Blossoms (桃花源記) as a
&ctitious place, a utopia written by the Chinese poet/writer Tao Yuan-ming
in 421 CE.2; (e existence of groups such as the Amish in the deep swirl of
globalization attests to the fact that many, if not all, cultural groups hold on
to their cultural values tightly.
    (ose elements of the original culture that are jettisoned are likely to
be aspects not &tting their present adaptation. For example, Chinese-style
architecture for homes on a large lot with sets of rectangle-shaped court-
yards and open space in between simply cannot continue because of rapid
population growth, even though its architectural aesthetics is a unique and
signi&cant achievement in human history. (e Western invention of sky-
scrapers, with hundreds of apartment units that take much less land and can
!!:                     Cultural Foundations of Learning

accommodate many more families, is now the standard home architecture.
But even so, the Chinese also strive to preserve their courtyard architecture
and other cultural achievements such as Suzhou gardens as a cultural sym-
bol through the oCcial protection of the UNESCO.
    (ose things that people grip more tightly are a different story. (ese
are the time-tested but also culture-speci&c values that are indispensible
and dear to the people. (ese are likely elements that enter the core of peo-
ple’s cultural and ethnic identity. For example, Taiwan, after decades of not
requiring schoolchildren to study Confucian texts (presumably in response
of internal struggles of tradition and modernity), recently announced a new
educational policy proposal that requires all high school students to take
one class per week to read Confucian texts. Part of the reason for such a
requirement is for improving Taiwanese children’s “declined” moral educa-
tion, as seen in the deteriorated student–teacher relationships and increas-
ing bullying in school.29 Even China, after denouncing Confucian values
during the Cultural Revolution (19::–197:) and several decades of ambiva-
lent exploration into the past, somewhat clandestinely erected (in early 2011)
a large Confucius statue on its Tian An Men Square, the utmost political
center of China, both physically and symbolically. (ey now also con&dently
put Confucian excerpts in their language arts curriculum for their nine-year
compulsory education.!0 Furthermore, they issued national economic and
social policies that ring a de&nitive Confucian tone such as “peaceful and
prosperous society” (小康社會), ensuring that every family has suCcient
food, shelter, and secure and peaceful life. (is was a utopia as envisioned by
the great sages of Chinese culture thousands of years ago but was never pos-
sible to achieve. Now, after several decades of effort, this utopia (at least as it
was outlined by the Chinese government) has been, surprisingly, achieved
by China.!1 When China announced this national goal back in 19;2, it reso-
nated well with people, and subsequently the whole society engaged in con-
certed effort to achieve this goal. I argue that this type of concerted effort is
possible because the goal strikes a deep harmonious chord with long-held
cultural beliefs and desires that individual members share.
    (e development of children’s cultural/ethnic identity in a multicul-
tural or immigrant context offers a further example. It is also a well-known
phenomenon that overseas Chinese (and, for that matter, other immigrant
groups regardless of their cultural origin) are more traditional in some ways
than those living in China proper. How can this be? How can people who
live in a culture that demands them to become more assimilated into the
host culture, like the United States, for example, wind up being more tra-
ditional than folks who continue to live in their native culture and, for the
                       Changing Landscape of Learning                       !!7

most part, never had a day living abroad? To put this contrast more sharply,
Asian people who grow up in the United States, a culture that has very dif-
ferent values that frequently contradict Asian home values, uphold more
Chinese traditional values than their fast-changing Chinese contemporar-
ies in China. Yet, it has been repeatedly observed that Asian Americans
retain their cultural values in ways that Chinese in Taiwan, Hong Kong,
and China may &nd outdated, kitsch, and tacky (俗氣 or 土氣), particu-
larly among the motherland youth who tend to gravitate toward vogue and
break away from tradition.!2
    (e answer to this puzzling phenomenon lies in the fact that to the extent
that every human being develops and needs to come to terms with his or
her identity, cultural models continue to serve as sources and resources for
immigrant children’s identity development. (ose who left their native cul-
ture and settled in a new place have nothing to rely on but the cultural models
they took with them. Whatever they have is the model they use to cope with
their new adaptation and to rear their children (unlike the early waves of
immigrants, many current immigrants also maintain ties to their home cul-
ture thanks to the advancement of communication technology. Such effort
affords them renewed sources and resources from their home cultures). Some
cultural elements they brought with them originally may prove to be irrele-
vant to their new lives, and thus may be abandoned. But what de&nes who
they are, distinguishes them from other groups, connects them back to their
ancestral lineage, and what they do best lie at the very core of their sociocul-
tural existence, their identity, and is therefore unlikely to be discarded.
    (ere is a large body of research on human identity and its development.
Culture and ethnicity play an unquestionable role in shaping human iden-
tity. During psychology’s infancy, the great American psychologist William
James identi&ed two mutually constitutive perspectives of human self: the
“I-self ” and the “Me-self.”!! In his theory, the I-self is the knower, the side
that does the recognizing, observing, judging, forming goals, and taking
action for the self. (e Me-self is what is known about the self. It is the con-
tent of the self-description and self-characterization. To use a more current
metaphor that captures the distinction, the I-Self is the author or storyteller
whereas the Me-Self is the character in the story itself.!4
    Clearly, culture influences both sides of self-development. However, cul-
ture’s role may weigh more heavily on the I-Self within three dimensions:
self-continuity, self-distinctness, and self-agency.!5 Self-continuity is the
sense that we are the same persons over time, even though we all grow and
change throughout our lives. For those who live in a culture that is pene-
trated by a much larger and powerful culture and faced with diCculties of
!!;                    Cultural Foundations of Learning

maintaining their own culture, such as Native Americans living on reserva-
tions, their children’s challenged sense of self-continuity can lead to grave
consequences.!: Similarly, for those who are enculturated in one culture and
then move to another to be further acculturated, their sense of continuity
may also face challenges. All ethnic groups strive to maintain their sense of
continuity by actively teaching their home culture’s values to their children.
Retaining one’s cultural/ethnic identity is a serious developmental task for
such children!7 and has been repeatedly documented to be signi&cant pro-
tective factor for them.!;
    Self-distinctness is the sense that, despite commonly shared human char-
acteristics, we strive to retain our unique quality as a cultural group. For this
reason, we observe that unique cultural values along with the more visible
markers such as language, food, traditional garment, arts, and festivals of
a given culture are clear targets of distinctness. Children appropriate such
distinctness as their own as they grow up. Finally, self-agency is the sense
that we are the cause of our thoughts, actions, effectiveness, and achieve-
ment. (ings a culture is said to excel at may be the most relevant feedback
for self-agency. Children are more likely to be taught such skills, and in turn
perpetuate the excellence of that culture. For example, Asian movie makers
know that their martial arts movies are recognized throughout the world.
It does not surprise anyone that Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon would be
made by a Chinese movie maker, and made well. (ese three core compo-
nents of self as shaped by culture give rise to individuals’ sense of cultural/
ethnic belonging and pride. Research has shown that this identity-shaping
source of cultural/ethnic belonging and pride is essential in the develop-
ment of minority and immigrant children.!9


          le-rnin) ,elieD/ -/ p-rt oD one’/ i?entitE
Because children develop learning beliefs early on, &rst under parental
socialization and later under the joint socialization of parents and school,
culturally informed learning beliefs are part of children’s identity. (e degree
to which learning beliefs are integrated into children’s identity should reflect
the degree of the overall importance that a given culture attaches to learn-
ing. As reviewed in this book, learning beliefs differ from culture to culture,
such as purpose of learning, how to self-express in the West, and how not
to speak in social contexts in East Asia. We have reason to believe that the
more complex the skills children are required to learn in a given culture, the
more their learning beliefs matter to their identity. (is argument rests on a
simple assumption: the more complex skills children are required to learn,
                       Changing Landscape of Learning                     !!9

the more time they will spend on such learning. When a person spends
most of his or her time doing one kind of activity, that activity is bound to
be of high importance. Currently, owing to compulsory education, school
learning in the West, Asia, and most other cultures in the world has reached
this level of importance for learning. (e relative seriousness is perhaps
reflected in the length of the school day and school year, and the amount of
homework students are required to complete.
    It is true that not all children take school learning as their most impor-
tant activity, despite the fact that their cultures may hold such a view. But
many children do, perhaps not initially, but gradually when they take on
their culture’s view as their own. (ey do so also because their learning
beliefs serve them well, enabling them to achieve better and consequently
receive recognition from their culture. If learning models/beliefs did not
have any eCcacy and real bene&t, they would have been abandoned by
the culture. Based on research, learning with a virtue orientation certainly
assumes the utmost importance for most East Asian children and families,
but the same is also true for many children and families of Western and
other cultural groups according to their own cultural heritages. For these
children, learning occupies a central place in their identity. Once a part of
one’s identity, culturally informed learning beliefs will continue to guide
that person’s thinking, feeling, and behavior throughout his or her life.
    Viewed from this perspective, the two large reasons identi&ed for main-
taining cultural values are quite related. When children are young, they
are socialized by parents and their larger social world in accordance with
parental beliefs and convictions that are informed by their cultural learning
models. As internalization continues, these values become part of the chil-
dren’s mindset as they are growing up, and are eventually integrated as part
of their identity. When they mature and become parents themselves, they
repeat the same cycle in childrearing, thus renewing their cultural models.
    In sum, although globalization is accelerating and cultural mixing is
expanding, cultural learning models are unlikely to disappear or collapse
into one grand global consilience.40 Instead, different learning models will
continue to survive and revive across different groups, creating the ever-
widening mosaic landscape.


            cB-llen)e/ in cBil? ?evelop.ent -n?
                   e?uc-tion in e-/t -/i-
(e force of cultural retention and the force of cultural mixing lead
to inevitable tension that confronts childrearing and education. In a
!40                   Cultural Foundations of Learning

fast-changing world, it is unavoidable for children in any culture that is
open to the outside world to be exposed to values other than those of
their native culture. Many cultures are also actively seeking and borrow-
ing educational concepts and practices from other cultures and inten-
tionally subject their children to such mixed learning. (is even happens
within cultures with mostly homogenous population, such as China.41 I
recall being asked a few years ago to give workshops to school teachers in
China on how to foster creativity in Chinese children. I gave an example
of how my own son as an elementary school student in an American pri-
vate school was asked to pretend to be a plant in the garden. His learning
was to document how he as this plant grew and thus to observe the plant
everyday to describe its growth. It was a scienti&c as well as a literary pro-
ject. My son pretended to be a bitter squash in his grandma’s garden, a
vegetable beloved by the Chinese (as I discussed in Chapter 4). He did a
great job with his project, but admittedly under much nudging and super-
vision of his mother – me.
    Upon hearing this example intended to foster children’s creativity in
learning science and in writing, the Chinese teachers shook their heads
saying, “It is impossible for us to teach like that.” It was not the case that
they did not have the understanding of such teaching and learning or they
lacked ability to do so, but they rejected this way of teaching, for two rea-
sons. First, Chinese children must be prepared for their local and national
examinations that determine whether a given student will advance to higher
and more competitive schooling, given that their compulsory education
promises only nine years. (is type of free exploration takes time Chinese
teachers and students do not have. (us, teachers who participated in the
workshop regarded inquiry-based learning as a luxury. Second, this type
of free-ranging learning struck them as no different from herding sheep
(放羊式教育) – that is, letting children roam around aimlessly with no
measurable teaching and learning results at the end. How would we know
if the child learned anything? What is the difference between this type of
learning and growing vegetables as they have been doing before schooling
begins? What if children simply do not do it? Who makes sure that each
child will actually do it if it is totally up to the child to decide? What if
the child does not like it? (ese teachers asked many questions. To them,
this type of teaching is irresponsible and would not sit well with parents
most of whom do not have my kind of educational background (PhD) to
supervise their children. (ese teachers felt a responsibility to ensure that
every child receives the same education, and as such no child should be let
loose to wander off without instruction and guidance. If so, they reasoned,
                       Changing Landscape of Learning                      !41

they would have an education system of much inequity, because family had
to assume more responsibility. To my mind, there was a third objection
these teachers did not articulate but nevertheless implicitly expressed: Free-
ranging learning would forfeit the development of learning virtues, which,
according to the review of this book, is a serious cultural challenge.
    It is clear that Chinese and other East Asian educators as well as par-
ents have envied Western educational ideals for 150 long years. (is envy
has resulted in endless efforts to learn from the West. To be sure, and to
their credit, they have learned much that is worthy of learning (e.g., science,
democracy, and the whole formal educational system). I would argue that
they successfully mastered the content. But teaching and learning with the
Western approach, particularly free exploration, learning by interest and
choice, challenge to authority, and verbal communication – the backbone
of Western learning – have proven to be extremely diCcult. A case in point
is offered by most recent research conducted by Marieke van Egmond.42
She used my proposed conceptual mind- versus-virtue distinction to study
Chinese and German college students. She found that the supposedly more
westernized Shanghai college cohort and those Western-minded Chinese
students who chose to study in German universities still show more vir-
tue orientation and less mind orientation than their German peers. Given
that more than a century has been spent on borrowing Western learning
approaches, it seems to be taking an inordinately long time for them to
manifest themselves. It would be diCcult to argue that East Asia has not
tried hard. I would say that they have tried enough, even by the Confucian
standard for life-long self-perfection. Peculiarly and surprisingly, much of
the Confucian way has prevailed, as if hinting that the more effort is made
to eradicate it, the more immune it has become to such effort. It seems,
ironically, that a Sisyphus type of effort-failure spell has been cast on this
cross-cultural learning.
    We are compelled to ask: Why keep trying to change something that has
failed to change for 150 years? Or perhaps the question ought be posed in a
different way: Is it worth this effort? And to what end? After all, we pity and
laugh at Sisyphus, a mythological creation, because in our sane mind we
would not do what he does. If this were the behavioral pattern of an individ-
ual, few would think that this is normal human behavior. But East Asia does
not seem to have any problems with this type of continuously futile effort. I
think it is time for them to stop to ponder.
    As discussed in this book, the resistance to change is bound to happen
&rst because the basic family relationships continue without much chal-
lenge. If the senseless Cultural Revolution did penetrate into the family
!42                   Cultural Foundations of Learning

and managed to dent the family system, it did not destroy it permanently.
It would be hard to imagine any force that would succeed in eradicating
Confucian family relationships and childrearing practices after they have
survived for thousands of years. So long as this system continues, chil-
dren come to school with home-forged ideas, motivation, and behaviors.
Second, this resistance is expected because the tradition serves the people
well even in modern and globalized learning. Asian children’s repeated high
achievement in international education assessment undoubtedly strength-
ens their con&dence, and deservedly so. And the current economic success
of China and other East Asian cultures would have been unthinkable if
their people had been unwilling to make great efforts or learned only for
personal fun or interest. No one denies that much of East Asia’s economic
achievement reflects the economic processes and standards of the West.
However, it is also apparent that East Asia relied on, even in learning to be
like the West, their native learning model, namely those learning virtues
discussed in this book.
   I am not advocating that East Asian educators and parents should not
look at the West – or, for that matter, any other culture – in order to borrow
ways to help their children learn better. I am of the opinion that East Asia
stands to bene&t from contemplating ways to foster both models of learn-
ing. But this effort requires careful contemplation, design, and practice.
Before design and practice, there is an even more basic requirement: a shift
in a philosophical outlook. It is important that this learning from the West
not pit one model against the other, particularly condemning their own
Confucian model as inferior and embracing wholesome importation of
the Western model as a panacea for their educational problems. As alluded
to before, this way of learning from the West has proceeded in a schizo-
phrenic fashion. On the one hand, there is incessant condemnation of their
own tradition, but on the other, their cultural model survives and bene&ts
them, thanks to the tireless home socialization. Such learning for the past
150 years has had heavy liabilities and unintended consequences, and these
ought to be analyzed, recognized, and made clear to parents, educators, and
children themselves. East Asia is more likely to succeed in &nding outside
ways to improve their learning if these ways do not end up costing their
parent–child relationships, teacher–child relationship, and peer relation-
ships, all of which thrive on Confucian core values.
   In the larger scheme of learning, there are plenty of successful learn-
ers from East Asia who master both models well as a result of studying in
both systems (but such success within East Asia is highly questionable, as
                        Changing Landscape of Learning                         !4!

discussed previously). (ey are a good place for education designers to
start. On the high end, those Nobel Prize winners and great scientists of
East Asia such as C. N. Yang, T. D. Lee, and Y. T. Lee all grew up in East
Asian families and went to school there, but they later received Western
education and research training. Perhaps this is one way to contemplate
how to help children learn both ways. Such exemplars’ learning experi-
ences and creativity are usually sequenced from home culture to Western
culture, with the former laying a solid foundation and the latter fostering
creative breakthrough. Whether their early foundational learning turned
out to be an asset or a liability, or a liability stimulating creativity, this pro-
cess should be studied and documented. Important insights can be gained
to guide educational adjustment and parental socialization efforts.
    On the ordinary end, millions of East Asian students seeking under-
graduate and graduate education in the West for the past decades also offer
overwhelming examples of learning both ways. (ese learning experi-
ences deserve to be studied and analyzed and in turn offer useful practices
within East Asian cultures. Regrettably, very little research exists on such a
potentially enlightening topic involving such a large group of students. It is
intuitively vital to understand how such learners with deeply entrenched
learning beliefs from their home cultures encounter Western learning. Do
they undergo the same process as I did with my German studies? Do they
stumble over their own taken-for-granted cultural beliefs? If so, how does
that process unfold? How does it enable them to forge ahead and to achieve
creativity, as many ostensibly do? On the negative side, such a cross-cultural
reflection may end up eroding their self-con&dence, resulting in many
deserting their intellectual pursuits altogether. If so, how does their alien-
ation take place? It seems to me that such a research effort will yield signif-
icant insights into cross-cultural learning.
    Finally, learning both ways well may require designing speci&c and
thoughtful contexts within East Asia. For example, children could be taught
that both fun/interest-based learning and must-learn activities regardless of
personal interest (e.g., math and languages) are important. Schools can offer
contexts in which children’s own interests can be the primary propeller for
learning, but also contexts in which learning how to exercise virtues is the
main goal. Being able to learn both ways is certainly better than being able
to learn only one way. But how best to achieve such learning and education
will depend, in part, on knowledge backed by research on such experiments
and processes. In the absence of reliable research, experimentation is likely
to be haphazard and futile.
!44                    Cultural Foundations of Learning


      cB-llen)e/ in cBil? ?evelop.ent -n? e?uc-tion
                Dor e-/t -/i-n i..i)r-nt/
Whereas schools in East Asia have some leeway to decide which way, or
what combination of ways, to apply, immigrant children from East Asia to
the West have no choice but to plunge into the two learning models. East
Asians have been settling down in the West for more than a century, partic-
ularly in the United States, but very little research on their general accultur-
ation exists. Even less research is available on how children develop and are
socialized in developing their learning beliefs at home and school. (ere is
research on Asian Americans, but such research does not typically focus on
the immigrant context. Currently, 70 percent of Asians in the United States
come from the so-called two-generation families, with parents born and
raised in their home cultures and children born and raised in the United
States.4! As it turns out, this immigrant context is full of challenges and
risks.
   Child development in immigrant context has drawn increasing atten-
tion from researchers. In this section, I share some relevant &ndings from
my own research comparing learning beliefs of Chinese immigrant and
European-American children at preschool age. For the &rst set of &nd-
ings, we examined children’s achievement in three domains: oral expres-
sion, reading, and math.44 To our surprise, Chinese immigrant children’s
oral expression was signi&cantly below that of their European-American
peers, despite their often remarkable achievement in reading and math.
Moreover, their oral expression was also below the national mean (100).
In other words, Chinese immigrant children may know more literacy and
math than they are able to express. (ese research &ndings are especially
troubling against the cultural directive of verbal expression in America.
Even at age four, these children are signi&cantly behind their European-
American peers in this development.
   (e second set of research &ndings also pertain to Chinese immigrant
children’s self-expression.45 Recall the large differences in speaking versus
not speaking between the West and East Asia as discussed in Chapter ;. My
colleagues and I were interested in how Chinese immigrant children are
perceived by their teachers given the cultural difference and their low oral
expression found earlier. We looked at two groups of Chinese immigrant
children in two school contexts in comparison with European-American
children. (e &rst group attended Asian-dominant preschools, with 50 per-
cent or more Asian staff and children, commonly found in ethnic enclaves
such as Chinatown. (e second group of children attended European
                      Changing Landscape of Learning                     !45

American-dominant schools, with few or no Asian staff and children, in
the suburbs, typical for Chinese middle-class immigrant children. Needless
to say, all European-American children attended European American-
dominant schools. We also assessed children’s learning engagement, school
adjustment, and peer relations as a function of the teacher perceptions of
their quietness.
    We found that Chinese immigrant children, irrespective of their socio-
economic status, their English pro&ciency, and teachers’ own ethnic
background, are indeed perceived as less self-expressive and quieter than
their European-American peers by their teachers. Sadly, being quiet but
in European American-dominant schools, Chinese children showed less
learning engagement and suffered worse peer relations. However, being
quiet in Asian-dominant schools not only did not predict any negative
associations, but also was positively correlated with school adjustment and
learning engagement. In comparison, the quietness of European-American
children did not impact their learning engagement, school adjustment, or
peer relations at all.
    Taken together, quiet Chinese immigrant children did not fare well
intellectually and socially in European American-dominant schools even
when they came from a comparable socioeconomic status and spoke flu-
ent English. (ey faced these problems because, we suspect, their quiet-
ness in the European-American context was regarded as a negative trait.
However, their quietness was viewed as positive in learning and peer rela-
tions in schools where most adults and children were culturally similar to
them. (us, the traditional view in psychology that quietness somehow is
an immutable property, a personality trait, residing only inside the child is
questionable. Asian children’s quietness may be an oscillating object in the
eye of the beholder. Depending on who is looking at them, their quietness
can be viewed as positive or negative. Furthermore, it would be strange if
immigrant children who grow up in Western cultures that strongly value
and cultivate children’s self-expression turn out to be more quiet than chil-
dren in East Asia where judicious silence is truly golden. But this strange
situation may be surprisingly true with East Asian children in the West.
(eir home culture’s prized reluctance to speak may put them at risk in
their host culture.
    It is not easy for adults to imagine what it would feel like to be inno-
cent young children but cast in a negative light in a social context that is
supposed to help them learn and grow. It is also disheartening to think
about these children who step outside their protective home, where they
are showered with love and positive regard,4: into a place where they
!4:                   Cultural Foundations of Learning

receive negativity. Worse yet, such negativity is emitted under the false
pretence of positivity of loving and caring preschool. Most diCcult of all
is the fact that neither the immigrant families, nor the schools with their
well-meaning teachers and staff, nor the children themselves are cogni-
zant of this deeply hidden but effectual negativity. It is hidden because we
did not know about its existence until this research has revealed it. It is
effectual because it shows the associated negative impact on their devel-
opment. Nonetheless, although young and innocent, children are able to
perceive the contrast between home’s true positive regard and school’s
perplexing negativity. (is kind of daily experience between the positive
and negative cannot be harmless to children. Under such school social-
ization, Asian immigrant children’s development is likely to worsen as
they grow older.
    Unfortunately, there is severe shortage of research on Asian immigrant
children, and as a result, Western cultures at large are not well informed
about these children’s challenges and processes for successful acculturation.
Current education policies leave Asian children out because they achieve
well on paper.47 (us, their quietness may turn into quiet suffering. (ere
are many other areas that also show signs of concern because of East Asian
learning models and beliefs. For example, parents’ emphasis on academic
achievement may be suspected of doing psychological harm to children. As
discussed in Chapter :, peer harassment and bullying is rampant against
Asian immigrant children because of their perceived achievement.


         tBe nee? to un?er/t-n? ?iver/e cultur-l
                     le-rnin) .o?el/
(us far, I have said little in this chapter about whether the West should and
can learn something from East Asia. To be sure, the West has been learning
some things from East Asia, such as martial arts and contemplative prac-
tice, which is even entering today’s Western formal schooling. But I am not
aware of the concerted, long-term commitment to learning anything more
from East Asia on the part of the West. It is not my goal to entertain in this
book why this is the case. But I hope that this book can stimulate thinking
on this topic among interested readers.
    It is, however, my view that, if childrearing and education are to suc-
ceed in our accelerated globalized world, it is imperative that more research
be conducted on cultural learning models, children’s learning beliefs, and
related socialization. Globalization increases rather than reduces the need
for us to understand cultural variations. Undoubtedly, such research will,
                       Changing Landscape of Learning                        !47

on a more general level, inform cultures that are confronted with the ques-
tions of what to treasure and retain and what to reform and discard, what
to learn from the outside and what to create on their own. Engaging in
such debates can enable cultures not only to &nd their best ways to navigate
through and move along with the globalized world, but also to avoid costly
mistakes and irreparable damage.4;
    On a more practical level, such research will certainly inform cultures
that receive many international students who seek higher education, such
as the United States and many other Western cultures. Students from differ-
ent cultures bring with them deeply rooted learning beliefs when they come
to a culture for undergraduate or graduate education. Yet, if the receiving
cultures remain unaware of important cultural differences, or worse yet,
only stereotypically aware of super&cial “differences,” the receiving cultures
are bound to offer educational programs and pedagogy that do not serve
the students’ needs well. If so – and frequently it is the case – both the cul-
tures and international students stand to lose much.
    Last but not least, research on cultural learning models and learning
beliefs is also urgently needed to inform parents in their home cultures who
contemplate immigration to another culture (i.e., voluntary immigrants).
Knowing what might be at stake for their children may help them make
judicious decisions. For children already immersed in another culture, it
is imperative that parents, communities, and schools have full knowledge
of potential risks associated with immigration. Such awareness is the only
path toward &nding possible ways to ease the acculturative stress for fami-
lies and their children.
    (ere is really no need for a Faustian either-or bargain. It is quite possi-
ble to obtain knowledge and to retain one’s soul. Perhaps one simply needs
to respect and understand one’s cultural values and learning beliefs but also
venture into those of others. One can grow both with what has been encul-
turated and assimilated in one’s own culture and what has been acculturated
in another. As Voltaire once said, we all must cultivate our garden, planting
what is useful to us and removing the weeds that stifle growth.


                                    note/
 1. Portes, A., & Rumbaut, R. G. (2001). Legacies: The story of the immigrant sec-
    ond generation. Berkeley: University of California Press; Suárez-Orozco,
    C., & Suárez-Orozco, M. (2001). Children of Immigration: The developing
    child. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; Suárez-Orozco, C., Suárez-
    Orozco, M., & Todorova, I. (200;). Learning a new land: Immigrant students
    in American society. New York: Belknap; and Garcia Coll, C. T., & Marks, A.
!4;                      Cultural Foundations of Learning

     (2009). Immigrant stories: Ethnicity and academics in middle childhood. New
     York: Oxford University Press.
  2. Li, H., & Zahniser, St. (2002). (e determinants of temporary rural-to-urban
     migration in China. Urban Studies, 39, 2219–22!5, and National Bureau of
     Statistics of China. (201, March, 11). Rural migrant workers amounted to 225.42
     million (1:.;F of its total population) at the end of 200;. Retrieved April, 1:
     2011 from http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjfx/fxbg/t20110!10_4027100!2.htm
  !. See note 1 to this chapter.
  4. China topped the list of countries sending students to the United States, with
     127,:2;, making up 1;.5F of total international students, followed by India
     (15.2F) and South Korea (10.4F), and the largest increase of all sending coun-
     tries by 29.9F in academic year 2009–2010; also see Institute of International
     Education. (n.d.). Retrieved April, 1: 2011 from http://www.iie.org/en/Research-
     and-Publications/Open-Doors. China is also the largest country sending stu-
     dents to Europe, with the United Kingdom the top destination; see UK Council
     for International Student Affairs. (n.d.). Retrieved from April 1:, 2011 from
     http://www.ukcisa.org.uk
  5. As of 2009–2010, 70F of international students were funded by non-U.S.
     sources, with :2F from personal and family sources. Data from same source as
     the &rst reference in note 4 to this chapter.
  :. See note 1 to this chapter.
  7. U.S. Census Bureau. (2010). Overview of race and Hispanic origin: 2010 (Release
     No. C2010BR-02). Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/
     c2010br-02.pdf
  ;. Mahalingam, R. (Ed.). (200:). Cultural psychology of immigrants. Mahwah, NJ:
     Erlbaum.
  9. Zhou, M. (2009). Conflict, coping, and reconciliation: Intergenerational rela-
     tions in Chinese immigrant families. In N. Foner (Ed.), Across generations:
     Immigrant families in America (pp. 21–4:). New York: New York University
     Press.
10. Yoshikawa, H. (2011). Immigrants raising citizens: Undocumented parents and
     their Children. New York: Sage.
 11. See note 41 to Chapter ; for ethnographic descriptions of how some Chinese
     preschools are now actively promoting children’s critical thinking, exploration,
     creativity, and verbal expression.
12. Peréa, F. C., & García Coll, C. (200;). (e social and cultural contexts of bilin-
     gualism. In J. Altarriba & R. Heredia (Eds.), An introduction to bilingualism:
     Principles and processes (pp. 199–241). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
1!. See Putnam, R. D. (2007). E Pluribus Unum: Diversity and community in
     the twenty-&rst century: (e 200: Johan Skytte Prize lecture. Scandinavian
     Political Science, 30, 1!7–174 for his comprehensive research documenting that
     as American communities become more diverse, people tend to hunker down
     into their own private lives, resulting in less civic participation and trust of each
     other.
14. Rozin, P. (2010). (e weirdest people in the world are a harbinger of the future
     of the world. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 10;–109.
                         Changing Landscape of Learning                            !49

 15. Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). (e weirdest people in the
     world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, :1–;!.
1:. See, for example, Behrens, K. (2004). A multifaceted view of the concept of
     amae: Reconsidering the indigenous Japanese concept of relatedness. Human
     Development, 47, 1–27 for research on the unique concept of amae in Japanese
     parent–child and other relationships; and the third reference in note 51 to
     Chapter 2 for research on the prominence of shame and shaming techniques
     used to socialize children among Taiwanese.
 17. Baike (n.d.). Retrieved May 22, 2011 from http://baike.baidu.com/view/142;0.
     htmGsub142;0
1;. See Phinney, J. S., & Baldelomar, O. A. (2011). Identity development in multiple
     cultural contexts. In L. Arnett Jensen (Ed.), Bridging cultural and developmen-
     tal approaches to psychology: New syntheses in theory, research, and policy (pp.
     1:1–1;:). New York: Oxford University Press for a summary discussion on this
     topic.
19. See note 1 to this chapter.
20. Schneider, B., Hieshima, J. A., Lee, S., & Plank, S. (1994). East-Asian academic
     success in the United States: Family, school, and cultural explanations. In P. M.
     Green&eld & R. R. Cocking (Eds.), Cross-cultural roots of minority child devel-
     opment (pp. !!2–!50). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
21. Lipset, S. M. (199:). American exceptionalism: A double-edged sword. New York:
     Norton, and note 15 to this chapter.
22. See note 52 to Chapter !; and Bruner, J. (200;). Culture and mind: (eir fruitful
     incommensurability. Ethos, 36(1), 29–45.
2!. Bornstein, M. (Ed.). (1995). Handbook of parenting, Vol. 4. Hillsdale, NJ:
     Erlbaum.
24. See Wex, M. (2005). Born to kvetch: Yiddish language and culture in all of its
     moods. New York: Harper Collins for the Jewish example.
25. See Song, N. (1995). 鬆年 (()37–(906) 頤園畫語 [Song Nian (1;!7–190:) on
     painting in the Nurturing Garden (reprint)]. Shanghai: Shanghai Ancient Books
     for rejection of Western painting techniques by Chinese literati painters.
2:. See note 2 to Chapter 1.
27. See note 20 to this chapter.
2;. Tao, Y.-M. (19:!). 桃花源記, 古文觀止, 上 [(e land of peach blossoms in
     C.-C. Wu & D.-H. Wu (Eds.). Essence of classical literature, Vol.(]. Zhonghua
     Book Company.
29. See Taiwan Center for Chinese Curriculum. (n.d.). Retrieved April ;, 2011 from
     http://chincenter.fg.tp.edu.tw/cerc/9;ke.php for proposal to require high school
     students to read Confucian texts by Taiwan’s Ministry of Education.
!0. Hong, Z.-L. (2nd ed.). (2004). 義務教育課程標准實驗教科書:《語文》九年
     級. 江蘇教育出版社 [Chinese for 9th Grade: Standard experimental textbook
     for compulsory education] (Ed.). Jiangsu Province: Jiangsu Education Press.
 !1. (e term xioakang (小康之家), “every family with suCcient food, shelter, and
     secure and peaceful life,” then extended to a society of such families (小康社會),
     is the millennia-long aspiration in Confucian political and social thought. (is
     aspiration is not after wealth and luxury, but after contentment with life. It also
!50                      Cultural Foundations of Learning

     hopes for a community where the young are looked after, the old have a sense of
     belonging, peace and friendship are treasured, and people are worry free. (is
     type of community is the ideal of Chinese people for generations. For Chinese
     government to set xioakang as an economic and social goal for 1.! billion peo-
     ple, put a dollar &gure on it (H;00 annually per capita), and achieve it was no
     small accomplishment.
!2. When they visit China, some Chinese-American children receive remarks that
     their out&t is outdated, kitsch, and tacky (俗氣 or 土氣). Many people initially
     mistake Chinese-American children for poor kids from the countryside. Only
     upon hearing them speak flawless English would people believe that they came
     from the United States. Similarly, when I &rst came to Boston Chinatown in the
     19;0s, I thought that it was &lled with all kitsch Chinese stuff such as the images
     of dragon and phoenix, the pompous golden color on restaurants’ façades, and
     other “cheap” symbols of Chinese culture. But after some years in the United
     States, I &nd myself endeared to the “kitsch.”
!!. James, W. (1;92, 19:!). Principles of psychology. New York: Holt.
!4. Nakkula & Toshalis, 200:. Understanding youth: Adolescent development for
     educators. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
!5. Damon, W., & Hart, D. (19;;). Self-understanding in childhood and adolescence.
     New York: Cambridge University Press.
!:. Chandler, M. J., Lalonde, C. E., Sokol, B. W., & Hallett, D. (200!). Personal per-
     sistence, identity development, and suicide: A study of Native and non-Native
     North American adolescents. Monograph of the Society for Research in Child
     Development, 6)(2), vii–1!0.
 !7. See note 1; to this chapter.
!;. Kulis, S., Napoli, M., & Marsiglia, F. (2002). Ethnic pride, biculturalism, and
     drug use norms of urban American Indian adolescents. Social Work Research,
     26, 101–112.
!9. Juang, L. P., & Nguyen, H. H. (2010). Ethnic identity among Chinese-American
     youth: (e role of family obligation and community factors on ethnic engage-
     ment, clarity, and pride. Identity: An International Journal of Theory and
     Research, (0(1), 20–!;.
40. See Wilson, E. O. (199;). Consilience: The unity of knowledge. New York: Knopf
     for a proposal for a grand consilience of all knowledge.
41. See note 40 to Chapter ;.
42. Van Egmond, M. C. (2011). Mind and virtue: A cross-cultural analysis of
     beliefs about learning. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Jacobs University,
     Germany.
4!. U.S. Census Bureau. (2004). We the people: Asians in the United States, Census
     2000 Special Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
44. Li, J., Yamamoto, Y., Luo, L., Batchelor, A., & Bresnahan, R. M. (2010). Why
     attend school? Chinese immigrant and European American preschoolers’ views
     and outcomes. Developmental Psychology, 46(:), 1:!7–1:50.
45. Yamamoto, Y., & Li, J. (2012). Quiet in the eye of the beholder: Teacher percep-
     tions of Asian immigrant children. In C. Garcia Coll (Vol. Ed.), The impact
     of immigration on children’s development (pp. 1–17). Contributions to Human
     Development. Human Development. Basel: Karger.
                         Changing Landscape of Learning                           !51

4:. See note :2 to Chapter !.
47. For example, I spent two years doing research in a high school that was attended
    by some 400 Asian immigrant children. (ere was only one guidance counselor
    of Asian heritage. Yet, much of the school funding came from these Asian fam-
    ilies’ property tax. It was not much of a surprise that these children did not
    receive due service from the school district.
4;. During the Cultural Revolution, much of China’s Confucian tradition of learn-
    ing was attacked and abandoned. In the zeal of embracing Marxist educational
    ideology, millions of middle school, high school, and college-educated Chinese
    youth were sent to the countryside by Mao Zedong to receive so-called re-
    education from working people. (is ten-year-long educational experiment
    was based on the conviction of one man who held most power in the nation
    with the largest population on this planet. (e economic, social, and health
    costs to the nation, as well as individuals’ psychological suffering cause by this
    movement, are immeasurable.
