=== PAGE 217 ===
217© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2025
R. Hall, A. Boccanfuso (eds.), University-Industry Collaboration, International 
Series in Operations Research & Management Science 369, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-94913-5_12
Chapter 12
Gaining Support Within Companies 
for Collaboration
Chris Ramming
12.1  Introduction and Terminology
In general, for companies that engage with universities, some employees can be 
considered “practitioners” of university engagement while others can be consid -
ered “ stakeholders” in university engagement. Practitioners need to justify and 
implement a material investment comprising direct financial support, in-kind contri-
butions (such as equipment and facilities), and/or employee time. Stakeholders are 
the beneficiaries of the practitioners’ work and typically need to participate in some 
way to receive that benefit (e.g., with personnel and resources even if on an informal 
or intermittent basis). We will use the term “ collaboration” to describe the activi-
ties of engagement, for example, working together on a specific research project, 
hosting an intern, developing curricula, or advising students. Typically, practitioners 
have a deep understanding of both the university and the company, and they use that 
knowledge to motivate and orchestrate collaborations that advance the goals of 
stakeholders on both sides. This chapter is aimed primarily at supporting corporate 
practitioners of university collaboration, and indirectly at helping university-side 
collaborators understand the context and purpose of their collaboration from the 
broader corporate perspective.
Viewed through an organizational lens, practitioners are often members of a 
broader “Academic Engagement Team” (AET) with budgeted responsibility for 
leading and managing university collaboration in some form (see Callout 1). Some 
large companies have multiple de facto AETs focused on different facets of collabo-
ration, for example, research, talent acquisition, workforce development, strategic 
marketing, and corporate social responsibility. Some very large companies also 
have an umbrella “university relations” AET that helps coordinate the more 
C. Ramming (*) 
Portola Valley, CA, USA
=== PAGE 218 ===
218
specialized AETs and that can serve as a one-stop interface to universities engaged 
in multiple ways with a given company.
In some cases, the actual corporate collaborators are formally part of an internal 
AET, but in many cases, those collaborators are part of a stakeholder organization 
(such as a specific product team or business unit) that is intended to benefit from the 
collaboration activities. For example, a business unit leader may be a stakeholder in 
research that could potentially influence product roadmaps, and given an opportu -
nity for potential competitive advantage may be willing to formally dedicate and 
support activities needed to achieve the benefits of university R&D collaboration. In 
some cases, an AET practitioner will work to build stakeholder support in a “top 
down” manner (starting with the executive stakeholders), in other cases the support 
is built “bottom up” (through engineering stakeholders, product manager stakehold-
ers, and so on).
A theory of effective university–industry (UI) collaboration would be straight -
forward to describe but for a dizzying array of variations on the theme stem -
ming from
• Corporate strategy (manifested in the balance of emphasis on different forms of 
collaboration)
• Organizational design (especially degree to which university collaboration is 
managed by a centralized organization)
• The maturity and role of the company in its industry (which can influence the 
scope of university collaboration initiatives)
• The manner and ways in which other collaborators (government, nonprofits, and 
other companies) are incorporated into the collaboration
• the fundamental purposes and cultures of academia and industry (often leading 
to expectation misalignment that needs to be anticipated in the collabora -
tion design)
After introducing certain basic facets of university collaboration, this chapter will 
discuss complicating factors and their implications for the design, operation, and 
justification of AETs. This chapter will also highlight a case study that illustrates the 
application of suggested considerations.
12.2  Opportunities and Challenges
To make an effective case for university collaboration, the practitioner of UI col -
laboration needs to be an organizational “polymath”: technically astute, alert to 
corporate philosophy, capable of navigating a variety of organizational designs, 
adept at building support of key stakeholders, and strategically aware of the com -
pany’s maturity and its role in a broader industry context. Before diving into practi-
cal solutions and approaches, it is worthwhile to briefly tour some of the issues that 
a practitioner needs to consider.
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 219 ===
219
12.2.1  Alignment with Corporate Philosophy
To drive an effective AET, the corporate practitioner needs to be sensitive to the 
broader philosophy of their enterprise. Industry in the United States is primarily 
organized around the profit motive, and therefore, the returns on investment (ROI) 
of university collaboration need to be rationalized in terms of financial or strategic 
motivations, competitive advantage, and the opportunity costs of alternative invest-
ments. However, individual corporate philosophy also plays a role, and in some 
cases, the broader corporate philosophy can be either supportive or antithetical to 
specific forms of university engagement. The deciding factor in the strength or 
absence of university-facing functions is often the CEO’s approach to business. 
Here are several illustrations of the relationship between corporate philosophy and 
university engagement.
R&D Whether and how a company supports disruptive research depends in part on 
the company’s philosophy of growth. Does it deliberately fund “organic innova -
tion,” that is, home-grown new products and services? Or does it grow primarily 
through “inorganic innovation,” that is, the acquisition of companies with estab -
lished products and services? University collaborations can be relevant in both set-
tings, but the focus must be aligned with the broader corporate philosophy. For 
example, to focus on organic growth the practitioner might prioritize “research 
translation” metrics and incubation-related activities. To focus on inorganic growth, 
the practitioner might focus on scouting entrepreneurial faculty and on internal edu-
cation to create a more informed corporate “buyer” of acquisition targets early in 
their lifecycle.
Talent Acquisition In some cases, the hiring returns to a “talent acquisition” orga-
nization may be easy to quantify and justify. For example, a company establishing 
a new regional engineering office near a potential “talent feeder” university may see 
an attractive recruiting ROI from engagement with that university. Similarly, even 
without regional considerations, an organization may find that it needs to grow in 
skills that are best cultivated in a university setting. But executive preference can 
also be a deciding factor in the decision not to collaborate: for example, some com-
panies deliberately hire only experienced employees and do not recruit new gradu-
ates. Clearly, the decision to engage in technical collaborations and/or to fund 
university programs for a talent acquisition purpose is entirely dependent on broader 
corporate hiring policies and philosophy.
Corporate Social Responsibility In some cases, a company may be operated on 
tenets of “Stakeholder Capitalism” that seeks to benefit employees and society as 
well as shareholders. Such companies may be more willing to engage in long-term 
value creation even at the expense of short-term profits. On the other extreme, some 
companies adhere more to Milton Friedman’s view that “The Social Responsibility 
of a Business is to Increase its Profits,” which in some interpretations could put a 
skeptical eye on investments in certain kinds of university initiatives (e.g., diversity 
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 220 ===
220
and inclusion initiatives, speculative longer-term research), or perhaps simply favor 
forms of university engagement with more obvious marketing revenue drivers such 
as product placement and professional curriculum development.
The bottom line is that practitioners need to clearly understand the prevailing 
corporate philosophy as they seek support for AET initiatives.
12.2.2  Metrics: Key Performance and Effectiveness Indicators
To be effective in corporate settings, the practitioner needs to develop, monitor, and 
produce results in terms of metrics aligned to corporate priorities. A typical chal -
lenge for UI engagement is therefore to identify metrics and performance indica -
tors. These indicators serve two purposes: first, to help justify the investment in 
university collaborations, and second, to serve as management tools. However, 
picking metrics is notoriously challenging for university engagement:
• The benefits of university engagement are difficult to reduce to financial metrics 
such as expected net present value and revenue. Without such metrics, the prac-
titioner faces a thorny challenge in enlisting the support of business unit leaders 
and arguing for a budget to invest in collaborations.
• The total value of an engagement is the sum of incommensurable constituent 
metrics corresponding to the different facets of engagement (hiring, research 
outputs, strategic marketing, workforce development, employee development, 
etc.). As a result, it can be challenging to make an investment case to mid-level 
managers whose scope extends only to a subset of such facets. Correspondingly, 
the executive whose scope extends across these facets tends to be high in the 
organization, and may even be the CEO. This points back to the importance of 
aligning with corporate philosophy in the design of an AET.
• The business impact of a given investment can take many years to realize. This 
lag induces a reliance on leading indicators that by themselves may not be per -
suasive to business unit stakeholders (e.g., research publications may be a lead -
ing indicator of competitive differentiation, but do not always result in business 
impact).
In addition to these conceptual challenges, there are many implementation chal -
lenges in tracking university collaboration metrics. For example, at the infrastruc -
ture level, corporate HR systems may not be configured to capture information 
about whether a new hire was connected to a prior research collaboration.
More generally, the results of university collaboration (especially technical 
results) wend a long path from research groups to the benefiting product groups. 
Tracking the provenance of collaborative contributions is particularly tricky as ideas 
mature and as the custodian of those ideas move from group to group. Even when 
an AET initiates a university collaboration, other groups are ultimately responsible 
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 221 ===
221
for realizing business value, and the provenance of collaborative results can be for-
gotten along the way.
The bottom line is that an AET will be more successful if its plans and impact 
can be appreciated through the lens of relevant objective metrics.
12.2.3  Funding: Allocating and Managing Budgets
The corporate practitioner can “follow the money” to understand and support the 
company’s goals. In general, corporate budgets are carefully allocated to reflect 
business priorities. Clearly the decision to allocate funding in a particular way and 
to a particular organization or suborganization is an important decision. For those 
joining a new organization and trying to understand its philosophy of university 
engagement, the funding landscape can be analyzed to quickly appreciate an orga -
nization’s priorities and perspective on academic engagement. For example, fund -
ing through a corporate foundation or donor-advised fund clearly has a philanthropic, 
social responsibility component. In contrast, funding through a business unit or a 
functional group (HR, marketing) tends to be very focused on extending the goals 
of that business or functional group. And funding through a centralized organization 
such as the CTO office will suggest interest in looking beyond current lines of 
business.
Importantly, for those working to evolve a company’s approach to university 
engagement, reallocating the budget (however contentious it may become) can be a 
key management tool. Moving budget from one organization to another is one way 
to re-prioritize engagements to align with the purpose of the receiving 
organization.
The bottom line is that in the long run the returns on university collaboration 
need to track to the purposes for which funding has been allocated, or that funding 
can be at risk. The practitioner can sometimes use budget allocations to align effort.
12.2.4  Governance: Deciding How to Invest
The practitioner can extend support for university engagement by creating gover -
nance structures that extend responsibilities and ownership to a broader set of stake-
holders and supporters. In most corporate settings there is a close correspondence 
between budgets and decision authority over that budget. However, for centralized 
budgets in particular, and for university engagement programs that are not tied to 
quarterly profit and loss constraints, practitioners often find benefit in establishing 
governance structures that incorporate stakeholder input in the investment decisions.
For example, a centralized research AET may wish to empower a “technology 
council” or an “advisory council” or a “board of advisors” that reviews and recom-
mends investment proposals, strategic plans, and research collaboration progress.
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 222 ===
222
Although such councils are inherently inefficient in the sense that they compli -
cate decision-making and can be viewed as mere bureaucracy, councils comprising 
influential executives and technical leaders can nonetheless be valuable allies for 
building awareness and support for collaborations and individual project results. 
Ideally, council participants will both evangelize the program and help marshal the 
resources of their organizations around activities such as research translation. 
Deciding how to organize such governance structures is a key opportunity and 
sometimes a challenge. Once established, changing the governance approach can be 
as important a tool for evolution as reallocating the underlying budget.
The bottom line is that sharing responsibility and authority can increase buy-in 
and impact in university collaborations.
12.2.5  Organizational Design: Optimizing the AET Overlay
The practitioner will be more successful when the company’s AET(s) are thought -
fully incorporated into its organizational design. However, the multifaceted range of 
corporate interests (hiring, technology development, CSR, etc.) focused on a single 
category of partner (universities) means that there are many possible ways to design 
a company’s university-facing functions. The practitioner needs to consider how a 
given design affects their approach to university collaboration.
AETs are often implemented as “overlays” on other corporate business units (see 
Callout 1). Fully realizing the benefits of university collaboration therefore often 
requires practitioners to work effectively in a matrixed, highly decentralized organi-
zation. Importantly, the position of a practitioner within the larger company struc -
ture can be a factor in their effectiveness. “Centralized” practitioners may be more 
distant from day-to-day business priorities and less well positioned to identify and 
advocate for the most aligned university collaborations. Conversely, decentralized 
practitioners may be less aware and less fully incentivized or chartered to identify 
and advocate for university collaborations that serve the company but fall outside of 
an individual business unit purview.
Bottom line: practitioners need to consider and compensate for the strengths and 
weaknesses of their particular corporate design.
12.2.6  Evolution: Right Opportunities at the Right Time 
in a Company’s Lifecycle
The practitioner needs to be aware of the broader context of their company in order 
to pursue the most impactful strategic opportunities. An often-overlooked aspect of 
university–industry engagement is that companies evolve over time, sometimes 
with sharp inflection points in the university relationship. By thinking broadly about 
the evolving balance of corporate needs and the consequences for university 
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 223 ===
223
collaboration, it may be possible to anticipate and productively navigate change. 
For example:
• Startups face pressures that are different from those of an established company.
• Companies in a mature industry may have research priorities that differ from 
those in an emerging technology area.
• Conglomerates may have broader research interests and a different organiza -
tional structure than a company that is focused on a single line of business.
• Market leaders in tech-heavy industry segments may invest differently than new 
entrants (e.g., in pre-competitive research vs proprietary differentiation); even 
the format of the research may differ in this context. For example, a market 
leader may have a lower incentive to support open-source solutions than those 
trying to “catch up.”
Model of a Corporation with Academic Engagement Teams
There are many ways to organize a company and many ways to organize an 
AET within a company. A generic model of company organization contains 
one or more largely independent “business units” (BUs, e.g., manufacturing, 
design, or software) and one or more centralized cross-BU functions under 
leaders such as the chief technology officer  or human resources officer. 
Depending on the degree to which a company subscribes to Milton Friedman’s 
views on its desirable scope, there may also be a leader for corporate social 
responsibility to drive environmental sustainability, diversity, equity, inclu -
sion, and other forms of responsibility. Some companies minimize centralized 
functions by design, so their individual business units handle those functions; 
others seek synergies across lines of business and leverage centralized organi-
zations to drive synergies. An AET organization needs to be embedded in (aka 
overlaid on) the de facto corporate structure. It can be arranged in myriad 
ways. Some AET practitioners are “decentralized”, by which we mean embed-
ded in their stakeholder business units. Other AET practitioners may be part 
of a centralized organization such as the CTO office (logical for research- 
focused practitioners) or the HR office (logical for hiring-focused practitio -
ners). A practitioner’s university-related responsibilities may be full-time or 
part time, and may be formal or informal. A company’s practitioners may 
report to a single “centralized” leader or to separate leaders in their host orga-
nization. It is common for a company pendulum to swing between centralized 
and decentralized approaches as it evolves, reflecting the challenges of find -
ing a balance between business-unit-specific needs and generalized, less tai -
lored services. However, an AET is designed, the university-facing practitioner 
seeks to inspire and leverage collaboration from engineers, hiring managers, 
and others whose primary function and expertise does not involve university 
collaboration.
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 224 ===
224
In this light, the successful practitioner should prepare to lead the organization’s 
university-facing functions through growth and change.
Bottom line: it is essential to fully understand the company’s industry context 
and maturity in order to make an effective case for the “right” university 
collaborations.
12.2.7  Timescale Harmonization: Corporate with University
The practitioner needs to be aware of structural and cultural differences between 
industry and universities in order to motivate successful engagements. One of the 
most fundamental issues in UI collaboration is the difference in timescales and the 
pace of progress. Industry partners often work on quarterly or annual planning 
cycles, whereas PhD students need roughly 3 years to complete their thesis work. 
Industry partners are focused on bringing ideas to market quickly and predictably, 
whereas not every university project yields commercializable results. Even mature 
research at a university can take years to bring to market.
Timescales for patent commercialization can vary widely, but as explained in a 
report (Pressman et  al., 2022) prepared for the Biotechnology Innovation 
Organization (BIO) and the Association of University Technology Managers 
(AUTM), “there is considerable evidence that nonprofit technology is developed by 
its licensees for years after it is licensed but before products are sold.” The report 
cites studies showing between 3 and 8 years are needed to commercialize a licensed 
invention, which patent itself has presumably taken several years to issue.
Evidently, in life sciences, innovation timelines can be even longer as it can take 
over 10 years to go from “Phase 1” to regulatory approval (Thomas et al., 2021). In 
other disciplines, such as information technology (cloud computing, networking, 
etc.) and open-source software (OSS) may accelerate innovation and serve as a 
coordinating artifact, despite differing timescales. Practitioners need to manage 
expectations accordingly in the context of their company’s philosophy.
Bottom line: unless timescales are harmonized and expectations are set correctly 
on both sides, the practitioner will be challenged to motivate collaboration and 
deliver on realistic expectations.
12.2.8  Innovation: Bringing Research Ideas to Market
In many cases, the practitioner needs to have a systematic approach to “research 
translation” in order to motivate and operate collaborations with product impact. UI 
collaborations face a special challenge in managing innovation. Bringing a research 
concept (an “invention”) to market (“innovation”) requires significant corporate 
investment, often over the course of years. The responsibility for bringing a 
university- inspired idea to market often shifts to people outside of the university 
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 225 ===
225
collaboration apparatus (the AET). Setting the stage for a successful innovation 
trajectory is challenging, as is tracking the degree of impact on a new product once 
responsibility has been transferred to a product team. The timeframe for research 
translation can be years, and the evidence of impact can be diffused or lost as the 
fruits of a research collaboration evolve.
Bottom line: to maintain support and show evidence of impact, the practitioner 
needs to develop, retain, and articulate evidence of that impact over time.
12.2.9  Partnering: Recognizing When to Engage Government, 
Other Industry, and Nonprofits
The practitioner can often leverage and magnify funding and impact through broader 
external partnering, which can add to corporate appetite for university collabora -
tion. Industry–university collaboration is often influenced or supported by govern -
ments, yielding what are sometimes called “triple helix” collaborations that come in 
the form of joint investment, joint solicitations, and a range of contractual approaches 
from contracting to cooperative agreements. Motivating these forms of collabora -
tion requires an understanding of the benefits and tradeoffs relative to pure bilateral 
UI collaboration. Today, many governments are reflecting on how to maximize their 
nation’s investment in education and research (United States, 2022; National 
Science Foundation, 2022); optimizing UI partnerships is a topic of ongoing interest 
(Khargonekar et al., 2021). Section 12.3.8 discusses a present-day resurgence of 
interest in public–private partnerships.
Bottom line: the practitioner can be more effective when considering and creat -
ing options for funding and collaboration beyond bilateral university agreements.
12.3  Options, Solutions, and Impact
Touring the above-mentioned challenges and opportunities can help a practitioner 
inspire their colleagues with carefully chosen data and rationales for university col-
laboration. Here, we focus primarily on research collaborations; similar issues and 
analyses apply to workforce development, corporate social responsibility, and other 
facets of engagement.
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 226 ===
226
12.3.1  Alignment with Corporate Priorities
As described in section 12.2.1, practitioners of UI collaboration serve the interests 
of the corporation and need to accommodate that philosophy, whatever it is or may 
be. Moreover, in a subordinate role, proactively addressing change is crucial. Some 
of the actions a practitioner can take include
• Create programs that demonstrate returns in objective, quantifiable terms 
that reflect the corporation’s priorities. In general, it behooves the practitioner 
to design and maintain objective metrics of impact that substantiate the benefits 
of the engagement.
• Anticipate changes of control and/or philosophy. Especially for corporations 
that lean toward stakeholder capitalism, it can be helpful to anticipate the inevi-
table pendulum swings and forcing business cycles, which lead to company- 
wide scrutiny of its prioritized investments. By operating in a “worst case” 
mindset per Andy Grove’s famous motto, “Only the Paranoid Survive,” the UI 
practitioner can develop a living portfolio of results that can be used to educate 
new executives and respond effectively to the inevitable strategy reformulation 
“fire drills.”
• Partner with business unit leaders/stakeholders . In general, business unit 
leaders are acutely aware of profit-and-loss (P&L) drivers and, as such, are able 
to help gauge whether an AET and its programs contribute in a meaningful way. 
As implicit or explicit stakeholders in UI collaborations, their support can be 
crucial in justifying a central budget as well as augmenting that budget for BU- 
tailored initiatives.
• Earn the support of internal technical community leaders . To the extent a 
company’s strategy is based on leadership in the state-of-the-art, technical com-
munity leaders benefit disproportionately from insight into academic research 
frontiers. As such, the fellows, principal engineers, and those aspiring to become 
technical leaders see direct albeit sometimes intangible value in academic 
engagement. For example, when the corporate promotion philosophy includes 
technical leadership criteria, academic engagements can play an important part 
in helping those practitioners succeed. These largely intangible “human resource” 
returns can nonetheless contribute to support for centralized, longer-term UI 
investments.
• Market UI programs internally. In general, newsletters, workshops, and con -
ferences serve the important function of raising awareness within a company and 
in turn creating new opportunities to leverage collaborations on behalf of busi -
ness opportunities. Investing in internal marketing therefore is a crucial align -
ment technique.
Notwithstanding the importance of these “defensive” measures, it is also sometimes 
possible for practitioners/leaders of an AET to more proactively identify and shape 
corporate direction and philosophy. In particular, AET leaders have a seat at the 
discovery table and are privy to deep insight about the potential technical direction 
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 227 ===
227
of their industry. With a birds-eye view of that landscape, new business directions 
can sometimes be identified that afford the university research team a leadership 
position in shaping the company’s future. Moreover, an experienced AET leader 
may be positioned to help a company understand when changes in its evolution can 
be supported with new AET activities (see Sect. 12.3.5). In this light, the chief tech-
nology officer (CTO) generally has sufficient position power to effect change and is 
often a key partner and stakeholder in translating related insights into corporate 
strategy effects.
12.3.2  Metrics
An important exercise for practitioners is to define relevant performance indicators 
as a way of aligning with the purpose and philosophy of the AET and its specific 
purpose within the company’s priorities. These metrics would be defined at multiple 
levels: for the AET as a whole, for specific programs within the AET’s purview, and 
for specific collaborations within a program. The metrics would unambiguously 
show the value of the research (measures of effectiveness) and serve as useful man-
agement tools along the road to business value (measures of performance). Ideally 
the metrics would be necessary and sufficient to characterize and manage the desired 
collaborations. In an ideal world, the raw metrics would be straightforward to imple-
ment without excessive overhead.
Because of lengthy research timescales, the first order of business (especially for 
a newly created AET) is to develop “leading indicators” of success that can be used 
to manage engagements. For example, academic publications and/or patents can be 
viewed as leading indicators of meaningful product impact given that the academic 
peer review process and the patent system have both been honed over decades to 
identify novel advances. A collaboration that is intended to produce non- incremental, 
disruptive innovation might further recognize only publications in top-tier confer -
ences and journals, on the theory that the competition and quality bar for such con-
ferences is higher. But even that higher bar does not assure impact, which can only 
be judged retroactively in part by “trailing indicators” such as citations by other 
researchers and actual use in revenue-generating products.
In the longer run, the important industry metric must be measured in financial 
terms and may not take place until long after the university engagement is complete, 
and it may not be easily recognizable as deriving from the collaboration. The prac-
titioner therefore needs to find ways to track progress even after custody of a 
research concept has moved into a business unit. Special care should be taken to 
document successful research translation into revenue-generating products and ser-
vices, as these become the quantifiable metric for justifying continued investment.
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 228 ===
228
12.3.3  Funding Approaches
Common funding structures and their implications are listed in Table  12.1. These 
structures are not mutually exclusive and can reinforce each other. For example, 
companies that have both centralized funding (typically in a CTO office, as part of 
a corporate HR apparatus, etc.) and decentralized funding (in a business unit) may 
impose conditions on distributing that funding to universities. An example of such a 
condition might be a requirement for business units to provide matching funds as an 
indicator of commitment.
One responsibility and opportunity for AET practitioners, especially in a grow -
ing company, is to understand when specialized purposes have grown in importance 
such that a change to such funding structures is needed. Such changes may be 
Table 12.1 Potential academic engagement team funding structures
Funding approach Example pros Example cons
Inferred AET 
values
Centralized funding via 
operating expense 
(OpEx) budget
• Less constrained by 
current line of business 
priorities/biases
• Economies of scale in 
operating personnel
• Separation from 
business units, 
complicating 
research translation 
into product
• Subject to short-term 
business cycle 
fluctuations
• Company 
wishes to 
pursue 
strategic 
objectives 
beyond 
quarter-to-
quarter P&L
Centralized funding via 
a corporate foundation 
or donor-advised fund
• Less constrained by 
current line of business 
priorities/biases
• Not subject to short-
term OpEx budget 
fluctuations
• Cannot be used to 
accrue “prohibited 
benefits” such as 
Intellectual Property 
(IP) rights
• Company 
invests in 
corporate 
social 
responsibility
Distributed funding by 
business units via 
“operating expense” 
budget
• Line of business 
stakeholders improve odds 
of direct research 
translation (“innovation”) 
into products
• Not likely to lead to 
new lines of 
business
• Company 
expects 
concrete, 
short- term 
benefits from 
investment
Distributed or 
centralized funding 
by organizational 
functions (e.g., talent 
acquisition, R&D, 
CSR, marketing, 
training)
• Isolates facets of interest 
(e.g., hiring) and supports 
specialized engagements 
for that purpose
• Leads to AET 
fragmentation and 
complicated 
interfaces between 
different aspects of 
university 
collaboration
• Company 
values some 
particular 
facet of 
collaboration
Funding allocated to 
“research councils” 
representing 
specific technical 
disciplines contributing 
to the company’s 
success
• Isolates facets of 
technical interest (e.g., 
networking, storage, 
architecture) and builds 
internal alignment around 
related research
• Difficult to evolve 
budgets as new 
technical priorities 
emerge
• Company 
values a 
particular 
technology 
stack
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 229 ===
229
induced by factors such as growth in the company or changes in the external envi -
ronment and competitive landscape. The practitioner can then take a leadership role 
in articulating the need, defining the approach, and implementing the solution.
For example, it may be that curriculum, product donation, and talent aspects of 
university engagement are all initially handled by the same AET team that is focused 
on research engagements. However, as the program or company grows, it may prove 
more efficient to fund and operate those facets through the work of specialized 
teams. Alternatively, it may be that a company initially grows de facto AETs in 
several of its individual business units and has no centralized AET with independent 
funding. This arrangement may not work well if the company enters a phase where 
it is aggressively seeking growth through organic innovation: the business units will 
be predisposed to bolster their existing lines of business instead of seeking new 
opportunities.
Another motivation for centralization, as seen in the case study, can be the need 
to respond to a company-wide strategic challenge that would not be “in scope” for 
AETs organized by technical discipline.
12.3.4  Using Agreement Vehicles to Align UI Timescales
As a rule of thumb, collaborations with clearly defined technical goals and short 
time horizons are the easiest to justify, and that justification will typically be best 
described and evaluated by engineering team stakeholders in a company’s decen -
tralized business units. The research topic itself can also dictate whether the engage-
ment is best conducted in a decentralized or centralized business unit. Research 
related to improving existing products will most naturally be homed in an existing 
business unit. In contrast, those business units may be unable to support or even 
appreciate research that is disruptive or adjacent to their products and services. 
Agreements need to be tailored to the timescale of the engagement.
Consulting At one extreme end of the spectrum are consulting agreements (with 
faculty or students) meant to solve a specific product engineering problem. Often 
involving confidential parameters and well-defined objectives with clear timelines 
for impact, consulting agreements are best motivated and managed in a decentral -
ized fashion. Engineering teams can take the lead on initiating and defining such 
collaborations and generally have the mechanisms and processes to onboard the 
faculty without involving the AET practitioner. Even so, a centralized AET team 
may be helpful in tracking and understanding the frequency, number, and partici -
pants in such consulting arrangements as they pertain to the overall value of a spe -
cific university relationship.
Interns and Visiting Faculty  Student internships and visiting/sabbatical faculty 
arrangements are typically more open ended than consulting agreements, but still 
need to be hosted in research and distributed engineering teams to be impactful. The 
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 230 ===
230
technical value of these collaborations is often best assessed by those directly col -
laborating. There can be crossover motivation and value to (typically centralized) 
talent acquisition AETs, as intern programs often serve to feed an early-stage hiring 
pipeline. Importantly, interns focused on longer-term, more open-ended research 
collaborations are often on an academic career trajectory. It can be viewed as a 
“win” even when these interns become faculty instead of employees, especially 
when they continue to collaborate as faculty. The timescales for developing early- 
career faculty relationships span many years and require a long-term mindset on the 
part of the AET’s corporate stakeholders.
Joint Appointments Joint faculty appointments are an emerging form of collabo-
ration that concurrently tackle defined short-term proprietary business problems (in 
the role’s employee persona) and broader, longer-term research opportunities (in the 
role’s faculty persona). There is typically grass-roots industry motivation for joint 
faculty, and evaluating the success of an employee relationship is handled by day- 
to- day business processes. However, because the university is intimately concerned 
with the success of the arrangement, a centralized team may add value in supporting 
the university relationship in defining and executing the opportunity, and represent-
ing the joint employment as an element of a broader engagement with the partner 
university (UIDP, 2024).
Sponsored Research Agreements (SRAs) move further down the spectrum toward 
longer time horizons and increasingly open-ended problem formulations. These can 
take the form of individual faculty support, affiliate program engagement (Stanford, 
2024), large-scale research centers (Tennenhouse, 2004/2016), and other formats. 
Maintaining corporate support for SRAs can be challenging for a practitioner 
because universities operate on longer timelines than corporate product develop -
ment. For example, PhD programs involve three or more years of research, com -
pared to product groups in some industries that operate on quarterly planning cycles. 
Moreover, the connection between university research and revenue is rarely direct.
One approach to building support for sponsored research collaborations is to 
handle the earliest phases of university research projects with a centralized team 
until it matures enough to be actionable by a business unit, and then bring it to the 
business unit’s attention for a follow-on phase of advanced development. With this 
approach, the business unit need not be distracted by early explorations, but at the 
same time an opportunity to shape and guide the research may be lost. The dilemma 
for engagement management can sometimes be handled in a lightweight way by 
inviting business unit personnel to provide strategic context to the university teams 
and convey enough strategic perspective to inform research directions. Tracking the 
progression of early-stage research is arguably best done by a centralized team, 
potentially using indicators discussed below in the research translation section.
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 231 ===
231
12.3.5  Company Maturity
Importantly, as companies progress in their lifecycle from startup to maturity, their 
broader needs for university research collaboration can evolve significantly. The 
practitioner may benefit from considering the company and industry context when 
building support for collaboration. At one end of the spectrum are startups, and at 
the other, are established industry leaders.
At the risk of overgeneralization, startups seek to minimize technical risk by the 
time of their founding and are focused more on engineering than the discovery of 
additional fundamental breakthroughs. Thus, the need for university collaboration 
may not be urgent and, if conducted at all, the research may be focused on other 
benefits, such as talent acquisition, use case discovery, and solving complementary 
problems. In fact, open-ended research collaborations may be viewed as a distrac -
tion in a company’s early days. For example, despite being strong proponents of 
research and innovation, Intel’s founders are said to have discouraged research proj-
ects outside of their core product for fear that it would inspire people who, like 
themselves, left a prior employer to pursue an idea that could not be realized in the 
existing business model. Whether or not this story about Intel’s founders is apocry-
phal, “brain drain” is a risk.
At the opposite end of the spectrum from startups, mature industry leaders have 
the scale and perspective to take responsibility for the overall health of their indus-
try. It can be helpful to a practitioner to recognize when this shift takes place within 
the company or when shifts in the industry technology landscape take place. Often 
those shifts signal the opportunity to launch new and impactful collaborations. (See 
the semiconductor industry case study).
12.3.6  Research Translation
Research translation (aka “innovation,” the process of moving discoveries into 
products, services, and practice) is notoriously challenging. Universities and inter -
nal research groups are traditionally focused on expanding the sum of human 
knowledge with new ideas and discoveries (“invention”). The research process itself 
is lengthy, requiring years to build expertise and years to make meaningful new 
contributions, subject to some probabilistic combination of sweat equity and seren-
dipity. Moreover, putting those inventions into practice (“innovation”) is equally 
challenging. The process of incorporating an invention into a new product or service 
is lengthy, fraught with technical risk (can the engineering team even incorporate 
the result?), market risk (will product managers discover a compelling “product- 
market fit”?), and go-to-market risk (will the company’s sales apparatus be success-
ful?). In general, it can take years to bring a research idea to market.
One key strategy for building an R&D pipeline is to use a funnel model in which 
a large number of initial exploratory engagements is managed primarily by 
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 232 ===
232
members of the AET, then winnowed down through systematic criteria until the 
concept and its relevance are mature enough to make a case for direct business unit 
stakeholder engagement. At that point responsibility for the collaboration may shift 
from the AET to the business unit. Potential indicators of progress in a funnel are 
illustrated in Fig. 12.1—such milestones can be tracked by an AET to help maintain 
support for the overall program and help prioritize projects to actively drive to the 
next phase. Importantly some ideas are compelling enough to skip intermediate 
stages, for example, a business unit may take direct interest in a compelling univer-
sity breakthrough based solely on the university’s work.
Importantly, research translation within a company is not always the principal 
rationale for collaboration. In some cases, the research is aimed at eliminating bot-
tlenecks in other parts of the technology ecosystem, for example, the parallel pro -
gramming bottleneck illustrated in the semiconductor industry case study.
The relationship of university collaboration to inorganic growth is also interest -
ing to consider. In some fields, such as computer science, leading faculty and stu -
dents are often highly entrepreneurial. Thus, engaging in university collaboration 
can provide a window into the evolution of an emerging industry. Berkeley’s tradi-
tion of 5-year research centers has resulted both in technical advances such as 
Apache Spark (Apache Software Foundation, n.d.) and Ray (Berkeley, n.d.)), which 
in turn underpinned in influential “unicorn” startups (Databricks, 2013) (Anyscale, 
2019) that have fueled important disruptive progress (including OpenAI’s ChatGPT, 
which uses Ray (McManus, 2023)). In some cases, faculty startups may prove to be 
competitors, and in some cases partners, and in some cases acquisition targets in 
their own right.
Publications, 
preferably in 
top-tier 
venues
University 
prototype 
(validating 
the concept)
Internal 
research 
prototype 
(validating 
corporate 
relevance)
Internal 
business unit 
prototype 
(validating 
product-
market fit)
Evolving the 
business unit 
roadmap
Fielded 
product/serv
ice
Fig. 12.1 Research translation indicators. Intermediate steps can be skipped in some cases
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 233 ===
233
When working with entrepreneurial faculty, there are multiple innovation path -
ways available. Consider the example of Google and the research involving the 
PageRank algorithm (Page et al., 1998). iIndustrial collaborators in that research 
would have understood the algorithm well enough to incorporate the algorithm into 
their own products, an approach sometimes called “organic innovation,” but 
despite Stanford’s marketing efforts none licensed the patented algorithm. 
Ultimately the originating students leveraged the patented intellectual property 
and their know- how to create a company that could hypothetically have been 
acquired at some point by some larger company as an element of a contrasting 
“inorganic innovation” strategy. Neither pathway was taken; Google stood on its 
own and is now one of the most valuable companies in the world.  In hindsight 
however, the value of a collaboration with that team could have been realized 
through either organic or inorganic innovation approaches. On the organic innova -
tion pathway, an engineering team would have been the stakeholder. On the inor -
ganic innovation pathway, an “corporate development” team (Corporate Finance 
Institute, 2024) would have been been the stakeholder. On yet a third and interme-
diate pathway lies partnering, where the stakeholders would have been some com -
bination of the two.
12.3.7  Broader Cross-Sector Partnering
Emerging technology is increasingly central to the evolution of many industries: 
biotechnology, energy, telecommunications, semiconductors, computing, and 
manufacturing, to name a few. Universities are key contributors to technology 
progress as well as talent creation. Despite the challenges of engaging with uni -
versities—timeframe alignment chief among these—successful industry leaders 
have a long tradition of engaging closely with universities and are generally moti -
vated to continue doing so. Meanwhile, international rivalry and societal disrup -
tions caused in part by the rapid pace of technological progress are causing 
governments to become more active in shaping and funding novel public–private 
partnerships. In the United States, the CHIPS and Science Act seeks to reinvigo -
rate the semiconductor industry through a public–private partnership, the National 
Semiconductor Technology Center (NSTC), building from a long tradition of 
public–private partnerships in the semiconductor industry (Peña et al., 2021). The 
Act also authorized the National Science Foundation (NSF) to launch a new 
Technology Innovation Partnerships (TIP) directorate chartered with increasing 
the pace of research translation and the economic benefits of the government’s 
investment in basic research; public–private partnerships are a key tool of the TIP 
directorate.
An AET practitioner can leverage government partnering to increase the scale of 
available funding, which can help defray costs. At the same time, broader partnering 
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 234 ===
234
sometimes comes with complications that can hinder support within companies. A 
nonexhaustive list of considerations for multistakeholder collaboration includes:
• Governance. Multistakeholder decisions about the scope of solicitations, pro -
posal review and selection, and post-award management can be challenging in a 
setting with representatives from multiple sectors.
• Theory of competition. Many public–private partnerships (PPPs) include com-
panies that are explicitly competing with each other (Semiconductor Research 
Corporation, 2024). Competition and cooperation require careful management. 
Potential mitigations can include, for example, scoping the research focus in 
precompetitive time horizons, defraying the cost of common infrastructure, 
addressing ecosystem issues such as interoperability, or mitigating industry 
externalities (carbon footprint, public safety, etc.).
• Technology strategy. PPPs are often rooted in an explicit or implicit technology 
strategy, which can become a key topic of governance. A technology strategy for 
a PPP requires a deep understanding of the broader ecosystem and the role of 
other government and industry organizations.
• Intellectual property . When a PPP develops technology, the disposition of 
intellectual property can be a key factor in the success of the partnership.
As discussed in Section 12.5, PPPs are poised to become an even more important 
tool in evolving the national research enterprise.
12.4  Case Study: Inflection Points 
in the Semiconductor Industry
This case study illustrates how an Intel AET motivated the company to pursue an 
industry-scale research agenda through academic partnership, drawing on a number 
of ideas presented in this chapter.
In the late 2000s, the semiconductor and software industry faced a key inflection 
point. Driven up until that point by a combination of Moore’s “Law” and Dennard 
Scaling, microprocessor consumers saw remarkable and regularly-cadenced 
improvements in the capabilities of their personal computing based largely on 
increased clock speed. When that clock speed trend tapered for fundamental techni-
cal reasons, it became apparent that frequency scaling would need to be replaced by 
other foundations, in particular by increasing the number of processors rather than 
their clock speed. Unfortunately, this transition heralded a crisis in that software 
would need to be rewritten to take advantage of multicore scaling, whereas consum-
ers had previously experienced the benefits of frequency scaling without any change 
to the underlying software. To address this industry-wide problem, Microsoft and 
Intel teamed up to launch a prominent, large-scale university research initiative 
called the “Universal Parallel Computing Research Centers” (UPCRC) (Green, 
2008) and funded both the University of California at Berkeley and the University of 
Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, to do fundamental research in parallel programming. 
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 235 ===
235
The UPCRC initiative helped reorient the entire programming community at a cru-
cial inflection point in semiconductor technology and was followed by sustained 
large-scale government-funded initiatives such as the NSF XPS program (National 
Science Foundation, 2012). Today, parallelism has been richly explored and relevant 
techniques are now incorporated into computer science curricula worldwide. Only 
mature industry leaders, such as Microsoft and Intel, would perceive the benefit of 
tackling industry-scale problems, and only mature industry leaders would be in a 
position to make sufficiently large-scale investment to “move the needle.”
The UPCRC case study is illustrative for UI research practitioners in multiple 
dimensions corporate evolution, governance, funding, and partnering. Clearly both 
sponsor companies recognized the need to help address an industry-wide need, and 
both were at a point in their own evolution where it was possible to make a needle- 
moving investment. However, the corporate mechanics were nontrivial. Up until the 
launch of UPCRC, a set of decentralized Intel “research councils” controlled indepen-
dent university grant budgets on a topical basis, generally with small grants (Ramming, 
2013). The incumbent research council system was ideal for addressing a variety of 
defined research areas through consensus mechanisms, but was not well positioned to 
recognize or respond to fundamental shifts in the industry structure. Budgets in that 
funding/governance regime had been largely static over time, without regard to indus-
try or corporate context. In order to fund a large-scale UPCRC initiative, Intel Labs 
centralized a large fraction of its research council budgets and revamped the decision 
process to more easily follow from a de novo view of corporate research priorities. By 
centralizing some previously decentralized funding and introducing a new gover -
nance model, Intel positioned itself to tackle a strategic priority at scale.
Meanwhile, Intel’s manufacturing arm continued its quest to advance process 
technology with ever-lower feature sizes on a regular cadence. A key tool was and 
continues to be the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC), a long-standing 
PPP that funds pre-competitive university research and supports workforce develop-
ment (Semiconductor Research Corporation, 2024). Today, dimensional scaling of 
process technology is reaching asymptotic limits (Kim, 2024). As a result, “fabless” 
semiconductor companies, such as Nvidia, are growing in value relative to the 
actual manufacturer (Intel, TSMC), because architectural differentiation offers 
enormous competitive advantage in important applications, such as artificial intel -
ligence. Moreover, computing has become an increasingly important national secu-
rity asset, prompting the bipartisan “CHIPS and Science” legislation intended to 
“strengthen American manufacturing, supply chains, and national security, and 
invest in research and development, science and technology, and the workforce of 
the future to keep the United States the leader in the industries of tomorrow” (White 
House, 2022). As a result, the National Semiconductor Technology Center (NSTC) 
is now being established (National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST, 
n.d.)) For practitioners in the semiconductor and computing industries, the NSTC 
represents an important development and a forcing function to revisit UI strategies 
in ways that complement the work of the SRC.
Bottom line: The practitioner who can anticipate strategic inflection points in an 
industry and in a company will be better positioned to navigate change and shape 
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 236 ===
236
productive outcomes. UI engagement naturally provides the practitioner with the 
advanced insights needed to anticipate and address such change.
12.5  Takeaways and Future Strategies for Motivating 
UI Collaboration
The intent of this chapter has been to shine a spotlight on issues that can help the 
corporate practitioner navigate within a given corporate structure, in the context of 
a company’s evolution, and in the context of broader industry issues. A quick recap:
• Align initiatives with the broader corporate philosophy and be alert to evolution 
in that philosophy.
• Select metrics that accurately reflect and track progress against goals that are 
meaningful in the context of an AET’s function.
• Be alert to the implications of internal funding approaches and align initiatives 
accordingly. Alternately, shape those funding approaches to support the needed 
initiatives.
• Leverage governance structures to create buy-in and support for important 
initiatives.
• Structure collaboration agreements that harmonize timescales and goals for both 
the company and the university.
• Be versed in the many facets and approaches to “research translation,” given its 
prominence as a motivation for university collaboration.
• Be alert to broader opportunities for broader cross-section partnering.
Armed with these insights, the practitioner can motivate collaboration and play a 
meaningful role in shaping a company’s opportunities.
Looking beyond current practice, the practitioner may also need to consider 
nation-scale and global context. The mid-2020s are seeing a confluence of disrup -
tive trends in the US research enterprise that call for thoughtful response by UI 
collaboration practitioners. As documented in the NSF’s biennial report on the state 
of U.S. Science and Engineering (National Science Board, 2024a), US leadership in 
science and technology faces increasingly stiff competition (especially from China) 
while the US educational apparatus is failing to prepare a future scientific workforce 
that leverages the full potential of the US talent base with the proficiency needed to 
remain a STEM leader. More fundamentally, there are structural problems in the 
division of labor between government, industry, academia, and the philanthropic 
sector. Some data points (National Science Foundation, 2024b; National Science 
Board, 2024) concerning international competition:
• China is the top overall producer of Science & Engineering (S&E) publications 
(crossover in 2017).
• China is growing rapidly in publication quality as assessed by its fraction of “top 
1%” of highly cited publications.
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 237 ===
237
• China is trending to surpass the United States in R&D expenditures.
• China has surpassed the United States in patenting activity.
• China has the greater knowledge and technology-intensive (KTI) manufactur -
ing output.
• China is now awarding more S&E degrees than the United States.
Some data points concerning the US S&E workforce:
• Only 50% (approximately) of graduate and postdoctoral students/researchers are 
US citizens.
• Roughly 30% of master’s and doctor degree students have temporary visas.
• Women and minorities continue to be under-represented in the science and engi-
neering workforce.
Some data points concerning structural changes in the research enterprise:
• US R&D funding by industry has outpaced the growth in other sources.
• Although growing in absolute terms, the proportion of federal funding for basic 
research has dropped (since 2011) from 65% of the total to 40%, while industry 
has grown from 20% to 35%.
Recognizing these challenges, the National Academy of Sciences identified UI part-
nership as a key opportunity for progress in its 2024 “State of Science Address” 
(McNutt, 2024). Meanwhile, the National Science Board (Reed, 2024) provided 
congressional testimony calling for the mobilization “of all the country’s assets – 
government (at all levels), industry, academia, and nonprofits” through a more 
actionable National Technology Strategy. Dr. Reed’s testimony included these calls 
to action:
To stay competitive, we will need more coordination and partnership among government, 
academia, and industry to speed the translation of research, develop talent in areas of 
national need, seed STEM-based economic development nationwide, and inject critical 
technologies into our national defense ecosystem.
The radical changes in the R&D landscape call for a new approach that maintains the ben-
efits of our distributed system while still positioning our nation for competitive success. 
Facilitating a truly national S&T strategy will require the ability to effectively and effi -
ciently execute a whole-of-government effort, prioritize resources, and work hand-in-hand 
with our industry and academic partners, while being held accountable for progress toward 
agreed upon national goals.
A key enabler of radical change and progress has been the 2022 CHIPS and Science 
Act, which appropriated tens of billions in funding for the semiconductor industry, 
initiatives such as a National Semiconductor Technology Center, which is creating 
opportunities for UI collaboration to advance the state of the art. The act also autho-
rized enormous sums for R&D and innovation including a new “Directorate for 
Technology, Innovation, and Partnerships” within the National Science Foundation. 
Finally, the act calls for the development of a 4-year comprehensive national science 
and technology strategy, under the guidance of the Office of Science and Technology 
Policy (White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, 2024). These all 
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration
=== PAGE 238 ===
238
represent meaningful opportunities for UI practitioners to formulate novel and 
meaningful collaborations (public–private partnerships in particular) using the prin-
ciples developed in this chapter. With tools of engagement and visibility into the 
horizons of research, the industry practitioners of UI engagement can be leaders in 
helping corporations contribute and compete more effectively.
References
Anyscale (2019). Anyscale “about us”. https://anyscale.com
Apache Software Foundation (n.d.). Spark: A unified engine for large-scale data analytics . 
Retrieved from Apache Foundation: https://spark.apache.com
Berkeley Rise Lab (n.d.). Ray project site. https://rise.cs.berkeley.edu/projects/ray
Corporate Finance Institute. (2024). Corporate development.  https://corporatefinanceinstitute.
com/resources/management/corporate- development- guide/
Databricks. (2013). databricks.com/about- us. https://databricks.com
Green, K. (2008, March 19). Intel, Microsoft push parallel computing. MIT Technology Review. https://
www.technologyreview.com/2008/03/19/221324/intel- microsoft- push- parallel- computing/
Khargonekar, P., Kurose, J., Martin, C., & Martinis, S. (2021). Report of NSF workshop on a 
national network of research institutes (NNRI) . National Science Foundation. https://faculty.
sites.uci.edu/khargonekar/files/2021/07/NSF_NNRI_Workshop- _Report_Final.pdf
Kim, K. S. (2024). The future of 2D semiconductors beyond Moore’s Law. Nature Nanotechnology, 
19(7), 895–906. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565- 024- 01695- 1
McManus, R. (2023, January 17). How ray, a distributed AI framework, helps 
power ChatGPT. The New Stack . Retrieved 2024, from https://thenewstack.io/
how- ray- a- distributed- ai- framework- helps- power- chatgpt/
McNutt, M. (2024, June 26). 2024 State of science address.  National Academies. https://www.
nationalacademies.org/event/41687_06- 2024_the- state- of- the- science
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). (n.d.). National semiconduc -
tor technology center.  https://www.nist.gov/chips/research- development- programs/
national- semiconductor- technology- center
National Science Board. (2024). The state of U.S. science and engineering 2024. https://ncses.nsf.
gov/pubs/nsb20243/
National Science Foundation. (2012, October 22). Exploiting parallelism and scalability (XPS).  
https://new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/xps- exploiting- parallelism- scalability/504842/
nsf13- 507/solicitation
National Science Foundation. (2022). Directorate for technology, innovation, and partnerships 
(TIP). https://new.nsf.gov/tip/about- tip
National Science Foundation. (2024a). I/UCRC program description. https://iucrc.nsf.gov/
National Science Foundation. (2024b). Science and engineering indicators. https://www.nsf.gov/
statistics/seind/UI
Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., & Winograd, T. (1998). The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing 
order to the web. http://infolab.stanford.edu/~backrub/google.html#ref
Peña, V ., Slusarczuk, M.  M., Mandelbaum, J., Tucker, M.  A., Goldman, A.  R., & Thrift, 
E.  M. (2021). Lessons learned from public-private partnerships (PPPs) and options to 
establish a new microelectronics PPP . Institute for Defense Analysis. https://www.ida.
org/research- and- publications/publications/all/l/le/lessons- learned- from- ppps- and- options 
- to- establish- a- new- microelectronics- ppp
C. Ramming
=== PAGE 239 ===
239
Pressman, L., Planting, M., Moylan, C., & Bond, J. (2022). Economic contributions of university/
nonprofit inventions in the United States: 1996-2020. AUTM. Retrieved from https://autm.net/
AUTM/media/About- Tech- Transfer/Documents/BIO- AUTM- Economic- Contributions- of- 
University- Nonprofit- Inventions_14JUN2022.pdf
Ramming, J. C. (2013, February 11). Intel’s open collaborative research model. GUIRR Meeting: 
A Patent System for a New Innovation. National Academies.
Reed, D. (2024, April 2). National science board testimony. National Science Foundation. https://
www.nationalacademies.org/event/41687_06- 2024_the- state- of- the- science
Semiconductor Research Corporation. (2024). Member roster . Semiconductor Research 
Corporation: https://www.src.org/src/member/roster/
Stanford University. (2024). About industrial affiliates programs. industrialaffiliates.stanford.edu.
Tennenhouse, D. (2004). Intel’s open collaborative model of industry-university research. Research 
Technology Management, 47(4). https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2004.11671637
Thomas, D., Chancellor, D., Micklus, A., LeFever, S., Hay, M., Chauduri, S. et al. (2021). Clinical 
development success rates and contributing factors.  https://go.bio.org/rs/490- EHZ- 999/
images/ClinicalDevelopmentSuccessRates2011_2020.pdf
UIDP. (2024, January 30). The evolution and impact of joint faculty employment in university-indus-
try collaborations. https://uidp.org/the- evolution- and- impact- of- joint- faculty- employment- in-  
university- industry- collaborations/
United States. (2022, August 9). Chips and science act. Public Law 117-167 . Washington, DC, 
USA. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW- 117publ167/uslm/PLAW- 117publ167.xml
White House. (2022, August 9). FACT SHEET: CHIPS and Science Act will lower costs, create 
jobs, strengthen supply chains, and counter China.  Retrieved 10/2/2024, https://www.white-
house.gov/briefing- room/statements- releases/2022/08/09/fact- sheet- chips- and- science- act- 
will- lower- costs- create- jobs- strengthen- supply- chains- and- counter- china/
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. (2024, March 15). National strategy 
on microelectronics research . https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp- content/uploads/2024/03/
National- Strategy- on- Microelectronics- Research- March- 2024.pdf
Chris Ramming Over the course of his career, Ramming has worked extensively at the intersec-
tion of industry, academia, and government. At DARPA, Intel, and VMware he led programs to 
invest in a broad range of academic research collaborations across networking, cloud computing, 
security and privacy, artificial intelligence, and sustainability. His research investments spanned 
individual grants, large centers, multinational engagements, and joint programs with government 
and other companies. To realize meaningful research results in new products and services, much of 
Ramming’s work has involved the translation and incubation of ideas emerging from those invest-
ments. He presently serves in an advisory capacity to organizations that leverage and facilitate col-
laborative R&D, including UIDP.org, DARPA’s Information Science and Technology Study Group 
(ISAT), CRA.org/industry, Natcast.org, and the Confidential Computing Consortium. Ramming 
received a BA in computer science from Yale College and an MS in computer science from UNC 
Chapel Hill.
12 Gaining Support Within Companies for Collaboration