
=== PAGE 1 ===
The NSF Engineering Research Centers and the
University–Industry Research Revolution: A Brief
History Featuring an Interview with Erich Bloch
Barry Bozeman 1
Craig Boardman 2
ABSTRACT. The NSF engineering research centers (ERC)
program served notice of a sea change in university research
funding and institutional designs, representing a transition from
department-based, principle investigator-oriented university
science to a new center-based model encouraging universities
to work with industry and to work beyond the strictures of
academic disciplines. In our view, the past three decades of U.S.
science and technology policy have not seen an institutional
change of greater importance. This paper begins with a brief
history of the ERC program, including discussion of the
program’s origins, goals and research foci, growth, and
inﬂuence as a model for other science center programs in the
U.S. and abroad. Our ‘‘primary data’’ include an interview with
Erich Bloch, former NSF director who was one of the chief
architects and advocates for the ERC program. Because of the
historical importance of this interview, we present the entire
interview with the original material largely unaltered. We
conclude with discussion of the managerial challenges that
ERCs face within the context of traditional university
structures.
JEL Classiﬁcation: O32, O33, O38, O31, O30
In 1983, in the midst of a perceived U.S.
‘‘competitiveness crisis,’’ a National Academy of
Science panel recommended that the National
Science Foundation (NSF) establish interdisciplin-
ary centers for engineering research. The resultant
engineering research centers (ERCs) were not the
ﬁrst U.S. university research centers, nor even the
ﬁrst NSF-funded university research centers, but
they nonetheless served notice of a sea change in
university research funding and institutional
designs, constituting perhaps the genesis of the
multipurpose, multidiscipline, university research
center (MMURC), depending upon one’s deﬁni-
tion (Bozeman and Boardman, 2003). Prior to the
establishment of ERCs, there were certainly multi-
disciplinary, multipurpose and even multi-institu-
tional NSF centers, but none approached the
scope or scale of the ERCs. Whereas the NSF had
experimented with centralized, university-based
research centers with its materials science research
centers and its industry/university cooperative
research centers, the ERCs were different in goals,
design and, not insigniﬁcantly, the magnitude of
funding.
The goal of the ERC program to revolutionize
engineering research and education by focusing
more on interdisciplinary problems, building
closer ties between industrial and academic
research, and providing a different, more hands-
on education for engineering undergraduate and
graduate students. Engineering had been a step-
child of the NSF for many years but was soon to
have its own directorate and already had its own
NSF director, Erich Bloch, a professional engi-
neer who had not only spent his career in
industry but also never obtained a Ph.D., a ﬁrst
for the NSF director’s ofﬁce. The ERC program
has indeed revolutionized engineering research
and education. Not only has it inﬂuenced the way
other federal departments and agencies approach
the scientiﬁc and technical research problems
which lay at the heart of their institutional re-
search missions, but it has also fostered the estab-
lishment of similar research endeavors abroad.
The ERC program was, particularly at its
inception, quite controversial. NSF was the house
1Research Value Mapping Program
School of Public Policy
Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA 30332
E-mail: barry.bozeman@pubpolicy.gatech.edu
2Research Value Mapping Program
School of Public Policy
Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA 30332
Journal of Technology Transfer, 29, 365–375, 2004
# 2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
=== PAGE 2 ===
of basic science. More precisely, it was the house
of peer-reviewed, investigator-initiated basic
science. Now, in the name of competitiveness, it
seemed to some that the hallowed mission of NSF
was being diverted. Worse, there was widespread
fear that funds for small science, investigator-
initiated projects, would be siphoned off for
centralized centers operating not under traditional
grants but under cooperative research agreements,
a recently implemented expedient.
Today, one does not often hear the term
‘‘competitiveness’’ (though with a continued
recession, the catch phrase may enjoy a revival)
and the ERCs, now more than 20 years old, are
no longer in the eye of the research funding storm.
Indeed, the centers proved sufﬁciently popular
that other NSF centers programs have been
spawned, most signiﬁcantly the broad-based
science and technology centers (STC) program.
Moreover, while the ERC and STC programs
were in many respects pioneering, other large
research funding agencies, including the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and Department of
Defense, have bank-rolled a signiﬁcant number of
university-based research centers. When one adds
to the list the many state government-sponsored
university ‘‘centers of excellence’’ programs and
the centers established by the universities them-
selves, one ﬁnds that the university research
landscape has changed remarkably during the 20
years since the ERCs were a gleam in Erich
Bloch’s eye. In 1983, the academic department
and its laboratories was the place where university
research was performed. Today, there are hun-
dreds of university research centers and about
one-third of academic scientists and engineers are
afﬁliated with a multi-disciplinary, and often
multi-university, research center.
In our view, there has been no more important
institutional change in the past three decades of
U.S. science and technology policy than the
movement from department-based, principle
investigator-oriented university science to a new
center-based model encouraging universities to
work with industry and work beyond the
strictures of academic disciplines. Most of the
people who helped create this revolution are still
alive and remain quite active. The purpose of our
paper is to provide a brief overview of the
development of the ERC and its impacts. Our
‘‘primary data’’ for the paper include an interview
with Erich Bloch, former NSF director and
former Presidential Science Advisor and, most
important for present purposes, one of the chief
architects and advocates for the ERC program.
Before presenting the interview with Bloch,
however, it is useful to provide a brief history
of the ERC program.
1. A brief history of the engineering research
centers program
Origins
In his contribution to the ﬁnal report for the 1986
CETS
1 symposium2 on future expectations for the
then nascent NSF engineering research centers
(ERC) program, George A. Keyworth II, Science
Advisor to the President and Director of the Ofﬁce
of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP),
described how the idea for the ERCs ﬁrst came
to light. It happened during a 1983 presentation
made by the Committee on Science, Engineering,
and Public Policy (COSEPUP)
3 to OSTP on the
subject of computers in design and manufacturing.
Keyworth (1986) explains:
The presentation brought home to all of us how
radically the role of the engineer will change in
light of the tremendous information-processing
capabilities that are emerging . . . After the pre-
sentation we were convinced that we should be
doing more to help integrate engineering practice
and training . . . and that our future industrial
successes were going to depend on the availability
of different kinds of engineers than those who had
been successful in the past.
Following the presentation, Keyworth and col-
leagues, including George Low, president of Rens-
selaer Polytechnic Institute, turned to the National
Academy of Engineering (NAE) to assemble a
panel for developing new strategies with which
NSF and the university system could transform
the American engineer, who was up to that point
believed to be focused on narrow, discipline-based
topics, into a cross-disciplinary scientist and
practitioner possessing synthesis-oriented skills
such as systems design, optimization, and integra-
tion (Suh, 1986).
366
Bozeman and Boardman
=== PAGE 3 ===
In February 1984, the NAE panel, comprised of
engineering leaders from universities and industry,
responded with a report, ‘ Guidelines for Engineer-
ing Research Centers .’ The report expressed the
goal of a more hands-on approach to engineering
research and education in terms of the broader
U.S. mission of international competitiveness
(Mayﬁeld, 1987):
The goal of the centers is to improve engineering
research so that U.S. engineers will be better
prepared to assist U.S. industry in becoming more
competitive in world markets. Thus, engineering
research and education must be judged by their
success in achieving this linkage.
The tone of the report was appropriate to the
times. Throughout the 1970s and into the 1980s,
American industry was being outperformed by
newly industrialized nations building niche tech-
nology infrastructures which, combined, proved
formidable competition to the United States in the
world industrial market. Korean steel, Japanese
automobiles, Taiwanese electronics, and Indone-
sian aircraft set off a perceived ‘‘competitiveness
crisis,’’ both in the United States and in Europe,
which is often credited as the catalyst for the ERC
program. Consequently, the budget proposal to
Congress for ﬁnancial year 1985 included $10
million for ERCs, setting the stage for a new
engineering directorate at NSF. After the ﬁrst
round of proposal solicitation and review in 1984,
NSF funded six centers for 1985–1986. The goal
then was for NSF to eventually fund 19 centers in
addition to the original six.
Common goals, divergent research foci
In the 1984 Guidelines . . . report the NAE panel
identiﬁes two main goals for the ERC program.
The ﬁrst goal was to improve engineering research
and education so that engineers training in
American universities could more readily contri-
bute to engineering practice once they graduated.
The second goal was, by training engineers in more
industry-relevant ways, to assist U.S. industry in
becoming more competitive in world industrial
markets.
The NAE panel advised that all ERCs should
have three characteristics in common. First, ERCs
should foster regular interaction among university
engineers and scientists, including students, with
their counterparts in industry to ensure that the
research conducted in ERCs stays relevant to the
needs of the engineering practitioner and, more-
over, to facilitate knowledge ﬂow and technology
transfer between the academic and industrial
sectors. Second, ERCs should promote interdisci-
plinarity in its research to bring together the
knowledge, methodologies, and tools required for
the engineering practitioner to solve problems
important to an industrial sector or sectors. Third,
all ERCs must have an educational component
designed to attune future U.S. engineers to the
needs of industry, speciﬁcally in terms of hands-on
engineering research and education (Parker, 1997).
Despite these common goals and characteris-
tics, the scope of the engineering research topics
upon which ERCs focus is broadly diverse. The
ﬁrst ERCs, which emerged from the ﬁrst round of
proposal solicitation and review in 1984 and were
established in 1985–1986, focused on the areas of
systems research, intelligent manufacturing sys-
tems, robotic systems in microelectronics, tele-
communications, and biotechnological processes
(NAS, 1986). Since that time the research empha-
sis of ERCs has expanded to include such research
foci as earthquake engineering research, environ-
mentally benign semiconductor manufacturing,
and subsurface sensing and imaging technology,
to name a few.
Today NSF classiﬁes all ERCs under one of
four program meta-thrust areas for engineering
research, which do not differ greatly from the
research foci of the original six ERCs founded in
1985–1986. These meta-thrusts include bio-engi-
neering manufacturing and processing (six
centers), earthquake engineering (three centers),
microelectronic systems and information tech-
nology (eight centers), and manufacturing and
processing (ﬁve centers).
ERC program growth: Number of centers
At the outset of the ERC program there were six
centers receiving NSF funds. By 1990, NSF had
established 23 ERCs in addition to the original six,
though many of these failed to qualify for renewed
funding prior to the completion of the 11-year
NSF Engineering Research Centers and the University-Industry Research Revolution 367
=== PAGE 4 ===
award cycle (Feller et al., 2002). By 1994, 18 ERCs
were operating. In 1997, another ERC was added,
increasing the count to 19 centers. As of October
2003, there were 22 centers receiving funds
through the ERC program. For a list of current
ERCs and their thrust afﬁliation, see Table I. As of
January 2002, 13 ERCs are self-sustaining after
the conclusion of NSF support.
Since the ERC program’s inception in 1984, NSF
has awarded 56 grants to establish ERCs. Figure 1
tracks the distribution of these rewards by
year.
Table I
Current ERCs (as of october 2003)
Thrust Center Lead institution Link
Bioengineering
manufacturing and
ERC for the Engineering of Living
Tissues
Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA
www.gtec.gatech.edu
processing Center for Computer-Integrated
Surgical Systems and Technology
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD
http://cisstweb.cs.jhu.edu
Biotechnology Process Engineering
Center
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA
http://web.mit.edu/bpec/
ERC for Biomimetic
MicroElectronic Systems
University of Southern California–Keck
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
VaNTH ERC for Bioengineering
Educational Technologies
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN http://www.vanth.org/
Engineered Biomaterials
Engineering Research Center
University of Washington, Seattle, WA http://www.uweb.engr.washington.edu/
Earthquake engineering Paciﬁc Earthquake Engineering
Research Center
University of California at Berkeley, CA http://peer.berkeley.edu/
Mid-America Earthquake Center University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, IL
http://mae.ce.uiuc.edu/
Multidisciplinary Center for
Earthquake Engineering Research
University of Buffalo at Buffalo, NY http://mceer.buffalo.edu/
Microelectronic systems
and information
Center for Neuromorphic Systems
Engineering
California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA
http://www.erc.caltech.edu/
technology ERC for Extreme Ultraviolet
Science and Technology
Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
CO
http://euverc.colostate.edu/
Center for Power Electronic
Systems
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA
http://www.cpes.vt.edu/
Integrated Media Systems Center University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA
http://imsc.usc.edu/
Center for Subsurface Sensing and
Imaging Systems
Northeastern University http://www.censsis.neu.edu/
ERC for Collaborative Adaptive
Sensing of the Atmosphere
University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
MA
http://www.casa.umass.edu/
Packaging Research Center Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA
http://www.prc.gatech.edu/
Center for Wireless Integrated
MicroSystems
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor http://www.wimserc.org/
Manufacturing and
processing
ERC for Environmentally
Benign Semiconductor
Manufacturing
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ
(lead institution) in partnership with
Arizona State University, the University
of California at Berkeley, Cornell
University, MIT, and Stanford
University
http://www.erc.arizona.edu/
Center for Advanced Engineering
of Fibers and Films
Clemson University, Clemson, SC (lead
institution) in partnership with MIT
www.clemson.edu/caeff
ERC for Particle Science and
Technology
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL http://www.erc.uﬂ.edu/
Center for Environmentally
Beneﬁcial Catalysis
University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS (lead
institution) in partnership with University
of Iowa and Washington University at
St. Louis
http://www.ku.edu//C24 cebc/
Center for Reconﬁgurable
Machining Systems
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI http://erc.engin.umich.edu/
Source: http://www.erc-assoc.org/centers.htm.
368 Bozeman and Boardman
=== PAGE 5 ===
An important observation to take away from
Figure 1 is the discrepancy between number of
awards granted and the number of centers currently
receiving NSF funds. While some have graduated
and are now self-sufﬁcient, others have failed to
successfully navigate the renewal process. (In the
interview below, Erich Bloch indicates that these
early closures actually had some positive effects.)
As of November 2003, 41 ERCs and three
earthquake ERCs had been funded by NSF. This
constitutes an historical ‘‘survival’’ rate for ERCs
of 44/56, or 0.79.
ERC program growth: Magnitude of funding
Currently NSF funds approximately 30 % of ERC
total annual budgets, with industry, other federal
agencies, universities, and the states providing the
remainder (Lewis, 2004). The ERC program
constitutes a substantial proportion of annual
NSF expenditure on engineering research and
related activities. In ﬁnancial year 2003, ERCs
and its spin offs received higher levels of funding
than any other NSF engineering research endea-
vor, save SBIRs (small business innovation
research). Of the $132.7 million that NSF spent
on engineering education and centers (EEC) in
ﬁnancial year 2003 (see Figure 2, Table 3). NSF
allocated nearly half, $65.72 million, to the ERC
program. If this calculation is also to include NSF
expenditure on Earthquake Engineering Research
Centers, Nanoscale Science and Engineering Cen-
ters, and Science and Technology Centers, the
amount increases by $19.89 million to nearly $86
million, or 65 % of NSF expenditure on EEC and
approximately one sixth of overall NSF engineer-
ing expenditure.
4
Estimates for ﬁnancial year 2005 demonstrate a
modest decrease in NSF funding for the ERC
program over the next year. To support a steady
state of 19 ERCs, NSF has requested $63.49
million, which is down more than $2 million from
ﬁnancial year 2004 and down nearly $2.25 million
from 2003.
The ERC Progeny
As we mentioned, the ERC program has served as
a model for many other science center programs in
the United States and elsewhere. Perhaps the most
conspicuous progeny of the ERCs is the NSF’s
own science and technology centers (STC) pro-
gram. In a 1987 letter to NAS President Frank
Press, NSF Director Erich Bloch indicates that the
STC program was a direct spin off of the ERC
program (Metzger, 1987):
Just as the National Academy of Engineering played
a pivotal role in shaping the approach NSF used to
establish and administer the Engineering Research
Figure 1. ERC awards by year, 1984–2004 ( N ¼ 56).5
Figure 2. ENG subactivity funding (dollars in millions). 6
NSF Engineering Research Centers and the University-Industry Research Revolution 369
=== PAGE 6 ===
Centers, a similar contribution can be made by the
National Academy of Sciences with regard to this
initiative.
The ERC concept has been extremely inﬂuential
in other nations. For example, just a few years
after the ERC implementation in the United
States, the United Kingdom implemented a
program based explicitly on the ERC model. The
Science Foundation of Ireland (SFI) not only set
up its program Centers for Science, Engineering,
and Technology but recruited former director of
the National Science Foundation’s Science and
Mathematics Division, Dr. William Harris, to
serve as the SFI Director General.
One of many examples, a quite recent one, of
the inﬂuence of the ERC as a model is a pending
proposal, outlined in an options paper prepared by
the Space Science Working Group, a group of
space scientists and university government rela-
tions ofﬁcers, for ‘‘university-based research cen-
ters modeled after the National Science
Foundation’s Engineering Research Centers’’
(Association of American Universities and the
National Association of State Universities and
Land-Grant Colleges, 2003, p. 1). This white paper
on ‘‘NASA-University Workforce Development’’
seeks to expand NASA’s ability to replace its
rapidly retiring scientiﬁc and technical workforce
with highly qualiﬁed next-generation scientists and
engineers by having NASA ‘‘sponsor university
centers, similar in structure to the Engineering
Research Centers ...’ ’ a n d thereby establishing a
‘‘structure envisioned for NASA-supported uni-
versity centers . . . that would give both graduate
and undergraduate students and opportunity to
get hands-on experience in NASA-oriented skills.’’
From this historical context, we turn to our
interview with the individual who is one of those
most responsible for the university centers revolu-
tion, Erich Bloch (see inset).
2. Interview with Erich Bloch
We interviewed Erich Bloch in the late afternoon
of May 22, 2003 in Mr. Bloch’s Washington, D.C.
ofﬁce at the Washington Advisory Group, located
at 1275 K Street. Previously, Bozeman had con-
tacted Mr. Bloch and indicated we were interested
in talking with him about the history of the NSF
Table II
ENG centers (dollars in millions) 7
FY 2003 FY 2004 FY 2005
Change over FY 2004
Actual Estimate Request Amount Percent ( %)
Engineering Research Centers 65.72 65.55 63.49 /C0 2.06 /C0 3.1
Earthquake Engineering Research Centers 6.00 6.00 6.00 0.00 0.0
Nanoscale Science and Engineering Centers 6.10 18.91 22.01 3.10 16.4
Science and Technology Centers 7.89 7.96 7.96 0.00 0.0
Total, Centers Support $85.71 $98.42 $99.46 $1.04 1.1
About Eric Bloch
As Director of the National Science Founda-
tion from 1984–1990, Erich Bloch helped
originate and implement the engineering
research centers program. Among all NSF
directors, he was the ﬁrst engineer and the ﬁrst
who did not hold a Ph.D. For these reasons, his
appointment was initially controversial. Before
his NSF appointment, Bloch was Corporate
Vice President for Technical Personnel Devel-
opment at IBM. He received the National
Medal of Technology for developments that
‘‘revolutionized the computer industry,’’ and is
the recipient of the 2002 Vannevar Bush Award.
Currently he is afﬁliated with the Washington
Advisory Group where he advises on corporate
R&D management and strategic planning for
academically based research enterprises and
other not-for-proﬁt organizations. He is also
serving as a member of the President’s Council
of Advisors on Science and Technology, and is
the Distinguished Fellow at the Council on
Competitiveness.
370
Bozeman and Boardman
=== PAGE 7 ===
university centers programs, especially the ERCs
and the STCs.
We feel this interview is of historical importance
to students of technology policy and transfer as
well as to practitioners interested in the history of
university-industry relations in technology trans-
fer. Given the importance of the interview, we
present the entire interview and the original
material is largely unaltered. Some notes (in
parentheses) are provided in explanation. During
the interview, Bozeman was the lead interviewer
and Boardman the chief transcriber.
Bozeman: You were on the 1983 panel that
published guidelines for ERCs. Did concept of
the ERC crystallize before this panel got together?
If so, how? Who were the primary actors?
Bloch: There was no starting point in the
traditional sense. The whole situation when I was
on that panel—which was before I went over to
NSF—I think the whole focus was that in the
engineering community (scientiﬁc) research was not
associated with engineering. I knew about engineer-
ing, so I was appalled at this black and white idea of
what engineering’s all about. Out of this concern
was our focus of relating basic research to engineer-
ing . . . to change both science and engineering
cultures. A big proponent was George Low of RPI.
(Dr. George Low was President of Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute from 1969 to 1984.) I think
the general focus was what one can do to change this
impression of engineering and to change the
characteristics of engineering. But there was no
particular singular event. But the timing was very
important. If all this happened later there would
have been less impact.
Bozeman: If there was no competitiveness crisis
it wouldn’t have happened?
Bloch: Yes that’s my point. The coincidence of
the ERCs and competitiveness crisis is what made
it come to life.
Bozeman: In advancing the ERC idea, I under-
stand there was one especially important meeting
with George Keyworth (President Ronald
Reagan’s science advisor 1981–1985)?
Bloch: George Keyworth played a big role. From
1983 to 1984 I had many conversations with on
competitiveness. We had a common concern. He
participated in the semiconductor industry meet-
ings. I was representative to those from IBM. His
concern was that he saw lack of competitiveness in
the semiconductor industry. This (was among the
factors that) led to my becoming NSF director, my
relationship with Keyworth and our common
competitiveness concerns. Once NSF director, one
of the ﬁrst things I did was ERCs. Keyworth was
more cautious than me. I wanted twelve, Keyworth
wanted one. The idea needed to penetrate the whole
engineering community. I thought twelve would
send a message. So that was one rationale. Then
when I looked at NSF (pause) . . . it was just the
paymaster for PIs (principal investigators). I
thought this was dead wrong. The idea was that
NSF should be concerned about competitiveness
and look for new avenues to tie together industry
and government and universities. It was a new idea
to NSF. The next step was doing the same thing for
science centers, the STCs. But there were IUCRCs
(Industry University Cooperative Research Cen-
ters) before all this.
Bozeman: So did the IUCRC’s provide a sort of
a template for the ERCs and the STCs?
Bloch: Not really. The word ‘‘center’’ has been
used indiscriminately. For example, we have the
Materials Research Centers, but these were more
instrumentation centers than anything else. They
had no formal mandated ties to industry. ERCs
were a different animal. The culture of the centers
is antithetical to the PI system. (When NSF
implemented the ERCs) I suspected there to be
more gnashing of teeth than there was.
Bozeman: The IUCRCs were around in 1978
with a similar mission as ERCs—at least on paper.
Was there anything that you knew of from the
IUCRC experience that you explicitly avoided
when doing the ERCs?
Bloch: The ERCs are a different animal. They
are much more research oriented. They are also
broader in scope. IUCRCs drilled down to very
speciﬁc topics. To me it was an entirely different
program. Also, ERCs got a lot more money than
IUCRCs. (note: the IUCRC budgets typically are
$100,000–$200,000 per year). The two programs
were not in conﬂict nor was one a continuation of
the other.
Bozeman: Was there a cadre who got quickly on
board? Was there NSF staff that played an
important role from the outset?
Bloch: There was some staff that saw the need
for change, but no one necessarily knew in what
NSF Engineering Research Centers and the University-Industry Research Revolution 371
=== PAGE 8 ===
direction. Also, there were new people just coming
in. Nam Suh was one of these. He was kind of
torn. He grew up in a PI-grant world, but saw the
need for changing direction. Also, the assistant
director of biology, David Kingsbury (?) who
knew exactly why there was a need for the change.
Others like Bill Harris who have been here a while
was a big supporter. Also there were many who
opposed it. But enough of us agreed that some-
thing had to change.
Bozeman: At about the same time as the ERC
concept was getting traction there was also a
strong interest in some quarters to set up a
National Engineering Foundation, entirely sepa-
rate from NSF and, presumably, leaving NSF with
no engineering programs. Did these two develop-
ments come into conﬂict or complement one
another?
Bloch: I don’t know if they played against each
other. That’s why I mentioned Nam Suh. We came
to the conclusion that engineering was still in the
19th century. He was convinced that something
had to change substantively. In some ways, it was
not really helpful that George Brown (Member of
the House of Representatives and Chair of the
House Science and Technology Committee) was
lobbying for a ‘‘national engineering foundation.’’
He didn’t get his engineering foundation. So a
compromise took place. I’m not sure that these
two changes were unconnected. I think they were
quite connected. (The defeat of the engineering
foundation helped provide the opportunity for
NSF engineering research centers).
Bozeman: Outside of NSF, were others in
government or in the science and technology
policy agencies pushing for ERC’s or some
equivalent?
Bloch: George (Brown) was a big Democrat
pushing for them. He had a lot of focus on it and
was a senior member of Congress. The White
House science advisor (Keyworth) was also focus-
ing on it. The OMB was in the middle of things,
but chieﬂy because they were against allocating
more money, especially Stockman (President
Reagan’s Ofﬁce of Management and Budget
Director).
Bozeman: Was the issue of ERC’s or the
engineering foundation on President Reagan’s
radar screen? Did you speak with him about
this?
Bloch: No. Later NSF got on his screen with the
doubling of the NSF budget.
Bozeman: Could you tell me about the progres-
sion of ERCs to the STCs? Was it easier to garner
support for the STCs because of the ERC
experience?
Bloch: There was more criticism with the ERCs
than the STCs. The ERCs paved the way for
STCs. The scientists saw the money available from
the ERCs and this led many to back the STCs.
Many powerful people, including many members
of the NAS (the National Academy of Science),
saw the success of ERCs and thought that this idea
might work for science as well as it had for
engineering.
Bozeman: (The ERCs proposal requests are
quite general and do not specify particular areas of
engineering or research foci). When setting up the
ERC program, did you and others give much
thought to a more targeted approach, specifying
research areas of interest, rather than a traditional
proposal approach?
Bloch: We did not target because we knew if
you threw it right over (to the university engineer-
ing community) that we would get proposals from
the desired targets anyway. There was a demand
for it (becoming a center). So restricting options
didn’t seem right. (The NSF had other targeted
programs before the ERCs). . . . and it caused a lot
more unpleasantness but didn’t really buy any-
thing.
Bozeman: I was impressed with the fact that the
ERCs were created with no detriment to the rest of
the NSF budget for engineering research? Was this
a self-conscious strategy to develop support for the
ERCs?
Bloch: No, we never made that argument. It
would not have been believed. (University engi-
neering faculty) argued that if there were
no centers then that money would have gone
to the existing programs and funding PI’s in
the usual way. That wasn’t true, but that was the
spin.
Bozeman: The ERCs have by now been in place
for a long time. Have they veered from the original
vision?
Bloch: No. There have been some small
changes, but not from the original direction. The
program has kept its focus on education, industry,
funds matching, which I never thought would
372
Bozeman and Boardman
=== PAGE 9 ===
happen, and the sunset clause also. It’s kept to
these. Obviously it has changed in terms of
selection mechanism, but . . . (no major changes).
Bozeman: Have there been developments that
you have found disappointing?
Bloch: I wouldn’t say disappointing. The
number of centers did not increase to extent that
it should have. I had the idea of 22–23 after four or
ﬁve years. We could have been better off with
more centers earlier. But you can argue against
that . . . they need time to mature, etc.
Bozeman: In our own research (Bozeman and
Boardman, 2003) we have conducted interviews
with many ERC and STC directors. Most of the
points raised are very positive but we have heard
some complaints about NSF micromanagement
and the amount of time required for administra-
tion. Do you have any thoughts about this?
Bloch: Look. I have no doubt there’s micro-
managing going on. You can’t have an agency like
the NSF without micromanagement. The only way
to avoid it is to limit the number working in that
ofﬁce. However, the academic community is
immature. Their view is ‘‘Just send me money
and leave me alone.’’
Bozeman: Another point that some of the
directors make is that the missions have become
too broad, focusing not only on research but
education, technology transfer and social issues
such as minority employment and community
outreach.
Bloch: Life is tough.
Bozeman: Our research seems to show that
there is a great deal of variation in the extent to in
which ERC’s work with industry and their
effectiveness with industry? Is your impression
different?
Bloch: This is big problem (whether or not
centers are actually collaborative). Some proposals
build from ground up. Others take their existing
interests and use the ‘‘stapling approach’’ (they
simply repackage work that they are already
doing). In the better centers the university takes
a primary interest. So the way the university treats
the center makes a big difference. It’s a big source
of funding for them (the universities). I told this to
Harris the other day. (William Harris, director
general, Science Foundation of Ireland, former
Assistant Director, National Science Foundation).
I was glad I was in charge for the ﬁrst six centers.
We learned a lot from the ﬁrst two centers that
closed, Delaware and Santa Barbara. In a way I
was glad that not all the centers were renewed. It
sent a message that centers need to work to the
commitment and have a plan . (Bloch’s emphasis) If
you don’t have a good plan, the work and
commitment don’t matter. You’ll fail. Because of
this (the early failures), I believe prospective can-
didates are more careful about implementation.
Bozeman: (The ERCs and STCs require that
faculty appointed in the centers have tenured or
tenure-track appointments elsewhere in the uni-
versity, usually discipline-based departments).
Some of those we have interviewed tell us that
afﬁliation with an ERC or STC may be a double
load for researchers. They say it is like having two
jobs. Do you think there is a potential for burnout
or undermining productivity?
Bloch: You can’t have it both ways. The ground
rule is a faculty member at the center has to be a
member of a department . . . they can’t just belong
to a center. The problem isn’t the centers it’s the
departments. I’m against academic departments. I
think they should get rid of them. There is no such
thing as chemical engineering or mechanical
engineering by themselves. They meld. This dual
responsibility you talk about is unavoidable. If
someone can’t take it then they should get out. It
seems to me that it’s up to the individual. I’m not
so sure that centers are more prone to burnout
than any other job.
Bozeman: How about this as a potential
problem with the centers: We know most directors
have limited managerial experience. Most have
only managed research and want to continue to
manage research. Many have little interest or skill
in managing the day-to-day operations, personnel,
and ﬁnances of the center. They often hire some-
one else to manage the other aspects and in some
cases it seems that some managerial functions are
just neglected. Our research seems to indicate that
some directors are excellent managers and some
poor. The center selection process doesn’t seem to
pay much attention to overall management ability
but chieﬂy research management. Do you feel this
is a problem?
Bloch: You can ﬁnd this in any profession and
in any industry. But I agree with you. There are
management problems. Maybe (management
ability) should be part of the review process . . .
NSF Engineering Research Centers and the University-Industry Research Revolution 373
=== PAGE 10 ===
but maybe not. But I agree that management
ability can make a tremendous difference. Man-
agement styles is the issue here, not theories of
management. None if this is about textbook
management. If center directors managed by
textbook theory it would be a disaster.
Bozeman: (The ERCs and STCs have ‘‘sunset’’
provisions requiring that after a certain period
they become self-sustaining and NSF funding is
withdrawn.) Let’s turn to the sunset provisions. I
think all the center directors understand why these
are important, but some make the case that their
center has a harder time becoming self-sustaining
because their work is farther from the market or,
in some cases, such as earthquake engineering,
there is very little potential market. What do you
think about these views?
Bloch: Wait a minute. First, the sunset is very
simple. It was put in place to make sure that
centers ﬁnd their feet. The second reason was to
deﬂect from the idea of promoting bricks and
mortar centers and ever-expanding centers. The
idea of the sunset was at that time was that the
centers should show fruit or die . . . but there’s a
provision that you could reapply in a new
competition. Of course, you may lose next time
around. A third good reason for the sunset is that
the university should take over if they want the
centers to continue. The university can help ﬁnd
new sponsors and new money. It was not the idea
of the sunset to blow it up, but to make centers
ﬁnd other sources of support.
Bozeman: Thank you for your time. This has
been very helpful. I have just one last question.
Now that you know what we are trying to get at, is
there anything I should have asked that I didn’t
ask?
Bloch: You want me to do your work for you?
(Bloch laughs). I don’t know. What would be
interesting is to see not only how these centers
developed, but at this stage what is their direction
of development. For example, I am always
embarrassed when someone asks me how many
university centers there are. Nobody knows. NSF
supports more than 350 centers. What are they?
Where are they? Why are they? We need to bring
more knowledge to bear on this. We need to
develop a typology, a morphology of centers.
Otherwise, how will we know if we are funding the
right things? How will we know about the gaps?
3. The ERC management challenge
As can be readily inferred from the material above,
Mr. Bloch was his usual candid self. We have no
need to comment on the interview. Mr. Bloch’s
perspective and opinions stand on their own.
However, we think it appropriate to conclude
with what we feel is one of the greatest managerial
challenges of multipurpose, multidisciplinary uni-
versity research centers—balancing the sometimes
conﬂicting missions and doing so within the
conﬁnes of universities that have not yet taken
Mr. Bloch’s prescription to get rid of academic
departments.
In our interviews (Bozeman and Boardman,
2003) with university center directors, one ERC
director provided an especially cogent account of
the managerial conundrum for the relatively new
institutions: ‘‘I’m managing on the basis of a big
carrot and a little stick. The director has no way to
entice other than dangling money. The director
has no power and inﬂuence like the departments
have. People work together when they want to
work together.’’ Another ERC director echoed
these comments:
My biggest challenge is the diversity of faculty
interests and getting people to work together. There
is no question that this issue is the biggest struggle and
requires the most time and commitment. When we are
trying to add something else to their agenda, they have
to be convinced to give up something else. They have
to decide that they want to move forward in that
direction. People are driven by their own self-interests,
and if they recognize that what we want them to do is
something they want to do—they will do it. That’s why
we try to offer opportunities to work with companies.
This is something I can offer—opportunities to
interact, external things with companies or maybe
something we do at the Center, things like a seminar
series or journal club—things that give them oppor-
tunities for interacting in ways they want to interact.
Even though these individuals are very invested in
their own research, they recognize the power of
interaction. The capacity to make linkages is due to
having the Center and providing facilities.
To some extent the jury is still out regarding the
ability of these innovative institutional designs for
research and education to co-exist with traditional
university structures created hundreds of years ago
and little changed since. But the revolution has
begun.
374
Bozeman and Boardman
=== PAGE 11 ===
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of
the IBM Endowment for the Business of Govern-
ment.
Notes
1. National Research Council’s Commission on Engineering
and Technical Systems (CETS).
2. The symposium titled ‘‘The Engineering Research Centers:
Factors Affecting Their Thrusts’’ was held on April 29–30, 1985
under the auspices of CETS.
3. COSEPUP was a joint committee of the National
Academies of Science and Engineering and the Institute of
Medicine. The presentation was on then new information
processing capabilities, such as that enabled by the 1-megabit
RAM chip.
4. Total expenditure on centers divided by total engineering
expenditures equals 85.71/541.7. See Table II.
5. Developed by the authors from NSF data from https://
www.fastlane.nsf.gov/a6/A6SrchAwdf.htm N of 56 includes
ERCs and Earthquake ERCs. It does not include STCs.
6. Figures for 1994–2003 are actual, ﬁgures for 2004–2005 are
estimates. source: http://www.nsf.gov/bfa/bud/fy2005/pdf/
fy2005_8.pdf.
7. Source: http://www.nsf.gov/bfa/bud/fy2005/pdf/fy2005_
8.pdf.
References
Association of American Universities and the National
Association of State Universities and Land Grant Colleges,
2003, NASA-University Workforce Development’’ An
Options Paper , downloaded June 4, 2003, http://
www.aau.edu/useful/workforce%20letter.pdf
Bozeman, B. and C. Boardman, 2003, Managing the New
Multipurpose, Multidiscipline University Research Centers:
Institutional Innovation in the Academic Community ,
Washington D.C.: IBM Endowment for the Business of
Government.
Feller, Irwin, Catherine P. Ailes, and J. David Roessner, 2002,
‘Impacts of research universities on technological innova-
tion in industry: evidence from engineering research
centers,’ Research Policy 31, 457–474.
Keyworth, George A. II, 1986, ‘Improving the U.S. Position in
International Industrial Competitiveness,’ in The New
Engineering Research Centers: Purposes, Goals, and
Expectations, Washington D.C.: National Academy Press,
pp. 11–18.
Lewis, Courtland (ed.), 2004, ‘ERC Best Practices Manual: A
Collaborative Product of the NSF Engineering Research
Centers,’ online at http://www.erc-assoc.org/manual/bp_in-
dex.htm.
Mayﬁeld, Lewis G., 1987, ‘NSF’s Engineering Research Center
Program: How It Developed,’ Engineering Education 78,
130–132.
Metzger, Norman (ed.), 1987, Science and Technology Centers:
Principles and Guidelines , Washington D.C.: National
Academy Press.
National Academy of Sciences, 1986, The New Engineering
Research Centers: Purposes, Goals, and Expectations ,
Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Science Foundation FY 2005 Budget Request to
Congress, http://www.nsf.gov/bfa/bud/fy2005/pdf/fy2005.
pdf.
Parker, Linda, 1997, The Engineering Research Centers
Program: An Assessment of Beneﬁts and Outcomes , Arling-
ton, Virginia: National Science Foundation.
Suh, Nam P., 1986, ‘The Concept and Goals of the Engineering
Research Centers,’ in The New Engineering Research
Centers: Purposes, Goals, and Expectations , Washington
D.C.: National Academy Press, pp. 37–43.
NSF Engineering Research Centers and the University-Industry Research Revolution
375