Title: Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities
Pages: 28-66

--- PAGE 28 ---
3
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_1
Chapter 1
Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities 
and Opportunities
Michael R. Matthews
1.1  Introduction
Feng shui is a system of beliefs and practices originating some three to four thousand 
years ago that is concerned with identifying, charting, and utilizing the supposed 
all-encompassing flow of chi or qi, the putative universal life force, so that people’s 
lives and their habitat can be brought into harmony with it, made more natural, and 
so improved. It is a worldview and is a significant feature of Chinese and south-east 
Asian cultures.1 But it has long migrated from Asia and has an increasing interna -
tional commercial and personal presence. As a writer in the American Institute of 
Architects newsletter commented: ‘Feng Shui is no longer just an ancient Chinese 
secret. While slow to take root outside of its original heartland, it is now global and 
transcends culture and politics’ (Knoop 2001). Feng shui is a growth industry, yet it 
is a neglected topic in science education. It is also ignored in most philosophical 
discussions of pseudoscience and the demarcation dispute; discussions where it 
might be expected to be mentioned and used as a case study.
This neglect is an enigma as feng shui is a worldview that makes claims about the 
constitution of the world and the ways in which humans can most harmoniously live 
in the world. Unlike many comparable worldviews, feng shui explicitly claims to be 
scientific. The whole theory and practice of feng shui revolves around the identifica-
tion and utilisation of universal energy, or chi, that circulates in a defined manner 
through nature and through specific meridians in people’s bodies where purportedly 
there are 600+ nodes that can be manipulated by acupuncture. 2 This supposed 
1 Feng shui’s origins, history, philosophy and applications have been exhaustively written upon. 
See, among others: Bruun ( 2008), Bruun and Kalland ( 1995), Henderson (2010), Huang (1968),  
and Smith (1991, chap. 4), Yosida (1973).
2 In the official Chinese Pinyin system of Romanization, the Chinese character is rendered as Qi. In 
M.R. Matthews (*) 
School of Education, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
e-mail: m.matthews@unsw.edu.au

--- PAGE 29 ---
4
energy has remarkable properties that are mapped, harnessed and utilized by mas -
ters and this knowledge and technique can be appropriately taught and learnt.
Feng shui occupies just one sector on the wide spectrum of chi-based Eastern 
beliefs, therapies, and practices. Over some two to three thousand years, under dif-
ferent philosophical and cultural influences, many versions of fundamental chi-  
based practice have evolved and cemented their social and cultural place. Along 
with feng shui, others in the spectrum are: Qi Gong, Falun Gong, Tai Chi, and Jin 
Shin Jyutsu. They all combine chi ( qi) and work, practice or cultivation ( gong). 
Countless books elaborate on the metaphysics and ‘science’ of the fundamental 
categories. Ole Bruun writes:
The concept of qi, which may be translated into ‘breath’ or ‘breath of nature’, is fundamen-
tal to Chinese natural philosophy. It is strongly indicative of an organic predisposition in 
Chinese thinking in general, as opposed to the mechanistic orientation that became domi -
nant in European natural philosophy after the Middle Ages. (Bruun 2008, p. 108)
The Wikipedia entry for Qigong gives a reasonable overview:
Qigong is traditionally viewed as a practice to cultivate and balance qi (chi), translated as 
‘life-energy’ … qigong allows access to higher realms of awareness, awakens one’s ‘true 
nature’, and helps develop human potential. Qigong is now practiced throughout China and 
worldwide.
As with most serious issues in science education, the issues addressed in this 
chapter involve considerations in both philosophy of science and philosophy of edu-
cation. They include:
•  How feng shui constitutes a world view.
•  Why feng shui is a pseudoscience.
•  How examination of feng shui can contribute to knowledge of basic matters in 
philosophy of science, and more generally to better understanding of the nature 
of science.
•  How the historical and philosophical examination of feng shui in classrooms can 
contribute to the cultural health of society.
1.2  The Cultural Contribution of Science Education
Ideally education promotes the well-being of society. That is why so much effort 
and expenditure is put into education at all levels from pre-school through primary 
and secondary, to post-school, including university education. Social well-being 
encompasses personal flourishing, good and equitable economic functioning and 
the older Wade-Giles system of Romanization the character is rendered as Chi which is the 
Taiwanese usage favoured by most Western scholars. Less frequently the character is written as 
Ch’i. The Korean and Japanese preference for Chi is Ki, the word which appears in many of their 
Chi-based martial arts and therapies.
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 30 ---
5
cultural health. All school subjects make their own contribution to this overall social 
well-being. Apart from obvious areas of personal knowledge, clear thinking and 
psychological health, science education, and the culture-wide science literacy it 
promotes, can make contributions to the cultural health of societies by clarifying 
and appraising worldviews (Matthews 2009a, b).
In particular, a modicum of science literacy can be useful in identifying world -
views that are inconsistent with science, and especially identifying those purporting 
to be scientific (Fishman 2009). If clarity can be had about these distinctions, then 
students are better able to be more conscious, informed, appreciative, but also criti-
cal of their own and their culture’s worldviews and superstitions. Jon Miller, who 
for decades has researched science literacy and public understanding of science, 
well stated this point:
In addition to understanding basic scientific constructs, it is important for citizens to recog-
nize pseudoscientific constructs that seek to be recognized as scientific. Astrology is a good 
example. Since 1988, national samples of US adults were asked whether they though that 
astrology was “very scientific, sort of scientific, or not at all scientific.” Throughout this 
period, approximately 60 percent of US adults recognized astrology as being not at all sci-
entific. (Miller 2004, p. 278)
Which leaves 40% of the population believing astrology is ‘very’ scientific or ‘sort 
of’ scientific. Surveys in the UK have reported 63% of people believing in the para-
normal and 67% in astrology (Preece and Baxter 2000). In one survey, 31% of 
PGCE would-be science teachers believed in ghosts, and 25% believed in the effi -
cacy of crystals to keep people healthy (Preece and Baxter 2000).
Exercising Miller’s broader or deeper scientific literacy means students should 
develop a scientific ‘habit of mind’; its development is a mark of effective science 
education. In the words of the American Association of the Advancement of Science:
Taken together, these [scientific] values, attitudes, and skills can be thought of as habits of 
mind because they all relate directly to a person’s outlook on knowledge and learning and 
ways of thinking and acting. (AAAS 1989, p. 133)
1.3  Academic Neglect of Feng Shui
Given the multiple-millions of feng shui believers in Asia and increasingly beyond 
Asia, and feng shui’s immense social, commercial, and personal impact, it is note-
worthy that there has been so little appraisal, critical or otherwise, of feng shui in 
philosophical or educational literature. A whole raft of popular and highly regarded 
books devoted to pseudoscientific belief systems simply fail to mention feng shui.3 
Nor is it mentioned in the long review article ‘Science, Pseudo-science, and Science 
Falsely So-called’ (Thurs and Numbers 2013), or the edited 23-chapter Philosophy 
of Pseudoscience (Pigliucci and Boudry 2013. And, revealingly, feng shui does not 
3 Feng shui is not mentioned in any of the following best-selling books on pseudoscience: Gardner 
(1981), Grim (1990), Park (2000, 2008), Shermer (1997) or Sagan (1996).
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 31 ---
6
appear in the 35-chapter, 472-page Chinese Studies in the History and  Philosophy 
of Science  and Technology (Dainian and Cohen 1996). If feng shui were to be 
treated seriously and critically by historians and philosophers of science, this last 
Chinese-based anthology would be a natural home for such examination, but there 
is no such examination.
Despite widespread, and seemingly growing, commitment to feng shui, and 
despite it so clearly making claims about putative physical processes in the world, 
that is, sharing the same ‘ground’ as modern science - many years of science educa-
tion journals can be searched without finding any mention of feng shui. Nor does it 
appear in the Subject Index of school science textbooks even ones promoted in the 
Asian market.
This neglect is noteworthy as Asian countries famously top the world in school 
science achievement: Singapore, South Korea, Hong Kong, Japan, Shanghai and 
other Chinese centres define the gold standard in the field. These countries are also 
the gold medallists in feng shui belief. The concurrence of high science achievement 
along with widespread feng shui belief does raise the question: To what extent does 
science education promote a scientific habit of mind? Which invites a further ques-
tion: Can belief in feng shui theory and practice be compatible with a scientific habit 
of mind? Is something missing from ‘gold standard’ science education if it seem -
ingly has no impact on the cultural breadth and depth of feng shui belief and prac -
tice? Is development and exercise of a scientific habit of mind part of the meaning of 
‘gold standard’ science education? Can a science education be gold standard if it 
does not promote a scientific habit of mind? For the Enlightenment tradition, forma-
tion of a scientific habit of mind is the core responsibility of science education.
This disjunct between educational results and commitment to non- and anti-  
scientific beliefs is not confined to Asia and feng shui. It has oft been remarked that 
in the USA the same pairing of gullibility and education is found, with Sedona (AZ) 
being perhaps the poster case. One of the hundreds of counter-culture business oper-
ations functioning in the town, claims to:
have discovered some of the most potent concentrated energy fields (V ortex Phenomena) in 
the Sedona area to reconnect you with the energetic nurturance of Mother Earth’s NEMFs 
(natural electro-magnetic fields)
Appraisal of feng shui in classrooms gives the opportunity to explicate a number 
of important issues in science education and in philosophy of science:
•  What is the nature of science?
•  Can we separate science from proto-science, pseudoscience and just bad 
science?
•  Is pseudoscience a legitimate and useful category?
•  What was and is involved in transition from proto-science to science?
•  How do we evaluate competing accounts of phenomena?
•  What personal and social factors support the near-universal embrace of non-  
scientific explanations of natural phenomena?
•  How can the Asian cultural tradition be respected yet feng shui belief be criti -
cally appraised in schools?
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 32 ---
7
1.4  Chi and Feng Shui
Feng shui had its origin three-to-four thousand years ago in China as part of a family 
of cosmological worldviews in which an all-pervasive life force, or energy, known 
as chi (or qi) bound together nature and man.4 Before its articulation as a metaphysi-
cal cosmology, it was merely the collective, passed-down commonsense of Chinese 
and other cultures that needed to attend to environmental realities in order to sow, 
harvest, herd, build houses and villages, and live safely with whatever comfort 
could be garnered. Feng shui translates literally as ‘wind water’. It is not surprising 
that this became the name for the all-encompassing cosmological system, as wind 
and water were the primeval forces that formed landscapes and governed much of 
life. This was the conceptual milieu from which Taoism emerged and provided the 
metaphysical and proto-scientific component of systematic feng shui.
Chi is fundamental to the worldview, metaphysics and ‘science’ that ground 
ancient and contemporary fend shui practices. The name feng shui was introduced 
to Chinese vocabulary and culture by Guo Pu (276–324 ad ) in his early fourth cen-
tury AD Book of Burial (Guo 2004). Guo lived during the Jin dynasty (265–420 ad). 
He was a scholar, diviner, omen interpreter and, as with all Confucian scholars, a 
commentator on ancient texts. In Guo’s account, feng shui described the properties 
and behavior of chi which was the basic all-pervasive constituent, or energy, of the 
world. For Guo, as with all commentators, Chi is borne by wind and diverted or 
absorbed by water. The qi lines were orientated north-south, a property utilized in 
the early Chinese geomantic compasses, which then became the technological foun-
dation for the lodestone-based magnetic compasses that were later used in the West 
for navigation, and in Asia for both purposes.5
Guo in his Book of Burial writes:
The Classic says that if qi rides the wind it is scattered; if it is bounded by water it is held. 
Ancient men gathered it, causing it not to be scattered and curtailed its area of circulation. 
Hence this is referred to as fengshui. The method of fengshui is, first of all, to obtain water 
and secondly to store from the wind. (Paton 2007, p. 427)
Guo also elaborates on the mechanism of chi saying:
Qi circulates through the earth according to the geodetic force of the earth. It gathers where 
the geodetic force stops. The qi follows the trunk of a hill and branches along its ridges. 
(Paton 2007, p. 427)
A proper, historically-informed understanding of chi is clearly a major challenge, 
yet Stephen Field, a translator of Guo’s classic says that ‘Qi is the sine qua non for 
any discussion of feng shui’ (Guo 2001). So, this challenge cannot be avoided.
4 Many works discuss the notion of chi and its place in Chinese philosophy and proto-science. See 
Chan (1963, 1967), Fung (1947), Yoshida (1973) and Zhang (2002).
5 On the original Chinese geomantic interpretation and use of the compass see Aczel (2001, chap. 7) 
and Skinner (2008).
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 33 ---
8
An authoritative modern text on Chinese Philosophy written by Zhang Danian, 
from Beijing University Philosophy Department, devotes a chapter to Chi. The book 
provides an informative listing of scores of representative and influential Chinese 
chi beliefs from ancient times to the present. Zhang summarizes the tradition of chi 
beliefs as follows:
1. Qi is the original material out of which all things are formed by coagulation.
2. Qi has breadth and depth and can be spoken of.
3. Qi is contrasted with the mind. It exists independent of the mind.
4. Qi can move. Indeed, it is normally in a state of flux and transformation. (Zhang 2002, 
p. 63)
And he adds:
Hence, what Chinese philosophy says about qi is basically the same as what Western phi -
losophy says about matter. The Chinese theory, however, is distinctive on two counts:
 1. Qi is not impenetrable; rather, it penetrates all things;
 2. Qi is intrinsically in a state of motion and is normally in flux. (Zhang 2002, p. 63)
Edmund Ryden, the translator of Zhang’s book revealingly says:
Perhaps the best translation of the Chinese word qi is provided by Einstein’s equation, 
e=mc2.. According to this equation, matter and energy are convertible. In places the material 
element may be to the fore, in others, what we term energy. Qi embraces both. … Qi is both 
what really exists and what has the ability to become… Qi is the life principle but it is also 
the stuff of inanimate objects. … As a philosophical category … [this] meaning is then 
expanded to encompass all phenomena. (Zhang 2002, p. 45)
Ryden well captures the explicit identification of chi-theorising with basic theory of 
modern science. Chi beliefs are not meant to be removed from, outside of, or alien 
to science. Chi believers, or at least theoreticians, avowedly embrace and accom -
modate the most sophisticated foundational statement of modern science. But unlike 
orthodox science, there is no history of the conceptual, much less experimental, 
amplification and refinement of the basic idea.
For instance, Zhang’s description of ‘coagulation’ of elements might parallel a 
kitchen-chefs’s use of the term or maybe an artist’s when mixing paint, but it has no 
connection or comparison with the long history in chemistry of investigating what 
elements combine with what others to form compounds, the conditions under which 
the combinations can occur, and the detailed theory of valency which governs such 
combinations.
Identifying with science, and seeking the public esteem and legitimation that it 
brings, is a two-edged sword for feng shui: the more explicitly its advocates tout its 
scientificity, the more pressing is the need for scientific-philosophical appraisal of 
the worldview and associated geomantic practices. The enigma is that this has not 
happened in either education or philosophy communities.
The contrast with the long history of Atomism, or even the more recent history 
of Relativity Theory, is dramatic. In the latter fields, there is detailed, precise testing 
and elaboration of theory in the light of exact experimental testing, all done in a 
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 34 ---
9
public, published tradition. Once feng shui claims to be on the same field as science, 
then this contrast is invited and the deficiency of the former is obvious. An 
 educational and philosophical challenge is to make and appraise the contrast, draw-
ing out implications for the nature of healthy science.
1.5  Feng Shui Practice
Feng shui was never just an idle worldview; from the beginning, it was connected to 
practice, to decision making about where to live, the configuration of domestic and 
government buildings, lifestyles, and how to identify auspicious times and foretell 
futures. Feng shui was linked to geomancy; it was an Eastern version of astrology 
that was so routine across the entire ancient and medieval worlds, and that still lin-
gers in the modern world, both East and West. The practice side of Feng shui began 
as a way of building tombs to harness chi currents for the better after-life of ances-
tors and later became a method of orienting palaces, homes, commercial premises 
so that they too might achieve harmony with their natural environment (Chen and 
Wu 2009; Han 2001).
Three thousand years later, for millions of people, feng shui dictates major com-
mercial and domestic construction decisions as well as the proper internal arrange-
ment of offices, homes, kitchens, gardens, furniture and decorations (Mak and So 
2015). Millions more rely on feng shui astrological guides to make business deci -
sions and for the timing for significant personal and family events (Lim 2003; Lip 
2008), and to guide their decisions in romantic and personal life (Hsu 2003; Leung 
2010). Feng shui, for example, has an impact in the Asian hospitality industry where 
decisions about the location, layout, furnishings, decorations and marketing of 
hotels, resorts and restaurants are all dependent on advice about good feng shui; and 
where an institution’s bad feng shui is known, poor patronage and economic loss 
follows.
The universal distribution and flow of chi not only dictates the best-placement of 
structures to harmonize them with local energy flows, but chi also internalizes and 
determines the health and well-being of people. Chi is at the heart of all Traditional 
Chinese Medicine; it purportedly flows along numerous meridians in the body and 
any interruption to this orderly flow results in pain, illness and disease. Ken Tobin, 
who before ‘moving on’ (Tobin 2000), was a world-leader of the constructivist 
movement in science education has embraced chi-related medical practice, saying:
The underlying theory relates to Qi, universal energy, and its flows through the body. In the 
case of humans there are 26 pairs of safety energy locks (SELs) through which Qi flows, 
providing the life source to the body … When a body is disharmonized, energy can be 
blocked at or close to the SELs, thereby disrupting one or more of the flows needed to dis-
tribute the life force to different parts of the body. (Tobin 2015)
Tobin’s claims are typical of feng shui proponents who connect the practice to 
supposed fundamental cosmic and terrestrial ‘energies’ that are unknown, unde -
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 35 ---
10
tected and unmeasured by orthodox science. For instance, the International Feng 
Shui Society (UK) states that:
Chi, or qi, is the oriental word for the vital intangible natural energy that emanates from 
everything in our universe, a combination of both real and abstract forces: energy from 
the earth’s magnetic field, sunlight, cosmic influences, colour vibrations, the nature of our 
thoughts and emotions, the form of objects, the quality of the air around us. Depending 
on whether it flows harmoniously or not, chi influences how a place feels and how we feel 
in it.6
1.6  Commercial Feng Shui
Feng shui belief and practice is wide-spread in China, in Chinese-influenced Asia, 
and over the past 50 years, increasingly in the West. A study of feng shui in Korea 
commenced with the statement: ‘The importance of geomancy in understanding the 
East Asian cultural landscape and cultural ecology is difficult to overemphasize’ 
(Yoon 2006, p.xiii). Hong Kong is the pulsating centre of the feng shui industry. 
One scholar writes that: ‘Nowhere in the world is feng shui so intensely integrated 
into every aspect of social, religious and commercial life as in Hong Kong’ (Bruun 
2008, p. 136). One website announces that:
Today Hong Kong is the unofficial heart of feng shui practice. In a city where more than 
10,000 masters (called geomancers) now ply their craft, you can feel the power of feng shui 
everywhere.7
Nearly all Hong Kong businesses, big and small, and government departments, con-
sult feng shui experts to determine auspicious dates for deals and programme 
launches; to create interiors and environments that will bring good fortune for a 
business; to guide against creating bad feng shui for others that might result in 
costly legal battles and compensation claims (Emmons 1992). Feng shui advice is 
expensive. The standard ‘tycoon’ rate is £2–3 per square inch, repeat: per square 
inch, not square feet or yard or acre, of building (Moore 2011).
For impact, reach and cost of feng shui, Hong Kong is closely challenged by 
Taiwan. In 2004 the Taipei Times (17 October 2004) estimated that there were 
30,000 feng shui practitioners in Taiwan. And they are kept busy. After a serious 
train derailment in Taipei, the Transport Minister sought the advice of a feng shui 
master who divined that the main station had bad feng shui, including a faulty bagua 
symbol on its premises, and so the ministry realigned at considerable expense the 
station’s south entrance (Bruun 2008, p. 135). The opposition transport spokesman 
counter-claimed that the accident had nothing to do with feng shui but rather with 
inadequate technical systems and human error due to poor management practices. 
6 http://www.fengshuisociety.org.uk/
7 http://www.hotelclub.com/blog/the-power-of-feng-shui-in-hong-kong/#full-info
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 36 ---
11
This routine dispute invites, indeed demands, the recourse to scientific appraisal of 
the claims: on what other basis could courts make a determination?
It is increasingly common for architectural design and building construction in 
San Francisco, Los Angeles, Vancouver, Toronto, London, Sydney, Auckland 
and most major cities around the world to proceed in accordance with feng shui 
principles; and even in accordance with neo- or quasi-feng shui principles. Serious 
Western architectural and construction books (Alexander 1987; Gallagher 1993; 
Rossbach 1983) and scholarly articles (Marafa 2003; Chen and Wu 2009; Hwangbo 
1999, 2002; Mak and Ng 2005) are devoted to feng shui informed location, design, 
placement and construction  (Perry-Hobson 1994; Rossbach 1987). Indicative of 
this building- industry embrace of feng shui is the title of a recent book: Scientific 
Feng Shui for the Built Environment: Theories and Applications (Mak and So 2015). 
Feng shui is a curriculum subject in various Chinese and US university architecture 
programmes.
In Southern California, having positive feng shui lines, namely soft or curvy 
ones, is a featured consideration in the marketing of certain cars and there is even a 
radio station that gives regular updates on the state of regional and local chi energy 
lines. It is reported that in Los Angeles feng shui consultants, some earning as much 
as $750 an hour, were recruited from Hong Kong and Taiwan to redesign entire 
buildings and, where necessary, install structures that could ward off negative 
energy surreptitiously infiltrating a room or edifice (Queenan 2002).
The worldwide web has dramatically expanded feng shui influence and business: 
even in the most isolated places on earth a feng shui consultation is only one click 
and one credit-card charge away. There are thousands and thousands of feng shui 
sites on the web that list countless thousands of happy corporate and individual 
clients. One UK site alone mentions among its satisfied customers: Coca Cola, 
Orange, British Airways, Hiscox Insurance, Hilton Hotels, Marriott Hotels, and 
BRE (Building Research Establishment), University of Westminster School of 
Architecture, the National Health Service, and many more. There are feng shui sites 
for consultants, businesses, retail outlets, teachers, societies, associations, colleges, 
practitioners, conferences, seminars, publications, diplomas and much else.
All the foregoing examples of contemporary feng shui practice might be seen as 
the investigation of external or environmental feng shui, and the making of appro -
priate personal and construction decisions in the light of local feng shui. But once 
you commit to the existence of an all-pervasive life force, energy, or chi that binds 
together nature and man and governs their harmonization, then the next step is to 
admit its existence and powers within bodies; and to then move to control, redirect 
and manipulate its flow to enhance good effects (wellness) and minimize bad effects 
(illness). If chi is everywhere and travels everywhere, why should it stop at a per -
son’s skin? This is precisely the basis for numerous Asian acupuncture treatments 
and therapies. Chi is also the ‘physical’ foundation for the family of Pr āņa-based, 
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 37 ---
12
Hindu yoga exercises that seek to marshal and utilize, seemingly, the same all-  
pervasive life-force.
It was recognized some three-to-four thousand years ago in China when feng 
shui was first formulated that chi was both outside and inside people. This is noted 
by Fritjof Capra in his best-selling The Tao of Physics:
Traditional Chinese medicine, too, is based on the balance of yin and yang in the human 
body, and any illness is seen as a disruption of this balance. The body is divided into yin and 
yang parts. Globally speaking, the inside of the body is yang, the body surface is yin; the 
back is yang, the front is yin; inside the body there are yin and yang organs. The balance 
between all these parts is maintained by a continuous flow of ch’I, or vital energy, along a 
system of ‘meridians’ which contain the acupuncture points. … (Capra 1984, p. 98)
1.7  The Origin and Elaboration of Feng Shui
The ancient cosmological fount of feng shui was codified during the Bronze Age 
(10th – 4th centuries bce) in the Confucian classic Book of Changes or Yi jing (Rutt 
1996). One historian said of this work that it is:
the mother of Chinese divination, having fostered both its diversity and persistence; … feng 
shui is anchored in its perception of reality … it stands out as the single most important 
book in Chinese civilization … comparable to the sacred scriptures of the other great civi -
lizations (Bruun 2008, pp. 100–101).
Since the beginning, feng shui has been intimately associated with geomancy, one 
of numerous systematic forms of divination that have a long history in Asia (March 
1968; Smith 1991), but also elsewhere. Many people would like to know what the 
future holds for them. For thousands of years this has been the lure of astrology in 
all countries. The name ‘geomancy’ has its roots in the Ancient Greek geōmanteía 
which translates literally to ‘foresight by earth’, or ‘earth divining’. The practice of 
divining good and bad fortune by the spread of blown sand had older origins in the 
Arab world (Skinner 1980, p. 14). This tradition created the geomantic compass, or 
luopan compass, consisting of a circular, flat, inscribed wooden or brass plate, usu-
ally with 40 concentric rings and 24 direction lines, and a centered lodestone needle 
(Skinner 2008). Most science museums have compass exhibits from ancient times, 
and modern ones can be bought across the counter or online in most ‘esoteric’ 
stores. Lillian Too explains:
In feng shui, the attributes of the elements influence each of the eight sectors of the com -
pass. The four cardinal and four secondary directions each have a corresponding element. 
So the easiest method of creating good feng shui is simply to energize the element of each 
compass sector. Understanding element attributes is thus essential. (Too 1998, p. 42)
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 38 ---
13
1.8  Two Historical Encounters Between Feng Shui 
and the Western Scientific Worldview
It is informative to examine two moments in the history of contact between feng 
shui and Western science and philosophy. These historical episodes are illustrative 
of the general arguments advanced in this chapter and can also serve as suitable 
‘hooks’ for classroom discussion. In particular, there are lessons to be learnt from 
the celebrated engagements of two Christian missionaries with feng shui. First, the 
Jesuit priest Matteo Ricci in the late- sixteenth century; second, the Lutheran pastor 
Ernst Eitel in the mid-nineteenth century. Both episodes have historical, philosophi-
cal, political, cultural, theological and scientific dimensions. The episodes can, to 
whatever degree is appropriate in the classroom and curriculum circumstance, be 
elaborated with science classes. They also provide ideal cases for cross-disciplinary 
cooperation among teachers.
1.8.1  Matteo Ricci
Matteo Ricci (1552–1610) was one of the first Europeans to give an informed and 
detailed appraisal of feng shui belief and practice in China, and certainly one of the 
first whose account gained wide readership. 8 He was among the earliest, and fore -
most, of the Jesuit missionaries who were sent to Ming-dynasty China in the late 
sixteenth century following the thwarted efforts of Francis Xavier.9 As well as philo-
sophical and religious training at Jesuit universities in Rome, Ricci had serious 
mathematical, scientific and technical competence. At the Collegio Romano  he 
studied mathematics and astronomy with the famed German Jesuit, Christopher 
Clavius, who was known as ‘the Euclid of the sixteenth century’. Clavius was direc-
tor of the Gregorian calendar reforms; and although an opponent of helio-centrism, 
he was a confidant of Galileo and they exchanged mathematical and astronomical 
papers. The Jesuits he trained were the vehicle for bringing Galileo’s arguments, 
telescope and more generally the best European astronomy to China.
With 14 fellow Jesuit missionaries,  Ricci  left Lisbon in 1578 sailing to Goa 
where he spent 3 years completing theology studies; then sailed on to and arrived in 
Portuguese Macao in 1582. There he immersed himself in the study of Chinese 
language, literature, customs and history. His quick mastery of so much completely 
novel material was abetted by his astonishing, and much commented-upon memory. 
After one reading, he could repeat random lists of hundreds of characters. He had 
8 For studies of Ricci’s life and influence see: Cronin (1955), d’Elia (1960), Hsia ( 2012), Spence 
(1984), Rule (1986), Tang (2015b) and Wright (2010).
9 On the early history of the sixteenth-century Jesuit missions, and their precursors, see Rule 
(1986).
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 39 ---
14
written an essay on memory during his studies in Rome.10 Ricci’s life in China is a 
justly celebrated ‘first contact’ between Western philosophy and theology and 
Eastern religion, metaphysics and culture, and consequently something from which 
a better understanding of both traditions can be obtained. In 1583 Ricci began his 
27-year sojourn in China. It was a country for whose culture and achievements 
he had the greatest admiration, incorporating many customs within the practice of 
the embryonic Chinese Catholicism that he and fellow Jesuits were establishing. 
In 1615 Ricci’s travel journal, On the Christian Mission among the Chinese , was 
published posthumously in Rome in Latin with the oversight of his fellow Jesuit 
Nicolas Trigault.
Ricci’s mathematical, astronomical and chronological knowledge was taken up 
in a purely utilitarian way by the Chinese court and mandarins; it was seen to 
improve astronomy, astrology and calendar calculations upon which so much of the 
functioning of the Emperor’s state apparatus depended. Ricci’s ‘natural philoso -
phy’, or his Western science, had minimal impact on Chinese science and no impact 
on Chinese culture.11 Those who accepted the science, held an early version of the 
later nineteenth-century Chinese  traditionalist moto: ‘Chinese learning for the fun -
damental principles, Western learning for practical application’.
Chapter Nine of Book One of the Journal is titled ‘Concerning Certain Rites, 
Superstitious and Otherwise’. Ricci’s opening admonition is: ‘I would request of the 
reader that he recognize in the two following chapters a reason for sympathizing 
with this people and for praying God for their salvation’ (Ricci 1953, p. 82). He then 
proceeds by noting:
No superstition is so common to the entire kingdom as that which pertains to the observance 
of certain days and hours as being good or bad, lucky or unlucky, in which to act or to 
refrain from acting, because the result of everything they do is supposed to depend upon a 
measurement of time. This imposture has assumed such a semblance of truth among them 
that two calendars are edited every year, written by the astrologers of the crown and pub -
lished by public authority. These almanacs are sold in such great quantities that every house 
has a supply of them …and in them one finds directions as to what should be done and what 
should be left undone for each particular day, and what precise time each and everything 
should be done. In this manner the entire year is carefully mapped out in exact detail. (Ricci 
1953, pp. 82–83)
Ricci elaborated on divination:
These people worry a great deal about judging their whole lives and fortunes as dependent 
upon the exact moment of birth, and so everyone makes an inquiry as to that precise moment 
and takes an accurate note of it. Masters of this kind of fortune-telling are numerous every-
where …(Ricci 1953, p. 83)
And he observes, not unexpectedly, that:
Fraud is so common and new methods of deceiving are of such daily occurrence that a 
simple and credulous people are easily led into error. These soothsayers frequently have 
10 On Ricci’s memory feats, see Spence (1984).
11 There was strong opposition to Jesuit science by Confucian traditionalists. This is elaborated in 
Wong (1963).
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 40 ---
15
confederates in a gathering who declare to a crowd that everything that was told to them by 
the performer came to pass just as he had predicted it. Sometimes, too, when strangers are 
brought in as confederates and relate marvels of the past, the followers of the local imposter 
respond with loud applause. The result is that many deceived by this trickery, have their 
own fortunes told and accept what is predicted for them as the certain truth. (Ricci 1953, 
pp. 83–84)
Geomancy was thoroughly embedded in Ming dynasty (1368–1644) life, the 
practice being codified in the 1445 Daoist Canon that contained entire sections of 
geomantic charts for divination purpose. Few civil and military decisions were 
made without geomantic input; by law, no official building construction could 
 commence without geomantic certification  (Skinner 2015). Ricci regarded all of 
this as a superstitio absurdissima observing that:
What could be more absurd than their imagining that the safety of a family, honors, and 
their entire existence must depend upon such trifles as a door being opened from one side 
or another, as rain falling into a courtyard from the right or from the left, a window opened 
here or there, or one roof being higher than another? (Ricci 1953)
1.8.2  Ernst Johann Eitel
Two hundred and fifty years after Matteo Ricci’s landmark account of the early 
engagement of European natural philosophy and religion with Chinese culture, 
another missionary, Sinologist and linguist covered the same ground. This was 
Ernst Johann Eitel (1838–1908), a German Lutheran missionary with a doctoral 
degree from the University of Tübingen, who lived for many years in Hong Kong, 
who travelled within China, who oversaw educational enterprises in Hong Kong, 
who published a history of the colony (Eitel 1983), and who published translation 
dictionaries and studies of Buddhism (Eitel 1873). Importantly he published a sub-
stantial appraisal of the history, metaphysics and functioning of feng shui - Feng 
Shui: The Rudiments of Natural Science in China  (Eitel 1987). The book provides 
opportunity for elaboration of wider issues concerning feng shui, science and soci-
ety, science and experiment, science in China, and science and worldviews. These 
are all issues that can easily and naturally be discussed in science classes.
1.8.2.1  Feng Shui as a ‘Black Art’
Eitel notes how the European construction in the Treaty Ports that followed the mid- 
nineteenth century Opium Wars, was constantly embroiled in feng shui disputes 
about the work’s expected positive and negative impacts on the flow and distribution 
of chi in the port area. He observes how much of the foreigners’ building work in 
Hong Kong inadvertently turned out to be in ‘good’ feng shui sites (access to water, 
protection from high wind, away from malaria swamps, and so on) which led many 
Chinese to impute advanced feng shui knowledge to foreigners.
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 41 ---
16
This is the relatively harmless, near trivial face of feng shui – do what common 
sense and accumulated experience suggests and then call it ‘feng shui guided’. For 
instance, all feng shui site-selection manuals point out that invisible chi is blown 
away by wind and is accumulated and borne by water (Han 2001). Thus, attention 
to wind and water (the original meaning of feng shui) as indicators of chi is of 
paramount importance and consequently ideal feng shui sites should not be wind-
swept and should be located near water.
No one needs cosmology and metaphysics to come to this conclusion. Water is 
beneficial in all ways: for drinking, plant growth, temperature control, transport, and 
so on. Good ecological and common-sense reasons suggest proximity to water and 
avoidance of wind tunnels make for good living places. People claiming this 
conclusion as warrant for feng shui belief are committing the elementary logical 
mistake of affirming the consequent:
Feng shui →  site A will be healthy and beneficial.
Site A is healthy and beneficial.
∴ Feng shui is proved/warranted/confirmed/established/vindicated.
But, of course, any number of other ‘theories’, including scientifically informed 
ones, can equally suggest site A. Further, if site A turns out not to be healthy and 
beneficial, then other theories, especially scientifically-based ones, can suggest 
local reasons why this might be so and consequently can give guidance on rectifica-
tion or remediation of the local problem. It is not clear how feng shui theory can, on 
its own, do this. The theory is just an idle distraction.
Feng shui cannot make considered adjustments in the way that scientifically 
informed predictors of site A can make adjustments in the event that A turns out not 
to be favourable: ecological theories (acid rain), climatological (rising sea levels), 
geological (seismic activity) or economic (property values) - can explain the diver -
gence from expectation. Feng shui consultants claim that with water, sun and chi 
plants grow. A proper science education should lead students to inquire whether 
plants will grow with just two of these - water and sun. A classroom challenge will 
be to see how chi can be removed from the experimental set-up, as it is supposedly 
all pervasive. But if it cannot be removed, then equally gravitation or space could be 
identified as necessary for plant growth. It becomes apparent that chi is just an idle 
passenger; it is along for the experimental ride.
Quite predictably, two researchers report how feng shui-informed and feng shui- 
uninformed architects come to the same conclusion about the suitability of building 
sites, and even floor plans:
An empirical survey was conducted with architects in Sydney and Hong Kong, and the 
results show that the selection of surrounding environment for a building and interior layout 
as proposed by the [non-feng shui] architects generally concurs with the ideal Feng Shui 
model established more than two thousand years ago. (Mak and Ng 2005, p. 427)
When feng shui advisors go on to advise on the purchase and placement of crystals, 
mirrors, wind chimes, three-legged gold toads with coins in their mouths, the five 
elements in each room, and all the other paraphernalia that supposedly brings luck 
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 42 ---
17
and good fortune – then this suggests that the whole operation is just a piece of 
creative marketing; that the feng shui operation is a ‘dark art’.
Eitel recognised that feng shui site selection and medical guidance goes beyond 
harmless and benign commonsensical practices:
Well, if Feng-shui were no more than what our common sense and natural instincts teach 
us, Chinese Feng-shui would be no such puzzle to us. But the fact is, the Chinese have made 
Feng-shui a black art, and those that are proficient in this art and derive their livelihood 
from it, find it to their advantage to make the same mystery of it, with which European 
alchemists and astrologers used to surround their vagaries. (Eitel 1987, p. 1)
Eitel here articulates a standard criticism: what is good in feng shui practice is 
merely dressed-up commonsense – construct dwellings and plant crops in proximity 
to water and not in a wind tunnel or on a mountain top; have living areas orientated 
to the sun, and sleeping areas away from the sun; avoid having front and rear doors 
opening in an uninterrupted line; do not have toilets opening into living areas; etc. 
An advocate for feng shui recently wrote in an American Institute of Architects 
publication:
Feng Shui is all about what nurtures a building’s occupants and makes them feel comfort-
able in a space. As architects and designers, we instinctively do a lot of these things. Feng 
Shui provides the framework and the philosophy to support our instincts. (Knoop 2001)
The argument of this chapter is that all the associated metaphysics, cosmology 
and ultimately worldview is just hand-waving. As the saying is: ‘With the cosmol-
ogy and two dollars you can ride the subway’. But it is not idle or harmless hand 
waving, as it opens the cultural door to mystification and worse still, to manipula -
tion by charlatans (Huston 1995). If people get accustomed to believing the fantas-
tic, evidence-free, or evidence-neutral, chi narrative, then what other evidence-free 
or neutral beliefs might they be prepared to accept? European history if full of epi-
sodes of mass hysteria sustained by such gullibility.
1.8.2.2  Chinese Proto-Science and Avoidance of Experiment
Eitel sees feng shui as Chinese natural science, but for him it was a science that did 
not ‘grow up’ (Eitel 1987, p. 3). Eitel marks down Confucius and his influential 
early disciples for not engaging with and correcting the proto feng-shui systems of 
his age. Many historians and commentators on Confucianism make the same point: 
Confucius was not engaged by or interested in how the world worked; he had little 
if any concern with ‘natural philosophy’ (Chan 1957).
Joseph Needham repeatedly makes this observation (Needham 1963), and fol -
lows Eitel in saying that it was the rise of neo-Confucian thought in the late Sung 
Dynasty (ce 960–1280) that gave a ‘modern’ scientific direction to Chinese think-
ing about nature and led to studies in pharmacy, geography, magnetism, mathemat-
ics; the direction and groundwork was there, but not the maturation (Needham and 
Ling 1956, pp. 293–296). He writes:
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 43 ---
18
The Neo Confucians arrived at what was essentially an organic view of the universe. 
Composed of matter-energy ( ch’i) and ordered by the universal principle of organization 
(Li), it was a universe which, though neither created nor governed by any personal deity, 
was entirely real, and possessed the property of manifesting the highest human values (love, 
righteousness, sacrifice, etc.) when beings of an integrative level sufficiently high to allow 
of their appearance, had come into existence. (Needham and Ling 1956, p. 412)
Fifty years after Eitel, Joseph Needham, and many others, debated why Chinese 
proto-science did not mature in the way that European seventeenth-century did. The 
became known as ‘The Needham Question’. Needham, with his explicit Marxist 
convictions, looked to ‘external’ social factors for an answer (Needham 1963). 
These factors have been long identified: a stratified society where there was a clear 
separation of manual work and technological experience, from intellectual or 
 philosophical speculation; the primacy given in the Confucian tradition to ‘inner’ 
knowledge and personal well-being; the rigid court control of higher knowledge and 
its dissemination; an in-grained preference for utility rather than understanding, etc.
Eitel had better instincts on this central question, later to be called ‘The Needham 
Question’, of: Why was there no scientific revolution in China?12 Eitel’s answer was 
the lack of an experimental tradition in China. Not ‘kitchen’ or pragmatic experi -
ments dealing with how to improve production, transport, weapons, cuisine, or man-
ufacturing, but mathematically formulated and controlled scientific experiments with 
explicit methodological principles. Towards the end of his book, he writes:
There is one great defect in Feng-shui, which our Western physicists have happily long ago 
discarded. This is the neglect of an experimental but at the same time critical survey of 
nature in all its details. (Eitel 1987, p. 69)
Eitel here echoes Kant’s famous pronouncement in his Critique about the New 
Science only beginning when Galileo rolled balls down inclined planes and forced 
Nature to answer to questions that the natural philosopher asked: it was then that ‘a 
light broke upon all students of nature’ (Kant 1933, p. 20). Eitel might well have 
learnt from Kant’s commentary during his own doctoral studies at the University of 
Tübingen. His observation was not far off the mark. Nathan Sivin, the Sinologist 
and historian of Chinese science has written:
Still we do not find anything corresponding to Galileo’s conviction that physical realities 
must be isolated from the flux of sensation by measurement (as in experiments) so that 
physical truth can be made to manifest itself in straightforward quantitative relations. (Sivin 
1984, p. 546)
Alexandre Koyré’s account of the distinctiveness of the Scientific Revolution is 
relevant to Eitel’s answer to the ‘Needham Question’. As Koyré puts it:
… observation and experience – in the meaning of brute, common-sense observation and 
experience – had a very small part in the edification of modern science; one could even say 
that they constituted the chief obstacles that it encountered on its way. … the empiricism of 
modern science is not experiential; it is experimental. (Koyré 1968, p. 90)
12 There is a vast literature on the Needham Question, but see at least Jin et al. (1996), Sivin ( 1984), 
Lin (1995).
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 44 ---
19
Appraising Eitel’s important claim about the centrality of experiment is an occa-
sion not just for historical study, but for scientific/philosophical analysis of what 
constitutes an experiment. This latter question has been widely and energetically 
addressed in recent philosophy of science literature.13
1.8.2.3  Astronomical Problems for Feng Shui
Leaving aside any scientific or ‘metaphysical’ problem in translating from motions 
of the sun and moon to earthly and human affairs, Eitel identifies two major astro -
nomical problems for feng shui theory: the precession of the equinoxes and missing 
planets.
The Chinese astronomers/astrologers did not know of the precession of the equi-
noxes from east to west, the effect of which has been to disconnect the astrological 
signs of the zodiac from their respective constellations. Eitel comments that:
The Chinese, not knowing of the precession of the equinoxes, are rather perplexed by the 
discrepancy, but caring less for accuracy and more for ancient tradition, ignore the actual 
discrepancy, and still represent the twelve signs, not as they appear now, but as they 
appeared to their ancestors two thousand years ago. (Eitel 1987, p. 11)
This is a matter that at least some contemporary feng shui consultants deal with by 
simply severing the connection of auspiciousness from the position of star groups in 
the galaxy.
Eitel identifies another major conceptual and evidential problem: the Chinese 
recognised only five planets - Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Mars and Mercury. Given the 
centrality of these in the whole Chinese cosmological picture, it is easy to under -
stand why Chinese astronomers did not seek to discover new planets. Chinese 
astronomers may or may not have seen additional planets, but if so, they did not 
identify them as planets; they would have been regarded as comets, stars or some 
aberration, just as Uranus was by those who happened upon it from antiquity till 
William Herschel’s identification of it in 1781 (Miner 1998). Similarly, the spec -
tacular 1846 discovery of Neptune by Johann Galle following its mathematically 
precise prediction by Urbain Le Verrier (Grosser 1962) did not and could not have 
happened within the Chinese astronomical tradition. These are merely examples of 
the commonplace observation that culture impacts on the conduct of science, and 
that recognising and being alert to such a nexus is an important outcome of a good 
science education.
13 See at least Hacking (1988) and contributions to Radder (2003).
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 45 ---
20
1.8.2.4  Eitel’s Appraisal of Feng Shui and the Educational Task in China
Eitel concludes his exposition by writing that while 2000 years ago the embrace of 
some of the fundamental ideas of feng shui was understandable and ‘rational’, but 
such embrace no longer is. He writes:
Feng-shui is at present a power in China. It is an essential part of ancestral worship, which 
national religion, neither Tauism nor Buddhism managed to deprive of its all-pervading 
presence…Feng-shui is indeed the refined quintessence of Tauistic mysticism, Buddhistic 
fatalism and Choo-he’s materialism, and as such it commands if not the distinct approval 
yet the secret sympathy of every Chinaman, high or low. (Eitel 1987, pp. 65–66)
He notes that feng shui exponents:
had studied nature, in a pious and reverential yet in a very superficial and grossly supersti-
tious manner, but which, trusting in the force of a few logical formulae and mystic dia -
grams, endeavoured to solve all the problems of nature and to explain everything in heaven 
above and on the earth below with some mathematical categories. The result, of course, is 
a farrago of nonsense and childish absurdities. (Eitel 1987, p. 69).
Eitel had no hesitation in pointing to the educational project, specifically the 
science-education project, that was needed in his day:
The only powerful agent likely to overthrow the almost universal reign of Feng-shui in 
China I conceive to be the spread of sound views of natural science, the distribution of use-
ful knowledge in China … let correct views be spread regarding those continually inter -
changing forces of nature, heat, electricity, magnetism, chemical affinity and motion; let 
these views be set forth in as forcible and attractive, but popular a form as Choo-he 
employed, and the issue of the whole cannot be doubtful. (Eitel 1987, p. 69)
Although a Lutheran clergyman, he spoke with a voice informed by science and the 
Enlightenment:
The fires of science will purge away the geomantic dross, but only that the truth may shine 
forth in its golden glory. (Eitel 1987, p. 69)
Importantly, he did not underestimate the educational task; it could not be confined 
just to classrooms:
Feng-shui is, moreover, so engrafted upon Chinese social life, it has become so firmly inter-
twined with every possible event of domestic life (birth, marriage, housebuilding, funerals, 
etc.) that it cannot be uprooted without a complete overthrow and consequent re- organisation 
of all social forms and habits. (Eitel 1987, p. 65)
Not surprisingly, this contention has drawn down on Eitel the ire of some who 
have read his work. It is the kind of statement that is put up as ‘Exhibit A’ to dem-
onstrate cultural insensitivity, Western chauvinism and objectionable scientism and 
positivism. Notwithstanding all of this, Eitel’s recognition of the material embed -
dedness of feng shui beliefs, and the consequent social and cultural adjustments 
needed if they were to be abandoned or significantly changed, is both realistic and 
commendable; nothing is gained by ignoring the difficult personal, cultural and 
social adjustments that need to be made when modern science is seriously engaged, 
that is in other than just a utilitarian or technical way. Further, Eitel’s view has been 
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 46 ---
21
independently adopted by many contemporary Chinese scientists, philosophers, 
educators and cultural critics concerned with the modernization of Chinese culture 
(Tang 2015a).
1.9  Feng Shui, Education and Modernization of Chinese 
Culture
In the seventeenth century, China’s adoption of Matteo Ricci’s European technol-
ogy, astronomy and mathematics left Confucianism untouched; so too it left the 
entire Chinese political or imperial system untouched, indeed the latter was strength-
ened. At the beginning of the twentieth century, a small minority of scholars strove 
for more radical rapprochement between Chinese culture and modern science. For 
example, Ch’en Tu-Hsiu [Chen Duxiu] (1879–1942) was an ardent ‘public intel -
lectual’, political reformist and opponent of obscurantist Confucian philosophy. He 
was one of thousands who looked to Western thought, especially science, in order to 
modernise Chinese thinking, and strengthen the society so that the endless humilia-
tions of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries visited upon China by the 
European powers and Japan would not recur.
After living in France and absorbing a good deal of the thinking of the Enlightenment 
philosophes, Ch’en returned in 1910 to China and was, along with prominent teachers 
at Peking and Tsinghua universities and major publishers in Shanghai, a founding and 
influential member of the ‘New Thought’ (sometimes referred to as ‘New Culture’) 
movement. Ch’en wanted to modernise Chinese thinking, not just Chinese industry 
and technology. This ‘progressive’ movement was locked in conflict with a ‘tradi-
tional’ or ‘conservative’ one, both vying for influence in the early life of republican 
China following the collapse of the disastrous Manchu regime (Furth 1983). The New 
Thought movement launched their own journal New Youth. This was edited by Ch’en, 
and in it he published his own essay ‘The French People and Modern Civilization’. He 
saw that both politics and science contributed to the supremacy of Europe, and that 
both European liberal, democratic politics and Western science had to be embraced by 
China; there could be no return to the old ways.
The first issue of New Youth contained an editorial essay ‘My Solemn Plea to 
Youth’ in which Ch’en wrote:
Our men of learning do not understand science; thus they make use of yin-yang signs and 
beliefs in the five elements to confuse the world and delude the people and engage in specu-
lations on geomancy …The height of their wondrous illusions is the theory of ch’I [primal 
force] …We will never comprehend this ch’I even if we were to search everywhere in the 
universe. All of these fanciful notions and irrational beliefs can be corrected at their roots 
by science, because to explain truth by science we must prove everything with fact. 
Although this is slower than imagination and arbitrary judgment, every progressive step is 
taken on firm ground. It is different from those flights of fancy which in the end cannot 
advance one bit. (New Youth, 1915, vol.1, p.1. In Kwok 1965, p. 65)
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 47 ---
22
The editorial touches on most of the core scientific, philosophical, cultural and 
educational issues surrounding feng shui and how it is best treated in a school sys -
tem. These were momentous issues for China at the beginning of the twentieth 
century. The same issues recur in all societies and cultures as they ‘come to terms 
with’ science, and with Enlightenment beliefs especially secularism, liberalism and 
democracy in politics.
Ch’en’s crusade was supported by Fung Yu-Lan (1895–1990) the noted historian 
of Chinese philosophy (Fung 1949, 2008). In his much-cited 1922 publication 
written during the dark depths of Chinese warlord-ism and national humiliation, 
Fung maintained that:
What keeps China back is that she has no science. The effect of this fact is not only plain in 
the material side, but also in the spiritual side, of the present condition of Chinese life. 
China produced her philosophy [Confucius (551-479 bce), Mencius (372-289 bce)] at the 
same time with, or a little before, the height of Athenian culture. Why did she not produce 
science at the same time with, or even before, the beginning of modern Europe? (Fung 
1922, pp. 237–238)
More recently, Tang Yijie (1927–2014), a prominent Chinese philosopher, well 
stated the importance of this ‘cultural appraisal’ task:
If Chinese people want to make contributions to the ‘coexistence of civilizations’ in con -
temporary human society, they must first know their own culture well, which means they 
must have a cultural self-consciousness. The so-called cultural-consciousness refers to the 
fact that people in a certain cultural tradition can give serious consideration or make earnest 
reexamination of their own culture’s origin, history, characteristics (including both merits 
and weakness), and its tendency of progress … we must analyze the weak points of our own 
culture as well to better absorb other cultures’ essences, and to give a modern reinterpreta-
tion of Chinese culture, so that it can adapt to the general tendency in the development of 
modern society. (Tang 2015c, p. 299)
Clearly this task of ‘cultural self-consciousness’, as outlined by the Chinese 
scholars Chen, Fung, Tang and so many others, is an educational project that 
requires science-informed historical and philosophical input. It is a task with which 
all societies need to engage. Western and Middle-Eastern societies are as much in 
need, if not more, of this historical consciousness as Asian societies. The beginnings 
should be engendered by formal education; responsible science education will 
contribute to this task in all countries. The more explicitly the HPS dimensions of 
science are presented in classrooms, then the more fruitful will be such contribution 
to cultural self-consciousness.
HPS-informed science education can contribute to this cultural task of develop -
ing an historical consciousness by showing the historical and philosophical connec-
tions between modern science and the Enlightenment tradition. 14 And there are 
other things that science education can bring to the task: the cultivation of a scien -
tific habit of mind, the appreciation of empirical evidence, coherent and logical 
thinking, knowledge of basic mechanisms in the natural world.
14 On this see Matthews (2015, chap. 2).
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 48 ---
23
1.10  Feng Shui and the Chinese Communist Party
In 1940 Mao Tse-Tung declared for science and against superstition, including feng 
shui, saying:
The culture of this New Democracy is scientific. It opposes all feudal and superstitious 
thought; it advocates practical realism, objective truth, and the union of theory and practice. 
From this point of view, the scientific thought of the Chinese proletariat, along with the 
comparatively progressive material monists and natural scientists of the capitalist class, 
must unite to oppose imperialism, feudalism, and superstition; [they] must not ally them -
selves with any reactionary idealism. (Selected Works, vol.2, p. 700; in Kwok 1965, p. 19)
When the Chinese Communist Party came to power in 1949 it outlawed feng shui 
as a form of backward superstition and as being incompatible with Marxist theory 
and its associated materialist ontology. The Party said feng shui was one of the 
‘Four Olds’ (Shapiro 2001). The clamp down on feng shui was tightened during the 
Cultural Revolution. Mao’s efforts to outlaw and ban the practice, and to systemati-
cally refute the associated cosmological beliefs as being incompatible with Marxist 
dialectics and materialism, were Canute-like in their effect: the feng shui tide kept 
rising in China.
Part of the reason for this was that Mao’s embrace of science was the embrace of 
a stunted science; a purely technological science that ignored the wider social and 
philosophical implications of science, much less embraced its connection with the 
Enlightenment’s critical and ‘Open Society’ traditions. Chairman Mao’s Education 
Directive of July 11, 1968, said that, reluctantly:
It is still necessary to have universities; here I refer mainly to colleges of science and engi-
neering. However, it is essential to shorten the length of schooling, revolutionize education, 
put proletarian politics in command and take the road of the Shanghai Machine Tools Plant 
in training technicians from among the workers. Students should be selected from among 
workers and peasants with practical experience, and they should turn to production after a 
few years’ study. (Bloembergen 1980, p. 104).
Because the university curriculum was closely tied to practical outcomes, there was 
no course in General Physics, rather physics was divided into subspecialties – lasers, 
acoustics, magnetism, radio-physics, etc. – once admitted to a specialty in first year, 
students could only with great difficulty change. During this period, China pro -
duced hundreds of thousands of science graduates who had no inkling of the tradi -
tion and culture of modern science, much less had cultivated a scientific habit of 
mind, or a social-historical critical facility.15 Students graduated with what amounted 
to bachelor degrees in radios, or internal-combustion engines. They were more tech-
nicians than scientists; little in their education would prepare them for intelligent 
engagement with feng shui or party ideology.16
15 On this see Bloembergen (1980). As with other countries, there are blind-spots or ‘no-go’ areas 
in Chinese historical studies. For example, serious appraisal of Mao, and the devastation he 
unleashed on China, is simply not included in the curriculum.
16 This ‘stunted worldview-free’ science is favoured by proponents of ‘border-crossing’ in multi-
cultural science education (Aikenhead 1996). Such proponents maintain that indigenous commu -
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 49 ---
24
The first ever Chinese national science congress was held in March 1978 after 
the Party repudiated and denounced the Gang of Four and its anti-intellectualism, 
but there was not, of course, any denunciation of Chairman Mao. Vice-Premier 
Deng Xiaoping’s four modernizations – of agriculture, industry, defense, and sci -
ence and technology - were announced as Party policy and the 6000 attendees were 
ordered to contribute to the modernization of science. 17 A broader science training 
was envisaged, but there were limits. Fang Yi, a politburo member, future 
 Vice- Premier and President of the Chinese Academy of Science, in his speech to the 
congress said:
We actively advocate the study of Marxist philosophy by scientific and technical workers, 
and we should encourage and help them to do so. It is necessary to hold different kinds of 
forums regularly, begin publishing journals on the dialectics of nature, carry out research on 
the history of natural science, and encourage scientific and technical personnel to guide 
their scientific research with Marxist philosophical concepts. (Orleans 1980, p. 554)
Fang’s programme has continued to the present day, with ‘Dialectics of Nature’ 
being a compulsory course for all science graduate programmes (Gong 1996; Guo 
2014). It is little wonder that many Chinese intellectuals lament that a fifth modern-
ization, namely the modernization of culture, was not added to Deng’s four modern-
izations. But this would have deleterious consequences for Communist Party rule.
1.11  Teaching About Energy and Appraising Feng Shui
One obvious and non-controversial way to raise issues about feng shui in science 
classes is to do so when teaching units on energy. Throughout the world at all edu-
cational levels - elementary, secondary and college - energy is a ubiquitous topic in 
science programmes. The study of energy is one of the core requirements in the 
English (UK) school science programme where students are expected to detail dif -
ferent sources of energy and know how different cultures utilize these sources. 
Energy is one of the core ‘cross cutting concepts’ in the USA Next Generation 
Science Standards (NRC 2013).18
This ubiquity is deserved because energy is the central conceptual component of 
modern science – all modern science, not just physics. Mario Bunge observed: ‘All 
the sciences that study concrete or material things, from physics to biology to social 
science, use one or more concepts of energy’ (Bunge 2000, p. 458). Energy is a 
property of all existent things; hence it is universal. But it does not exist apart from 
nities should be taught enough science to cope with modern technology, but not use it to appraise 
their own worldviews or metaphysical commitments.
17 Deng Xiaoping and Fang Yi’s congress addresses are reproduced in Orleans ( 1980, 
pp. 535–556).
18 Papers presented at an international conference to link research to the teaching of energy in the 
NGSS can be seen in Chen et al. ( 2014). See also chap. 9 of this anthology.
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 50 ---
25
things of which it is a property; there is no ‘free-floating’ energy. Bunge is relaxed 
about calling energy a metaphysical concept:
Because it is ubiquitous, the concept of energy must be philosophical and, in particular, 
metaphysical (ontological). (Bunge 2000, p. 458)
For Bunge, and all competent philosophers, metaphysics does not license obscuran-
tism, incoherence or contradiction. Richard Feynman famously said in his Lectures 
in Physics that:
It is important to realize that in physics today, we have no knowledge of what energy is. We 
do not have a picture that energy comes in little blobs of a definite amount. It is not that way. 
However, there are formulas for calculating some numerical quantity, and when we add it 
all together it gives “28”—always the same number. It is an abstract thing in that it does not 
tell us the mechanism or the reasons for the various formulas. (Feynman 1963, Lect.4, sect. 
4.1, p. 2)
Although he modestly says that he does not know what energy is, he is prepared to 
defend the claim that whatever it is, it is conserved. And far from Feynman’s lecture 
legitimating all alternatives to orthodox scientific understanding of energy, he is 
prepared to say that psychoanalysis is not a science and that witchdoctors’ recourse 
to spirits as the cause of disease likewise marks them as non-scientific (Feynman 
1963, lect. 3, sect. 3.6). As long as chi remains in the heavens, then its violation, or 
otherwise, of energy conservation cannot be ascertained. But as soon as chi engages 
with worldly processes, then it enters terrestrial energy chains and can be shown to 
violate the conservation law if any of its putative effects are real.
In the USA, the Department of Energy (DoE) produced an educational guide that 
specifies an ‘energy literate’ person has:
An understanding of the nature and role of energy in the universe and in our lives. Energy 
literacy is also the ability to apply this understanding to answer questions and solve prob -
lems. (DoE 2012, p. 4)
The US Department further elaborates that such a person ‘Can assess the credibility 
of information about energy’.
Given the centrality of ‘energy’ in feng shui discourse and practice, and given the 
wide influence and impact of feng shui in Asian and now Western culture, these 
DoE objectives can assuredly be advanced by explicit treatment of feng shui in sci-
ence classes. The DoE guide means that students should be able to assess the cred-
ibility of feng shui energy claims (and indeed any other popular claims about energy 
creation or conservation). If daily feng shui forecasts are on the nightly news, then 
asking a class to assess their credibility is hardly an outside imposition on the class, 
or a pandering to a teacher’s proclivities.
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 51 ---
26
1.12  Scientific Testing of Chi Claims
Pleasingly there seem to be some opportunities for clear-cut scientific tests for the 
putative powers of chi. Dr. Yan Xin, a medical researcher from the Chinese Chi 
Research Centre, who has worked in major Western and Chinese universities, com-
mendably spells out the power of chi in a testable manner (Yan 2015). As Karl 
Popper would say, he bravely puts his theory’s neck on the experimental block:
the mind power or Qi emitted by a trained Qigong master can influence or change the 
molecular structure of many test samples, including those of DNA and RNA, even if these 
test samples are 6 to 2,000 kilometers away from the master. Qi can also effect the half-life 
of radioactive isotopes and the polarization plane of a beam of light as emitted from a 
Helium-Neon laser.19
At first, and even last, reading these are stunning claims; they certainly have the 
patina of science. As Yan Xin’s followers maintain: ‘His discoveries are changing 
the way modern science is viewed, and challenging many of its assumptions’ (ibid). 
But Dr. Xin then retreats and takes the theory’s head off the block:
Currently, the essential qualities of qigong and qi are difficult to study in a detailed, qualita-
tive, and quantitative manner. (ibid)
Pleasingly serious scientific research journals require studies to be done in a 
‘detailed, qualitative, and quantitative’ manner and so set a high bar for publication. 
So far, it seems, that feng shui ‘research’ has not met the standards of any reputable 
scientific journal; no reference appears in physics journals. But gullible people, with 
minimal science literacy, read such claims and believe that modern science has so 
changed and has endorsed such nonsense. But modern science is simply incompat-
ible with the truth of these claims; they could never find outlet in any serious science 
research journal.
Another colleague, Dr. Hui Lin, also of the Chinese Chi Research Centre offers 
the following striking example of chi power:
Consider a simple experiment on qigong potential. In this experiment people used their qi 
to shake pills out of a sealed bottle. However, the intermediate process was undetectable by 
any available means. The pills passed through the bottle (analogous to conducted experi -
ments in which a person passes through a solid wall), even though the bottle is completely 
sealed and intact, without any possibility of tampering.
Accepting at face value the results, he concludes that:
This demonstrates the probable existence of a form of energy associated with qi which 
transcends the three or four [gravitational, electromagnetic, strong and weak interaction] 
fundamental forces.
This all sounds very scientific and certainly would cause a revision in our under -
standing of science and of the world picture that science has given us. But in Hui 
Lin’s ‘experiment’, no independent witness to such ‘transportation’ is noted; and no 
replication study is reported. Independent observation and replication should be the 
19 See: www.item-bioenergy.com/infocenter/chinesechiresearch.doc
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 52 ---
27
beginning of any effort to bring these ‘truly remarkable results’ into the scientific 
fold.20 They should be among the first things that any scientifically literate student 
or adult asks of the remarkable experiment. Their absence is a powerful indicator of 
the whole feng shui practice being pseudoscientific.
After 200 years of modern scientific study of energy,21 with pressing contempo-
rary universal concern with clean energy production and use, and with numerous 
major international energy summits and conferences, it is noteworthy that feng shui 
energy is yet to be indentified and convincingly measured in any reputable labora -
tory. There are many putative such measures, providing ‘convincing’ evidence for 
the efficacy of chi, but as with the above cases from the China Chi Research Centre, 
they do not bear close scrutiny.
What constitutes ‘close scrutiny’ is something that can be taught in science 
classes when teachers have a modicum of HPS competence and interest. Students 
can read the texts, and follow the experimental footsteps of Galileo, Newton, 
Huygens, Priestley, Darwin, Rutherford, and so many others, and see and appreciate 
the difference between close scrutiny, careful measurement, appraisal of alternative 
hypotheses, and the lazy uncritical holding of original and perhaps prejudicial 
opinions.
1.13  Feng Shui as Pseudoscience
Belief systems, and associated practices, can usefully be categorized as: Science 
(either mature or proto-science), Pseudoscience (non-science that claims to be sci -
ence) and Non-science (History, Art, Theology, Philosophy, etc.). Such classification 
does depend upon adequate demarcation criteria, but these do not require any time-
less essentialism, and they can and have changed over time as scientific inquiry 
matures and takes new forms. 22 Further, membership of a category is not cut and 
dried, it is more a matter of family resemblance; there are clusters of criteria that 
mark out the categories, these can change over time, and not all boxes need be ticked,
Efforts to distinguish science from non-science, the original ‘demarcation prob-
lem’, have been pursued since at least David Hume’s time when in his Inquiry he 
commented:
When we entertain, therefore, any suspicion that a philosophical term is employed without 
any meaning or idea (as is but too frequent), we need but enquire, from what impression is 
that supposed idea derived? And if it be impossible to assign any, this will serve to confirm 
our suspicion. (Hume 1902, p. 22, emphasis in original)
20 The magician, James Randi, has rendered a great public service by replicating, exposing and 
debunking these sorts of claims (Randi 1987, 1995).
21 See at least Coopersmith (2010) and Harman (1982).
22 There is an enormous amount of philosophical discussion on the ‘demarcation problem’. 
See at least Butts (1993), (Hansson 2009, 2013), Mahner ( 2007, 2013), Nickles ( 2013) and 
Pigliucci ( 2013).
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 53 ---
28
Hume was enunciating his empiricism and using the grounding in sensation as a 
way of separating ‘sensible’ ideas from the wide class of others. Ernst Mach took 
Hume’s point seriously and, with recourse to his philosophical phenomenalism 
argued that a whole raft of central scientific concepts – mass, force, absolute space, 
absolute time, atom, molecule – were not scientific as they went beyond their sen -
sory anchors, or the observation statements that grounded them (Mach 1992). He 
famously said that he would ‘leave the Church of Physics’ if belief in atoms was 
required for its membership (Blackmore 1989).
Karl Popper acknowledged the force of Mach’s critique, but rather than accept 
orthodox science as unscientific, he proposed a new demarcation of science from 
non-science, namely Falsificationism or Testability, maintaining that:
A system is to be considered as scientific only if it makes assertions which may clash with 
observations; and a system is, in fact, tested by attempts to produce such clashes, that is to 
say by attempts to refute it. (Popper 1963, p. 256)
A great deal of late twentieth-century philosophy of science has been taken up 
with problems occasioned by using testability as a demarcation criterion for sci -
ence, and with efforts to find other more adequate criteria. Willard Quine, Thomas 
Kuhn, Imre Lakatos, Paul Feyerabend and Paul Thagard all contributed to this 
debate.23 Lakatos thought that his ‘methodology of scientific research programmes’ 
did provide a warranted demarcation in the way that Popper and Kuhn’s had failed 
to do (Lakatos 1970). Further this was important because:
… the problem of demarcation between science and pseudoscience is not a pseudo-problem 
of armchair philosophers: it has grave ethical and political implications. (Lakatos 1978, 
p. 7)
The mushrooming, internationalizing, billion-dollar feng shui industry is an exam -
ple of the ethical, political and cultural consequences of failing to identify pseudo -
science, or saying that such identification is impossible, to which Lakatos points. 
Being able to robustly identify feng shui as pseudoscience might put some brake on 
its spread and impact, it might redirect people’s monies to effective treatments, in 
some jurisdictions it might enable conviction for false advertising, etc. And beyond 
this, defense of such identification can engage citizens in careful analysis of an 
important philosophical point that is central to understanding the nature of science.
Carl Hempel usefully offered not so much a singular demarcation criterion, but 
rather a list of seven desiderata that identified good science, or specifically good 
scientific theories, among which are:
•  A theory should yield precise, preferably quantitative, predictions.
•  It should be accurate in the sense that testable consequences derivable from it 
should be in good agreement with the results of experimental tests.
•  It should be consistent both internally and with currently accepted theories in 
neighboring fields.
•  It should have broad scope.
23 For an outline of the arguments and literature, see Ladyman (2013), chap. 3).
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 54 ---
29
•  It should predict phenomena that are novel in the sense of not having been known 
or taken into account when the theory was formulated.
•  It should be simple.
•  It should be fruitful. (Hempel 1983, pp. 87–88; author formatting added)
This account usefully employs a number of criteria to distinguish good theories 
from not-so-good or poor theories. Indeed, ‘marks out of five’ can be given to theo-
ries on the basis of how well they meet each criterion, with a maximum possible 
score of thirty-five. Then discussion can occur about ‘cut-off’ marks for separating 
good from poor theories. Here poor theories can be improved, they can raise their 
mark by attending to one or other deficiency.
It is unfortunate that Hempel conflates ‘science’ with ‘theories’. Good theories, 
as Hempel characterizes them, are the expected outcome and indicator of good sci-
ence; but science as an organized, structured, historical-sociological entity, needs 
further characterization beyond what suffices for good theory. Extra ontological, 
methodological and sociological criteria are required; the more so in order to sepa-
rate science from pseudoscience.24 For a research or scholarly group to be called a 
scientific group, or for it to be pursuing a scientific practice, it needs have the fol -
lowing characteristics:
•  It should reliably produce a ‘quota’ of good scientific theories as characterized 
above.
•  It needs to seek new knowledge, to do research; not be ossified, stand still, and 
repeat extant knowledge.
•  It should be constituted as a research community pursuing cognitive goals and 
committed to finding out new things about the natural and/or social worlds; not 
just a community sharing beliefs, inquiring into texts or formulating legislative 
laws.
•  Its members need be trained or certified in such cognitive inquiry; science can be 
advanced by lay-people, but if no or few members of the community are suitably 
trained, then the community falls short of being a scientific community;
•  It should appeal only to ontologically stable entities in its explanations and theo-
rizing. Reference to ‘here today, gone tomorrow’ entities, or entities that come in 
and out of existence depending on who is thinking about them, diminish the 
scientific status of theories and communities that propose them.
•  It needs be committed to at least pragmatic methodological naturalism as the 
basis for evidence collection and theory appraisal; appeals to political, ideologi-
cal or religious authority is simply not allowed, nor is reference to divine scrip -
ture or revelation.
Methodological naturalism, in the final criterion, is not methodological material-
ism. The latter characterized the Mechanical Worldview of the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries (Schofield 1970), but with the progress of nineteenth and twen-
tieth century science, where there was recourse to stable, yet non-material, explana-
24 See Bunge (1991).
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 55 ---
30
tory and causal entities (non-contact forces, fields, radiation, gravitational waves, 
etc.) materialist ontology became a hindrance rather than an asset for science; and 
such novel non-material entities became ‘naturalised’.
One option is to claim that upholding methodological naturalism is a defining 
feature of a scientific community of inquiry (Mahner 2012). This does have an in- 
built conservatism as only currently acknowledged ‘natural’ entities can feature in 
the research of a putative scientific group. A more relaxed option is to take ‘prag -
matic methodological naturalism’ as a defining characteristic of a scientific com -
munity. Here the community tries to go as far as it can with extant naturalized 
entities, but recourse to new entities is not ruled out provided efforts are then made 
to naturalise them; that is, to show that they meet all the accepted grounds for incor-
poration into science (Fishman and Boudry 2013).
Much is rightly made of the under-determination of scientific theory by evi -
dence - the Duhem-Quine thesis (Harding 1976; Weinert 1995). More specifically 
there is serious argument, initiated by Ernst Mach in the late nineteenth century, 
about premature realist inferences to the reality of hypothetical constructs or entities 
in explanatory scientific theories (Matthews 2015, chap. 9). There are detailed phil-
osophical and scientific debates about the ontological status of phlogiston, caloric, 
atoms, genes, fields, electron shells, forces, and so on. Nothing comparable occurs 
in the uncritical, unreflective feng shui move from rural farming practice or archi -
tectural commonsense to the putative reality of chi. The mere juxtaposition of 
debates about realism in science and in feng shui can illustrate important features of 
science and of pseudoscience.
Larry Laudan, in a much commented-upon paper hoped to bring this discussion 
to an end with his claim that the demarcation quest was hopelessly contentious:
… it is probably fair to say that there is no demarcation line between science and non -
science, or between science and pseudo-science, which would win assent from a majority 
of philosophers. (Laudan 1996, p. 211)
And further that the efforts were misdirected because they:
managed to conflate two quite distinct questions: What makes a belief well founded (or 
heuristically fertile)? And what makes a belief scientific? (Laudan 1996, p. 222)
He concluded his paper with the admonition:
If we would stand up and be counted on the side of reason, we ought to drop terms like 
‘pseudo-science’ and ‘unscientific’ from our vocabulary; they are just hollow phrases 
which do only emotive work for us. (Laudan 1996, p. 222)
Laudan’s philosophical argument gained the assent of the majority of philosophers 
of science, not just the more general scholarly or educational constructivist commu-
nity who could be expected to readily embraced it. Constructivists were very happy to 
hear prominent philosophers saying that ‘everything is science; it is only politics, 
ideology, or culture that makes distinctions for their own purposes’. But Laudan’s 
obituary for demarcation was premature; many have found philosophical life in the 
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 56 ---
31
supposed corpse.25 Thus there is no overwhelming philosophical requirement to aban-
don the tripartite classification of Science-Pseudoscience-Non-science.
It helps the argument of this chapter to focus on just the first distinction, namely 
Science-Pseudoscience rather than the wider task of separating both from Non-  
sciences such as Art, History, Mathematics, Theology and so on. How these domains 
have justifiable warrants for their claims is a matter for separate investigation. 
Different philosophical, sociological and political indicators or markers of 
 pseudoscience have been advanced. Sven Hansson provided one such list whereby 
a corpus of belief and practice can be judged pseudoscientific in as much as:
•  There is overdependence on authority figures.
•  Unrepeatable experiments are too frequently adduced.
•  Data selectivity, or cherry-picking of evidence is too common.
•  There is an unwillingness to seriously test claims and predictions.
•  Confirmation bias is endemic and disconfirmation is neither sought nor 
recognized.
•  Some explanations are changed without systematic consideration. (Hansson 
2009)
And when:
•  They make claims about events and mechanisms in the natural world.
•  The claims cannot be epistemically warranted, yet effort is made to show their 
scientificity.
•  They too easily resort to auxiliary hypotheses to insulate claims from empirical 
refutation. (Hansson 2009)
A further characteristic that can be added to this list, is:
•  The practice makes scientific claims, but refuses to engage with the scientific 
community (publishing in research journals, presenting at research conferences), 
whose status it is claiming.
Although there is a certain variation of feng shui beliefs and practices, the feng 
shui ‘family’ ticks all the above ‘boxes’.
The central feng shui ontological entity, chi - its sine qua non as Stephen Field 
rightly called it – does not appear in any reputable physics research journal or book. 
Chi is not mentioned anywhere in the hugely-funded international search for new 
energy, renewable energy or clean energy. The Science in Contemporary China  
handbook (Orleans 1980) has chapters on all the Chinese natural, social and applied 
sciences, including biomedical sciences, but no chapter on either chi or feng shui. 
The only mention of either in the entire work is in discussion of acupuncture where 
the ‘meridian’ theory of freeing vital energy pathways by inserting needles into 
various of the 600+ meridian intersections, is listed as the original explanation for 
the efficacy of acupuncture; but this is then passed over in favour of contemporary, 
25 See at least: Bunge ( 1991, 2011), Butts (1993), Derksen ( 1993),  Ladyman ( 2013), Mahner 
(2007, 2013), Pigliucci (2013) and the 23 contributions to Pigliucci and Boudry (2013).
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 57 ---
32
routine physiological or psychological accounts of the highly-debated effects of 
acupuncture. Myron Wegman, the author of the Biomedical Research chapter in the 
above handbook, observes that: ‘a classic weakness …of most Chinese research on 
therapy is the absence of true controls, essential if one is to draw secure conclusions 
about the efficacy of a particular treatment’ (Wegman 1980, p. 273). He notes that 
this is a particular problem for acupuncture research because the illnesses ‘cured’ 
are often ones where there is a high portion of spontaneous recovery or 
remission.26
To say, as Ken Tobin above does, that the feng shui industry is engaged in and 
informed by ‘unorthodox’ or ‘alternative’ science is too generous. Leaving aside 
philosophical considerations, on just sociological or externalist grounds alone, chi- 
based feng shui is not a science. It does not meet the criteria of ‘playing the game’; 
practitioners might be playing a game, but it is not the science game. The situation 
is akin to a local rugby team saying they are playing ‘alternative baseball’ or 
‘unorthodox baseball’. For the latter names to be meaningful, there has to be an 
overlap in key elements with baseball. And the latter cannot be called ‘poor rugby’ 
as that suggests that by incremental improvements baseball could become rugby. It 
cannot. Rugby is an alternate to baseball, it is not alternative or unorthodox base -
ball. Similarly science and feng shui are not on a continuum; the difference is not 
like that between full-strength and lite beer.
Efforts to place science and feng shui on a continuum do not adequately capture 
the unfortunate cultural, commercial and personal realities of feng shui. For exam -
ple, one of the hundreds of newly arrived feng shui consultants in Sydney has in 
2016 advertised for business asserting that:
As a descendant of the Founding Father of Feng Shui – King Wen , highly sought after by 
scores of billionaire customers, with 30 years of experience, Master Feng, the world’s only 
Feng Shui Master who has the gift of SEEING Feng Shui energies, will help you get rid of: 
Bad Luck, Achieve Success, Health, Wealth and Happiness.27
Not only does King Wen ‘see’ energy but he has ‘x-ray vision’ that detects ulcers, 
slipped discs and a whole range of ailments. And he can predict people’s futures. All 
of this comes at a price. He claims his costly 3-day courses ‘eliminates confusion 
caused from different conflicting Feng Shui ideologies’. Full credit to King Wen 
that he acknowledges that other feng shui systems are ideologies. Although he does 
not elaborate his own meaning of ‘ideology’, doubtless whatever this account is, it 
is a reasonable expectation that it will apply to his own interpretation of feng shui.
26 There is a vast literature on the contentious Western interpretation of the success of Chinese 
traditional medicine, including acupuncture. See at least Porkert (1982).
27 See http://www.masterfeng.com/consultations.html
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 58 ---
33
1.14  Conclusion
Feng shui theorists and consultants are practicing something that superficially 
appears like science and is infused with scientific terminology – witness the title of 
the recent book Scientific Feng Shui for the Built Environment (Mak and So 2015) - 
but it is not science. The key elements of science, both content and methodology, are 
missing:
•  There is no tradition of controlled and reproducible experiment.
•  There is no recognition of the problematic recourse to ad hoc rescuing of failed 
hypotheses.
•  There is a dramatic inconsistency with the core of established scientific knowl -
edge, most especially the conservation of energy postulate.
•  There is no participation in the established, peer-reviewed, scientific research 
community and its journals.
•  There is altogether unwarranted dependence upon individual or sectarian inter -
pretation of basic feng shui principles; there are hundreds of different feng shui 
‘schools’ each with masters but no unified canon.
•  Finally, there is a radical disjunct between the law-governed, causally-  
deterministic worldview of science and the chaotic, idiosyncratic ‘fortune-  
telling’, ‘auspicious times’ worldview of feng shui. The latter is only imaginable 
if the fundamental laws of causation for macro objects are jettisoned; and if that 
happens then science is also abandoned. Whatever legitimate debate there is 
about causality at the micro or sub-atomic level (Bunge 1982), there is none at 
the macro-level where feng shui interventions, and chi-caused events supposedly 
take place.
In as much as the modernization of thought depends upon its reconciliation with 
science, then feng shui ideology is a barrier to modernization of thought in all cul -
tures where it has taken root. Further it is manifest that feng shui practice has been 
overtaken by charlatans and fraudsters; these are not absent from science, but the 
scientific community can identify them, and call them out.28 It is not at all clear how 
‘fake’ or fraudulent feng shui practitioners can be called out. The task is comparable 
to identifying and condemning heresy in religious traditions. The designation of 
feng shui as ‘pseudoscience’ well captures the differences with science, and alerts 
everyone to the omnipresence of fraud.
All institutions, belief systems and ideologies benefit from historical study; from 
understanding themselves in an historical sequence and context. All the major reli-
gions have gained from developing such perspectives. The change, and arguably 
corruption, of religious, political and more generally, ideological institutions and 
beliefs over time is a common historical reality. Judaism, Islam, Christianity, 
Hinduism, Marxism and Liberalism have all had to identify what is genuine ‘devel-
28 On fraud in contemporary science, see at least Bell ( 1992), Oreskes and Conway ( 2010), and 
Park (2000).
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 59 ---
34
opment’, what is ‘corruption’ and what is ossified ‘fundamentalism’ in the histori-
cal development of their traditions. This is abundantly true of science: an historical 
understanding of science reveals essential features of its dependence on culture, of 
its connection with philosophy and metaphysics, of its changing methodology and 
canons of proof, and much more.
Famously Thomas Kuhn said that it was his unplanned teaching of a history of 
science course at Harvard University that opened his eyes to a real understanding of 
science (Kuhn 1970, p.v). A cursory historical study shows that astrology and 
alchemy were once part of mainstream Western science, with Isaac Newton being a 
serious practitioner of both into the early eighteenth century. Natural theology was 
part of the birth of modern science and remained undisturbed at its core up to the 
time of Darwin and beyond. 29 But science has progressively developed, and its 
knowledge of the constituents and mechanisms of the world have refined. Astrology, 
alchemy and natural theology are no longer part of science. This has been an out -
come of science’s commitment to, minimally, pragmatic methodological natural -
ism.30 The same standard applied to feng shui takes it out of the scientific family.
Students can benefit from applying the same historical-philosophical analysis to 
feng shui, and this can be part of its examination in science classes. Across the spec-
trum of features of science  – experimentation, authority, prediction, precision, 
mathematisation, idealisation, coherence, testimony (Matthews 2011) - feng shui 
can be juxtaposed with science, and similarities and differences drawn out. Feng 
shui belief in society and classrooms presents not so much a problem for teachers as 
an opportunity (Martin 1994). Its considered and informed examination is a way for 
students to learn about the nature of science  (Turgut 2011) and other important 
social processes – marketing, determiners of belief, and so on. It will be apparent 
that feng shui violates all constitutive and procedural components of science. Such 
learning can be science education’s contribution to the cultural health of society. 
The latter is inversely related to the degree of gullibility, credulity, superstition and 
embrace of careless unwarranted beliefs in society (Kaminer 1999; Lindeman and 
Aarnio 2007; Shermer 2002). With better organised curricula, perhaps history, 
social studies, philosophy and cultural studies departments can cooperatively con -
tribute to the considered examination of feng shui.
A co-ordinated, cross-disciplinary approach to the inclusion of feng shui in a 
curriculum might look like the following table. Such subject co-ordination fits well 
the aspirations of integrated STEM-Humanities, or STEAM education programmes 
(Kim 2014).
29 Of many works on the theological background of early modern science see Hooykaas 
(1972,  1999), Mascall (1956),  and contributions to Lindberg and Numbers ( 1986).
30 On scientific naturalism, and religious responses to it, see Drees (1996, chap. 5).
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 60 ---
35
School Curriculum Subjects &T opics
Religion &
Ethics
HistoryS cience Social StudiesP hilosophy
Christian 
Missions in 
China
Energy Asian Cultural 
Beliefs
Religions & 
Science
Nature of 
Science
v Feng Shui
Science & Law
The State and 
Civil Society
Ecology Advertising & 
Pseudoscience
Causality &
Determinism  
References
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (1989). Project 2061: Science 
for All Americans, AAAS, Washington, DC. Also published by Oxford University Press, 1990.
Aczel, A. D. (2001). The riddle of the compass: The invention that changed the world . Orlando: 
Harcourt.
Alexander, C. (1987). A timeless way of building. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bell, R. (1992). Impure science: Fraud, compromise and political influence in scientific research. 
New York: Wiley.
Blackmore, J. T. (1989). Ernst Mach leaves “the Church of Physics”. British Journal for Philosophy 
of Science, 40, 519–540.
Bloembergen, N. (1980). Physics. In L.  A. Orleans (Ed.), Science in contemporary China  
(pp. 85–109). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Bruun, O. (2008). An introduction to Feng Shui. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 61 ---
36
Bruun, O., & Kalland, A. (Eds.). (1995). Asian perceptions of nature  – A critical approach . 
London: Curzon Press.
Bunge, M. (1982). The revival of causality. In G. Floistad (ed.), Contemporary philosophy, vol. 
2, (pp. 133–155) The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, Reproduced in Martin Mahner (Ed.), Selected 
essays of Mario Bunge, (2001), (pp. 57–74) Amherst: Prometheus Books.
Bunge, M. (1991). What is science? Does it matter to distinguish it from pseudoscience? New 
Ideas in Psychology, 9, 245–283.
Bunge, M. (2000). Energy: Between physics and metaphysics. Science & Education, 9 (5), 
457–461.
Bunge, M. (2011). Knowledge: Genuine and bogus. Science & Education, 20(5–6), 411–438.
Capra, F. (1984). The Tao of Physics, 2nd revised edition of 1975 original . New York: Bantam 
Books.
Chan, W.-T. (1957). Neo-Confucianism and Chinese scientific thought. Philosophy East and West, 
6(4), 309–332.
Chan, W.-T. (1963). A source book in Chinese philosophy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Chan, W.-T. (1967). Chinese philosophy, 1949–1963: An annotated bibliography of mainland 
China publications. Honolulu: East-West Center Press.
Chen, X., & Wu, J. (2009). Sustainable landscape architecture: Implications of the Chinese phi -
losophy of ‘unity of man with nature’ and beyond. Landscape Ecology, 24(8), 1015–1026.
Chen, R. F., Eisenkraft, A., Fortus, D., Krajcik, J., Neumann, K., Nordine, J., & Scheff, A. (Eds.). 
(2014). Teaching and learning of energy in K-12 education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Coopersmith, J.  (2010). Energy, the subtle concept: The discovery of Feynman’s blocks from 
Leibniz to Einstein. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cronin, V . (1955). The wise man from the west: Matteo Ricci and his Mission to China. New York: 
Harper Collins.
Dainian, F., & Cohen, R. S. (Eds.). (1996). Chinese studies in the history and philosophy of science 
and technology. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Department of Energy (DoE) USA. (2012). Energy literacy: Essential principles an fundamental 
concepts for energy education. Washington, DC: US Department of Energy.
d’Elia, P.M. (1960). Galileo in China. Relations through the Roman College between Galileo 
and the Jesuit Scientist-Missionaries (1610–1640) , (S.  Rufus, Trans.). Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
Derksen, A.  A. (1993). The seven sins of pseudoscience. Journal for General Philosophy of 
Science, 24, 17–42.
Drees, W. B. (1996). Religion, science and naturalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eitel, E. J. (1873). Buddhism: Its historical, theoretical and popular aspects. London: Trübner &.
Eitel, E.J. (1873/1987). Feng Shui: The rudiments of natural science in China, Lane, Crawford & 
Co., Hong Kong, Graham Brash, Singapore.
Eitel, E.J. (1895/1983). Europe in China: A History of Hong Kong , (ed. H.J. Lethbridge) Hong 
Kong: Oxford University Press.
Emmons, C. F. (1992). Hong Kong’s Feng Shui: Popular magic in a modern urban setting. The 
Journal of Popular Culture, 26(1), 39–50.
Feynman, R. P. (1963). The Feynman Lectures on physics, vol. I: Mainly mechanics, radiation, and 
heat. Pasadena: California Institute of Technology.
Fishman, Y . I. (2009). Can science test supernatural worldviews? Science & Education, 18 (6–7), 
813–837.
Fishman, Y . I., & Boudry, M. (2013). Does science presuppose naturalism (or, indeed, anything at 
all)? Science & Education, 22(5), 921–949.
Fung, Y .-L. (1922). Why China has no science – An interpretation of the history and consequences 
of Chinese philosophy. International Journal of Ethics, 32(3), 237–263.
Fung, Yu-Lan. (1947). The spirit of Chinese philosophy  (H. E. Rughes, Trans.). London: Kegan 
Paul.
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 62 ---
37
Fung, Yu-Lan. (1949. History of Chinese philosophy  (D.  Bodde, Trans.). Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Fung, Y .-L. (2008). Selected philosophical writings of Feng Yu-Lan. Beijing: Foreign Languages 
Press.
Furth, C. (1983). Intellectual change: From the reform movement to the may fourth movement, 
1895–1920. In J. K. Fairbank (Ed.), Republican China 1912–1949 (pp. 322–405). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gallagher, W. (1993). The power of place: How our surroundings shape our thoughts, emotions & 
actions. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Gardner, M. (1981). Science: Good , bad and bogus : A skeptical look at extraordinary claiims . 
Buffalo: Prometheus Books.
Gong, Y . (1996). Dialectics of nature in China. Beijing: Beijing University Press.
Grim, P. (Ed.). (1990). Philosophy of science and the occult. Albany: State University of New York 
Press.
Grosser, M. (1962). The discovery of Neptune. New York: Dover.
Guo, P. (2001). The Zangshu, or Book of Burial (S. Field, Trans.). web source. [original ≈ 300bce].
Guo, P. (2004). The Zangshu, or Book of Burial (J. Zhang, Trans.). Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press. 
[original ≈ 300bce].
Guo, Y . (2014). The philosophy of science and technology in China: Political and ideological influ-
ences. Science & Education, 23(9), 1835–1844.
Hacking, I. (1988). Philosophers of experiment. In A. Fine & J. Leplin (Eds.), PSA 1988 (V ol. 2, 
pp. 147–156).
Han, K.-T. (2001). Traditional Chinese site selection-Feng Shui: An evolutionary/ecological per -
spective. Journal of Cultural Geography, 19(1), 75–96.
Hansson, S.  O. (2009). Cutting the Gordian knot of demarcation. International Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, 23, 237–243.
Hansson, S. O. (2013). Defining pseudoscience and science. In M. Pigliccci & M. Boudry (Eds.), 
Philosophy of pseudoscience: Reconsidering the demarcation problem  (pp. 61–77). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Harding, S. G. (1976). Can theories be refuted? Essays on the Duhem-Quine thesis . Dordrecht: 
Reidel.
Harman, P.  M. (1982). Energy, force and matter: The conceptual development of nineteenth-  
century physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hempel, C. G. (1983). Valuation and objectivity in science. In R. S. Cohen & L. Laudan (Eds.), 
Physics, philosophy and psychoanalysis: Essays in honor of Adolf Grünbaum  (pp. 111–127). 
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Henderson, J. R. (2010). Cosmology and concepts of nature in ancient China. In H. U. V ogel & 
G. Dux (Eds.), Concepts of nature: A Chinese-European cross-cultural perspective (pp. 198–
218). Leiden: Brill.
Hooykaas, R. (1972). Religion and the rise of modern science . Edinburgh: Scottish Academic 
Press.
Hooykaas, R. (1999). Fact, faith and fiction in the development of science . Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.
Hsia, P.-C. R. (2012). A Jesuit in the Forbidden City: Matteo Ricci 1552–1610 . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Hsu, S.-T. (2003). Yin & Yang of love: Feng Shui for Relationships. St. Paul: Llewellyn.
Huang, S.-c. (1968). Chang Tsai’s concept of Ch’i. Philosophy East and West, 18(4), 247–260.
Hume, D. (1777/1902). Enquiries concerning the human understanding and concerning the prin-
ciples of morals, (L.A. Selby-Bigge, ed), Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Huston, P. (1995). China, chi and Chicanary: Examing traditional Chinese medicine and chi the -
ory. Skeptical Inquirer, 19(5), 38–42.
Hwangbo, A.  B. (1999). A new millennium and feng shui. The Journal of Architecture, 4 (2), 
191–198.
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 63 ---
38
Hwangbo, A. B. (2002). An alternative tradition in architecture: Conceptions in Feng Shui and its 
continuous tradition. Journal of Architectural and Planning Research, 19(2), 110–130.
Jin, G., Fan, H., & Liu, Q. (1996). The structure of science and technology in history: On the fac-
tors delaying the development of science and technology in China in comparison with the west 
since the 17th century (part one). In F. Dainian & R. C. Cohen (Eds.), Chinese studies in the 
history and philosophy of science and technology (pp. 137–164). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Kaminer, W. (1999). Sleeping with extra-terrestrials: The rise of irrationalism and the perils of 
piety. New York: Pantheon Books.
Kant, I. (1787/1933). Critique of pure reason. (N. K. Smith, Trans.). (2nd edn). London: Macmillan, 
(First edition, 1781).
Kim, P. W. (2014). The wheel model of convergence STEAM education based on traditional sci -
entific contents. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 12 (9), 
2353–2371.
Knoop, A. (2001). Feng Shui for architects. Newsletter: American Institute of Architects. http://
www.lezley.info/feng-shui.htm.
Koyré, A. (1968). Metaphysics and measurement. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd ed.). Chicago: Chicago University 
Press. (First edition, 1962).
Kwok, D. W. Y . (1965). Scientism in Chinese thought: 1900–1950. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Ladyman, J.  (2013). Toward a demarcation of science from pseudoscience. In M.  Pigluicci & 
M.  Boudry (Eds.), Philosophy of pseudoscience: Reconsidering the demarcation problem  
(pp. 45–59). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakatos, I. (1970). Falsification and the methodology of scientific research Programmes. In 
I.  Lakatos & A.  Musgrave (Eds.), Criticism and the growth of knowledge  (pp.  91–196). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakatos, I. (1978). Introduction: Science and pseudoscience. In J. Worrall & G. Currie (Eds.), The 
methodology of scientific research programmes: Volume I (pp. 1–7). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Laudan, L. (1983/1996). The demise of the demarcation problem. In L. Laudan Beyond positivism 
and relativism: Theory, method and evidence, Westview Press, Boulder, pp. 210–222.
Leung, K. (2010). Beliefs in Chinese culture. In  Oxford handbook of Chinese psychology  
(pp. 221–240). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lim, J. T. Y . (2003). Feng Shui for business and office. Toronto: Warwick Publishing.
Lin, J. Y . (1995). The Needham puzzle: Why the industrial revolution did not originate in China. 
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 43(2), 269–292.
Lindberg, D.  C., & Numbers, R.  L. (Eds.). (1986). God and nature: Historical essays on the 
Encounter between Christianity and science. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lindeman, M., & Aarnio, K. (2007). Superstitious, magical, and paranormal beliefs: An integrative 
model. Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 731–744.
Lip, E. (2008). Feng Shui for success in business. Singapore: Marshall Cavendish.
Mach, E. (1910/1992). Sensory elements and scientific concepts. In J.  Blackmore (ed.) Ernst 
Mach: A deeper look, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 118–126.
Mahner, M. (2007). Demarcating science from pseudoscience. In T.  Kuipers (Ed.), Handbook 
of the philosophy of science: General philosophy of science- focal issue  (pp.  515–575). 
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Mahner, M. (2012). The role of metaphysical naturalism in science. Science & Education, 21(10), 
1437–1459.
Mahner, M. (2013). Science and pseudoscience: How to demarcate after the (alleged) demise of 
the demarcation problem. In M. Pigliucci & M. Boudry (Eds.), Philosophy of pseudoscience: 
Reconsidering the demarcation problem (pp. 29–59). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mak, M. Y ., & Ng, S. T. (2005). The art and science of Feng Shui – A study on architects’ percep-
tion. Building and Environment, 40(3), 427–434.
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 64 ---
39
Mak, M. Y ., & So, A. T. (2015). Scientific Feng Shui for the built environment: Theories and appli-
cations. Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong Press.
Marafa, L. M. (2003). Integrating natural and cultural heritage: The advantage of feng shui land -
scape resources. International Journal of Heritage Studies 9 Part, 4, 307–324.
March, A.  L. (1968). An appreciation of Chinese geomancy. Journal of Asian Studies, 27 (2), 
253–267.
Martin, M. (1994). Pseudoscience, the paranormal, and science education. Science & Education, 
3(4), 357–372.
Mascall, E. L. (1956). Christian theology and natural science: Some questions in their relations . 
London: Longmans Green & Co..
Matthews, M. R. (Ed.). (2009a). Science, worldviews and education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M.  R. (2009b). Teaching the philosophical and worldview components of science. 
Science & Education, 18(6–7), 697–728.
Matthews, M. R. (2011). From nature of science (NOS) to features of science (FOS). In M. S. 
Khine (Ed.), Advances in the nature of science research: Concepts and methodologies  
(pp. 1–26). Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (2015). Science teaching: The contribution of history and philosophy of science: 
20th anniversary revised and enlarged edition. New York: Routledge.
Miller, J. D. (2004). Public understanding of, and attitudes toward, scientific research: What we 
know and what we need to know. Public Understanding of Science, 13, 273–294.
Miner, E. D. (1998). Uranus: The planet, rings and satellites. New York: Wiley.
Moore, M. (2011). Feng shui scandals cause 20 per cent drop in business, The Telegraph 8th 
March.
National Research Council (NRC). (2013). Next generation science standards. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press.
Needham, J. (1963). Poverties and triumphs of the Chinese scientific tradition. In A. C. Crombie 
(Ed.), Scientific change: Historical studies in the intellectual, social and technical conditions 
for scientific discovery and technical invention, from antiquity to the present  (pp. 117–153). 
New York: Basic Books.
Needham, J., & Ling, W. (1956). Science and civilisation in China. In  History of scientific thought 
(V ol. 2). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nickles, T. (2013). The problem of demarcation: History and future. In M. Pigliucci & M. Boudry 
(Eds.), Philosophy of pseudoscience: Reconsidering the demarcation problem  (pp. 101–120). 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Oreskes, N., & Conway, E. M. (2010). Merchants of doubt: How a handful of scientists obscured 
the truth on issues from tobacco smoke to global warming. New York: Bloomsbury Press.
Orleans, L. A. (Ed.). (1980). Science in contemporary China. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Park, R. L. (2000). Voodoo science: The road from foolishness to fraud. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Park, R. L. (2008). Superstition: Belief in the age of science. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Paton, M.  J. (2007). Feng shui: A continuation of the Art of Swindlers? Journal of Chinese 
Philosophy, 34(3), 427–445.
Perry-Hobson, J. S. (1994). Feng Shui: Its impacts on the Asian hospitality industry. International 
Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 6(6), 21–26.
Pigliucci, M. (2013). The demarcation problem: A (Belated) response to Laudan. In M. Pigliucci 
& M. Boudry (Eds.), Philosophy of pseudoscience: Reconsidering the demarcation problem  
(pp. 9–28). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pigliucci, M., & Boudry, M. (Eds.). (2013). Philosophy of pseudoscience: Reconsidering the 
demarcation problem. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Popper, K. R. (1963). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge . London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Porkert, M. (1982). The difficult task of blending Chinese and Western science: The case of the 
modern interpretations of traditional Chinese medicine. In G. Li, M. Zhang, & T. Cao (Eds.), 
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities

--- PAGE 65 ---
40
Explorations in the history of science and technology in China  (pp.  553–572). Shanghai: 
Shanghai Chinese Classics Publishing House.
Preece, P. F. W., & Baxter, J. H. (2000). Scepticism and gullibility: The superstitious and pseudo-  
scientific beliefs of secondary school students. International Journal of Science Education, 
22(11), 1147–1156.
Queenan, J. (2002). Beyond Feng Shui. Skeptical Inquirer, 12(4).
Radder, H. (Ed.). (2003). The philosophy of scientific experimentation . Pittsburgh: University of 
Pittsburgh Press.
Randi, J. (1987). The faith healers. Buffalo: Prometheus Books.
Randi, J. (1995). An encyclopedia of claims, frauds, and hoaxes of the occult and supernatural . 
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Ricci, M.: 1617/1953 On the Christian mission among the Chinese . In L.L. Gallagher, China in 
the sixteenth century: The Journals of Matthew Ricci, 1583–1610, Random House, New York.
Rossbach, S. (1983). Feng Shui: The Chinese Art of Placement. New York: E.P. Dutton.
Rossbach, S. (1987). Interior design with Feng Shui. New York: E.P. Dutton.
Rule, P. A. (1986). K’ung-tzu or Confucius? The Jesuit interpretation of Confucianism . Sydney: 
Allen & Unwin.
Rutt, R. (1996). The book of Changes (Zhouyi): A bronze age document. Richmond: Curzon Press.
Sagan, C. (1996). The demon-haunted world: Science as a candle in the dark . London: Headline 
Book Publishing.
Schofield, R. E. (1970). Mechanism and materialism: British natural philosophy in an age of rea-
son. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Shapiro, J. (2001). Mao’s war against nature: Politics and environment in revolutionary China . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shermer, M. (1997). Why people believe weird things: Pseudoscience, superstition, and other 
confusions of our time. New York: W.H. Freemand & Co..
Shermer, M. (2002). ‘Feng Shui’, The Skeptics encyclopedia of pseudoscience (V ol. 2, pp. 111–
112). Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO.
Sivin, N. (1984). Why the scientific revolution did not take place in China  – Or Didn’t it? In 
E. Mendelshohn (Ed.), Transformation and tradition in the sciences (pp. 531–554). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Skinner, S. (1980). Terrestrial astrology: Divination by geomancy. London: Routeledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Skinner, S. (2008). Guide to the Feng Shui compass: A compendium of classical Feng Shui . 
Singapore: Golden Hoard Press.
Skinner, S. (2015). Advanced flying star Feng Shui. Singapore: Golden Hoard Press.
Smith, R.  J. (1991). Fortune-tellers and philosophers. Divination in Chinese society . Boulder: 
Westview Press.
Spence, J. D. (1984). The memory palace of Matteo Ricci. New York: Penguin.
Tang, Y . (2015a). Confucianism, Buddhism, Daoism, Christianity and Chinese culture. Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Tang, Y . (2015b). Some reflections on new confucianism in Chinese mainland culture of the 
1990s. In Y . Tang (Ed.), Confucianism, Buddhism, Daoism, Christianity and Chinese culture  
(pp. 67–78). Dordrecht: Springer.
Tang, Y . (2015c). On the clash and coexistence of human civilizations. In Y . Tang (Ed.), Confucianism, 
Buddhism, Daoism, Christianity and Chinese culture (pp. 291–307). Dordrecht: Springer.
Thurs, D. P., & Numbers, R. L. (2013). Science, pseudoscience, and science falsely so-called. In 
M. Pigliucci & M. Boudry (Eds.), Philosophy of pseudoscience: Reconsidering the demarca -
tion problem (pp. 121–144). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tobin, K. (2000). Constructivism in science education: Moving on. In D.  C. Phillips (Ed.), 
Constructivism in education  (pp.  227–253). Chicago: National Society for the Study of 
Education.
M.R. Matthews

--- PAGE 66 ---
41
Tobin, K. (2015). Connecting science education to a world in crisis. Asia-Pacific Science Education, 
1, 2. doi:10.1186/s41029-015-0003-z.
Too, L. (1998). Essential Feng Shui: A step-by step guide to enhancing your relationships,health 
and prosperity. London: Random House.
Turgut, H. (2011). The context of demarcation in nature of science teaching: The case of astrology. 
Science & Education, 20(5–6), 491–515.
Wegman, M. E. (1980). Biomedical research: Clinical and public health Aspects. In L. A. Orleans 
(Ed.), Science in contemporary China (pp. 269–294). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Weinert, F. (1995). The Duhem-Quine thesis revisited. International Studies in Philosophy of 
Science, 9(2), 147–156.
Wong, G. (1963). China’s opposition to Western science during the late Ming and Early Ch’ing. 
Isis, 54(1), 29–49.
Wright, J. (2010). Mission to China: Matteo Ricci and the Jesuit Encounter with the east. London: 
Faber.
Yoon, H.-K. (2006). The culture of Fengshui in Korea: An exploration of East Asian Geomancy . 
Plymouth: Rowan & Littlefield.
Yosida, M. (1973). The Chinese concept of nature. In S. Nakayama & N. Sivin (Eds.), Chinese 
science: Explorations of an ancient tradition (pp. 71–89). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Zhang, D. (2002). Key concepts in Chinese philosophy, (translated and edited by Edmund Ryden). 
Beijing: Foreign Languages Press.
1 Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities