Title: The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction
Pages: 67-90

--- PAGE 67 ---
43
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_2
Chapter 2      
The Enlightenment: Truths Behind 
a Misleading Abstraction                                      
Robert Nola
In trying to come to understand what ‘The Enlightenment’ means, enlightenment is 
not always readily forthcoming. Historians are prone to “periodize” history (mainly 
European history) using terms such as ‘The Renaissance’, ‘The Reformation’, ‘The 
Age of Reason’, ‘The Enlightenment’ (are these last two the same?), ‘The Romantic 
Age’, ‘The Age of Revolutions’, ‘The Modern Age’, and so on. What distinguishes 
one period from another is often hard to determine. Here the focus is on the period 
of “The Enlightenment”, its scope, the content of its characteristic doctrines, their 
epistemic standing and some critics of the (idea of) the Enlightenment.
Of the multifarious issues that surround The Enlightenment, the following few 
are selected for attention in this essay. Section 2.1 of this paper canvases a few of the 
competing accounts of when The Enlightenment occurred, how many “enlighten -
ments” there were and what some of its central doctrines might be. As a leading 
hypothesis I draw (but not uncritically) on Jonathan Israel’s idea that there are just 
two aspects to The Enlightenment, the Radical and the Moderate, and his more 
detailed account, in the form of eight cardinal points, of how one might characterise 
the Radical Enlightenment. Section 2.2 makes some suggestions that expand on the 
role of science in The Enlightenment that are not well captured in Israel’s account. 
Section 2.3 develops some brief comments about what it might be for a person to be 
enlightened about some subject matter. Note here that the word ‘enlightened’ is an 
adjective that is applied to a person. This is to be distinguished from its nominaliza-
tion when it is turned into the abstract noun ‘The Enlightenment’. It will be claimed 
that its denotation remains quite unclear; if not treated with care it is a misleading 
abstraction.
In Sect. 2.4 it is suggested that talk about ‘The Enlightenment’ is better replaced 
by an epidemiological approach that considers the scatter of enlightened and unen-
lightened people at a time in any given society. This is the kernel of hard fact about 
R. Nola (*) 
School of Humanities, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
e-mail: r.nola@auckland.ac.nz

--- PAGE 68 ---
44
“The Enlightenment” as it exists in a given society at a time. The approach taken 
here is that of methodological individualism in which a seemingly holistic concept 
like “Enlightenment” is given an analysis in terms of individual people who are 
enlightened to some degree or in some respect. Section 2.5 considers some of the 
definitional comments made by Mendelssohn and Kant in their respective accounts 
of The Enlightenment; these are just two of the many early attempts to characterise 
the Enlightenment. The final Sects. 2.6 and 2.7 consider some of the claims made 
by some recent detractors of the Enlightenment (such as John Gray, Horkheimer 
and Adorno). Their claims have gained some currency but, as will be argued, they 
are not convincing and are often implausible. But they are part of the current wide-
spread denigration of “The Enlightenment” that has reached beyond philosophy and 
sociology into science education where typically one author, for example, maintains 
that: ‘Enlightenment epistemology of science is imbued with cultural meanings of 
gender’ and that the Enlightenment gave rise to all manner of undesirable dualisms 
(Brickhouse 2001, p. 283).
2.1  What Is Enlightenment?
There is little agreement as to when “The Enlightenment” started. Many suppose 
that it began at some time during the first half of the 1700s though others push its 
origin back to a time in the 1600s in order to include the works of Descartes (1596–
1650), Spinoza (1632–1677) and Newton (the first edition of his Principia 
Mathematica was published in 1687) as crucial to philosophical and scientific 
aspects of “The Enlightenment”. It remains a moot point as to whether what some 
call “the scientific revolution” is to be included within The Enlightenment. The 
scientific revolution was inaugurated much earlier by Copernicus (his De 
Revolutionibus was published just before his death in 1543) and was continued by 
Bacon, Galileo, Kepler, who were followed by many others.
If “the scientific revolution” is regarded as an independent matter (as it is here), 
it remains important to trace the influence of both science and the methods of 
science on “The Enlightenment” conception of rationalism and reason. Matthews 
follows many in saying: ‘The eighteenth-century Enlightenment was the fruit of the 
seventeenth-century scientific revolution’ (Matthews 2015, p. 23). Many suppose 
that “The Enlightenment” ended by the end of the eighteenth century; the decade of 
the French Revolution 1789–1799 is commonly said to mark its end.
For some, for example Habermas, these dates are too restrictive. There is still 
supposed to be an ongoing “project of enlightenment” 1 which remains unfinished. 
1 There is a quite ordinary sense of the phrase ‘The Enlightenment Project’ in which we can say 
that some of the ideas and ideals that were inaugurated in the 17th and 18th The Enlightenment 
period are yet to be fully articulated or even adequately implemented (such as sexual equality). 
Harbermas, of course, might well invest the phrase with a different meaning as when he talks of 
“Modernity – an Unfinished Project” at the beginning of the ‘Preface’ to Habermas 1990, p. xix. 
See also the collection by Honneth and others 1992.
R. Nola

--- PAGE 69 ---
45
More broadly, Bertrand Russell held the view that the enlightenment was a phase in 
a more general progressive development which began in antiquity, and that reason 
and challenges to the established order were constant ideals from that time until 
now. Given what we ordinarily understand by being enlightened and using reason, 
Russell is right in that it would be odd to claim that the Ancient Greeks, some of the 
medieval philosophers, as well as theoreticians in our own time, were not enlight -
ened. A similar point is acknowledged by a leading historian of The Enlightenment, 
Peter Gay, who speaks of a ‘first enlightenment’ to be found in Ancient Greece and 
the Roman Empire.2 For him the subsequent “second” seventeenth–eighteenth cen-
tury enlightenment period is said to be “pagan” in that it rejects much of the inter -
vening Christian view of the world.
Is the “The Enlightenment” the same sort of thing in different places in Europe? 
Some point to the distinctive character of national enlightenments such as “The 
Scottish Enlightenment”, “The French Enlightenment”, and so on. The historian 
John G. A. Pocock in his Barbarism and Religion,  V ol. 1, The Enlightenments of 
Edward Gibbon deliberately uses the plural ‘Enlightenments’ in the subtitle of his 
book about the various, distinct enlightenments with which Edward Gibbon was 
allegedly involved. He underlines this plurality by saying: “it is a premise of this 
book that we can no longer write satisfactorily of ‘The Enlightenment’ as a unified 
and universal intellectual movement“(Pocock 1999, p. 13). So we are to drop the 
‘The’ indicating uniqueness. More broadly this suggests that in the attempt to say 
what “The Enlightenment” is, we are to abandon the idea that in any definition of 
the concept there is to be found a common core of characteristics which the alleg -
edly various instances of the several “Enlightenments” all share. To use an idea of 
Wittgenstein, there might still be a family resemblance between the various kinds of 
Enlightenment even though there is no essential common core to them all. However 
on this view it does not emerge clearly just how many distinct “Enlightenments” 
there really are.
In three volumes, each about 900 pages long, another prominent historian of The 
Enlightenment, Jonathan Israel, resists Pocock’s position and claims that there were 
just two Enlightenments in Europe and America  - Radical and Moderate main -
stream (or conservative).3 Leading radical enlighteners were, for example, Spinoza, 
Bayle, Meslier, d’Alembert and Diderot; they advanced social and political ideas 
that were radically opposed to prevailing restrictive views advocated by the church 
and absolutist monarchies. Leading moderate enlighteners included, for example, 
Hume, Locke, V oltaire and (the later) Rousseau.4 To various extents they drew back 
2 Gay 1967, volume 1; see Book One, Chapter Two, entitled ‘The First Enlightenment’ and the 
bibliographical essay on pages 464–81. Note that the subtitle to volume 1 is ‘The Rise of Modern 
Paganism’.
3 In Israel 2006, chapters 1.1 and 34 ‘Postscript’ the case is made against the “many” enlightenments 
of Pocock and a supposed “one” enlightenment suggested by Gay. He makes a case for there being 
just two trends in the enlightenment period, radical and moderate. Though disputed, this will be 
provisionally accepted here since it is not germane to my main purpose in mentioning Israel’s work.
4 For an elaboration of this distinction see Israel 2006, section 1.1, pp.  3–15 and section 34 
‘Postscript’. The later Rousseau is even said to become ‘… the moral “prophet” as it were of one 
form of Counter-Enlightenment’ (ibid., p 11).
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 70 ---
46
from the more radical stance and even in some cases were apologetic towards, if not 
supportive of, the absolutist tendencies to be found in churches, governments and/
or monarchies. Of the two kinds of enlightenment the moderate became the much 
more dominant in its public support and approval.
Unlike many historians of The Enlightenment, Israel assists discussion of what 
doctrines the Radical Enlightenment endorsed by distilling out eight, brief cardinal 
points which he takes to characterise it. In this essay I will, with one modification, 
provisionally accept Israel’s cardinal points as a useful hypothesis to keep in mind; 
though it should also be recognised that the thinkers of the Enlightenment were 
quite diverse in their doctrines and not all would have endorsed every one of the 
following cardinal points in exactly the form expressed5:
 (1) adoption of philosophical (mathematical-historical) reason as the only and 
exclusive criterion of what is true;
 (2) rejection of all supernatural agency, magic, disembodies spirits and divine 
providence;
 (3) equality of all mankind (racial and sexual);
 (4) secular ‘universalism’ in ethics anchored in equality and chiefly stressing 
equity, justice and charity;
 (5) comprehensive toleration and freedom of thought based on independent critical 
thinking;
 (6) personal liberty of life style and sexual conduct between consenting adults, 
safeguarding the dignity and freedom of the unmarried and homosexuals;
 (7) freedom of expression, political criticism, and the press, in the public sphere;
 (8) democratic republicanism as the most legitimate form of politics.6 (Israel 2006, 
p. 866)
5 Abner Shimony makes a good point about the diversity of views of leading members of the 
Enlightenment. They were: ‘rationalists, empiricists and mediators; Newtonians and dissenters 
from Newton: system builders and skeptics; theists, deists, agnostics and atheists; cultural univer-
salists and cultural pluralists; advocates of a variety of bases of ethics; a wide spectrum of political 
theorists; physicalists and mentalists; determinists and advocates of free will; trusters and distrust-
ers in benevolent despotism; believers and disbelievers in the inevitability of human progress. 
Some core commitments, shared by almost all of the Enlightenment philosophers, can be reason -
ably extracted and these, in my opinion, need little modification to be permanently valuable’ 
(Shimony 1997, p. S2). Shimony then proceeds to give a list of 10 core commitments of The 
Enlightenment which differ from those of Israel; but there is no deep inconsistency, or great 
distance, between the two lists. Shimony’s list puts greater emphasis on matters to do with science 
and could have just as well been used here instead of Israel’s eight cardinal points. Finally Shimony 
examines four criticisms of The Enlightenment and makes convincing responses to them 
(pp. S3-S9). His account is laid out and discussed in Matthews (2015, pp.24–26).
6 In Israel 2011, section 1.1 (‘Defining the Enlightenment’, pp.  1–8) the author reviews other 
attempts at a definition of ‘The Enlightenment’ and proposes something like (1) to (8) in truncated 
form. He takes it to be a unitary movement occurring on both sides of the Atlantic from about 1680 
to 1800 which is driven by philosophy (here Spinoza is said to have had an important role at the 
beginning) and is socially ameliorative in transforming accepted values and practices. The extent 
to which the Enlightenment is linked to revolution is one aspect of the division between Radical 
R. Nola

--- PAGE 71 ---
47
We can take these eight to points embody central beliefs and values of enlighten-
ment thought. They can be divided into two broad categories, scientific ((1) and (2)) 
and social-ethical ((3) to (8)). 7 It is important to note that there is no logical link 
between scientific aspects of the enlightenment and its social/ethical aspects; each 
is logically independent of the other. But it just so happens that they do accompany 
one another, largely because of the more general background role of reason sup -
posed in The Enlightenment that draws upon the scientific revolution.
The first two points are an attempt to characterise philosophical and scientific 
aspects of the Enlightenment; but (1) does not do it adequately as will be argued in 
Sect. 2.2. Clearly (2) distances science from religion. However this Enlightenment 
goal has not been realised fully; it is still a matter of dispute when one considers the 
resurgence of religious views which oppose science such as creationism or intelli -
gent design or the moderate doctrine of NOMA championed by Stephen J. Gould 
which gives science and religion non-overlapping, consistent and complementary 
domains of concern. 8 In contrast (3) to (8) spell out social and ethical aspects of 
Israel’s Radical Enlightenment. Moderate Enlightenment departed from Radical 
Enlightenment in that it compromised on some of these social-ethical principles; for 
some of the non-radicals there was even a backsliding into supporting forms of 
absolute monarchy, authoritarianism (political and religious), and the like.
These eight cardinal points do not now have the same radical edge that they 
might have had in the eighteenth century. But there is a good sense in which we can 
agree with Habermas, Russell and Gay that the Enlightenment project is unfinished. 
In some respects the philosophical clarification of what each entails has yet to be 
fully articulated and agreed upon; and some of the ethical and political goals are 
only now being realised in some countries (e.g., the rights of gays, same sex mar -
riage, sexual equality, the exercise of tolerance, and the like). Depending on what 
country one is in, the conflict between religion and science embodied in (2) still 
looms large. And the same can be said for the characterisation of science in the 
seventeenth–eighteenth century enlightenment period. Twentieth century philoso -
phy of science deepens our understanding of both science and philosophy well 
beyond what might have been envisaged in that period; and this is still an ongoing 
process.
and Moderate trends within the Enlightenment. Cassirer has a different view from Shimony and 
Israel: ‘The true nature of Enlightenment thinking cannot be seen in its purest and clearest form 
where it is formulated into particular doctrines, axioms, and theorems; but rather where it is in 
process, where it is doubting and seeking, tearing down and building up’ (Cassirer 1951, p. ix). But 
there need be no inconsistency between picking out some cardinal points and also understanding 
the activity of thinking as some kind of process.
7 Bristow, 2010, distinguishes three different areas of enlightenment: scientific; moral/political; 
aesthetic. Gay, 1970, chapters 5 and 6 also includes aesthetics in the various areas of enlighten -
ment, as does Cassirer, 1951, chapter VII.
8 For an account of his NOMA, see Gould 1999. For one of the many recent accounts of the conflict 
between religion and science which rejects Gould’s distinction, see Coyne 2015, pp. 106–12.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 72 ---
48
Given the different ways in which the phrase ‘The Enlightenment’ could be used, 
some writers might well have thought that the best thing to do is to drop it alto -
gether. But dropping it has the drawback that a number of eighteenth century think-
ers used a term equivalent to the English word ‘Enlightenment’ to refer to their 
period of activity. The term ‘The Enlightenment’ appears to be of late usage in 
English; according to the on-line OED, the use of the expression beginning with 
‘The’ followed by capital ‘E’ was only common in the nineteenth century after the 
time when some say “The Enlightenment” period had ended. On the continent their 
various terms for ‘The Enlightenment’9 had a longer history and towards the end of 
the eighteenth century writers on the topic became more self-reflective about what 
“The Enlightenment” was supposed to be.
This self-reflection began when Johann Zöllner posed an innocent question 
‘What is Enlightenment?’ in a footnote of a paper he published in the December 
1783 issue of Berlinische Monatsschrift. The reflection began in earnest when the 
same journal published the next year a series of articles which attempted to answer 
Zöllner’s question, beginning with those of Moses Mendelssohn and Immanuel 
Kant (these are discussed in Sect. 2.5).10 But there was no general agreement as to 
what The Enlightenment was. So little clarity about the nature of it was achieved 
that an anonymous 1790 article in the Deutsche Monatsschrift ‘… argued that the 
term had become so divorced from any clear conventions of usage that discussions 
of it had degenerated into “a war of all against all” between combatants who mar -
shalled their own idiosyncratic definitions’ (Schmidt 1996, p. 2).
Though the eight cardinal points listed by Israel help anchor discussions about 
the beliefs and values of enlightenment thought, some might contend that we still 
remain in the same late eighteenth century state of conflict concerning its definition. 
Given what some contemporary critics of the Enlightenment think it is (see Sects. 
2.6 and 2.7), one has good grounds for saying that the situation has not changed 
very much today. The remainder of this essay attempts to say to what extent it is 
possible to characterise “The Enlightenment” and to dispel some current miscon -
ceptions about it.
2.2  Science and The Enlightenment
Historians do not always have sufficient understanding of doctrines within philoso-
phy and the philosophy of science; Israel’s philosophical cardinal point (1) is a good 
example of this. But the problems here can be readily repaired by making some 
broad comments about the development of science and the methods of science from 
the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries that can replace what is said in Israel’s first 
9 A related term in German is Aufklärung and in French is éclaircissement. All three terms connote 
the casting of light upon some matter, or a process of bring something to light.
10 These two papers and three other contemporary papers are collected in Part I of Schmidt (ed.) 
1996.
R. Nola

--- PAGE 73 ---
49
cardinal point (1) (but perhaps not as succinctly). Here Israel lists one of the ways 
in which science and its philosophy has influenced some of the doctrines of The 
Enlightenment: he speaks of ‘philosophical (mathematical-historical) reason as the 
only and exclusive criterion of what is true’. But reason is reason, whether in the 
context of philosophy, mathematics or history. And in none of these cases is it a 
criterion for truth; this is a separate matter (which reason might well presuppose). 
The important matter that can be readily agreed upon is the broad role of scientific 
reasoning in “The Enlightenment” (setting aside the irrelevant appeal to mathemat-
ics and history). But what might this be?
Let us set aside questions about whether what is commonly called the “Scientific 
Revolution” was in one sweep quite revolutionary. However, the models of the cos-
mos provided by Copernicus in his 1543 De Revolutionibus inaugurated a chain of 
rethinking of theories of dynamics and cosmology that were developed by a number 
of thinkers from Galileo to Newton. Though much of this occurred well before sev-
eral dates suggested for the start of The Enlightenment period, it had an important 
influence as a scientific exemplar of the kind of reason that any Enlightenment 
thinker thought they should try to emulate.
In considering this, we need to distinguish between the products of the various 
kinds of scientific thinking, such as the laws, theories, postulates and models that 
were developed, and the processes that were employed to arrive at these products. 
These processes fall under the general notion of the methods of science such as 
methods for discovering laws and theories, methods for assessing rival theories 
(such as Newton’s versus Descartes’ theories of motion in a resisting medium in 
which Newton’s theory was triumphant), methods for constructing idealized models 
of real systems (first developed by Galileo but subsequently followed by others), 
and the like. Not only were the products of the “scientific revolution” quite novel 
within The Enlightenment period; but also the methods of science themselves were 
novel and contributed to our idea of how reason can function when dealing with not 
only the natural world but also the human and social worlds to which Enlightenment 
thinkers were to turn their attention. It is this broad appeal to the notion of the role 
of reason and method in science and elsewhere that can replace Israel’s cardinal 
point (1).
But a little more needs to be said of this. The works of scientists from Copernicus 
onwards often contain an account of what the role of reason ought to be in science. 
Francis Bacon promulgated principles of reason such as principles of induction and 
inductive elimination. Descartes was preoccupied by setting out his ‘Rules for the 
Direction of the Mind’. Much more successful and influential in science were 
Newton’s ‘Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy’ that stand at the beginning of Book 
Three ‘System of the World’ in his Principia and which were employed in arriving 
at his law of Universal Gravitation. Subsequently philosophers developed theories 
about the extent and limitations of reason which are still open to debate (for example, 
Kant in his 1781 Critique of Pure Reason). If there is an unfinished project of “The 
Enlightenment” it is in the area of the philosophy of science and its  articulation 
of what scientific reason might be, and reason more generally. Theories of method, 
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 74 ---
50
logic and the nature of rationality grew in the twentieth century leading to a deepening 
account of scientific reason along with more broad theories within epistemology. 11 
The eighteenth century Enlightenment had only an intimation of this.
Some of the issues involved here are well-stated by Rebecca Goldstein in her 
recent critical review of a book on The Enlightenment:
… the soul of the Enlightenment unmistakably lay in an endorsement of reason, though not 
necessarily a priori reason, since many Enlightenment thinkers were robust empiricists …. 
They appealed to rational powers, which meant that only certain kinds of justification for 
beliefs would be countenanced—namely those that were, in principle, accessible to all 
humans relying only on our shared cognitive capacities. Insisting on this standard was the 
Enlightenment’s revolution. There could be no privileged knowers who appealed to special 
sources of knowledge—available to them by way of heavenly revelation, or authoritative 
status, or intimations to which their group was privy. Even tradition couldn’t stand merely 
on its longevity but had to justify its right to continue to exist.
The Enlightenment, in short, amounted to an assertion of epistemic democracy. Whatever 
can be known by one person can, in principle, be known by all, as long as they master the 
techniques for knowing that are relevant to a field. It’s no accident that the development of 
modern empirical science was intertwined with the Enlightenment. (Goldstein 2015, p. 51)
Talk of there being no privileged knowers with a special inside track to knowl -
edge and there being epistemic democracy for all of those who are willing to make 
the intellectual effort, not only underpins Israel’s point (2) about the rejection of the 
supernatural but prepares the ground for the positive features of method and reason 
suggested in point (1) that give content to the principles of an epistemic democracy 
advocated by many enlightenment thinkers. It is this conception of epistemic 
democracy, along with the principles of scientific reason, that were being developed 
from the eighteenth century onwards, which lie behind Israel’s cardinal points (1) 
and (2). It is this expanded conception of these points which will be assumed here.
2.3  What Is It to Be Enlightened?
What do we normally mean by being enlightened? In our ordinary use of the term a 
person can be enlightened when they are instructed about, or informed about, or 
have some ““light” cast upon”, some matter about which they previously knew little 
or nothing. Negative connotations are added when it is said that a person is at the 
same time freed from ignorance, superstition or prejudice. In addition, a person can 
be said to be enlightened when they acquire some understanding of some matter or 
be in a position to offer an explanation of it. Thus in reading Newton’s Principia one 
can become enlightened, say, about the universal character of gravitational 
11 There is a good account of aspects this in Shimony 1997. Shimony is a philosopher of science 
who is well known for defending Bayesianism as the method of science to adopt; he is not an 
historian like most of the writers considered so far. There are also a few hints about the role of sci-
ence and it methods in Cassirer 1951, chapter II, though his comments are largely with respect to 
Newton and some of Newton’s contemporaries.
R. Nola

--- PAGE 75 ---
51
attraction and how the law that governs it works. Negative connotations are empha-
sised when it is added that one is freed from some former prejudice, superstition or 
ignorance about the nature of gravitation as it acts in the universe.
Could one say that one’s tax consultant enlightens one about one’s tax returns? 
This is not ruled out in the above and remains an acceptable use of the term in ordi-
nary English when one is informed about factual matters. (However note that no 
negative connotation such as superstition or prejudice need be involved; it is simply 
a matter of not knowing.) If one wished to set aside such a case, one would have to 
add that being informed about factual matters may not be the proper intensional 
object of “being enlightened about …”. Rather, the proper object of being enlight -
ened is acquiring some explanatory knowledge or understanding rather than merely 
knowledge of particular fact. Enlightenment about, say, gravitational attraction is 
akin to gaining knowledge of, or understanding about, Newton’s theory of gravita-
tional attraction and its associated law12; this is different from merely getting knowl-
edge of a factual matter such as the gravitational mass of the Moon. In addition 
becoming enlightened may well involve using some of the principles of epistemic 
democracy suggested in the previous section.
Setting aside what some early writers may have said about the nature of the 
enlightenment (see Sect. 2.5) we may proceed in a slightly anachronistic way and 
consult the on-line OED. It says two things about being enlightened: (1) ‘… bring -
ing someone to a state of greater knowledge, understanding, or insight; the state of 
being enlightened in this way’. Here there is emphasis on the state of acquiring 
some initial knowledge or understanding. But further emphasis on the word ‘greater’ 
suggests a pervasive feature of past and present science, viz., its ability to grow. 
Science is not static in what it produces; in line with its epistemic democracy, it is 
dynamic and revisionary giving us new or improved laws, hypotheses and theories 
as well as methods and techniques of observation gathering and experimentation.
Within theories of scientific method criteria have been proposed in which we can 
determine the extent to which we have improved knowledge (or more correctly, 
beliefs) over previous knowledge (beliefs); or improved understandings or explana-
tions when compared with previous attempts at understanding or explanation; or we 
have ways of determining any increase in truth-likeness or verisimilitude; or we 
have ways of determining when we have some degree of evidential support, or 
greater evidential support, for our laws, theories and hypotheses. Here emphasis is 
placed on the idea of enlightenment being a process within the growth of knowl -
edge. There is nothing novel about this aspect of enlightenment so defined. It is a 
feature of science both before and after the commonly suggested seventeenth and 
eighteenth century scope of The Enlightenment period.
12 Of course one might not be fully enlightened about Newton’s theory of gravitational attraction 
but only partially so. However partial enlightenment is a step along the path to greater enlighten -
ment as one’s knowledge and understanding develops. Think of the more limited understanding of 
Newton himself and his application of his theory when compared with later developments of the 
theory of gravitation suggested by Laplace, Lagrange and Hamilton.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 76 ---
52
The on-line OED goes on to make an important contrast between an earlier state 
of pre-enlightenment understanding which is then replaced by an enlightened view: 
(2) ‘The action or process of freeing human understanding from the accepted and 
customary beliefs sanctioned by traditional, esp. religious, authority, chiefly by 
rational and scientific inquiry into all aspects of human life, which became a char -
acteristic goal of philosophical writing in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centu-
ries.’ This is not merely a matter of getting greater and greater understanding, this 
being one of the important critical functions of science in relation to earlier sci -
ences. Importantly enlightenment has a further critical and revisionary function in 
that customary, traditional and religious beliefs and various kinds of authorized 
beliefs are to be replaced, this being the first step on the path to initial (if not com -
plete) enlightenment. And by what means are the pre-enlightened beliefs and values 
to be replaced by enlightened beliefs and values? This is something called “rational-
ity” or “scientific method” - whatever they are.13 Thus the methods of science help 
us in both aspects of the notion of enlightenment distinguished by the OED. Its use 
helps people make the first move from pre-enlightened beliefs and values to enlight-
ened beliefs and values; and then it helps people to get improved beliefs once the 
initial move has been made out of the pre-enlightened phase.
The above will suffice to say what the property of being enlightened might be 
when predicated of persons. In addition the kind of knowledge involved is given 
some content by the eight cardinal points listed by Israel (noting the revised (1)). 
Thus a person is enlightened when they apply scientific methods and advocate tol -
eration, freedom of expression, sexual equality, republicanism, etc. To require that 
they also conduct their lives in the light of these principles and actually practice 
what they advocate is to adopt a strongly committed version of enlightenment. They 
are also enlightened when they use some principles of scientific method to argue for 
some point of view and do not abandon epistemic democracy in favour of some kind 
of epistemic privilege, as might their religious rivals.
What now counts as being unenlightened? A necessary condition for a person to 
be enlightened would be, for example, to believe in toleration, or freedom of expres-
sion or sexual equality (i.e., to advocate most or all of the eight cardinal beliefs and 
values listed by Israel); to fail to so believe would make one unenlightened. However 
mere belief might not be enough for enlightenment: one is required also to practice 
what one believes leading to a more strenuous form of enlightenment. Note that not 
being enlightened is not to be confused with the Counter-Enlightenment; this is a 
philosophical and political movement opposed to some or all of the main tenets of 
The Enlightenment (such as Israel’s eight points). One can be unenlightened but not 
be a member of the Counter-Enlightenment.
13 As already suggested, the nature and scope of scientific method and rationality, though an impor-
tant part of the seventeenth and eighteenth century enlightenment period, is still part of the unfin-
ished project of the enlightenment. See for example the growth of statistical methods or random 
clinical trials during twentieth century science. There are still issues to be addressed in a full 
account of the nature of scientific method and the scope of rationality in various spheres. This is 
suggested in the revisionary comments on Jonathan Israel’s cardinal points (1) and (2) of the previ-
ous section 2. See also Shimony 1997.
R. Nola

--- PAGE 77 ---
53
2.4  The Enlightenment Versus the Epidemiology of Being 
Enlightened
Epidemiology is the study of the distribution of some property throughout a given 
population (which could be human or non-human, though here we will stay with 
human populations). One could focus on any property (over a given time). Typically 
within epidemiology the property is a medical one, such as the spread of influenza 
in a population over a given time. But one can consider the distribution of non-  
medical properties across a population such as being over 2 m tall, or owning two 
or more homes or having more than 10 million dollars in wealth. The population is 
then divided into two groups (which can have fuzzy boundaries); those who have 
the specified property and the complementary group of those who do not have the 
property.
In the same way one can also consider the distribution of mental properties over 
a population, such as the property of believing in some proposition, that p. Thus in 
a given population some will believe that the free market is the most efficacious 
form of economic organisation while others will not; some will believe that God 
exists while others will not; some will believe in creationism while others will not; 
and so on for any belief whatever. Here the population is divided into two groups: 
those who believe some claim that p and the complementary group who do not 
believe that p (which can be further divided into those who positively disbelieve that 
p, or have no belief either way that p, or have suspended belief in p, or are so con -
fused that they do not know what they believe).14
Now apply the epidemiology of beliefs to the particular case of the beliefs char-
acteristic of “The Enlightenment” (such as the conjunction of (most of) Israel’s 
eight cardinal points). It would be an empirical matter to determine just how wide-
spread were these Enlightenment beliefs at any given time in, say, the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries across Europe (though not an empirical investigation that 
one could easily carry out now).
Israel gives us a hint of these empirical matters when he says:
In this present work, over seventy writers French, Dutch, German, Italian and British active 
within the period between 1660 and 1750 have been identified as significantly contributing 
to formulating and publicizing the ideas which drove the Radical Enlightenment, in con -
junction with social forces and grievances where these helped to produce the ideas and 
shape the controversies. … among the five main ‘national’ contingents, the French group 
turns out to have been by far the largest, the Dutch the second largest, and the British group 
seemingly the smallest.’ (Israel 2006, p. 867)
We can say that, in a given society, a few people (such as the above writers) are the 
enlightened at that time, and indeed the radically enlightened. Just how many fellow 
travellers in each society were also radically enlightened is hard to tell. But we can 
say that the number of people in a given society who were (radically) enlightened 
14 On the application of epidemiology to cultural contexts see Sperber 1996, ‘Introduction’ pp. 1–6 
and Chapter 4 ‘The Epidemiology of Beliefs’.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 78 ---
54
was quite small when compared with the number of people in the complementary 
class who were not enlightened at all (and this would include a small number of 
members of the Counter-Enlightenment who knew of the doctrines of the radically 
enlightened few but were opposed to them).
This highlights the way in which the use of the phrase ‘The Enlightenment’ can 
mislead. It is an abstract noun which is not clear in its denotation. Does it refer to a 
period of time? Or a body of doctrine? Or some people? Or a movement or a pro -
cess? Or what? Context of use might not always help here. However an approach 
based on the epidemiology of belief invites us to consider (i) the adjective ‘enlight-
ened’ which can apply to the members of a class of people and (ii) the adjective 
‘unenlightened’ which applies to the members of a complementary class. A period, 
or an “Age”, might be characterised by having a small number of enlightened peo-
ple in it while also containing a large number of unenlightened people. In such a 
case the phrase “The Enlightenment” when applied to the Age as a whole will be 
misleading in another way.15
Here there is an important distinction to mark that perhaps Kant is trying to make 
when he says: ‘If it is asked “Do we now live in an enlightened age?” the answer is 
“No”, but we do live in an age of enlightenment” (Kant 1996, p. 62). We do not live 
in an enlightened age because of the paucity of people who are in fact enlightened; 
the complementary class of the unenlightened is, in comparison, quite large and 
they are dominant. But because there are some enlightened people, as few as they 
may be, there is some enlightenment in the age.
Importantly there is no overall thing such as “The Enlightenment” to talk about. 
In one of its uses the phrase ‘The Enlightenment’ might be thought to pick out an 
enlightened age; but according to Kant there is no such thing to pick out as there is 
no general enlightenment distributed across all, or most, people. In another of its 
uses the phrase ‘The Enlightenment’ might refer to an “age of enlightenment”; but 
then few in the age are enlightened and there is a much bigger complementary class 
of people to take into account who are not enlightened. What is being talked about 
is often unclear or misleading. The distinction Kant attempts to make becomes 
clearer on the epidemiological approach taken here. It separates the use of an adjec-
tive ‘enlightened’ when applied to people (or not as the case may be) from the more 
obscure ‘The Enlightenment’ which is unclear in its denotation and so can mislead 
those who use the term.
Since being enlightened is not an “all-or-nothing” matter, the epidemiological 
approach needs modification. Suppose we have some persons x who live in a given 
society S (or Age) over a time t; and suppose further that they hold some  enlightened 
beliefs and values, B, on some subject matter M. The beliefs they hold might be 
some of the eight given in Israel’s (modified) list, or at least some smaller number 
of them which form a cluster. The first modification arises as follows. We should not 
expect that person x always be fully enlightened about subject matter M; they may 
15 Approaching matters in this way gives an account of the seemingly holist notion of Enlightenment 
in terms of the mental properties of people; in this way the proposed analysis is of a piece with the 
doctrine of methodological individualism.
R. Nola

--- PAGE 79 ---
55
be only partially so (as an example see footnote 12 on this). Taking this into account 
allows that a person’s enlightenment can come in degrees which can then be 
comparative.
As an illustration consider John Locke’s well known account of tolerance. 
Locke’s attempt to develop an account of the concept of toleration is at best partial; 
modern accounts are, in several respects, an improvement. Infamously Locke 
restricts the extension of the concept of those to be tolerated; his account is partial 
since atheists are not to be included and he has serious doubts about Catholics. 
(Locke 1689/2010–15, section 10, p. 21). Since Locke’s time we have expanded the 
extension of those who must be tolerated making it a universal ideal. However the 
extent to which tolerance is actually practised between groups and nations is a sepa-
rate empirical socio-historical matter which tells us about the degree to which 
enlightenment ideals are actually realised. For various groups of people the exten -
sion of tolerance is at best partial; so we can legitimately speak of the unfinished 
project of enlightenment.
A second illustration is the case of David Hume who is often cited as a leading 
enlightenment figure. Is he always enlightened when it comes to race? Hume tells 
us that ‘the most rude and barbarous of the whites, such as the ancient Germans, the 
present Tartars, have still something eminent about them” (Hume  1985, p. 208, fn. 
10). But not so the “negroes” as Hume calls them. None of them have any redeem-
ing features at all: ‘I am apt to suspect the negroes to be naturally inferior to whites”. 
That negroes accomplish anything is to be compared to ‘… a parrot who speaks a 
few words plainly’ (loc. Cit.). Hume’s espousal of an appalling form of selective 
racism concerning “negroes” illustrates, at best, a case of “partial enlightenment” 
(in the sense being distinguished).
A second modification concerns the possibility that a person x be enlightened 
about some subject matter M but not about some other subject matter M* (say, they 
are fully or partially enlightened about the science of gravitational attraction but not 
fully or partially enlightened about political matters such as republicanism). It is a 
commonplace observation that some people are enlightened about some subject 
matter M at a time but not enlightened about other matters such as M*; and yet other 
people are not enlightened about M at all. Note that all of this can vary over time.
Further modifications allow that a person’s belief B is not a matter of either full, 
or no, belief; there are degrees of belief D in between to take into account.16 In addi-
tion the degree of belief may be sanctioned by some principles of reasoning or 
principle of scientific method R.17 Clearly people can differ in the respects and the 
degree in which they are enlightened.
16 Here one could adopt an account, found in theories of probabilistic degrees of belief, as to how 
D is to be understood. D can vary on a scale from 0 to 1.
17 Perhaps this could be expressed more strongly; it is not just that a person’s beliefs are sanctioned 
by some principles of rationality but a person’s actually holds the belief on the basis of the sanc -
tioning principles. Being so enlightened is more strenuous in requiring the actual use of principles 
of reason in belief formation. Being unenlightened would then be accompanied by forming beliefs 
dogmatically without any appeal to principles like R.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 80 ---
56
This suggests at least seven parameters in terms of which enlightenment can be 
assessed: <a person x in a society S at a time t, a set of beliefs and values B held by 
x about some subject matter M, some principles of belief assessment R employed 
by x, and some degree D to which B are given credence by x>. Or in short: <x S, t, 
B, M, R, D>. This gives a finer gradation concerning enlightenment; having an 
enlightened attitude to matters is not an all-or-nothing affair. Importantly as x and t 
vary (within S) the attempt to find the incidence of beliefs B about M in S will result 
in a scatter of individuals who are enlightened to some degree; but this will shade 
off into a scatter of individuals who lack any such beliefs - the unenlightened. As 
indicated this scatter can vary over time and place; determining what is the scatter 
is a matter of empirical science.
The epidemiological approach taken here shows that one cannot talk in a general 
way about “The Enlightenment”; this is part of the inflation of the term 
‘Enlightenment’ and its denotational obscurity. Rather there is just the social scatter 
of the property of being enlightened and unenlightened with respect to people. 
Perhaps with some charity, the term ‘Enlightenment’ can be understood on some 
occasions of its use to be a shorthand way of referring to this scatter.
2.5  Early Attempts to Define ‘Enlightenment’: Moses 
Mendelssohn and Immanuel Kant
In his brief 1784 commentary, Moses Mendelssohn does not really attempt to pro -
vide a definition of the term ‘enlightenment’; but he makes links between it and 
other notions such as Culture (Kultur) and Education (Bildung) (though the term 
‘Bildung’ can cover all three concepts). He also makes comments which link nicely 
with what has been developed in the above sections about the epidemiological scat-
ter of the property of being enlightened.
Enlightenment, he says, concerns more theoretical matters, such as our knowl -
edge and our ability to rationally reflect and to eliminate prejudices. This is said to 
stand in contrast to culture which is oriented towards more practical matters that can 
arise in political, ethical and aesthetic contexts. He readily acknowledges the differ-
ent degrees to which societies can be enlightened; the epidemiology of being 
enlightened differs between different cultural groups such as Berliners, the English, 
the Chinese and the Ancient Greeks. He also recognises that enlightenment can 
come in different degrees: ‘… the enlightenment of a nation is proportional to (1) 
the amount of knowledge, (2) its importance …. (3) its dissemination through all 
estates, (4) its accord with their vocations’ (Mendelssohn 1784/1996, p. 55). Each 
of these four considerations can fit with the above set of parameters for determining 
the scatter, in any population, of the property of being enlightened.
Mendelssohn also acknowledges the way in which education is important in 
spreading enlightenment. Education is the main way of providing us with an enlight-
R. Nola

--- PAGE 81 ---
57
ened view of the world (viz., increasing knowledge and understanding of the world), 
a critical stance from which to evaluate prejudice, and an appreciation of how ratio-
nal reflection is involved in both these matters. Here Mendelssohn touches on the 
significant issue of, given the small scatter of enlightened people compared with the 
larger scatter of the unenlightened, how the number of the enlightened is to be 
increased. Since the acquisition of knowledge and understanding lies at the heart of 
the enlightenment project, education becomes important in increasing the extent 
and degree of enlightenment in any society.
In contrast, Kant does attempt to say what the enlightenment is; this attempt is 
commonly cited but not often critically evaluated (one exception is Bittner 1996). 
Kant tells us that the motto of the enlightenment is: ‘Sapere aude! Have the courage 
to use your own understanding!’ (Kant 1784/1996, p. 58). As has been said above, 
understanding and explanation are two proper goals of the epistemic enterprise 
associated with enlightened thinking. We can all agree that each person, when they 
can, ought to autonomously employ their own powers of reason in thinking, in con-
structing explanations and forming their understanding of some subject matter.
Importantly the injunction rules out (1) appeal to authorities (such as religious or 
monarchical), socially sanctioned traditions, habits and conventions so that epis -
temic democracy prevails. Kant also emphasises two additional points when he 
talks of (2) courage, which might well have to be employed in (3) the use of ones’ 
own understanding rather than that of another. These three points are emphasised in 
what can be taken to be Kant’s account of ‘enlightenment’: ‘Enlightenment is man-
kind’s exit from self-incurred immaturity. Immaturity is the inability to make use of 
one’s own understanding without the guidance of another’ (loc. Cit.).
A number of points need to be made about Kant’s account. First, the definition 
(if that is what it is) given by the injunction ‘Sapere aude’ is almost content-less. As 
important as the injunction is, and although it states that individuals should ‘own’ 
their beliefs and not be swayed by mere authority, it does not tell us anything about 
the actual beliefs and values that an enlightened person ought to entertain or reject, 
for example, along the lines of the eight cardinal points listed by Israel (modified or 
unmodified).
Second, one might summon up one’s courage to have beliefs with some content 
but miscalculate what the proper use of one’s understanding ought to be. So, some-
thing normative has to be added to using one’s understanding to ensure that it is a 
proper use so that the products of one’s understanding bear some relationship to the 
truth.
Thirdly, one might well dispute whether any immaturity 18 one suffers from is 
self-inflicted so that one is unable to make use of one’s understanding without the 
18 Some argue that part of the problem in understanding Kant here is with the use of the English 
term ‘immaturity’ which commonly translates a German term which has legal overtones not pres-
ent in the English. Thus the German term can apply to the legal status of minors who do not have 
certain kinds of responsibilities; but this is not the necessarily the case with the English 
‘immaturity’.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 82 ---
58
help of another. One’s inability to use one’s own understanding may not be self-  
inflicted and could well be due to other factors outside one’s control such as lack of 
the right education, lack of training to acquire the right skills, lack of opportunity 
during one’s life, and so on.
Fourthly, one should not make the inference that there was a prior stage in which 
one was mature and then later one is immature (whether it is one’s own fault or not) 
and that one might try to recover the earlier phase of maturity; there might well be 
no such earlier phase to recover.
Finally, is Kant saying that we ought to put no, or very little, weight on the judge-
ments of others in forming our own beliefs and that always we ought to maximize 
our own judgmental autonomy? For an enlightened outlook Kant says that we need 
to make a public use of our reason in all matters. In contrast there are those who tell 
us not to. Thus the tax collector says: ‘Don’t argue, just pay. The clergyman says: 
‘Don’t argue, just believe’. And so on.19 Certainly the injunction ‘ Sapere aude!’ 
rules out such cases. But would it rule out the following case from science (rather 
than religion)? Suppose that a scientist, or Isaac Newton himself, says, pointing to 
Principia, Book III on gravitational attraction, ‘Don’t argue; just believe this stuff 
on gravitational attraction!’
We lay people often take what scientists say about their field as authoritative. 
Moreover scientists in one field (say, genetics) take what other scientists in another 
field (say, plasma physics) on authority and do not think through the other’s science. 
In general a scientific claim that p (say, about Newtonian gravitation) is taken on 
trust by others who do not work in the field. And they take it on trust because of the 
authority of the scientist (after all it is Isaac Newton!), or the authority of the book 
or journal in which the claim that p is published; and so on. In such cases there is an 
authoritative person who offers us expert testimony.20 Standardly in such a case we 
do not have to argue for ourselves all the ins and outs with some Newton about his 
theory but simply accept matters on his word. But if one simply takes on board 
Newton’s claims as a matter of expert testimony does it follow that one is immature 
in some way, as Kant might be understood to claim?
What this example shows is that we can separate Kant’s connection between self- 
incurred immaturity and the guidance that another can provide without fully using 
one’s own understanding. Importantly in education a student can accept such guid-
ance without being self-incurably immature, as in the case of coming to know on the 
basis of testimony. Kant might well be asking for too much in requiring that the 
light of reason shine in all cases of knowing. After all we do get much of our knowl-
edge from expert testimony without reckoning we are immature in some way. But it 
should always remain an open possibility, as Kant indicates, that we also come to 
know matters, such as Newton’s theory of gravitational attraction, on the basis of 
the exercise of our own powers of reason. This is an aspect of epistemic democracy 
(see Sect. 2.2) which is at the core of Enlightenment ideas and ideals.
19 See Kant 1996, p. 59. Kant talks of our freedom to use public reason in not following these 
injunctions.
20 On expert testimony see Gelfert 2014, especially Chapter 9.
R. Nola

--- PAGE 83 ---
59
2.6  Some Modern Critics of “The Enlightenment”
 (a) John Gray
There is a general tendency found in several contemporary critics to want turn off 
the lights of “The Enlightenment”. Rather than cast light on the world it has been 
claimed to be responsible for some of the dark episodes of recent human history 
from colonialism to imperialism, anti-Semitism, the Holocaust, racism, and the like. 
Thus John Gray wants to tell us: ‘The role of the Enlightenment in twentieth- century 
terror remains a blind spot in western perception’ (Gray 2008, p. 50). One can take 
this to be a causal claim saying that “The Enlightenment” has been casually respon-
sible for some acts of twentieth century terror - though we have failed to notice this. 
Further on he tells us: ‘The Enlightenment played an indispensable role in the 
development of Nazism’.21 Indispensability is more casual talk. Thankfully Gray 
does not think that the Enlightenment was causally involved in all twentieth century 
acts of terror, the case of the 1994 massacre in Rwanda being an exception he men-
tions. But he does allege there is a causal role of “The Enlightenment” in bringing 
about some twentieth century acts of terror, or the Nazis.
Contrary to Gray, many would find it hard to envisage how Kant’s directive 
‘Sapere aude!’, viz., ‘employ one’s own understanding!’, or Israel’s eight cardinal 
points of Enlightenment doctrine (see Sect. 2.1), could have been responsible for 
either terror or Nazism. Gray’s remarks are fatuous in an important way. He talks of 
“The Enlightenment” as if it had causal powers to bring about things. But this is a 
category error due to the inflated use of language. We have noted in Sect. 2.4 that it 
is hard to determine what the denotation of the abstract name ‘The Enlightenment’ 
is. Perhaps it refers to period of time, say from 1660 to 1790. But periods of time 
have no causal powers. Nor can the eighteenth century “Enlightenment” make a 
leap over time to causally affect the Nazis of the twentieth century. Perhaps it refers 
to some eighteenth century doctrines; but again, propositional doctrines, in them -
selves, have no casual powers.
The suggestion made in Sect. 2.4 about the epidemiology of beliefs and values 
held by people in some society over time might bring us closer to the right kind of 
ground for the casual powers allegedly at work here; it is people and the beliefs on 
which they act that have causal powers. Putting matters this way turns on the 
 important distinction between a group of people who were enlightened (they 
adopted something like the eight doctrines listed by Israel) and the complementary 
group who were unenlightened (either they had never heard of Israel’s eight doc -
trines or, if they had, they were counter-enlightenment people who rejected them).
21 See chapter 2, ‘Enlightenment and Terror in the Twentieth Century’ in Gray 2008, p. 78. Again 
on p. 78 Gray tells us that ‘Nazi ideologues picked up from … Counter-Enlightenment thinkers 
whatever they found useful – as they did with the thinkers of the Enlightenment’. But Gray also 
speaks of ‘… a Nazi state which spurned the Enlightenment and all its works …’ (Gray 2002, 
p. 101). Doing both of these seems impossible, even for the Nazis.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 84 ---
60
Here another distinction mentioned in Sect. 2.4, but not noticed by Gray, becomes 
important: it is Kant’s distinction between “living in an enlightened age” (we do 
not) but “living in an age of enlightenment” (we do because there are some enlight-
ened people, however few). In this context, the reference of Gray’s use of the term 
‘The Enlightenment’ remains quite obscure. We can ask: which group, the enlight-
ened or the unenlightened, might be the best candidate of the alleged causes of 
twentieth century terror or the Nazis? One would have to attribute a great deal of 
cognitive dissonance to the enlightened if they are to be deemed causal agents which 
bring about terror or Nazism.
The above merely addresses the question of what is the alleged casual power at 
work in these cases of terror, or the rise of the Nazis. It does not yet say whether the 
supposed casual power actually brings about the alleged effects. The problem with 
claims of the sort made by Gray and others is that there is no investigation into what 
are the cause-effect relations that are supposed to hold that would rule out merely 
accompanying features which are not causes. That there are enlightened people who 
hold enlightenment doctrines and that they are contemporaneous with people who 
do not hold or reject enlightenment doctrines (some of whom are agents of terror or 
Nazism), seems to go unnoticed in vague all-encompassing talk of “The 
Enlightenment” as some kind of causal power. One would have to show which of 
the enlightened and the unenlightened is casually responsible for terror or the Nazis; 
but even this much is not done. What we have are obscure and untested claims about 
causal relations in which no care has been taken to separate out genuine causes of 
particular events from spurious accompaniments. This is bad science. But this is one 
way in which causal claims about the supposed obnoxious effects of “The 
Enlightenment” get their currency.
Gray tells us about one of the sources of his claims about the rise of the Nazis: 
‘The argument advanced by some members of the neo-Marxist Frankfurt School, 
which says that Nazism is a logical development of Enlightenment thinking, is 
much overstated; but there is more than a grain of truth in it’ (Gray 2008, p 78). 
Here the reference is to the 1944 work of Horkheimer and Adorno, The Dialectics 
of Enlightenment. If Nazism were to be a logical development of a certain kind of 
enlightenment thinking, then that would be to misuse the notion of logic and to 
confuse it with causation. Happily, this is said to be an overstatement; so we can 
pass over this claim. But it is left to us to search out what grains of truth we have 
been offered. Alas, the grains are meagre pickings. Horkheimer and Adorno wrote 
their book towards the end of WWII in exile in California. They wished to explain 
the rise of the Nazis in Germany and the Enlightenment is invoked to that end. How 
this explanation is supposed to work remains obscure or contestable.
 (b) Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno
In the ‘Introduction’ to their book The Dialectics of Enlightenment, Horkheimer 
and Adorno summarize their final chapter ‘Elements of Anti-Semitism: The Limits 
of Enlightenment’ as follows: ‘The argument and thesis of “Elements of Anti-  
Semitism’ is concerned with the actual reversion of enlightened civilization to bar-
barism’ (Horkheimer and Adorno 1994 pp. xvi-xvii). Though seven theses are 
R. Nola

--- PAGE 85 ---
61
advanced about the nature of anti-Semitism, nothing substantial is established to 
causally connect a reversion of “enlightened civilization” to anti-Semitic and Nazi 
barbarism with “The Enlightenment” supposedly invoked as the temporally distant 
cause.22 Again as in the case of Gray, lack of clarity about the reference of ‘The 
Enlightenment’ does its job of obfuscation. All three commentators ride roughshod 
over Kant’s subtle distinction between “living in an enlightened age” and “living in 
age of enlightenment”.
One commentator, James Schmidt, finds there is hardly a connection at all 
between “The Enlightenment” and Nazism owing to the broad way in which 
Horkheimer and Adorno understand ‘The Enlightenment’:
The conception of enlightenment the book elaborated lacked historical specificity and its 
account of Nazi genocide ultimately made the choice of victims appear as contingent. The 
costs incurred by both these points should not be underestimated.
In the account offered by Horkheimer and Adorno, “enlightenment” has been defined so 
broadly as to make it virtually identical with the attempt to master nature through instru -
mental reasoning. As a consequence, any hope of understanding what was historically spe-
cific to the eighteenth-century Enlightenment is lost. (Schmidt 2000, p. 97)
There are two objections here. The first is the familiar point that the referent of 
‘Enlightenment’ is obscure. The second is a new, surprising, point: Horkheimer and 
Adorno claim that the use of instrumental reasoning to obtain mastery defines ‘The 
Enlightenment’ (and that this leads to a disaster for the Enlightenment – a claim to 
be evaluated shortly). But they give the game away when they refer to non-  
enlightenment figures such as Francis Bacon, and Odysseus (!), as users of instru -
mental reasoning. In fact humans have used such reasoning ever since humans 
began to think. So, such reasoning cannot be a defining characteristic of “The 
Enlightenment”.
Instrumental reasoning is not specifically listed in Israel’s 8 cardinal points; but 
let us not quibble about whether or not such reasoning is to be found there. (It would 
be in an expanded version of Israel’s point (1) as suggested in Sect. 2.2, but other 
kinds of rationality are covered in point (1) than just instrumental reasoning.) 
Importantly Israel lists much more in his eight cardinal points which emerged in the 
eighteenth century Enlightenment period, and are characteristic of it. These items 
should be invoked if claims are to be made about any casual connection between the 
Enlightenment and anti-Semitism or Nazism. But it hard to see how any of these, 
such as toleration, equality, freedom of thought, liberty, equality, republicanism, 
etc., could in any way be casually responsible for anti-Semitism or Nazism. They in 
fact count against any such casual connection.
Horkheimer and Adorno have bigger fish to fry. They begin their book by telling 
us: ‘In the most general sense of progressive thought, the Enlightenment has always 
aimed at liberating men from fear and establishing their sovereignty. Yet the fully 
enlightened earth radiates disaster triumphant’ (ibid., p. 3). And they speak of ‘the 
22 The seven theses to be found in ‘Elements of Anti-Semitism’ is usefully discussed in Schmidt 
2000 in a section entitled ‘Projection and Anti-Semitism’, pp. 91–97.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 86 ---
62
indefatigable self-destructiveness of the enlightenment’ (ibid, p. xi). To emphasise 
this they also tell us of ‘… the first phenomenon for investigation: the self- destruction 
of the Enlightenment’ and add that ‘… the actual historic forms – the social institu -
tions – with which it [The Enlightenment] is interwoven, already contains the seed 
of the reversal universally apparent today’ (ibid., p. xiii). These and other like pas-
sages spell out the main idea behind the title of their book Dialectic of Enlightenment. 
There is a dialectic at work in the Enlightenment; this is said to be a contradiction 
or, more metaphorically, something that contains the seed of its own destruction or 
transformation into something else. The emergence of anti-Semitism is, allegedly, 
just one aspect of the working out of these dialectical tensions.
Talk of a “dialectic” at work has always been obscure with many resisting such 
talk; they rightly ask for a more specific account of what are the causes at work 
which have supposed incompatible tendencies. But it can also be away of obfuscat-
ing what one wishes to talk about. Marx himself was not above this, and in fact says 
as much in a letter to Engels when he temporarily took over his job of newspaper 
commentator on Indian affairs when Engels fell ill: ‘It’s possible that I shall make 
an ass of myself. But in that case one can always get out of it with a little dialectic. 
I have, of course, so worded my proposition as to be right either way.’23 One might 
well suspect that Horkheimer and Adorno have more than a little of Marx’s dishon-
est cunning in using dialectic to get out of intellectual trouble and to be right regard-
less whatever they say.
It is hard to determine what dialectical contradiction lies at the heart of “The 
Enlightenment” which contains the “seeds” of its own destruction. But it is gener -
ally supposed to be due to the dominant role of instrumental reason to the exclusion 
of other forms of reason in our coming to master nature. The Elizabethan Francis 
Bacon (hardly an Enlightenment figure though he is prominent in the so-called ‘sci-
entific revolution’), is excoriated for promoting this kind of thinking in his advocacy 
of science. In summing up Bacon’s alleged stance Horkheimer and Adorno tell us:
What men [sic] want to learn from nature is how to use it in order wholly to dominate it and 
other men. That is the only aim. Ruthlessly, in despite of itself, the Enlightenment has 
extinguished any trace of its own self-consciousness. The only kind of thinking that is suf-
ficiently hard to shatter myths is ultimately self-destructive’ (Horkheimer and Adorno 1994, 
p. 4)
In this context they also cite Bacon’s claim that ‘power is knowledge’.24 Though 
this is a common view it is hardly compelling. First, it supposes that all principles 
of reasoning are instrumental in character which, we may suppose, is of the form ‘if 
23 A letter by Marx to Engels, 15 August, 1857; see Marx-Engels Collected Works Vol 40 (1983) 
p. 152.
24 This is a slogan, often advocated by Foucault, which should be resisted. Most books on episte -
mology do not claim that the definition of knowledge involves power. In fact they do not even 
mention it, since they think that the view is so mistaken it is not worth noting. But of course if you 
know something then your powers of action can be enhanced. But this has nothing to do with the 
nature of knowledge itself; at best it is a possible consequence.
R. Nola

--- PAGE 87 ---
63
you want V then do X’. These are means-ends claims where ‘X’ is some procedure 
or action to be carried out and ‘V’ is something one might want, or value, or it might 
even be a value itself. 25 But as has been suggested in Sects. 2.2 and 2.5 in which 
principles of scientific reasoning are mentioned, in particular Newton’s Rules of 
Reasoning in Philosophy, these are not instrumental in form; they are categorical. In 
fact in science one finds both instrumental claims alongside categorical claims. And 
in some of these categoricals the value might be truth itself; and X tells one how to 
arrive at truth. This is hardly an instrumental value to be excoriated.
Horkheimer and Adorno have a very one-sided and blinkered view of both sci -
ence and its methods in ignoring categorical claims or the values that can enter into 
instrumentalities; but this is not uncommon in theoreticians of their ilk. For this 
reason their considerations about the dominance of instrumental reasoning fails to 
make its point.
A second unacceptable claim is that domination of nature and other men is ‘the 
only aim’ that instrumental principles can have. True, people do wish to finds means 
(some provided by science) to dominate others. But this is not always the case and 
one can have instrumentalities that involve aims other than domination, such as 
those mentioned in Israel’s cardinal points which express values such as equality, 
secularism, toleration, freedom, and the like. Though there are a lot of instrumen -
talities of domination to be noted, they are not the only instrumentalities and they 
have competitors with other values. This is something that most advocates of 
enlightenment values would recognise in their struggle against the absolutist ten -
dencies of the churches, monarchies and governments of the time. And it is some -
thing we should recognize pace Horkheimer and Adorno.
Thirdly, there is the unacceptable claim that, as a result, the Enlightenment is 
somehow self-destructive. This might be so if the instrumentalities are only directed 
at dominance. But they are not. As just mentioned the social and ethical values 
espoused by enlightenment thinkers also involve values such as equality, secular -
ism, toleration, freedom, republicanism and the like. These are ignored by 
Horkheimer and Adorno.
At the end of their book Horkheimer and Adorno tell us: ‘Enlightenment which 
is in possession of itself and coming to power can break the bounds of enlighten -
ment’ (p.  208). Characteristically this is a somewhat obscure remark about an 
Enlightenment “in possession of itself” which somehow “breaks its own bounds”. 
(This occurs when, presumably, issues of equality, secularism, toleration, freedom 
are given prominent recognition). If such a kind of Enlightenment is possible, then 
it would appear to be in contradiction with claims they make at the beginning of the 
book about ‘the indefatigable self-destructiveness of enlightenment’ in which this 
possibility appears to be ruled out. No dialectical wriggle can get them out of this 
contradiction; rather they must seriously modify the core of the dialectical claim 
25 It is important to note that in instrumentalities of the form mentioned, V can be a value itself, and 
not merely some goal or end that one might wish whatever its value. Horkheimer and Adorno seem 
not to recognise this point and reduce all instrumentalities to means-ends claims whatever the end.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 88 ---
64
about Enlightenment’s self-destructiveness. And this they appear to do when, as 
some commentators suggest, they had planned to write a sequel which would coun-
teract the negative view of Dialectic of Enlightenment with a more positive view in 
a work tentatively called Saving the Enlightenment.26
It is hard to tell from Horkheimer and Adorno’s critique whether there is any -
thing worth saving in “The Enlightenment”, contorted as it allegedly is by instru -
mental reasoning amongst other defects. If there were genuinely a “dialectical 
contradiction” at the heart of the Enlightenment then there is nothing to write about 
in any sequel; the Enlightenment is stuck with its alleged internal contradiction (and 
whatever fate is supposed to follow from this). But that there is such a contradiction 
is hopelessly obscure. As Marx advises, Horkheimer and Adorno can wriggle out of 
their predicament with a little dialectic and be right either way.
Do Gray or Horkheimer and Adorno mange to tell us something about the nature 
of Enlightenment? At best Gray gives us false causal consequences of it. And I leave 
it to a recent (not unsympathetic) commentator to tell us about Horkheimer’s and 
Adorno’s book: ‘The few mentions of the original libertarian and emancipatory 
nature of the Enlightenment within the volume were hardly adequate to counterbal-
ance its apocalyptic tone and unsubstantiated indictments, or the authors’ unilateral 
pronouncements according to which “Enlightenment is as totalitarian as any sys -
tem” (Horkheimer and Adorno, p. 24)’ (Ferrone 2015, p. 33).
2.7  Conclusion
Here just three of the many critics of “The Enlightenment” have been mentioned. 
But there is now an academic industry hard at work discrediting the Enlightenment 
by showing that it is intimately bound up with the Nazis, the holocaust, capitalism, 
colonialism, universalism in education  – you name it! To deal with all of these 
would require much more space than is available here. But many of them make 
Gray’s false assumption that if something is coincidental with “The Enlightenment” 
then “The Enlightenment” must be the cause of it. To make this error one must not 
only have a poor idea of how casual connections are to be tested; also one has failed 
to see that talk of “The Enlightenment” is often quite obscure and that its referent is 
unclear. By introducing the idea of the epidemiology of enlightenment one can then 
begin to see how excessive focus on a nominalization of what is more properly 
adjectival can lead one astray. Talk of ‘The Enlightenment’ can be a convenient 
shorthand; but it comes at the cost of taking the nominalized name at face value and 
assuming that there is a definite “object” to be spoken about. The epidemiology of 
being enlightened tells us what are the real facts hidden behind the veil of a nomi -
nalizing abstraction.
26 On this supposed sequel see Schmidt 2000, p. 101. It seems as if little of it was actually written 
down.
R. Nola

--- PAGE 89 ---
65
References
Bittner, R. (1996). What is enlightenment? In Schmidt (Ed.) (1996) pp. 345–358.
Brickhouse, N.  W. (2001). Embodying science: A feminist perspective on learning. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 38(3), 282–295.
Bristow, W. (2010). Enlightenment. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.) The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
URL = http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/enlightenment/. Accessed 26 Apr 2016.
Cassirer, E. (1951/1932). The philosophy of the enlightenment . Princeton: Princeton University 
Press.
Coyne, J. A. (2015). Faith vs. fact: Why science and religion are incompatible. New York: Viking.
Ferrone, V . (2015). The enlightenment: History of an idea. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gay, P. (1967). The enlightenment: An interpretation: Volume 1, the rise of modern paganism . 
London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
Gay, P. (1970). The enlightenment: An interpretation: Volume 2, the science of freedom. London: 
Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
Gelfert, A. (2014). A critical introduction to testimony. London: Bloomsbury.
Goldstein, R. (2015,May). Don’t overthink it. Review of Matthew B. Crawford, The world beyond 
your head: On becoming an individual in an age of distraction . In  The Atlantic monthly  
(pp. 50–52). Boston: The Atlantic Co.
Gould, S.  J. (1999). Rocks of ages: Science and religion and the fullness of life . New  York: 
Ballantine.
Gray, J. (2002). False dawn: The delusions of global capitalism. London: Granta Books.
Gray, J. (2008). Black mass: Apocalyptic religion and the death of utopia. London: Penguin.
Habermas, J. (1990). The philosophical discourse of modernity: Twelve lectures. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press.
Honneth, A., McCarthy, T., Offe, C., & Wellmer, A. (Eds.). (1992). Philosophical interventions in 
the unfinished project of enlightenment. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Horkheimer, M., & Adorno, T. (1994/1944/1947). The dialectics of enlightenment  (Cumming J., 
Trans). New York: Continuum.
Hume, D. (1985). Of national characters. In E. F. Miller (Ed.), David Hume: Essays moral, politi-
cal and literary (pp. 197–215). Indianapolis: Liberty Classics.
Israel, J. I. (2006). Enlightenment contested. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Israel, J. I. (2011). Democratic enlightenment. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kant, I. (1996/1784). An answer to the question: What is enlightenment? In J.  Schmidt (Ed.) 
(1996) pp. 58–64.
Locke, J.  (1689/2010–15). ‘Toleration’ (or ‘First letter on toleration’) translated by Jonathan 
Bennett. http://www.earlymoderntexts.com/assets/pdfs/locke1689b.pdf. Accessed 20 Apr 
2016.
Marx, K., & Engels, F. (1983). Letter of Marx to Engels, 15 August 1857. Collected works volume 
40. Marx and Engels 1856–1859. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Matthews, M. R. (2015). Science teaching: The contribution of history and philosophy of science. 
New York: Routledge.
Mendelssohn, M. (1784/1996). On the question: What is Enlightenment? In Schmidt (Ed.) (1996): 
pp. 53–57.
Pocock, J. G. A. (1999). Barbarism and religion: Volume 1, the enlightenments of Edward Gibbon, 
1737–1764. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schmidt, J. (Ed.). (1996). What is enlightenment? Eighteenth-century answers and twentieth- cen-
tury questions. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Schmidt, J. (2000). Genocide and the limits of enlightenment: Horkheimer and adorno revisited. In 
Stråth and Kaye (Eds.) (2000), pp. 81–102.
2 The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading Abstraction

--- PAGE 90 ---
66
Shimony, A. (1997). Some historical and philosophical reflections on science and enlighten -
ment. In L. Darden (Ed.), Proceedings of the 1996 PSA meeting  (pp. S1–S14). East Lansing: 
Philosophy of Science Association.
Sperber, D. (1996). Explaining culture: A naturalistic approach. Oxford: Blackwell.
Stråth, B., & Kaye, J. (Eds.). (2000). Enlightenment and genocide, contradictions of modernity 
(philosophy and politics, volume 5). Brussels: Peter Lang International Academic Publishers.
R. Nola