Title: The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey
Pages: 91-121

--- PAGE 91 ---
67
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_3
Chapter 3      
The Enlightenment Tradition and Science 
Education in Turkey                                       
Deniz Peker and Özgür Taskin
3.1  Introduction
The original Enlightenment tradition in Europe emerged as a reaction to the Catholic 
and Protestant churches’ dogmatism and feudal aristocratic oppression in quest for 
a more rational and sceptical worldview, and a freer society. The Enlightenment 
ideology projected a broad range of notions such as universalism, objectivity, ratio-
nality, empiricism, scientism, anti-revelationism, naturalism, utilitarianism, opti -
mism and independence (Matthews 2015a, Chap. 2). In the interest of space, we 
limit our examination of the enlightenment mostly to the development of the mod -
ern and secular Turkish state and its educational institutions beginning from the 
reformation of medieval Ottoman Empire structures (eighteenth century) to con -
temporary Turkish society.
The original Enlightenment was a product of social, political, cultural, philo -
sophical and economical influences in a given time frame (roughly seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries) and geography (Western Europe). For instance, the scientific 
revolution of the seventeenth century prepared the way for the eighteenth century 
Enlightenment movement. So also did the religious wars that made questionable the 
entrenched prestige and moral and intellectual authority of the church. The condi -
tions that brought about the Enlightenment were unique to its time and place. Thus 
beyond the centre of the enlightenment, at the periphery, different cultures went 
through different processes of enlightenment influenced by their own cultural, polit-
ical and material conditions.
D. Peker (*) 
Department of Teacher Education, Columbus State University, Columbus, GA, USA
e-mail: peker_deniz@columbusstate.edu 
Ö. Taskin 
School of Education, Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey
e-mail: omuozgurtaskin@gmail.com

--- PAGE 92 ---
68
Historical analyses show that beyond Western Europe each enlightenment trajec-
tory is unique in the way it adopts, transforms, or redefines the original enlighten -
ment ideas (Outram 2013). It is argued that the enlightenment of the non-West is a 
process of appropriation in which the “transferred” ideas from the West create a 
new, emerging discourse to accommodate new ideas into existing schemas (Patiniotis 
and Gavroglu 2012). Patiniotis and Gavroglu argue that this new discourse is the 
best way to overcome the local constraints because new ideas are not transferred 
into a vacuum; rather they replace or modify existing ways of thinking, reasoning or 
organizing knowledge. Thus this discursive negotiation phase is a necessary ele -
ment to overcome an initial rejection of ideas and creates a context for their new 
legitimization.
Given these assumptions, we will provide a treatise of Ottoman-Turkish enlight-
enment, paying particular attention to the unique aspects of the Ottoman and Turkish 
case, which is different in many respects from Western Europe. For clarity, we 
reserve the words West and Western Europe to refer to countries beyond the west of 
the Ottoman Empire borders even though the Ottoman Empire had territories in 
Europe. Our purpose is to show, beginning from the eighteenth century Ottoman 
Empire, how the enlightenment ideas were initially perceived by the Ottomans as 
part of their long-standing modernization efforts and continued through the more 
systematic ways during the late Ottoman, early Turkish Republic, and finally mod-
ern Turkey. First, we will provide the context for the Ottoman case by describing its 
unique characteristics where the battles of enlightenment took place. We will then 
provide accounts of important historical events in the Ottoman-Turkish enlighten -
ment trajectory. Finally, we will provide a conclusion to our analysis.
3.2  The Ottoman Context
The enlightenment tradition in modern Turkey cannot be understood without first 
examining the enlightenment tradition in the late Ottoman Empire. The Ottoman 
Empire had different societal dynamics than Western Europe; thus, to understand 
the enlightenment tradition in the Ottoman Empire (and subsequently, Turkey) one 
needs to pay attention to these differences. These differences are related to religion, 
state-religion relationships, scientific and intellectual inheritance, and economic 
variables.
First, the Ottoman Empire was an Islamic state, even though the empire was 
home to many non-Muslim groups. The ruling Sultan (Padisah) of the empire was 
also the Caliphate for the Islamic world, meaning that he was the direct representa-
tive of God in the world. However, the Caliphate did not assume any divine or pro-
phetic role; nor did he have any particular religious status other than being at the 
highest position of protecting the Islamic order. The power of the Sultan was only 
limited to Sharia, the Islamic Law (Berkes 1998).
The Ulema was the religious authority, composed of the corps of learned men of 
religion who ensured that the laws and executions of the ruling Sultan were in 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 93 ---
69
accordance with Sharia. Members of the Ulema were trained in madrasas that were 
in essence, higher education institutions teaching theology and Islamic law. The 
Ulema had three classes within itself: imam (minister of religion), mufti (juricon -
sult), and kadi (judge). All of these were involved in regulating the relationship 
between the religion and many aspects of social life based on Islamic laws. However, 
the roles of muftis were particularly important because they were responsible for the 
administration of justice and determined whether the Sultan’s laws and actions are 
in accordance with Islam. The highest ranking mufti was named Seyhul-Islam (or 
Shayk al-Islam), who was appointed by the Sultan but who had the power to depose 
a Sultan if they were not acting in accordance with Sharia. Seyhul-Islam’s authority 
was almost equal to Sadrazam (Grand Vizier) who had the highest authority in state 
affairs below the Sultan. Seyhul-Islam declared official statements, called fetvas, on 
legal and technical matters but also about declarations of war as well as new innova-
tions such as the use of coffee or tobacco (Berkes 1998). This model of Islamic 
jurisprudence as part of the state still continues, though to a much lesser degree in 
the Republic of Turkey. The Department of the Affairs of Piety (Diyanet) issues 
fetvas on personal religious matters although it does not directly interfere with the 
state affairs (Gulalp 2005).
When comparing the enlightenment tradition in Europe and Islamic societies, 
there are a few differences between Christianity and Islam that are worth mention -
ing. First, Islam does not have the same ecclesial institutions and priestly class as 
does the bulk of Christian tradition. In Christian Europe, the church and the state 
were, for the most part, separate but allying forces, typically defending one anoth -
er.1 Whereas in Islamic societies, the church and the state were fused; there was not 
a separate church institution (Berkes 1998; Davidson 2006). The Ulema in the 
Ottoman State was more of a temporal and official body, unlike the Catholic or 
Orthodox clergy who had a spiritual corps organized through the church, but often 
did not have an official position within the government. Thus, as a state authority, 
Ulema’s prime function was to protect the order (nizam) against any change or 
reform. In such a traditionalist system, there was no room for change through the 
agency of state. Berkes argues that Ulema’s influence was so strong that those who 
proposed a reform or change had to say that they were doing so in order to restore 
the order (nizam). It is important to note that during the Ottoman times there were 
major reform movements with similar cognates, such as the Tanzimat, the New 
Nizam, and Nizamat-I Essasiye (Berkes 1998).
A second difference between Islamic and Christian societies relates to their asso-
ciation with science. With some qualification, the Enlightenment was a clash 
between the new science and Christianity  – both Catholic and Protestant. 2 Both 
Christianity and Islam were in harmony with science in the medieval times or what 
1 The distinction was very blurred in the Papal States and in Calvin’s Geneva, and less blurred 
elsewhere. In England, France and Spain, there were ‘established’, state-sanctioned and controlled 
church structures that considerably blurred the church/state division.
2 This is a major and contested historic thesis, but see, for instance, Gay ( 1970) and Israel (2001, 
2006, 2011).
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 94 ---
70
is known as the Golden Age of Islam. Tensions came later in the seventeenth cen -
tury when modern science began to emerge in Europe. Even though some thinkers 
still argue that there is a harmony between Islam and modern science (Altwaijri as 
cited in Davidson 2006), this is rather superficial, according to Edis and BouJaoude 
(2014), because Islam has a conflict with materialism that rejects supernatural 
forces operative in nature. The conflict between religion and science in the Ottoman 
Turkish intellectual life did not start until the end of the nineteenth century when 
Western ideas of positivism and biological materialism emerged (Ihsanoglu 2006).
According to Ihsanoglu ( 2006), the Ottomans initially saw themselves superior 
to Europe and the autarchic structure of governance did not allow for much transfer 
of scientific and technological knowledge between governments. While the 
Ottomans selectively adopted new developments, when the Empire lost its political 
and military edge against Europe, such transfer of scientific and technological 
knowledge increased, especially in the military area. Ihsanoglu indicates that the 
Ottomans were mainly interested in the final products and applications of scientific 
and technological achievements, rather than the processes that brought them about – 
a situation very similar to many parts of the contemporary world. The Ottomans 
were not interested in theory, experiment, and the research aspects of science. They 
lacked the experimentalist tradition and thus struggled to accommodate logical 
methods and novel empirical knowledge (Kucuk 2012). As such, pre-modern sci -
ence remained as a collection of isolated facts, often mixed with superstitious beliefs 
(Edis and BouJaoude 2014). It was not until in 1900 that research became a part of 
the Ottoman scientific culture with the establishment of the first modern university 
replacing madrasas.
Kucuk (2012) points out that the original sceptical movement that epitomized 
seventeenth century philosophical thinking was absent in Ottoman circles. For 
instance, Spinoza and Bayle were not known to the Ottomans; and, ironically, 
Ottoman scepticism toward religion came from religious thinkers themselves rather 
than philosophers. For instance, Akkach (2007) notes that while in Christian Europe 
the battle between reason and faith resulted in favour of reason, within the Muslim 
Middle East, faith and reason had a dialectical relationship. Akkach further elaborates 
his point by describing four groups of thinkers who represented rational thinking 
in Ottoman culture during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. These were 
(a) scientists, (b) science-oriented scholars and entrepreneurial officials who promoted 
the public profile of science in Ottoman society, (c) religious scholars with puritani-
cal views who thought that Islam should free itself from mystical and superstitious 
beliefs, and (d) another religious group of scholars who advocated for the expansion 
of the rational scope of Islamic faith while increasing receptiveness to new ideas 
and a sense of tolerance.
Thus, just like the way the church and the state are fused in Islam, it appears that 
reason is fused with faith at least during the early enlightenment period. This alludes 
to what Israel ( 2006) defines as moderate (or conservative) Enlightenment, as 
opposed to radical Enlightenment. According to Israel, radical Enlightenment is 
characterized by the purest sense of the enlightenment ideal represented by reason 
alone. Alternatively, moderate enlightenment is represented by reason combined 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 95 ---
71
with faith and tradition. Between the two, the moderate form was more dominant 
and accepted throughout the Ottoman Empire during the early Enlightenment period 
(Kucuk 2012).
Before being exposed to modern western science, science during the classical 
period within the Ottoman Empire was practiced in madrasas (religious institutions 
where Islamic studies were conducted). Ottoman scientific activities mainly focused 
on mathematics, astronomy, medicine and physics. One of the earliest contributions 
came from Qadi Zadeh al-Rumi (d. 1440) who wrote Commentary on the Compendium 
on Astronomy and Commentary on The Fundamental Theorems (in Mathematics), in 
Arabic. His tradition continued through his students including Ali Kuscu (d. 1474), 
who was from Turkestan. Still, some of the twelve books he wrote on astronomy 
(mostly in Persian) were widely taught in Ottoman madrasas (Ihsanoglu 2006).
In medicine, one of the most significant contributions was made by Serefeddin 
Sabuncuoglu (1385–1470?) who wrote a surgery textbook entitled Imperial Surgery, 
in Turkish. The book was the first of its kind with descriptions of specific surgical 
procedures accompanied by colourful miniatures as well as the first known depic -
tions of female surgeons (Bademci 2006).
Perhaps one of the most interesting cases in the history of Ottoman science is 
Taqii-al-Din (1520/1525–1585) and his observatory. On the one hand, this case 
shows how Ottomans were open to new developments and scientific discovery; on 
the other hand, it shows how fragile these efforts were in a society where theocracy 
and superstitious beliefs were prevalent. In the Ottoman tradition, since the late 
fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries the palace had astronomers who were gradu-
ates of madrasas. These astronomers prepared calendars, fasting schedules, horo -
scopes, and determined the most propitious hour for important events such as 
imperial accessions, wars, the launching of ships, etc. (Ihsanoglu 2006). Taqii-al 
Din, who came from Egypt, was appointed as the chief Ottoman astronomer early 
during the reign of Sultan Murad III (1574–1595). A sophisticated, state of the art 
observatory was built for him that operated between 1574 and 1580. Taqii-al-Din 
invented the sextant and other astronomical tools to determine equinoxes, and 
brought many new approaches to determining the positions of stars. Further, he 
developed more precise methods to determine the time of the Sun’s apogee than 
those of Copernicus and Tycho Brahe.
While Brahe, who was a Danish contemporary of Taqii-al-Din, was able to con-
tinue his work within his observatory until his death, Taqii-al-Din’s work was cut 
short because his observatory was ordered to be demolished by Sultan Murad III in 
1580. Although historians do not agree on the exact reasons for this, one explana -
tion is that Taqii-al-Din’s prediction of favourable success for the Ottoman army 
(based on his recorded observations of Halley’s Comet) did not materialize. 
However, another important explanation is that the Ulema was suspicious of Taqii- 
al- Din’s activities (believing that such activities might support infidels) and recom-
mended the demolition to the Sultan (Sayili as cited in Akkach 2007). Thus, while 
Brahe’s apprentice, Kepler, further developed Brahe’s ideas to propose the laws of 
planetary motion, Taqii-al-Din did not have the opportunity to refine his ideas, most 
of which remained vague. Later, the scientific activities in the Ottoman Empire 
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 96 ---
72
drastically declined, beginning from the seventeenth century, due to the disruption 
in the economy, the loss of land, and the loss of power in the central authority to 
support scientific activities (Ihsanoglu 2006).
An important argument about why Islamic nations did not have enlightenment 
comparable to that of Europe relates to the economic structure of the Islamic societ-
ies. According to Davidson ( 2006), feudalism was the prime mode of production 
within Europe whereas the Ottoman Empire had a tributary mode of production. 
The difference between these two modes of production lay in how the economic 
power over the peasants was exerted by the monarchies within their respective con-
texts. In Europe, a more decentralized governing structure existed in which mon -
archs passed some of their authority down to local lords who then exploited the 
peasants who lived on the land through coercive rent and labour. Davidson argues 
that this fragmented structured allowed for the development of a capitalist economy 
because different forms of production relations could exist. On the other hand, in the 
Ottoman Empire, all agricultural land belonged to the Sultan with peasants as the 
Sultan’s direct tenants. The central state, which did not allow for private ownership 
of land or different approaches to production, collected taxes directly from the peas-
ants with religion as the source of the political legitimation of this tributary mode 
(Gulalp 2005).
As the Enlightenment movement was emerging in Europe where capitalism was 
growing, the Ottoman Empire kept its tributary-based economic structure and it was 
poorer than Europe (Georgeon 2006; Kucuk 2012). More importantly, the Ottoman 
Empire, and the subsequently young Republic of Turkey, did not have the signifi -
cant conditions that led to the Enlightenment such as the Renaissance, seventeenth 
century scientific revolutions, or the modern wars of religion. Nevertheless the post- 
War proclamation of the Republic of Turkey, with its modern constitution, was cer-
tainly in the enlightenment tradition.
In his work related to the early enlightenment of Istanbul (during the reign of 
Sultan Ahmed III 1703–1730), Kucuk ( 2012) describes two mechanisms noted by 
historians for the spread of the Enlightenment from its Western European origin to 
different geographies. The first mechanism was through the actors and networks of 
people that carried the ideals of Enlightenment. The second mechanism was the 
dispersion of the Enlightenment ideals through the texts that were systematically 
translated across different domains of inquiry, including literature, politics, philoso-
phy, etc. It appears that both mechanisms were in place during the early Ottoman 
and Turkish enlightenment period. Many Ottoman-Turkish thinkers visited Western 
Europe, especially France (Korlaelci 2009), received education, and influenced the 
political and intellectual life within the Ottoman Empire. Many literary and scien -
tific works were translated to the Ottoman and Turkish languages. For instance, 
from 1729 to 1928, the year Turkey adopted the Latin alphabet, 3534 books were 
translated into Turkish (Berk 2007). This tradition continued in the young Turkish 
republic. For example, Hasan Ali Yucel, a Minister of National Education and one 
of the important political figures of the early republic, initiated a bureau of  translation 
that translated 496 pieces of world literary classics and philosophical texts into 
Turkish between 1940 and 1946.
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 97 ---
73
In what follows, we present the Enlightenment tradition by examining some of 
the key events within distinct historical periods from the late Ottoman Empire to 
today’s modern Turkey while providing cultural, social, and political contexts for 
these events.
3.3  Eighteenth Century Reforms in the Ottoman Empire
During this period, after losing battles in both military and economical fields, the 
Ottomans realized that they were not the better of the West in such matters. The 
Ottoman Empire began losing its land and power beginning with the Treaty of 
Karlowitz (1699), and subsequently the Treaty of Passarowitz (1718). These treaties 
mark the decline of the Ottoman Empire, and later resulted in long-lasting 
Westernization (i.e., modernization) movements which were the precursors for 
more systematic enlightenment movements culminating in Ataturk’s comprehen -
sive reforms that, in many respects, out-enligthened what had occurred politically 
and culturally in Western nations.
Berkes (1998) defines this period as the “new worldliness” where the spirit of 
worldliness rose as the interest in secular learning increased; this was true not only 
for the prosperous elite but also for other classes too. Ottomans were interested in 
new developments in every area of life including science, philosophy, history, 
music, and architecture. The period following the Treaty of Passarowitz up to 1730 
is called the Tulip Era, where the Ottomans oriented themselves toward the West. 
During this Tulip Era, Ottomans adopted new tools and technologies including 
printing press machines, architectural and literary styles, and translated many for -
eign books into the Ottoman language. Ottoman diplomats were sent to France and 
other countries to better understand the reasons for the West’s success.
The loss of territory took its toll on the empire’s economy because tax money 
that came from local merchants trading with Europe was lost (Gunal 2013). To 
recover from this economic downturn, the Empire first brought in Western scholars 
during Selim III’s reign (1789–1807) and, later, sent students to the West during 
Mahmut II’s reign (1808–1839). During this period, the opening of new military 
and civilian schools in addition to the Madrasas was the first attempt to increase the 
quality of education as well as the Ottoman Army’s power. The artillery branch of 
the army was reorganized and headed (1729) by Claude Alexandre de Bonneval, a 
French army officer who joined the Ottoman Army and converted to Islam. New 
naval engineering and army engineering schools were opened in 1773 and 1796, 
respectively, focusing on building their own artillery weapons. The first science 
textbook translations were made during this period even though they were for mili-
tary purposes rather than general education (Gunal 2013).
According to Tekeli and Ilkin ( 1993), the Ottomans’ scientific developments 
were delayed, fragmented, and selective. For instance, the earliest references to 
Copernicus were in 1660, and until the beginning of nineteenth century Ptolemy’s 
theories were taught in astronomy courses. However, Galileo and Newtonian laws 
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 98 ---
74
were adopted earlier for military purposes. It was hard to say that there is a systematic 
effort for gaining scientific advancements and reforming schools.
While Ottoman ruling elites were trying to understand the West and the charac -
teristics of their institutions that made them successful, non-Muslim communities 
within the Ottoman Empire had their own enlightenment within their respective 
communities. The Ottoman Empire occupied a massive land spread over three con-
tinents. Within this largely diverse geography and rich ethnic composition, it is hard 
imagine a unified view of an enlightenment phenomenon for Ottoman societies. 
Greeks, Armenians, and Jews had their own trajectories of enlightenment on the 
Ottoman canvas. During 17th and 18th centuries Greek educational institutions 
were still influenced by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. Beginning 
with the reform movements within the Patriarchate in 1776, the influence of mer -
chants increased, especially in secondary education (Tekeli and Ilkin 1993). With 
the increased Greek nationalism, two engineering schools were opened in Bucharest 
and Jassy. Later in 1803, Greeks established an academy in Ayvalik with a labora -
tory and library.
Before experimentation and laboratories first appeared in Darulfunun in 
the1860s, at the beginning of the 1800s, a young Greek scholar Konstantine Kumas 
was teaching about experimentation, observation, and Kantian philosophy in Greek 
schools in Izmir. However, the Patriarchate reacted to the secularization of educa -
tion and these schools were closed in 1819. Another school in Istanbul, Kurucesme, 
provided education for low income Greek students from the secondary level to the 
postsecondary, higher education level. This school was also not welcomed by the 
Patriarchate and, in 1820, was closed during a Greek uprising. The Greek Church 
feared that their authority over the Greek community was diminishing which was a 
typical phenomenon among the different churches of the Ottoman society. Still, the 
Greeks began using the printing press (1627) and there was a growing group of 
Greek intellectuals questioning the Church’s authority.
The Armenian community was also active in their schooling efforts. Armenians 
used the printing press beginning in 1576. As such, Tekeli and Ilkin ( 1993) report 
that Armenians translated works that originated in Vienna and Venice. In the Amlorti 
Monastery in Bitlis (located in eastern Anatolia province), science courses were 
taught by the start of the eighteenth century with many Armenian schools opening 
in many parts of the Empire throughout the early eighteenth century. However, the 
first known official Armenian school was opened by Midirgic Miricanyan toward 
the end of the eighteenth century and later this school was converted to a postsec -
ondary higher education institution. Somel ( 2005) reported that the quality of 
Armenian schools was better in the western and central parts of Anatolia than east-
ern Anatolia, which suffered from a scarcity of teachers. By the 1870s, in Anatolia 
there were about 450 Armenian schools and 80,000 students, while in Istanbul there 
were approximately 48 schools and 6000 students (Dere 2008).
Although Jewish schools thrived during sixteenth century, they were relatively 
more stagnant during seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in comparison to Greek 
and Armenian schools. Tekeli and Ilkin (1993) attribute this to the fact that the Jews 
lost ground to the Greek and Armenians in the Ottoman Court. Another purported 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 99 ---
75
reason for the loss of influence from Jewish schools is the fact that Sabbatai Zevi, a 
Jew from Izmir, declared himself the Messiah in 1648 and 1666. The resulting 
spread of mysticism within Jewish society hampered the progression of Jewish 
schools. Interestingly, while the Jewish people were the first to bring the printing 
press to the Ottoman Empire in 1492, in the 60 years between 1650 and 1710 they 
had not published any books. It was not until the second half of the nineteenth cen-
tury that Ottoman Jews detached themselves from the Western religious communi-
ties (Tekeli and Ilkin 1993). During this strict conservative era, the Orthodox Jewish 
community advised that their members not send their children to Galatasaray High 
School, one of the oldest educational institutions in Istanbul because it did not 
observe kosher rules.
The eighteenth century meant an exploration of Western ideas and institutions 
for the Ottoman ruling class and elite. They realized that change was necessary but 
also wanted to understand the reasons for the West’s continually developing advan-
tage in military and economical areas. Many diplomats were sent to Europe and an 
extensive flow of Western ideas, tools, knowledge, and ways of living became avail-
able. Within this context, the Ottomans were first interested in reforming the mili -
tary. They realized the importance of mathematics and physical sciences for military 
success. Several books in trigonometry and natural sciences were translated and, for 
the first time, printing press machines were used. Ibrahim Muteferikka, a Hungarian 
war slave who converted to Islam, was the first person to use a printing press among 
the Ottoman’s Muslim community. He had to convince Ottoman Sadrazam (Grand 
Vizier), Seyhul Islam and the Ulema to use the printing machines. He was able to 
secure permission for printing only non-religious books.
In the Ottoman Empire, unlike Western Europe, it took until the nineteenth cen-
tury to have the first constitutional political system. For such a system to be estab -
lished, medieval estates needs to be dissolved. However, because the religion and 
state were fused within the Ottoman tradition, there was resistance to such social 
and political changes for a long time (Berkes 1998). Therefore, the Ulema contin -
ued to exert its authority over the acceptability of changes. In time, the Ulema 
accepted some changes as inevitable necessities of the times. However, when the 
status quo was threatened by the need for change at the beginning of the seventeenth 
century, the views among the group of lower ranking Ulema fundamentalist con -
tested most changes as being against Sharia (Berkes 1998). Increasing interest for 
mysticism and superstition in society, bolstered by fundamentalist views, was the 
biggest obstacle for rationalism.
Another reason for the growing resistance to change came from the Ottoman 
resentment of the West due to the unfolding political events at the beginning of the 
eighteenth century. First, there was a reaction against the West’s increased interest 
in materialist life in a society, where spiritualism had long been the dominant ethos. 
Second, as the Ottoman Empire was threatened by a rising Russia, it turned her face 
more toward the West, especially France, which was the strongest power within 
continental Europe. France and the Ottoman Empire both had conflicts with Russia, 
and their alliance grew through strengthened diplomatic relationships. The Ottoman 
Empire granted France several concessions that allowed legal, economical, and 
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 100 ---
76
other privileges. These concessions to France, along with France’s diplomatic 
encouragement to begin a war with Russia, resulted in more resentment of the West 
and its Ottoman reformers when the Ottoman Empire lost the war with Russia 
(1768–1774). As the Ottomans continued to struggle in economic and military 
areas, they saw Europeans as a threat to their sovereignty and cultural and religious 
inheritance (Berkes 1998).
3.4  Nineteenth Century Reforms in the Ottoman Empire
During the nineteenth century, while Europe experienced an expansion of bourgeois 
and proletariat classes with growing industrialization and capitalism, the Ottoman 
Empire still maintained its mediaeval class composition. Ottomans were still focus-
ing on regulating the relationship between the citizens and the state, especially for 
the minority populations. Tanzimat Proclamations (1839) and The Ottoman Reform 
Edict of 1856 are two important milestones of this era. The Tanzimat Proclamations 
were the first constitutional document in any Islamic country. It stated that a new set 
of laws will be implemented, although still in accordance with Sharia. These new 
laws were meant to protect the inviolability of life, property and honour, and were 
applicable to all citizens, Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Later, the Reform Edict 
of 1856 further extended the rights of citizens, especially for non-Muslims.
On the other hand, despite the economic and social struggles of the Ottoman 
Empire, the infusion of scientific and technological knowledge continued, impor -
tantly, with a more positive perception of science promoted at least among the rul -
ing elite and intellectuals. By the mid-19th century a growing group of Turkish 
intellectuals who had been to Europe, or were influenced by European ideas, 
emerged. This group promoted a new discourse on science and emphasized the 
familiarity with science as one of the conditions of being a good, patriotic Ottoman 
(Yalcinkaya 2015). Yalcinkaya asserts that in nineteenth century, one of the most 
frequently used words within Ottoman texts about the state was “ignorance”. It was 
held that ignorance of the “new knowledge” (science) was the main reason that the 
Ottoman State was failing; by then the Ottoman ruling class had realized that reli -
gious sciences and modern sciences were entirely different realms. In order to pros-
per in this world, they understood that scientific and technological advancement was 
necessary. On the other hand, tensions emerged between the ruling class and intel -
lectuals because official documents presented science as a gift bestowed by the 
Sultan to his subjects rather than knowledge which was a human enterprise acces -
sible to everyone who was interested in it.
Yalcinkaya’s work further illustrates how new knowledge (science) was negoti-
ated among the Ottoman elites as “useful” knowledge as they attempted to position 
science with respect to the old knowledge (religion). Eventually, these discussions 
brought a turning point during this century in which this new knowledge became 
associated with Turkish while old knowledge (religion) was associated with Arabic; 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 101 ---
77
meanwhile Turkish nationalism grew, especially among such groups as the Young 
Ottomans.
Prior to the Tanzimat Proclamations, public education was not on the agenda of 
reform movements. As a continuation of the army engineering schools that were 
opened in previous century, several more major schools were opened including a 
medical school (Tibhane-i Amire) in 1827, a surgery school (Cerrahhane-i Amire) 
in 1832, a military school (Mekteb-i Harbiye) in 1839, and a veterinarian school 
(Baytar Mektebi) in 1841; these were later followed by agricultural, welding, and 
forestry schools. In 1859, the first public administration school, Mekteb-i Mulkiye, 
was opened. These schools, however, did not comprise a unit similar to a university, 
but later conglomerated to make the first university-like establishment, Darulfunun, 
in 1863. During the reign of Mahmut II, children of the high ranking bureaucrats in 
the Ottoman Court and its branches were encouraged to go to these new schools. In 
1820, the Besiktas Society of Science was established by some of the high ranking 
bureaucrats who held their meetings at their houses. This can be viewed as the first 
faculty organization in Turkish higher education (Gunal and Gunal 2011). Later 
these people were exiled and accused of being Bektashi, a non-mainstream, Alevi 
Islamic sect, in the state’s attempt to prevent the growth of this scientific organiza-
tion (Tekeli and Ilkin 1993).
The first elementary level schools (Sibyan Mektepleri) were opened in 1824 and 
elementary education was mandated for Muslim children by an imperial edict; but 
schooling rates still remained low. In 1838, public middle schools (Rustiye 
Mektepleri) were opened, but their dispersion across the empire had been quite slow 
(Tekeli and Ilkin 1993). In 1845, concerned by the slow progress of public educa -
tion, Sultan Addulhamid II proposed that the focus should be on how religion and 
reason can be reconciled (Berkes 2002). In the same year, new military schools at 
the middle school and high school levels were opened. To provide the work force 
needed for these newly opened schools, a Normal School for Boys (Darulmuallimin 
1847), a middle-school level teacher-preparation school (Darul Muallimi Sibyan 
1862) and a Normal School for Girls (Darulmuallimat 1870) were opened. Two of 
the biggest successes of this era were the inclusion of girls in middle education, and 
the sending of graduates of the engineering school to Europe between 1846 and 
1855.
In 1841, Prof. Bernard, who was invited from Vienna and served as palace physi-
cian, secured permission from the Ulema to work with human cadavers which was 
previously prohibited (Yildirim 2014). The Medical school, which had a 9 year pro-
gram that heavily emphasized science content within the first 4 years, saw its first 
graduates in 1843. Scottish author Charles MacFarlane noted interesting observa -
tions about the Ottoman medical school. According to MacFarlane’s notes, Turkish 
medical students read books about materialism and appreciated these views. Systeme 
de Nature by Baron d’Holbach and writings of Diderot and Cabanis were some of 
the work MacFarlane referred to. MacFarlane was surprised when he learned that 
V oltaire’s Dictionary of Philosophy  and Candide were translated into Ottoman. 
Berkes (2002) noted that these observations were shocking for MacFarlane, who 
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 102 ---
78
had anti-materialist views. Berkes adds that the Medical school raised important 
intellectuals including Hayrullah Efendi, Hekim Ismail Pasha and Fuat Pasha.
In 1851, Cevdet Pasha founded Encumen-i Danis, a type of scientific society 
whose purpose was to provide a venue for intellectual discussions, encouraging 
scientific research, and illuminating the public about scientific advancements. The 
idea of Darulfunun was first seeded here (Berkes 2002). Later, some who had left 
Encumen-i Danis founded another scientific society, Cemiyet-I Ilmiye-I Osmaniye. 
From this latter group, Tahir Munif Efendi published the first science journal, 
Mecmuai Funun  in 1862. Later, two public high schools (Sultani) were opened, 
Galatasaray (1867) and Darussafaka (1873). It is interesting to note that the first 
modern university type establishment, Darulfunun (1863), opened before these high 
schools. Darulfunun would have initially suffered from a lack of students; these 
feeder schools would partially offset that problem.
The Engineering schools that were opened in the eighteenth century provided the 
foundation for Darulfunun, which literally means science-house. It was intention -
ally named so that they were distinct from madrasas which were educational institu-
tions that primarily taught religious studies (Gunal 2013). In 1863, some scientific 
demonstrations and experiments were made open to the public and garnered much 
attention. In one of these events, Dervish Pasha demonstrated electricity. Soon 
thereafter, the Ottoman Government opposed these science demonstrations for two 
reasons. First, it was thought that these demonstrations and experiments were 
against religion. Relatedly, a second reason was that some thought that it was inap-
propriate for high ranking government officials to take part in them. Darulfunun was 
closed two and a half years after its opening due to a fire; it reopened and closed 
several more times thereafter. As Gunal ( 2013) emphasized in his book, it was 
understood at that time that elementary and secondary education should also have 
science content in order to provide students for Darulfunun.
But, this begs the question as to why Darulfunun opened first, in the absence of 
a supporting public education system. The answer is twofold. First, some of the 
Ulema within the madrasas resisted modernization. The Ulema wanted to protect 
their privileged status in the theocratic society. Second, the leaders of the Ottoman 
Government perhaps sought a quick remedy for the economic loss and weakened 
government authority by simply hoping that Darulfunun would improve the deterio-
rating conditions. It was easier to provide a higher education for a small, young, 
elite group in Istanbul than making a grassroots movement of public education 
across the country.
In 1864, a new unit in the Ministry of Education was established (Meclis-i Kebir) 
which included one appointed representative from Greek, Armenian, Catholic, 
Protestant, and Jewish communities. In 1867, France gave a diplomatic note to the 
Ottoman Government for reforming the education system that influenced the pass-
ing of the Ordinance of General Education in 1889.The 198-item ordinance 
addressed teacher education, reserving the existing Christian schools and opening 
new ones, establishing mixed-sex education, and opening new public libraries 
(Altin 2008). In addition, it addressed the opening of elementary schools (Sibyan 
mektepleri) in every village, middle schools (Rustiye mektepleri) in each town, high 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 103 ---
79
school preparation schools (Idadi) in larger towns, and high schools (Sultaniye) in 
each regional centre; and teacher colleges for men and women in Istanbul and a new 
university were proposed.
After the Ordinance of General Education came into existence, Darulfunun was 
reopened in 1870 with a new name, Darulfunun-u Osmani. It included faculties of 
Law, Literature, and Science. The opening ceremony was made in three languages. 
Tahsin Efendi, the first director of Darulfunun-u Osmani, spoke in Turkish, Greek 
instructor Jan Aristokles spoke in French, and Cemalettin Afgani spoke in Arabic. 
Tahsin Efendi, who was educated in France, influenced many Darulfunun-u Osmani 
students who were taught in the French language. Many resource books and jour -
nals were ordered from Europe. Even though Tahsin Efendi went to Medrese and 
received a religious education, he was accused of blasphemy and eventually dis -
missed. Similarly, Cemalettin Afgani Efendi, another leading figure in the school, 
was accused of atheism upon his remarking that prophecy is an art. He had to even-
tually leave Istanbul (Tekeli and Ilkin 1993; Berkes 2002).
In 1872, Darulfunun was closed for the second time. Although at the surface 
level the reason for the closing was Cemalettin Afgani’s actions and remarks, it was 
clear that Sheikh al-Islam, the religious authority, did not like Darulfunun. In addi-
tion, the facts that Tahsin Efendi had endorsed the then-current French education 
system, that he was a Bektashi, and that Darulfunun housed several other progres -
sive educators made Darulfunun an easy target for accusations that led to its closing. 
Perhaps the naming of Darulfunun (which literally translates to science house) 
instead of disguising it with a different name such as darululum (house of knowl -
edge) was a strategic mistake (Tekeli and Ilkin 1993).
Because of the attacks from reactionaries and lack of legislation protecting 
Darulfunun, its third opening, which occurred with little fanfare in 1874 was under 
the name of Galatasaray Sultani. This third iteration of Darulfunun was the first to 
produce graduates, all of whom were taught in French because of a lack of instruc-
tors who could teach in Turkish (despite the official language of the school being 
Turkish). The Galatasaray Sultani was closed in 1877 due to what is generally 
believed to be economic problems and the Ottoman-Russia wars. However, Gunal 
(2013) suggested another possibility for the closing of the Galatasaray Sultani. At 
that time, the Ottoman Empire lost its power within the Balkan region. Because 
most of the Galatasaray Sultani’s students had Balkanian origins, the closing of the 
institution could have been a political move to prevent the education of Balkanian 
youth which the government feared could betray the Empire.
In 1896, the Grand Vizier Said Pasha submitted a report to the Sultan Abdulhamid 
II indicating that the Ottoman Empire could only be successful in competing with 
the West if the Ottoman people widely endorsed a scientific worldview. In 1900, 
Darulfunun reopened for the fourth time with five faculties including an education 
faculty. During the reign of Sultan Abdulhamid, there was a great level of censor -
ship by the ministry of education of what was taught in Darulfunun, especially in 
the social sciences, because of a fear that education could lead to changes society 
and a reduction in the Sultanate’s power. Hashem Pasha, the Minister of Education, 
accused Darulfunun of eroding the moral values of its students.
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 104 ---
80
With the second constitutional era beginning in 1908, Emrullah Efendi became 
the Minister of Education who advocated for a compulsory, free elementary educa-
tion (Gunal 2013). At the time, it was believed that the quality of primary and sec -
ondary education would increase with a rise in the rate of higher education 
attainment. Thus, there was an increased interest in the opening of new institutions 
of higher education. In 1912, the name of Darulfunun was changed to Istanbul 
Darulfunun. Later, during WW I, Allied forces occupied Istanbul and many faculty 
members who were thought to be members of the Ittihat and Terakki (Committee of 
Union and Progress), a Turkish nationalist group, were exiled. Some of the remain-
ing faculty were discharged. Despite all these pressures and the devastating effects 
of the wars, Istanbul Darulfunun remained open until 1933 (Gunal 2013).
Darulfunun was also a milestone for co-educational education. In 1914, the first 
female students were accepted although they were taught in separate classrooms 
from male students. However, because of a negative societal reaction to this, Inas 
Darulfunun with teacher education programs in literature, mathematics, and natural 
sciences was opened exclusively for women. In 1921, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk 
opposed single sex education during the National Education Congress, bringing 
about some mixed-gender classrooms. Still, some women boycotted these classes.
In the meantime, Ionia University, the first institution to carry the word “univer-
sity” within its name, was established in 1919 by the Greeks in Izmir (Gunal 2013). 
Its founder was Konstantionos Karatheodoris, a well-known mathematician who 
also taught Albert Einstein. When the Greek invasion of Western Turkey was halted 
during the Turkish Independence War, the Greeks reduced resources for this 
university.
The trajectory of the Enlightenment tradition within the Ottoman society had its 
ups and downs. While efforts were made to move the society forward through edu-
cation, these efforts periodically fell short as evidenced by Darulfunun’s history. 
Perhaps the biggest barriers for change were the primarily agrarian society with its 
traditional values, and the existing medieval structures, including the still influential 
Ulema class. In addition, in response to weakening economic conditions due to land 
lost and diminishing tax revenues, religious and nationalistic conservatism emerged 
which further increased society’s resistance to change.
.
3.5  First Half of Twentieth Century: A New State
The 1920s were marked by a post WWI economic depression, continuing wars for 
independence, and the foundation of the new Republic of Turkey. Before the Turkish 
Republic was founded in 1923, the Sultanate was abolished in 1922. Later, in 1924 
the Caliphate was abolished and a special law (Tevhid-i Tedrisat) regulating the 
unity of all instructional practices was passed. This meant the closing of institutions 
that solely taught Islamic doctrine, such as Madrasas, and the opening of secular 
institutions (Okcabol 2005). In the meantime, another education law regulated how 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 105 ---
81
religious education was to be given. In 1924, Prayer Leaders and Preachers schools 
(Imam Hatip Schools) were opened, followed by theological schools. Although it 
may seem counter intuitive that a secular government would open imam schools, 
they did so to create a new clergy class who was well-educated and practiced a non- 
extremist form of Islam. In 1928, coeducational institutions were established and 
the Latin alphabet was accepted. Natural sciences, physics, and chemistry became 
mandatory courses. Further, all of the educational services were now controlled 
under the authority of the Ministry of Education. All of these changes were quick 
and revolutionary.
For the first time, secularism in Turkey found its constitutional recognition and 
legitimation when in 1928 when the article declaring Islam as the official state reli-
gion was removed from the constitution. Later, in 1937, secularism was added to the 
constitution as the defining feature of the state (Berkes 1998). The Turkish idea of 
secularism was borrowed from the French laicism and appropriated in a unique way. 
That is, secularism should not be understood as an abstract concept and legal bundle 
of rights and policies. Rather it should be understood as a specific ideology, bound 
to a particular religion and political context (Cinar et al. 2012).
In the case of Turkey, secularism is not just a mechanism for the government to 
control the religious practices, but, more importantly, it is a way to use religion as 
means to establish state authority. Unlike some Western states such as France, the 
church and state in Turkey has never been separated. The Department of the Affairs 
of Piety (Diyanet) continues to be a state branch, organized directly under the office 
of the prime minister. As such, using public funds, it manages various religious 
affairs such as, appointing imams and muftus, maintaining mosques, distributing 
religious publications, etc. One example of how the state controls religion in public 
spaces was the banning of head scarfs in schools, universities, and government 
offices for many years, until this ban was abolished under a more recent regulation. 
Diyanet issues a Friday hutbe (sermon script) every week and this is read to the 
Muslim followers in approximately 85,000 mosques across the county. These hut -
bes mostly address the original and central ideas of Islam, but they are often coloured 
with the official ideology of the state.
Ataturk’s Turkey (1923–1938) faced toward the West, and it had a firm positivist 
authoritarian ideology driving it to get rid of some of the old structures that seemed 
to be obstacles for change. From the epistemological stand point this ideology 
assumes that what we know about nature and society is the same kind of knowledge, 
and from the political standpoint this knowledge has the function to shape and con-
trol the society (Toker and Tekin 2007).
The roots of positivism in the Turkish Enlightenment tradition go back to the 
Tanzimat period. First, several Ottoman ambassadors in France were directly 
exposed to positivism. For example, Mustafa Resit Pasha (1800–1858) read August 
Comte, and under Resit Pasha’s auspices, Ibrahim Sinasi (an author and journalist) 
became friends with such French philosophers as Earnest Renan and Emile Littre. 
This trend continued over several decades and a growing number of Turkish intel -
lectuals subscribed to positivist thought and became influential thinkers of the time 
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 106 ---
82
including Riza Tevfik, (1868–1949), Huseyin Cahit Yalcin (1874–1957), and Ziya 
Gokalp (1876–1924), (See Korlaelci 2009).
History and literature were the fields where the first gleanings of positivist 
thought were seen in Turkish intellectual culture. Beginning from the Tanzimat 
period to the early years of the Turkish Republic until the death of Ataturk, the his-
tory textbooks’ descriptions of the early historical ages removed religious accounts 
of the origin of humans, and adopted a naturalist approach supported by physical 
anthropological evidence. In these textbooks, it is stated that “God” is an imagina-
tion of the human mind rather than the creator of everything. The “chain of life” 
claim that humans originated from other life forms was embraced by history text -
books (Toprak 2011). Beginning in 1930, mandatory religious courses were gradu-
ally removed and religious expressions were removed from general education 
programs and textbooks (Eskicumali 2003). The curriculum was related to daily life 
and secularized. For the first time, in 1934, the theory of evolution appeared in the 
nation’s curriculum. Many foreign textbooks and resources were translated into 
Turkish. In 1934 the constitution was changed so that women were given the right 
to vote and to be elected to parliament. Thus there were a number of major radical 
social, cultural and educational changes that all occurred within a decade.
By 1924 news spread that the alphabet would be changed from Arabic to Latin. 
Darulfunun faculty indicated that they would boycott this. For the new republican 
regime to flourish, restructuring of the Darulfunun was necessary (Gunal 2013). 
Beginning in 1928, supported by a new legislation, students were sent abroad for 
advanced academic studies to provide the academic workforce needed to restructure 
Turkey’s system of higher education. An amended version of this law is still in 
effect resulting in many modern faculty members in Turkey who obtained their 
terminal degrees from abroad. About this same time, the Ministry of Education 
requested a report from Swiss-German educator, Albert Malche, regarding the sta -
tus of Turkey’s higher education system. The resulting report indicated that 
Darulfunun did not contribute to Turkey’s knowledge base; simple translations from 
Western work were admitted as dissertations; faculty, who were often occupied with 
outside jobs, had minimal involvement in the campus; and advisement, mentoring, 
and scholarly work were absent. Turkish reporters made similar observations as 
well and the government decided to take action (Oncu 2007).
In 1933, Darulfunun was closed for one day and the name was changed to 
Istanbul University. One hundred and fifty seven of the 240 faculty members were 
discharged and provided the option of working for another department within the 
state. This represents the first ideological retrenchment of university faculty within 
Turkey and was part of a larger effort to establish a modern university. It strove to 
fortify the single party regime’s higher education ideology of strengthening the 
secular nation-state model while continuing to modernize. Interestingly, Oncu 
(2007) points out that this reform was paradoxical in and of itself, as the relatively 
self-autonomous Darulfunun was replaced with an institution representing the 
authoritarianism of the government.
Faculty positions at the new Istanbul University were filled with the remaining 
Darulfunun academics, young academics who were returning from their training in 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 107 ---
83
Europe and many scientists who escaped from Nazi Germany (Gunal 2013). It is 
worth noting that the quality of faculty who left Germany and came to Istanbul 
University were among the best in their disciplines. Alfred Kantorowicz was an 
eminent dentist, who remarked that Istanbul University was the best German 
University of the world. These German academics were political dissidents in Nazi 
Germany; they were liberals who were primarily socialists and Jewish (Guleryuz 
2008; Oncu 2007). In 1933, the Advanced Agriculture Institute was opened in 
Ankara with Friedrich Falke serving as its first rector. Although it was classified as 
an institute, in several respects it was thought to embody more university character-
istics than Istanbul University itself (Gunal 2013). In fact, Turkey’s first doctoral 
program was opened in this highly research-orientated institution. This institute 
later became Ankara University in 1946, with strong programs in the natural 
sciences.
In order to re-structure schooling and establish a public education system, Turkey 
invited several educators and academics to consult in the planning of these reforms 
and new initiatives. The most influential of these people was John Dewey who made 
his first visit during the summer of 1924. During a three-month visit he visited 
schools in Turkey and spoke with teachers, school administrators, and higher level 
officials. Upon leaving, he created an initial report followed up by a more compre-
hensive report on the Turkish education system that addressed aspects of instruc -
tional programs, the Ministry of Education’s organization, teacher education, the 
schooling system, health and hygiene, and school discipline. Through these works, 
Dewey discussed the problems of teachers and teacher education, the importance of 
translating basic science education resources to Turkish, and the democratic admin-
istration of schools (Dewey 1924a). Ultimately, Dewey provided several recom -
mendations related to the decentralization of education, the re-structuring of rural 
education based on local needs, the opening of local and mobile libraries, and estab-
lishing educational unity while avoiding uniformity.
The influence of Dewey on the Turkish education system was contentious for 
several reasons. First, Dewey and Turkish leaders philosophically differed on the 
purpose of education. For Ataturk and his officials, education was a political tool to 
help shape society as the new state sought to develop its identity. For Dewey, how-
ever, education was rather a social ideal that contributed to the ongoing free growth 
of society (Santoro and Dorn 2012).
More importantly, Dewey and Turkish officials also differed on the administra -
tion of education; while Dewey advocated a system with strong localism, Turkish 
officials believed in a centralized education system which imposed a national cur -
riculum. Even though Dewey acknowledged that the central government should 
lead the reform movements, he warned that a highly centralized education system 
would make the social ideal of democracy impossible, due to a lack of local com -
munity involvement. Along this vein, Dewey warned that a high level of nationalism 
and centralism would result in anti-democratic practices (Santoro and Dorn 2012). 
This is exactly how Kemalism (i.e., the principles of Ataturk) is criticized by many 
modern intellectuals, who assert that it suppressed different ethnic and religious 
identities.
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 108 ---
84
However, Ataturk’s prime goal was to build a nation and a secular government. 
Over the previous two centuries, the Ottomans failed to save the state while attempt-
ing reforms. The Empire was dissolved with most of the Balkan nations claiming 
their own sovereignty and Arabic nations becoming colonies of the Western States. 
Ataturk recognized that the Turks were predominantly poor, uneducated peasants 
who did not have a strong sense of Turkish identity because the Ottoman Government 
treated them according to their religious affiliation. Ataturk believed that for the 
new state to survive and flourish it must be based on a strong Turkish identity. As 
Bilgi and Ozsoy (2005) pointed out, for the new Turkish Republic’s ruling elite the 
main causes of the predicament were traditional and religious values of the people. 
Thus, Dewey’s recommendations on local community involvement were not con -
sidered. A national secular education system and curriculum would ensure that the 
state’s political goals will be better achieved.
Santoro and Dorn (2012) discuss other accounts of Dewey’s work that represent 
contrasting claims about whether Dewey’s recommendations were actually imple-
mented. For instance, Joseph Szyliowicz regarded the influence of Dewey as being 
very little to none. Yet, according to Ata (2000), Dewey’s report significantly influ-
enced the Turkish education system. Ata suggests that some of Dewey’s influences 
include the opening of the Department of Instruction and Education (Talim ve 
Terbiye Dairesi), the Gazi Teacher Training Institute, and the Bureau of School 
Architecture. In addition, the Ministry of Education’s academic journals, such as 
Maarif Vekaleti Mecmuasi , often published articles on the education systems of 
other countries including, among others, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, and Japan. 
This is consistent with Dewey’s suggestion that Turkey should synthesize its own 
education system by adopting elements from various other systems instead of com-
pletely copying another nation’s entire system. Furthermore, library networks were 
developed and mobile libraries were established to reach out to the people in remote 
places so that the ideals of the new republic could be disseminated (Ata 2000).
Dewey wrote four essays on Turkey after he returned to the USA. In “Secularizing 
a Theocracy”, Dewey (1924b) notes that the young Turkish republic was destined to 
be a secular state. Dewey reasoned that this was inevitable because most Western 
nation states followed the same model. Additionally, he cited the treacherous deal-
ings of the Sultanate with foreign powers, as well as the degeneration of the 
Caliphate institution as important contextual elements that ultimately supported the 
secularization process. In “Angora, The New” (1924c) Dewey shares his reflections 
about Turkey’s new capital, Angora (Ankara), and discusses the reasons for the new 
state’s choice of Angora over Constantinople as her capital. In “The Turkish 
Tragedy”, Dewey (1924d) discusses the underlying events that caused the civil wars 
that alternately pitted the Turks against the Greeks and the Armenians. Dewey attri-
butes some of the blame for these wars and their resulting tragedies to the “Great 
Powers” of the time, Russia and Great Britain, who provoked ethnic clashes among 
Ottoman nations. Finally, in “Foreign Schools in Turkey,” Dewey (1925) provides a 
glimpse into Turkey’s foreign schools and discusses the perplexity of keeping for-
eign schools open during the beginning years of the Turkish Republic in an era of 
elevated nationalism.
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 109 ---
85
One of the most significant products of the Turkish enlightenment movement 
were Village Institutes that addressed some of Dewey’s recommendations about 
rural development. The founders of the Village Institutes were the Minister of 
National Education, Hasan Ali Yucel, and the Elementary Education General 
Manager, Ismail Hakki Tonguc, both of whom were important figures in the nation’s 
education history. The Village Institutes were coeducational institutions established 
in rural areas with the goal of rural development and creating teachers to be placed 
in rural elementary schools. It is also argued that these institutions were founded to 
instil the ideology of the single party regime in the rural areas (Karaomerlioglu 
2009). American educator Fay Kirby ( 2000) noted that the Village Institutes were 
not a copy of the Western institutions and had been very influential in educating 
rural people.
The first Village Institutes were opened in 1940 and lasted until 1947. The open-
ing of Village Institutes caused outrage among the right-wing politicians within the 
Parliament. By 1945, it was recognized that the Village Institutes had revolutionized 
rural education (Arayici 1999) and were producing approximately 2000 graduates 
each year. Thus, it is worthwhile to look at the operation of these schools more 
closely by first examining their guiding principles benefiting the rural community 
including, a) field-based rural education, b) learning by doing, c) connecting agri -
cultural production with science and technology knowledge, d) providing health 
and hygiene for rural populations, and e) bringing cultural activities from the larger 
cities and Western culture. The Village Institutes were designed to be self-sustaining 
and rejected the standard rote learning approach. Observation, experimentation, 
research, and discussion were some of the strategies used in these institutions 
(Oguzkan 1990). The goal of the Village Institutes was to raise enlightened, produc-
tive, sociable, and educated citizens.
In some respects, the Village Institutes addressed several of the issues in Dewey’s 
report including a pragmatic approach to education with many opportunities to 
practice and apply skills, a consideration of local needs, and a focus on rural educa-
tion. In one anecdote, Hasan Ali Yucel told the president of the Turkish Republic 
that the Village Institutes were created with Dewey’s ideas in mind (Inonu 1998). 
After WW II, Turkey transitioned to a multi-party political system and became more 
politically aligned to the USA. During this period, Hasan Ali Yucel was not elected 
to Parliament and Hakki Tonguc, and their working team, were eliminated. Resat 
Semsettin Sirer, who was known to be a Hitler admirer, became the next Minister of 
National Education (Ak 2015). Sirer believed that those who were educated in the 
Village Institutes were communists and would 1 day rise up against those in power. 
Additionally, the Village Institutes were under political attack from the conserva -
tives because a coeducational boarding school concept was hard to accept and, as 
was very typical for the period, they were accused by right-wing politicians of creat-
ing communist propaganda (Gunal 2013).
In 1946, similar accusations regarding communism became widespread in other 
universities, leading to the dismissal of several leading academics, including Niyazi 
Berkes, Pertev Naili Boratav, and Behice Boran (Oncu 2007). The founder party of 
the republic, the Republican People’s Party (RPP), was becoming more  conservative 
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 110 ---
86
and eventually the right-wing Democrat Party (DP) separated from RPP.  The 
depression years during WW II were characterized by an increase in religious con-
servatism. In 1950, the DP won the elections as the first party to be elected in a 
multi-party election. The conservative Minister of National Education, Tevfik Ileri, 
first separated the co-ed Village Institutes into two single-sex institutes for boys and 
girls. Further, he invited K.V .  Wofford, an obscure figure from Florida State 
University, to prepare a bogus report that would provide a basis for the closing of all 
twenty Village Institutes (Altunya 1999).
Karaomerlioglu (2009)  provides an interesting perspective regarding the reasons 
for the closing of the Village Institutes. First, these institutes went beyond their 
initial mission of establishing a sustainable village life where villagers learned to 
increase agricultural productivity. Instead, educated village men began to migrate to 
the cities. Second, these institutes were very much associated with the single party 
regime and were seen as an obstacle to the transition to a multi-party system. Thus, 
contrary to the popular belief that the RPP opposed the closing of these schools, the 
RPP leadership actually supported their closing for political purposes. The RPP’s 
right-wing leaders wanted to weaken the opposition while gaining the favour of 
Western allies by accusing the Village Institutes of spreading communism. Today, 
the Village Institutes still remain an interesting enigma of Turkish political history.
In 1946, “Universities Laws” that reformed the way universities operated passed. 
According to new laws, universities were provided with more autonomy and legal 
personality in response to increasing demands for higher education. Universities 
were provided with a self-governance model, this was an improvement over the 
1933’s authoritarian reform that abolished Darulfunun (Korkut 2003; Oncu 2007).
In 1948, religion courses were included in the national curriculum as electives. 
Later, the DP kept their promise to re-open imam schools and by, 1951, every stu -
dent was required to take religious courses unless they overtly declared an unwill -
ingness not to do so, which, because of social pressures, was not easy to do.
Subsequent to WWII and Turkey’s admission into the United Nations and NATO, 
Maarif Colleges (secondary level schools) were opened. In these schools the medium 
of instruction was English for mathematics and science courses. During this period 
Turkish Education, formerly influenced by continental Europe, was increasingly 
influenced by American education views (Akyuz 1999). It was during this time 
(1951), when the Cold War began, that right-wing political leaders re- opened Prayer 
Leaders and Preacher Schools to counterbalance leftist political currents.
While Sputnik affected science education within the U.S., the Turkish system 
was also affected in specific ways. For example while atomic theory and the theory 
of evolution were introduced in textbooks plate tectonic theory was not. (Tebligler 
Dergisi 1957). The overall quality of the curriculum was improved while conserva-
tive ideologies gained greater prominence (Durmus 2013). During this time, a 
Turkish McCarthyism prevailed in which there was widespread right-wing political 
discourse regarding how to defend against communism and materialist ideology 
that ignored society’s values. Also at this time, Middle East Technical University 
(METU), a very influential Turkish University, was established (1956) with U.S. 
support. Ironically, even though METU was opened by a right-wing Turkish admin-
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 111 ---
87
istration and received U.S. support, the students of METU were mostly known to be 
much more sympathetic to leftist ideals and were very influential during the student 
demonstrations following 1960 (Caliskan 2015).
3.6  Military Coups: 1960–1980
In the two decades after 1960, Turkey experienced three military coups. The first of 
these occurred in 1960 as a result of the Democratic Party administration’s extreme 
authoritarianism and conflicting policies toward the secular model of governance 
(Howard 2001). The military intervention resulted in the removal of the Democratic 
Party from power, execution of the Prime Minister and two cabinet members, and, 
later, the passing of a new constitution. The junta regime declared its allegiance to 
NATO and other international organizations. As in continental Europe’s post-war 
era, a planned economy model was adopted and the State Planning Organization 
was established. Even though it was passed during a junta regime, the 1961 consti-
tution was regarded as being very liberal because it allowed for the existence of 
labour unions, provided a higher level freedom of expression, supported a more 
autonomous structure for universities, and introduced the notions of “social govern-
ment” and “pluralistic democracy” (Birol 2012). In the 1965 elections the Workers 
Party of Turkey won seats in the Parliament, a first for a socialist party. In 1967, the 
Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions (DISK) was founded.
Following creation of the 1961 constitution, new economic planning and devel-
opment packages were proposed that targeted a basic education for everyone as well 
as increased vocational and technical schools to produce qualified technicians and 
scientists (Okcabol 2005). The first science magnet high schools (Science Lycees or 
Fen Liseleri) were established in the early 1960s and Ankara Fen Lycee received 
support from the Ford Foundation. Taken together, these efforts were aimed at rais-
ing a new generation who were better versed at questioning, reasoning and invent -
ing (Yılmaz and Morgil 1992).
During this time, the influence of positivism can be seen within many new educa-
tion programs. For example, some of the science magnet lycees’ curricula were 
adopted from America. In 1962, 20 science and math textbooks and curricular pro-
grams were translated into Turkish by the Science Textbooks Translation Project. 
The Physics Sciences Study Curriculum (PSSC), Chemical Education Materials 
Study (CHEM Study), and Biological Science Curriculum Study (BSCS) programs 
were adopted in physics, chemistry and biology courses. With these new curricular 
programs, textbooks included terms such as ‘theory’, ‘observation’, and ‘hypothe-
sis’, as well as discussions about the nature of science (i.e., methods of science, the 
role of scientists, and the definition of science). In 1963, The Scientific and 
Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) was founded to support 
research and development projects at Turkish institutions, provide scholarships for 
researchers, and publish popular science magazines and books for that were very 
affordable priced for the public.
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 112 ---
88
Reform strategies of the 1970s stressed the protection of youth from extremist 
ideologies. However, the cold war era of street demonstrations and clashes between 
opposing youth groups was a harbinger of future military take-overs. The 1971 coup 
resulted in the closing of both the Workers Party of Turkey and the Confederation of 
Progressive Trade Unions. During this period, while all vocational middle schools 
were closed, imam schools at the middle grades were re-opened (Okcabol 2005). 
Coeducational imam schools were opened at the high school level, even though 
females could not serve as imams in Islam (Altunya 1999). Because of a fear of 
communism, educational policies aligned with right-wing conservatism as well as 
nationalist and Islamist values.
3.7  Towards a Market Economy: 1980–2010
This period was characterized by the 1980 military coup, a new constitution (1982), 
a transition to a free-market economy, legislation creating a new Higher Education 
Council (1983), the establishment of non-public foundation universities, and the 
depoliticisation of universities. As Turkey approached the 1980s, the bourgeoisie 
class grew and it was evident that they needed to integrate to the rest of the world 
economy. However, Turkey did not have a true free market economy, as the govern-
ment heavily regulated most areas of economic production.
In May of 1979, the Turkish Industry and Business Association’s (TUSIAD) full 
page newspaper ads called for a change in Turkish economics. These ads were so 
influential during a time of political instability that they triggered the overthrowing 
of the social democrat administration of the time. On January 24, 1980, new eco -
nomic regulations were released by the government that abolished the mixed eco -
nomic system involving heavy government regulation of private investments and 
capitals; a free market economy model was adopted. Later, on September 12, 1980, 
the military once again took control during a time of political and economic insta -
bility, where political assassinations and street clashes were increasingly common.
The junta regime was an effective apparatus for implementing this new eco -
nomic model while easily suppressing any opposition. The mastermind of January 
24 decisions, Turgut Ozal, was later elected as the Prime Minister in the first general 
elections in 1983 after junta regime ostensibly relinquished power. During these 
elections the most significant political actors were banned from politics, paving the 
way for an easy win for Ozal, who also received international support from such 
leaders as Reagan and Thatcher.
It would be foolhardy to think the 1980s coup and its aftermath were indepen -
dent from global politics. For instance, the U.S.’s support of radical political Islam 
during the Cold War era in response to Soviet Union threats is well documented 
(Dreyfuss 2005). Turkey’s politics was also influenced by this increasing level of 
political Islamism. During Ozal’s term, religion classes became mandatory in all 
middle and high school grades. Biology textbooks of the national curriculum had 
ideas suggesting that the theory of evolution was questionable (Durmus 2013). A 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 113 ---
89
book entitled Creationism and published by the Institute for Creation Research 
(ICR) in the U.S. was translated into Turkish by the Ministry of Education Press and 
sent out to all biology teachers (Edis 1999). The Minister of National Education of 
at that time, Vehbi Dincerler, accused those teachers who taught the theory of evolu-
tion of being communists (Sayın and Kence 1999).
In a report by the State Planning Organization (Devlet Planlama Teskilati or 
DPT), it was recommended that all curricular content should be in harmony with 
religion (DPT 1983). Creationist ideas were also added to the biology textbooks of 
the national curricula as an alternative hypothesis to explain the origin of life (Sayın 
and Kence 1999). Even though the theory of evolution remained in the textbooks, it 
was largely diluted with creationist references. At the same time, religion course 
textbooks attacked the theory with misconstrued interpretations. For instance, one 
reads “according to Darwin, strong ones would live, and weak ones would be elimi-
nated. However strong organisms such as dinosaurs and mammoths have become 
extinct, whereas some weak organisms such as earthworms could survive” (Ayas 
and Tümer 1994, p. 13).
The coalition administration of 1996 passed a bill to change the duration of man-
datory education from 5 to 8 years. The key to the bill was that during this manda -
tory 8 years of education, no vocational or Prayer Leaders and Preachers Schools 
were offered at the middle grades level (grades 6–8). Previously, students could 
choose to go to these sorts of schools, beginning at the sixth grade and continuing 
to high school in the same area. Prayer Leaders and Preachers Schools were very 
important in politics as evidenced by one of the political leaders confessing “Imam 
schools are our backyard” thus suggesting that graduates of Prayer Leaders and 
Preachers Schools were avid supporters of his political movement.
The higher education situation was no different. The 1980 junta regime estab -
lished the Higher Education Council (Yuksek Ogretim Kurumu or, YOK) in 1981 
that oversaw all of the state’s higher education institutions - there were not any pri-
vate higher education institution at that time. One of the first moves by the Higher 
Education Council was to discharge hundreds of faculty members who were mostly 
social progressivists and leftists. YOK legislation equipped the university presidents 
(rectors) and deans with unprecedented authority so that they could control the aca-
demia in the interest of the ruling administration (Oncu 2007).
Although most members of the Higher Education Council are academicians, they 
are appointed by the President, and therefore, the council is very political. As such it 
acts as if it is a branch of the ruling administration. For instance, in 1986 during the 
aftermath of the Chernobyl disaster, several Turkish scientists did investigations 
about the increased radiation amounts in the black sea region of Turkey. The Higher 
Education Council prevented these scientists from disseminating their results. Most 
recently, the Higher Education Council communicated to the universities in a confi-
dential note that academic research on Syrian refugees in Turkey was not allowed 
without first receiving the permission of government authorities (Odatv 2015).
During the subsequent 2000s, concepts such as individualism and entrepreneur-
ism become more prevalent, and the influence of globalism and neo-liberal dis -
courses has become more visible. Constructivism became a preferred educational 
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 114 ---
90
theory, along with eclecticism. On the other, this did not mean that government or 
political authority embraced pluralism; dissidents, including college students, con -
tinued to suffer from the laws inherited from the last junta regime. Any divergent 
political idea can be interpreted as a threat to the “indivisible integrity of the state” 
according to the Turkish Penal Code, resulting in jail time.
In this period, constructivism and post-modernist discourses gained more popu-
larity in Schools of Education, teacher education, and school curricula. In the 1980s 
and 1990s, huge numbers of Turkish students were sponsored by the State to pursue 
graduate studies in the UK and USA. In both countries, constructivism was in its 
ascendency. Not surprisingly, this doctrine was brought back to Turkey. Commonly 
Schools of Education taught that each individual learns differently, there are multi-
ple ways to reach the truth, there is not an absolute truth, and knowledge is con -
structed and culturally bound and grounded. With little intellectual debate, 
constructivism was endorsed as the guiding philosophy of science curricula (MEB, 
Ilkogretim Fen ve Teknoloji Dersi Mufredati 2006). The American National Science 
Education Standards (NSES, NRC 1996) has been influential in shaping the science 
curricula at grades 6–8. Similarly, the high school biology curriculum has been 
influenced by the Campbell biology curriculum. However, interestingly, sections 
relating to the theory of evolution were excluded from the Turkish Biology text -
books. In the meantime, creationist propaganda peaked, partly through the support 
of the state, as public schools allowed the distribution of free creationist 
publications(including the notorious Atlas of Creation) and field trips to so called 
fossil museums funded by creationists. Although a critique of the science curricu -
lum has been made (Taskin 2005), along with several critiques of how evolution is 
presented, (Peker et al. 2010; Taskin 2011, 2013), these have had little influence on 
what is implemented within the schools.
Also, during this period values education became part of the curriculum, espe -
cially within the early grades, along with a great deal of research being conducted on 
values education in Turkey. Although values are important elements of human devel-
opment and identity, it appears that the values education, as practiced, promotes pri-
marily those values associated with religion rather than more universal or secular 
values. Unfortunately, it has been shown that prospective teachers’ religious values 
negatively affects their attitude toward science (Mugaloglu and Bayram 2009).
In 2012, public education at the primary and secondary level was structured with 
a 4 + 4 + 4 model, in which students take 4 years of primary education, followed by 
another 4 years of education at the middle grades level, and then 4 years of second -
ary education. The key to the model is that for the second four-year term, students 
can choose the option of going to vocational schools, one of which is the Prayer 
Leaders and Preachers Schools (Imam Hatip Okullari). The middle grades sections 
of these schools were closed in 1997, and it is the current Justice and Development 
Party administration’s agenda to increase enrolment in Imam Schools, something 
that has been very controversial since these schools’ first inception in 1951.
One of the critiques of the 4 + 4 + 4 model is that it primarily serves the needs of 
the market economy rather than the developmental needs of the students. In this 
model, primary education starts at age five, with the second four-year period begin-
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 115 ---
91
ning at age nine, when students can enrol in vocational schools. Although current 
laws prohibit businesses from hiring anyone younger than 15 years old, a specific 
rule was added that allows businesses to hire children younger than 15 years old 
who are enrolled in a vocational school (Muftuoglu 2012). Clearly these new poli-
cies serve a neo-liberalism philosophy in which schools are evaluated based on their 
ability to produce a workforce that is economically productive rather than their abil-
ity to create liberally educated citizens (Inal et al. 2014).
At almost all levels, the Turkish education system uses high stakes tests to deter-
mine which students will be eligible to go the next level of specialized (magnet) 
schools or college. During the last 13 years, the testing system has been changed 
five times. Entry into secondary education (Grades 9–12) has been very confusing 
for most parents and students with the different categories of schools’ names repeat-
edly changing. Also, many regular high schools have been converted to Prayer 
Leaders and Preacher schools. For instance while the number of these imam schools 
was 450 in 2003, their number has increased to 1000 by 2015, with almost half a 
million students enrolled (Anadolu Agency 2015). When mandatory religious 
courses are required at the expense of science courses in public schools, and public 
religious schools are promoted at the expense of non-religious schools, Turkey’s 
success in the core areas of education is diminished. For instance, in the Programme 
for International Student Assessment (PISA) study of 2012, Turkey was ranked at 
the 44th place among 65 OECD countries in mathematics, science and reading 
achievement (OECD 2014).
The Turkish higher education system has grown very fast in the last decade. The 
number of universities almost doubled from about a 100 at the beginning of the 
2000s to 193 as of 2016. However, the number of higher education institutions in 
Turkey is still much fewer than some of the other countries of comparable size in the 
West. The quality of higher education has been questionable as most new institutions 
lack the physical, academic, and personnel infrastructure to support quality educa -
tion. Furthermore, the entire higher education system needs a major overhaul because 
it is managed by the central Higher Education Council, a very highly political institu-
tion with its members and president appointed by the President of the country. This 
system threatens academic freedom and tenure as individual faculty members can be 
easily penalized by the central authority as well as their local university administra-
tions because of their dissident ideas (Ugur 2016; Bohannon 2016).
3.8  Conclusion
From the beginning reform movements of the eighteenth century Ottoman Empire 
to today’s Turkey, all had an elitist character (Berkes 2002; Gulalp 2005; Weiker 
1981). The ruling bureaucracy assessed the need for reforms and implemented them 
accordingly, with mixed success. However, the Turkish reforms during the period 
between 1923 and 1946 have been revolutionary and progressive in the sense of 
dismantling old structures. Even though Turkey moved to a multi-party democratic 
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 116 ---
92
system in 1946, this was the beginning of a counter-revolutionary period as the 
gains of republican revolution were sacrificed for the political zeal of the ruling par-
ties. Perhaps the most significant example of this was the banning of the Turkish call 
for prayer from the mosques and reverting back to the Arabic call, a language that 
the overwhelming majority of the people did not speak. This was such a quintes -
sential problem. If enlightenment is simply putting reason before anything else, how 
could one put reason before something (i.e., a religion) that one cannot even under-
stand because of a language barrier? Another turning point was the closing of the 
Village Institutes which ultimately made it difficult to modernize because there was 
no longer an organized way to reach out to the rural communities.
The years between 1946 and 1960 were a period of growing conservatism fuelled 
by the cold war. The period between 1960 and 1980 has been relatively more liberal, 
with some interruptions due to military interventions and tensions between oppos -
ing groups. This period also represents the growth of the much more positivistic 
science education curricula. Beginning with the aftermath of the 1980 coup, author-
itarianism and conservatism climbed. The 1980 military coup and the resulting 
1982 constitution passed by the junta regime tremendously impacted Turkish edu -
cation, politics, and social life.
This 1982 constitution, with many amendments, is still in effect in modern 
Turkey. Originally, it limited freedom of expression and social pluralism to a great 
extent. Starting in the mid-1980s, the armed Kurdish movement arose and by the 
1990s praetorianism became the modus operandi; increased ethnic tensions primar-
ily fed nationalism and Islamism while leftist elements were greatly suppressed. 
The ensuing years of the 2000s represents neo-liberalism’s pinnacle, and the gains 
of the early republic, especially laicism, continued to be eroded under the model of 
moderate Islamism. Post-modernism, constructivism, and individualism provided a 
perfect apparatus for reactionaries to dilute the positivist values of Ataturk’s repub-
lican tradition, while shaping a more neo-liberal curriculum.
Ataturk believed that the safeguarding of the principles of the young republic, 
social change, and economic development could only happen through education. In 
this sense, Santoro and Dorn (2012) compare Ataturk to some of America’s revolu-
tionary leaders such as Jefferson, Madison and Hamilton. Ataturk believed in an 
education system that represented the values of the Enlightenment ideology such as 
universalism, rationality, objectivity, scientism, secularism, optimism. This was evi-
dent in his speeches and programs. For instance, one of his most famous aphorisms 
is that “the only guide in life is science”. Ataturk was optimistic about the country’s 
future by setting a goal for the Turkish youth to reach the highest level of 
civilization.
However, as many sociologists have asserted, the challenge of the Turkish mod-
ernism and secularism project was that it was not grown out of society, it was given 
to society (Akural 1984; Steinbach 1984). To use the cliché, it was ‘top down’ 
reform. As such it was not so different from all comparable reform efforts in the 
West. According to Steinbach, only the intellectuals and bureaucratic elites who 
benefited from the system identified themselves with Kemalism, while traditional -
ists and the masses did not connect to this idea. Similarly, Akural points out that the 
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 117 ---
93
Kemalist project was not organically grown concept as functionalists define, with -
out internal stresses and conflicts a complete social change would not be possible. 
Even though the “populism” principle of Kemalism aimed at absolute equality of 
citizens before the law, some of the old feudal structures (agalik) were difficult to 
change because of the land owning senators. Further, Kemalism failed to establish a 
welfare system to facilitate the overturn of this feudal structure, especially in eastern 
Turkey (Akural 1984).
Despite all the initial problems associated with the devastated economy after the 
independence war of the 1920s, an overwhelmingly uneducated peasant society, a 
strong feudal tradition, and religious conservatism, the Turkish modernity project 
can be seen as more of a success than a failure. The Turkish modernization project 
resulted in a number of successes including the establishment of a secular national 
state with a relatively stable democratic political system. This modernization saw 
the development of a strong sense of national identity, the preservation of traditional 
and local culture, and the growth of transportation, mass media, communication, 
schooling rates, and a variety social, cultural, political and other interest groups 
(Weiker 1981).
On the other hand, the top-down approach of the Kemalist modernization project 
caused long lasting political tensions between the secularists and traditionalists 
(Gulalp 2005). When one considers the unique secular model of Turkey, where reli-
gion is subjugated to (but not entirely separated from) the state (Davison 1998), one 
sees a dialectical relationship between the two; it is a relationship in which it is 
sometimes questionable which controls the other, as exemplified by the mandate for 
religious education. A tension arises between the secularists, who want to protect 
the public sphere and create a critical discourse concerning the traditional forces 
(Outram 2013), and the Islamists, who want use the same public space to “live” 
their religion (Turkmen 2012).
The inseparable nature of religion from the state, the public sphere, and other 
realms of life suggests that if any enlightenment can be assumed in this context it 
should be the “moderate enlightenment” (Israel 2006) where reason is combined 
with faith and tradition as opposed to where the reason is the only guiding truth. As 
presented earlier, Kucuk (2012) and Akkach (2007) noted the existence of this phe-
nomenon with different but similar terms for the seventeenth century Ottoman 
Empire. This trend seems to be continuing in today’s society where there is a strong 
conservative tradition.
Islamists in Turkey have long blamed the secular state for its authoritarianism 
that interfered with their tradition. Today, secularists are more concerned with the 
increasing influence of political Islamism in public life and the resulting lack of 
religious toleration. Somer (2007) argued that democratic consolidation – the idea 
of strengthening democracy so that it is unthinkable for the great masses to reverse 
the gains of democracy – can be a viable model to protect secularism. Only in a 
democratic and secular society can the Turkish Enlightenment tradition be fur -
thered; without such protection, the gains of free speech, gender equality, non-  
preferential treatment of any religion, universal education, can all be rolled-back 
and legislated away.
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 118 ---
94
The Enlightenment should not be seen as a closed historical period, neither in the 
West or in in non-Western societies (Outram 2013). Conflicts between Enlightenment- 
informed science education and conservative, reactionary forces exist today in 
Turkey as we documented here and in many other countries around the world 
(Matthews 2015b), particularly in the Middle East (Nielsen 2016). The antidote for 
the counter-Enlightenment and reactionary movements is a vigorous, serious, and 
national science education because good science education develops citizens with 
critical and informed habits of mind who value reason, who acknowledge the impor-
tance of gathering evidence and testing beliefs, who affirm the necessity of open 
public discussion and debate, who deny all illegitimate claims to epistemic authority 
concerning the natural and social worlds. But, denying illegitimate claims to scien-
tific authority means affirming legitimate ones; and a challenge of constructivist and 
relativist accounts of science is to see how they can identify and support the latter. If 
all sciences and methodologies are equal, then there can be no legitimate or authori-
tative science; surely a debilitating conclusion for science teachers and advocates.
Acknowledgement We thank Michael Matthews, the editor, and anonymous reviewers for their 
very helpful feedback and Greg Blalock for his careful reading of the manuscript.
References
Ak, G. (2015). Turk dusunce hayatinda Mediha Esenel (Berkes) ve 1948 DTCF tasfiyeleri iliskisi 
uzerine bir inceleme. Journal of Modern Turkish History Studies, XV/30, 251–293.
Akkach, S. (2007). Makers of the Muslim world- ‘Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi: Islam and the 
enlightenment. Oxford: Oneworld Publications.
Akural, S. M. (1984). Kemalist views on social change. In J. M. Landau (Ed.), Ataturk and the 
modernization of Turkey (pp. 125–152). Boulder: Westview Press.
Akyuz, Y . (1999). 17. Yüzyıldan Günümüze Türk E ğitiminde Başlıca Düzenleme ve Geli ştirme 
Çabaları: Genel Özellikler ve Do ğrultular, Milli E ğitim Dergisi [Journal of National 
Education], 144.
Altin, H. (2008). 1869 Maarif-i Umumiye Nizamnamesi ve Ö ğretmen Yetiştirme Tarihimizdeki 
Yeri. Fırat Üniversitesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Dergisi, 13(1), 271–283.
Altunya, N. (1999). Türkiye Cumhuriyeti’nde Din Eğitimi, 75 Yılda Eğitim (Gök, F. Ed.). (s:215–
222). İstanbul: Tarih Vakfı Publications.
Anadolu Agency. (2015). İmam hatip lisesi say ısını 440’dan 1017’ye çıkardık. http://www.hur-
riyet.com.tr/egitim/28069550.asp. Accessed 15 June 2015.
Arayici, A. (1999). Kemalist Dönem Türkiye’sinde Eğitim Politikaları ve Köy Enstitüleri. İstanbul: 
Ceylan Yayınları.
Ata, B. (2000). The influence of an American educator (John Dewey) on the Turkish Educational 
System. The Turkish Yearbook of International Relations, 31, 119–130.
Ayas, R., & Tümer, G. (1994). Liseler için Din Kültürü ve Ahlak Bilgisi I [Religion and Ethics for 
High Schools I]. Ankara: Milli Egitim Basimevi [Ministry of Education Publications].
Bademci, G. (2006). First illustrations of female “neurosurgeons” in the fifteenth century by 
Serafeddin Sabuncuoglu. Neurocirugia, 17, 162–165.
Berk, O. (2007). Batilasma ve Ceviri (westernization and tranlastion). In T. Bora & M. Guntekingil 
(Eds), Modern Turkiye’de Siyasi Dusunce, V ol 3: Modernlesme ve Baticilik, (pp. 511–520). 
Istanbul: Iletisim.
Berkes, N. (1998/1964). The development of secularism in Turkey. London: C. Hurst & Publishers Ltd.
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 119 ---
95
Berkes, N. (2002). Türkiye’de çağdaşlaşma.[Turkey’s Coming of Age] . İstanbul: Yapı Kredi 
Publications.
Bilgi, S., & Ozsoy, S. (2005). John Dewey’s travelings into the project of Turkish modernity. In 
T. S. Popkewitz (Ed.), Inventing the modern self and John Dewey: Modernities and the travel-
ing of pragmatism in education (pp. 153–177). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Birol, S. (2012). 1961 Anayasasinda ifade ozgurlugu. Istanbul Universitesi Iletisim Fakultesi 
Dergisi, 43, 39–54.
Bohannon, J.  (2016). Update: Vacationing Turkish scholar arrested after her return. Science. 
doi:10.1126/science.aaf9817.
Caliskan, N. (2015). ODTU Tarihce: 1956–1980. Istanbul: Propoganda Yayinlari.
Cinar, A., Roy, S., & Yahya, M. (2012). Religious nationalism as a consequence of secularism. In 
A. Cinar & S. Roy (Eds.), Visualizing secularism and religion : Egypt, Lebanon, Turkey, India 
(pp. 1–22). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Retrieved from http://www.ebrary.com.
Davidson, N. (2006). Islam and the enlightenment. Socialist Review. http://socialistreview.org.
uk/304/islam-and-enlightenment. Accessed 4 Mar 2015.
Davison, A. (1998). Secularism and revivalism in Turkey: A hermeneutic interpretation . New 
Haven: Yale University Press.
Dere, M. (2008). Türkiye’de az ınlık okullar ı (1945–2007). [Minority Schools in Turkey].  
Unpublished Master Thesis Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü, Niğde University.
Dergisi, T. (1957). Liselerin yeni müfredat programı hakkında, Cilt: 20 Sayı: 976. Ankara: Milli Eğitim.
Devlet Planlama Teskilati (DPT). (1983). Milli Kültür Özel İhtisas Komisyonu Raporu, Yayın no: 
DPT: 1920-ÖİK: 300, Ankara.
Dewey, J. (1924a). From The Collected Works of John Dewey, 1882–1953, The Middle Works of John 
Dewey, 1899–1924, V olume 15: 1923–1924, Essays [Page mw.15.274, blank] [Page mw.15.275] 
https://chipbruce.files.wordpress.com/2008/10/dewey_turkey.pdf. Accessed 10 Apr 2015.
Dewey, J. (1924b). Secularizing a theocracy: Young Turkey and the Caliphate. New Republic, 40, 69–71.
Dewey, J. (1924c). Angora, the New. New Republic, 40, 169–170.
Dewey, J. (1924d). The Turkish Tragedy. New Republic, 40, 268–269.
Dewey, J. (1925). Foreign schools in Turkey. New Republic, 41, 40–42.
Dreyfuss, R. (2005). Devil’s game: How the United States helped unleash fundamentalist Islam . 
New York: Henry Holt and Company, LLC.
Durmus, Ö. Z. (2013). Cumhuriyet dönemi fen eğitimi dokümanlarında bilim konusunda değişim: 
Tarihsel yorumlamacı bir içerik analizi. Unpublished Master Thesis. Marmara University.
Edis, T. (1999). Cloning creationism in Turkey. Reports of the National Center for Science 
Education, 19, 30–35.
Edis, T., & BouJaoude, S. (2014). Rejecting materialism: Responses to modern science in the 
Muslim Middle East. In M. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, 
philosophy and science teaching (pp. 1663–1690). Dordrecht: Springer.
Eskicumali, A. (2003). E ğitim ve Toplumsal Değişme: Türkiye’nin Değişim Sürecinde E ğitimin 
Rolü (1923 – 1946). [Education and Social Change: The role of education in Turkey’s change 
process]. Boğaziçi Üniversitesi Eğitim Dergisi [Boğaziçi University Journal of Education], 19 
(2), 15–29.
Gay, P. (1970). The enlightenment: An interpretation. The rise of paganism . London: Weidenfeld 
and Nicolson.
Georgeon, F. (2006). Osmanli-Turk Modernlesmesi 1900–1930: Secilmis Makaleler  [ Ottoman- 
Turkish modernization: selected articles]. Istanbul: Yapi Kredi Kultur Sanat Yayincilik.
Gulalp, H. (2005). Enlightenment by fiat: Secularization and democracy in Turkey. Middle Eastern 
Studies, 41(3), 351–372.
Guleryuz, N. A. (2008). Turkiye’ye gelen cogu Yahudi kokenli Alman prosesorler ve Albert Einstein. 
Şalom. http://www.salom.com.tr/haber-64078- turkiyeye_gelen_cogu_yahudi_kokenli_alman_
profesorler_ve_albert_einst.html. Accessed 25 Apr 2016.
Gunal, İ. (2013). 50 soruda üniversite. [University in 50 questions].  İstanbul: Bilim ve Gelecek 
Yayınları.
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey

--- PAGE 120 ---
96
Gunal, S., & Gunal, I. (2011). Üniversitelerde örgütlenme deneyimi. In F.  Ercan & S.  Kurt 
Korkusuz (Eds.), Metalaşma ve İktidarın Bask ısındaki Üniversite  (pp.  555–564). İstanbul: 
Sosyal Araştırmalar Vakfı Publications.
Howard, D. A. (2001). History of Turkey. Westport: Greenwood Press. Retrieved from http://www.
ebrary.com.
Ihsanoglu, E. (2006). An overview of Ottoman scientific activities. http://www.muslimheritage.
com/uploads/An_Overview_of_Ottoman_Scientific_Activities1.pdf Accessed 26 Mar 2016.
Inal, K., Akkaymak, G., & Y ıldırım, D. (2014). The constructivist curriculum reform in Turkey 
in 2004 – In fact what is constructed? Journal for Critical Education Policy Studies, 12 (2), 
350–373.
Inonu, E. (1998). Anılar ve düşünceler, 1.cilt. İstanbul: Boyut Publications.
Israel, J. I. (2001). Radical enlightenment: Philosophy and the making of modernity 1650–1750 . 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Israel, J. I. (2006). Enlightenment contested: Philosophy, modernity, and the emancipation of man 
1670–1752. New York: Oxford University Press.
Israel, J. I. (2011). Democratic enlightenment: Philosophy, revolution, and human rights, 1750–
1790. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Karaomerlioglu, A. (2009). Koy Enstituleri. In T. Bora & M. Gultekingil (Eds.), Modern Turkiye’de 
Siyasi Dusunce, Kemalism (V ol. 2, pp. 283–293). Istanbul: Iletisim.
Kirby, F. (2000). Türkiye’de Köy Enstitüleri, 2. baskı, Ankara: Güldiken Yayınları.
Korkut, H. (2003). Turkiye’de cumhuriyet doneminde universite reformlari. Milli Egitim Dergisi, 
Sayi 160. http://dhgm.meb.gov.tr/yayimlar/dergiler/Milli_Egitim_Dergisi/160/korkut.htm. 
Accessed 5 May 2016.
Korlaelci, M. (2009). Positivist dusuncenin ithali. In T. Bora & M. Guntekingil (Eds.), Modern 
Turkiye’de Siyasi Dusunce: Cumhuriyete Devreden Dusunce Mirasi-Tanzimat ve Mesrutiyetin 
Birikimi (pp. 214–222). Istanbul: Iletisim.
Kucuk, B. H. (2012). Early enlightenment in Istanbul. San Diego: University of California.
Matthews, M. R. (2015a). Science teaching: The contribution of history and philosophy of science: 
20th anniversary revised and expanded edition (Second). New York: Routledge.
Matthews, M. R. (2015b). Reflections on 25 years of journal editorship. Science & Education, 24, 
749–805.
MEB (2006). Ilkogretim Fen ve Teknoloji Dersi Mufredati. http://ttkb.meb.gov.tr/program2.aspx. 
Accessed 25 Nov 2015.
Muftuoglu, O. (2012). Labor markets in the process of restructuring 4+4+4 formula. Education, 
Science Society Journal, 10(40), 25–33.
Mugaloglu, E. Z., & Bayram, H. (2009). Do religious values of prospective teachers affect their 
attitudes toward science teaching? Journal of Turkish Science Education, 6(3), 90–96.
Nielsen, R. (2016). Teaching evolution in the Middle East [Blog]. Nielsen Lab Blog. http://www.
nielsenlab.org/2016/02/teaching-evolution-in-the-middle-east/. Accessed 10 June 2016.
NRC (National Research Council). (1996). National science education standards . Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press.
Odatv. (2015). YOK’ten universitelere talimat Suriyelileri arastirmak yasak.  http://odatv.com/
suriyelileri-arastirmak-yasak-0605151200.html. Accessed 20 Nov 2015.
OECD. (2014). PISA 2012 Results in Focus: What 15-year-olds know and what they can do 
with what they know: Key Findings . http://www.oecd.org/pisa/keyfindings/pisa-2012-results- 
overview.pdf. Accessed 25 Nov 2015.
Oguzkan, A. F. (1990). Kuruluşunun 50. y ılında Köy Enstitüleri  (pg. 12–37). Ankara: E ğit-Der 
Publications.
Okcabol, R. (2005). Türkiye Eğitim Sistemi. [Turkish education system]. Ankara: Ütopya.
Oncu, A. (2007). Akademisyenler: Universite reform soyleminde bati. In T. Bora & M. Gultekingil 
(Eds.), Modern Turkiye’de siyasi dusunce, vol 3: Modernlesme ve Baticilik, (pp. 521–536). 
Istanbul: Iletisim.
Outram, D. (2013). The enlightenment: New approaches to European history . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
D. Peker and Ö. Taskin

--- PAGE 121 ---
97
Patiniotis, M., & Gavroglu, K. (2012). The sciences in Europe: Transmitting centers and the appro-
priating peripheries. In J. Renn (Ed.), The globalization of knowledge in history, (pp. 321–343). 
Edition Open Access: Max Planck Research Library for the History and and Development of 
Knowledge.
Peker, D., Comert, G.  G., & Kence, A. (2010). Three decades of anti-evolution campaign and 
its results: Turkish undergraduates’ acceptance and understanding of the biological evolution 
theory. Science and Education, 19(6–8), 739–755.
Santoro, D. A., & Dorn, C. (2012). A vital, free, independent, and lay republic. In R. Garlitz & 
L. Jarvinen (Eds.), Teaching America to the world and the world to America: Education and 
foreign relations since 1870. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Sayın, U., & Kence, A. (1999). Islamic scientific creationism: A new challenge in Turkey. Reports 
of the National Center for Science Education, 19, 18–29.
Somel, S. A. (2005). Christian community schools during the Ottoman reform period. In E. Özdalga 
(Ed.), Late Ottoman Society: Intellectual legacy (pp. 257–276). New York: RoutledgeCurzon.
Somer, M. (2007). Moderate Islam and secularist opposition in Turkey: Implications for the world, 
Muslims and secular democracy. Third World Quarterly, 28(7), 1271–1289.
Steinbach, U. (1984). The impact of Ataturk on Turkey’s political culture science World War II. In J. M. 
Landau (Ed.), Ataturk and the modernization of Turkey (pp. 77–87). Boulder: Westview Press.
Taskın, O. (2005, October 8). New science curriculum in Turkey. Cumhuriyet Newspaper, Bilim 
Teknik, 968, 20–22.
Taskin, O. (2011). Can willingness and hands-on work together? Teaching biological evolution 
and dealing with barriers. Evolution Education and Outreach, 4(3), 467–477.
Taskin, O. (2013). Pre-service science teachers’ acceptance of biological evolution in Turkey. 
Journal of Biological Education, 47(4), 200–207.
Tekeli, İ., & Ilkin, S. (1993). Osmanlı İmparatorluğu’nda eğitim ve bilgi üretim sisteminin oluşumu 
ve dönüşümü. Ankara: Türk Tarih Yüksek Kurumu Yayınları.
Toker, N., & Tekin, S. (2007). Batici siyasi dusuncenin karakteristikleri ve evreleri: “Kamusuz 
Cumhuriyet”ten “Kamusuz Demokrasi’ye”, In T.  Bora & M.  Gultekingil (Eds.) , Modern 
Turkiye’de siyasi dusunce, vol 3: Modernlesme ve Baticilik (pp. 82–106). Istanbul: Iletisim.
Toprak, Z. (2011). Darwinizmden Ateizme Türkiye‟ de Tarih Eğitiminin Evrimi. Toplumsal Tarih, 
216, 20–33.
Turkmen, B. (2012). Islamic visibilities, intimacies, and counter publics in the secular public sphere. 
In A. Cinar & S. Roy (Eds.), Visualizing secularism and religion: Egypt, Lebanon, Turkey, India. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Retrieved from http://www.ebrary.com.
Ugur, M. (2016). Academic freedom under threat in Turkey. Times Higher Education.  https://
www.timeshighereducation.com/features/academic-freedom-under-threat-in-turkey. Accessed 
2 June 2016.
Weiker, W. F. (1981). The modernization of Turkey: From Ataturk to the present day. New York: 
Holmes & Meier Publishers Inc.
Yalcinkaya, M. A. (2015). Learned patriots: Debating science, state, and society in the nineteenth 
century Ottoman Empire. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Yildirim, N. (2014). A view of the history of the Istanbul Faculty of Medicine. http://istanbultip.
istanbul.edu.tr/en/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/historyofimf.pdf. Accessed 11 May 2016.
Yılmaz, A., & Morgil, İ. (1992). Türkiye’de Fen Öğretiminin Genel Bir Değerlendirmesi Sonuçları 
ve Öneriler. Hacettepe Üniversitesi Eğitim Fakültesi Dergisi, 7, 269–278.
3 The Enlightenment Tradition and Science Education in Turkey