Title: Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal
Pages: 122-159

--- PAGE 122 ---
99
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_4
Chapter 4 
Cultural Studies of Science Education: 
An Appraisal             
Christine L. McCarthy
4.1  Introduction
The Cultural Studies of Science Education (CSSE) became prominent in 2006 with 
the launching of the Springer journal of the same name. The field has in the past 
decade developed a congeries of inter-related theses about the nature of modern sci-
ence as a human activity and correspondingly of science education. Yet some of the 
theses most deeply entrenched in CSSE scholarship actively obstruct the role of 
scientific inquiry in providing genuine knowledge1 of the dynamic interactions that 
constitute the world (or the universe, reality, existence, or simply, what is).2 Science 
education, if it is to serve both its intellectual and social purposes, must be under -
girded by a sound conception of the general nature of the process of modern scien-
tific inquiry, and an understanding of the nature and value of scientific knowledge.
Developing a thorough knowledge of the determining factors of physical and 
social problems through the process of scientific inquiry is a necessary condition for 
developing, testing and refining active solutions to those problems. Developing a 
widely shared cultural consensus on the value of scientific knowledge and hence of 
scientific method is also necessary, if in a democratic society the political will is to 
be gathered to take social action based on that knowledge. One of the cultural pur -
poses of primary and secondary science education is to lay the groundwork neces -
sary for building that social consensus.
But, there is currently a disturbing disinclination, in some quarters, to see mod -
ern scientific inquiry and knowledge as relevant to solving social/cultural/physical 
problems. Cordero, in 2001, states that modern science offers an account the world 
1 Epistemological questions regarding the characterization of knowledge are taken up later in the 
chapter.
2 See McCarthy 2014 and McCarthy 2017.
C.L. McCarthy (*) 
College of Education, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
e-mail: christine-mccarthy@uiowa.edu

--- PAGE 123 ---
100
that in its detail and coherence is so far superior to other accounts that “A scientific 
culture is correspondingly on the rise, centered on this [scientific] picture and its 
attendant style of thinking” (p.  2001). Cordero also notes that “Opposition to 
according science special intellectual prominence is not in short supply” (p. 18). It 
seems that currently the opposition to the knowledge generated by modern science 
is in many quarters culturally ascendant. I will argue that the prevalence in science 
education of erroneous post-modern interpretations of the nature of science, the 
nature of knowledge, and the nature of truth contribute to the social problem of 
cultural disdain for, or neglect of, modern science, its practices and its findings.
Wolpert (1992) argues that the scientific attitude, the inclination to engage in 
extended experimental inquiry to reach well-warranted beliefs about the world, is 
an attitude that generally requires cultural inculcation. Given the stringent norms of 
science proper, Wolpert argues, the scientific attitude is unlikely to arise naturally, 
in the absence of extensive education in and about science. That education is diffi -
cult to achieve, because understanding scientific inquiry requires understanding 
complex sets of abstract theoretical formulations about the dynamics of the world. 
The scientific knowledge about the world that is achieved tends to be highly coun -
terintuitive. While it is not to be expected that all students will become scientists, in 
a modern society all students should develop a basic comprehension of the scientific 
inquiry and knowledge upon which the society depends. In the absence of a general 
commitment to high quality science education, the general scientific competence in 
a society is likely to be insufficient to promote, and to demand, the use of scientific 
knowledge as the essential guide to social policy.
It is hard to say which is more incongruous, the turn against modern science in 
scientifically advanced countries, or the same phenomenon in countries most 
urgently in need of scientific advancement. The global spread of the anti-science 
attitude has the potential to lead to social, environmental and/or economic disasters 
of unprecedented proportions.
In Part I, I briefly set out a significant social problem, global warming, that is 
exacerbated by anti-science ideologies, and I introduce the cultural studies of sci -
ence education (CSSE). In Part II, I examine prominent post-modern theses com -
monly held in, and characteristic of, the field of CSSE. I argue that acceptance of 
these post-modern theses is antithetical to the development of genuine scientific 
knowledge, and to the application of scientific method and knowledge to urgent 
social/cultural crises. In Part III, I argue that there is a set of philosophical positions 
that is conceptually essential to the understanding of genuinely modern science, and 
antithetical to central CSSE theses. This set includes naturalism, ontological real -
ism, a correspondence conception of truth, and a naturalistic conception of 
knowledge.3
3 I shall use the term ‘modern science’ to indicate inquiries and the results thereof that conform to 
the philosophical/social norms of science. The term ‘modern science’ is used normatively, refer-
ring to science properly so-called.
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 124 ---
101
4.1.1  Anti-science in Contemporary U.S. Culture
Recent news reports in the United States on global warming should be alarming to 
proponents of modern science. The scientific consensus on the human causation of 
global warming is well established. A comprehensive account of the scientific con-
sensus is available, in Stocker et al. ( 2014). Despite the scientific consensus, anti-  
science ideology in the U.S.  Federal government is politically influential. Major 
U.S.  Federal House and Senate committees charged with deciding on issues of 
national science policy are led by politicians who reject the consensus of modern 
science, generally for religious reasons (see Bradley 2011). The position of Senator 
Jim Inhofe (R., Oklahoma) is an example. Inhofe is the Chair of the Senate 
Committee on the Environment and Public Works. Inhofe “has called climate 
change ‘the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people’ and compared 
the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] to the Gestapo” (2014 Nov 15 From 
the Economist, Climate Change: Dealing with Denial).
Donald Trump, while a Presidential candidate, provided another example. During 
an interview by the editorial board of The Washington Post, Trump stated:
I think there’s a change in weather. I am not a great believer in man-made climate change. 
I’m not a great believer. There is certainly a change in weather that goes—if you look, they 
had global cooling in the 1920s and now they have global warming, although now they 
don’t know if they have global warming … Perhaps there’s a minor effect, but I’m not a big 
believer in man-made climate change.4
Other highly placed deniers of human caused global warming include: 
Congressman Paul Ryan (R.  Wisconsin), House Majority Leader; Senator Lisa 
Murkowski (R.  Alaska), Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources; 
Congressman Fred Upton (R.  Michigan), Chair, House Energy and Commerce 
Committee; Senator Mitch McConnell (R. Kentucky), Senate Majority leader; and 
Congressman Lamar Smith, Chair of the House Committee on Science, Space and 
Technology.5 The anti-science attitude of corporate entities primarily concerned 
with expanding the wealth and power of the corporation, though deplorable, is not 
surprising. But it is surprising that voters in the U.S. would repeatedly elect persons 
with strong anti-science platforms to positions in the federal government. Cultural 
antipathy toward science is a troubling state of affairs, when the effective ameliora-
tion of current social problems is the overall goal. Though the causal factors contrib-
uting to the anti-science ideology are many and diverse, one point of intervention 
4 https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2016/03/21/a-transcripteditorial board 
-of-donald-trumps-meeting-with-the-washington-post-editorial-board/
5 For a fuller account, see Dunlap and McCright (2014), Merchant (2015), and also
http://www.joanneoellers.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Republican-and-Democratic-
Views-on-Climate.pdf
http://www.environmentmagazine.org/Archives/BackIssues/September-October 2008/dunlap-
full.html
http://thinkprogress.org/climate-denier-caucus-114th-congress/ http://thinkprogress.org/cli-
mate/2013/12/11/3045841/house-science-hearing-weather-climate/
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 125 ---
102
could be the science education efforts in the U.S. public schools. Yet current trends 
in science education, arising in the CSSE literature, are inconsistent with the nature 
of science, properly conceived.
4.1.2  Cultural Studies of Science: Re-conceptualizing Science 
and Science Education
Ken Tobin, in his ‘Connecting science education to a world in crisis’ (Tobin 2015), 
maintains that the global crises currently facing the world cannot be adequately 
addressed unless science educators adopt a new position on the logic of science, a 
position which Tobin calls “multilogicality”. Tobin’s multilogicality, intended to 
provide for openness to multiple and diverse cultural beliefs in the context of sci -
ence education, seriously misconstrues the nature of modern science.
Tobin makes the claim that, currently, much of science education suffers from an 
outdated “adherence the tenets of crypto-positivism”  (Tobin 2015), and that this 
creates problems for research in the social sciences.6 For example, an “over reliance 
on statistical analyses leads to oversimplified modes that strip away context and are 
reductive…. Hypotheses and associated statistical tests support causal models that 
rarely predict social conduct…” (Tobin 2015).
In response to the inadequacies of what are conceived as positivistic scientific 
methods, Tobin develops the notion of “a multilogical methodology that embraces 
incommensurability, polysemia, subjectivity, and polyphonia as a means of preserv-
ing the integrity and potential of knowledge systems to generate and maintain dis -
parate perspectives, outcomes and implications for practice” (Tobin 2015).
The stated aim of a multilogical method raises concern. Multilogical method is 
described as “a means of preserving the…potential of knowledge systems to gener -
ate and maintain disparate perspectives, outcomes and implications for practice…” 
(Tobin 2015). The project of acquiring an objective scientific knowledge of the 
world seems to be denied by Tobin. Tobin seeks to maintain disparity in beliefs 
about the world, and considers this state of confusion about the interactive dynamics 
of the world to be a good thing, and the goal of scientific inquiry. Why?
The answer seems to be Tobin’s rejection of “power discourses“. Tobin writes:
In such a multilogical model, power discourses such as Western medicine carry no greater 
weight than complementary knowledge systems that may have been marginalized in a 
social world in which monosemia is dominant. (Tobin 2015).
The consequences of Tobin’s re-conception of science can be dire. Consider, for 
example, its consequences in the current social crisis due to the spread of the Zika 
virus by the Aedes eagypti mosquito. Modern medicine (sometimes called “Western” 
medicine, despite its global range) has identified a connection between the Zika 
6 For an account of the all-to-common misconstrual of positivism in education writing, see 
Matthews (2004).
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 126 ---
103
virus and the development in utero of microcephaly in infants. Alternative beliefs 
about this threat to health may arise from “ways of knowing” other than scientific 
inquiry. Unwarranted beliefs about the causes of the microcephaly epidemic will 
serve to exacerbate the crisis. Tobin, though, “accept[s] poly-ontology (i.e., the co- 
occurrence of multiple realities/many ways to answer the question: What hap -
pened?)” (Tobin 2015). While it is possible that many different and conflicting 
opinions about the causes of the Zika situation can be generated, it remains the case 
that the causal interactions that constitute the medical crisis are real, and can be 
known, in principle, via scientific inquiry. It should not need stating, at this point in 
the progress of modern science, that only inquiry that is conducted according to 
scientific norms has the potential to ameliorate the problem: at a given time there 
may be more than one scientific answer to the question, and all such answers will 
depend upon social and political support in order to be acted upon. But none of this 
is to say that all opinions on the etiology and means of transmission of the Zika 
virus are equally true or worthy of funding.
What are the conceptions of the nature of scientific inquiry and of scientific 
knowledge that are advanced in the theoretical literature in the cultural studies of 
science education? I will address this question next, and argue that the central philo-
sophic theses underlying the cultural studies of science and science education actu-
ally undermine development of true beliefs about the nature, methods and results of 
science.
4.2  Postmodernism and the Cultural Studies of Science 
Education
4.2.1  The Postmodern World-View
The postmodern worldview presents numerous variations on its basic theses. I will 
set out several post-modern theses that are prominent in the context of science and 
science education.
In The Reenchantment of Science: Postmodern Proposals , Griffin calls for a 
“constructive post-modernism” that will reverse the disenchantment of the world 
wrought by modern science and scientific knowledge; this disenchantment is said to 
be due to “the denial to nature of all subjectivity, all experience, all feeling…” 
(Griffin, in Griffin, (ed.,) 1988b, p. 2). Harman (in Griffin, (ed.), 1988a) sets out “…
the ‘secret’ [that] has been more and more openly shared: Experienced reality does 
not conform to the ‘reality’ they taught us in science class; the ‘scientific worldview’ 
is not an adequate guide for living life or for managing a society”  (Harman 1988, 
p.122, emphasis in original). Harman calls for development of a “complementary 
science” that would “take as its particular focus subjective experience, conscious -
ness…purpose, value choices, ...alternate states of consciousness, [and] particularly 
‘deep intuition’” (Harman 1988, p. 123), among a long list of other subjective mind- 
based foci.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 127 ---
104
Harman states: “Whereas the implicit assumption in positivistic science is that 
the basic stuff of the universe is matter-energy, this alternate approach makes a dif-
ferent assumption: The basic stuff of the universe exhibits two fundamentally differ-
ent kinds of properties: matter-energy properties and mind-spirit properties ” 
(Harman 1988, p. 123, emphasis in the original) . The post-modern view Harman 
promotes returns to the substantial dualism of Descartes, a duality of Mind and 
Matter, somehow conjoined and interactive. This view is unsupported by modern 
science, and thus is counterproductive in the teaching of science.
Farrell (1996) takes a different tack, critically examining the historical develop-
ment of post-modernism, and analyzing its radical departure from the world-view of 
the modern period. Farrell posits three potential sources of power that serve to 
determine the beliefs of persons. These are: (1) the world; (2) the self; and (3) the 
culture. According to Farrell, in a modern society, the principal determinative factor 
is considered to be the world (reality, what is). In a postmodern society the principal 
determinative factor is considered to be the culture (cultural practices, linguistic 
discourse, established beliefs). Farrell finds this change in emphasis to be the “stan-
dard move” in postmodern thought. Postmodernists emphasize culture as the deter-
minative factor in fixing belief, and to such a radical extent that the other two factors 
largely drop out of the picture.
Farrell gives a number of examples of this, but one is particularly pertinent: “Did 
the scientist match his beliefs with what reality is like? No, says Rorty. He made his 
beliefs conform with what conversational practices had frozen as the background 
that fixed what everyone would count as real” (Farrell 1996, p. 249). For the post -
modernist thinker, “all determinative power flows to the position of cultural practice 
and interpretation” (Farrell 1996, p. 249). Postmodernism is “inflating the role of 
cultural practices so radically that world and self virtually disappear as constraints 
on those practices or as measures of their success” (Farrell 1996, p. 249).
Farrell’s description of postmodernism fits well with the thesis common in the 
CSSE literature that all forms of knowledge, and even scientific knowledge, are 
mere dogmatically held cultural beliefs; there is little if any place for the world in 
driving theory commitment or theory change; it is all a matter of intracultural nego-
tiation. The culturally-set beliefs need not be subjected to the continual critique, via 
the experimental testing that is definitive of genuine scientific knowledge. In all 
cultures, the dissemination of knowledge is necessarily a matter of cultural prod -
ucts—e.g., books, journals, web sites, etc.—but, the process of achieving knowl -
edge via ongoing scientific experimental inquiry distinguishes modern scientific 
culture from postmodern culture.
4.2.2  Re-constructing Science
The radical re-conceptualization of the concept of science and the subsequent re-  
construction of science education are key intellectual aims of the literature that 
makes up cultural studies of science education. (See, for example, Irwin & Bednarz 
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 128 ---
105
(1998), Roth & Barton (2004), LaRochelle et al. ( 2009) and Sefa Dei (2011).) Roth 
et al. ( 2001) set out their view succinctly. “Science is viewed as a discourse that is a 
relatively recent activity of humankind, the goal being to make sense of a universe 
of phenomena in terms of knowledge that is viable” (Roth, Tobin & Ritchie 2001, 
p. 218).
Examined closely, this statement provides a great deal of information about the 
CSSE conceptualization of science. “Science is viewed as a discourse…”. Science 
is conceived as a culturally based set of discursive practices that human beings 
sometimes engage in. The authors make no mention of the activity of experimental 
inquiry. The goal of a discursive science is “to make sense of a universe of phenom-
ena”. The authors make no mention of the discovery of real causal relationships 
existing among thing/events in the world, which determine the occurrent and pos -
sible interactions in a localized natural system. The goal of science, as described by 
Roth, Tobin, and Ritchie, is subjective; the goal is to develop ideas that make sense 
to certain persons, or, more broadly, to certain cultures. But, in the absence of the 
ongoing experimental testing characteristic of modern scientific inquiry, there is an 
endless number of different and mutually exclusive sets of ideas that might “make 
sense”, subjectively, to different persons and cultural groups. Absent commitment 
to modern science, individuals and cultures can be expected to develop and accept 
radically different ideas about interactivities that constitute the universe. And, 
absent the commitment to modern scientific inquiry, with its acceptance of the fal -
libility of knowledge, demonstrably false beliefs are likely to be dogmatically held.
Roth et al. ( 2001) describe the universe as a universe of phenomena. The term 
‘phenomena‘serves to indicate the presence of active meaning-making subjects 
whose interpretation of experienced events is in large part determined by their own 
conceptual structures, or by the culturally inculcated core beliefs. It is the subjects’ 
experiences that must be made to make sense; the universe as it is in itself apart 
from the contribution of the experiencing subject is considered to be inaccessible. 
As such, it cannot be objectively known, nor even known to exist.
The concept of ‘knowledge’ appears in Roth, Tobin and Ritchie’s conception of 
science. They specify that this knowledge is to be “viable”, and make no mention of 
its needing to be judged to be true, or likely to be true, on the basis of compelling 
reasons. The concept of viability as the defining characteristic of knowledge is a 
thesis developed in von Glasersfeld’s (1993) ‘Questions and Answers about Radical 
Constructivism’ where he writes “Truth in constructivism, as I keep repeating, is 
replaced by viability” (Glasersfeld 1993, p. 25). When knowledge is conceived as 
any belief-system that meets the criterion of viability, it follows that any longstand-
ing, “time-tested” system of cultural belief must be counted as knowledge. As each 
culture has its own historically developed body of such beliefs, each culture has its 
own knowledge. The body of cultural belief, developed by any sort of method and 
tested only by its endurance over time, is to be considered, in the postmodern/cul -
tural studies worldview, to be the “science” of that culture.
On this view, “science” is any process occurring in a culture that is causally 
active in developing the longstanding beliefs of the culture. It matters not what 
methods are employed to fix upon the body of belief that comes to be accepted by 
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 129 ---
106
the larger cultural community. The method of fixing belief could involve the re-  
telling of traditional stories, or the study of revelations believed to reside in a sacred 
text. Or, the fixed belief may have come in a dream, or by intuition. All methods are 
to be held equally productive of “knowledge”, in the sense of longstanding cultural 
belief, and therefore all are held to be equally “scientific”, in the new sense.
In the CSSE literature, social justice is taken to require that long-standing belief 
systems of all cultures be respected equally as bona fide knowledges, particularly by 
the “Western” scientific culture. This is an odd requirement. It is motivated, it seems, 
by the idea that long-standing belief systems must be getting something right, given 
that the societies in question have persisted, “successfully”, for very long 
time-spans.
Modern science, in contrast, is recognized to be a quite recent form of activity. 
And, because of the commitment of modern science to continual testing and revi -
sion of the body of knowledge acquired, both the methods of inquiry and the con -
clusions of inquiry are continually changing. The most current science of the present 
day is substantially different from the science of previous centuries. So, the criterion 
of “long-standing-ness” would serve to rule out modern science as knowledge. 
What is in fact the most advanced knowledge would thus be judged not to be knowl-
edge at all. Yet, in the cultural studies of science education literature, calls are made 
for the inclusion of long-standing cultural belief systems and methods of “inquiry”, 
in the science education classroom (see McCarthy 2014).
It is considered necessary in the CSSE literature to hold that there is a multiplic-
ity of culturally based knowledges, many of which will be mutually inconsistent, 
and thus mutually exclusive, or would be, if the concept of correspondence truth 
were in the picture. It is clearly true that fundamentally different conceptions of the 
dynamic interactions of the world exist, in the various cultures and sub-cultures cre-
ated by human beings. But the fact of culturally based epistemic diversity does not 
determine the cognitive value of the accepted conceptions of the world.
The CSSE pedagogical implication is that, in science education, a rich array of 
different knowledges should be offered in the classroom, from which each student 
may choose. The only criterion of choice, once a correspondence theory of truth is 
rejected, is that the chosen knowledge system either has utility for or makes sense 
to the individual; these are subjective criteria. It is quite likely, and understandable, 
that the familiar knowledge (belief-system) of one’s culture of origin will be chosen 
over modern science. Such choices, it is held, must be fully respected, as a matter of 
an ethical obligation of respect for persons and for cultures.
Given the technological products of modern science, humans now occupy a 
globe in which travel has become relatively easy. “Border-crossing” between and 
among cultures, both literally and figuratively, is a common phenomenon. Different 
cultures, formerly geographically isolated, which may have historically developed 
different knowledges, values, and ways of living, are increasingly coming to occupy 
the same geographical regions. This can lead to assimilation, in which the cultural 
“borders” gradually disappear. But it can also lead to cultural conflict, which may 
develop into domination, exploitation, and violence, and even to attempts at cultural 
genocide. This state of cultural antagonism is one of the most serious of the dynamic 
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 130 ---
107
interactions facing global society, and may become catastrophically destructive. 
How is the problem of cultural conflict to be addressed?
In the post-modern world-view, and in cultural studies of science education, the 
solution is thought to require a radical change in the naturally human antagonistic 
response to cultural difference. An important goal of education, and a fortiori, of 
science education, on this view, is to bring about the appreciation and celebration of 
interpersonal difference. Two things are conflated, however: respect for persons, 
and respect for persons’ beliefs. Respect for persons is an essential social ethical 
norm, a judgment that can be warranted by reference to inquiry into the well-being 
of persons in a social context. But this ethical norm does not require adopting a non- 
critical attitude toward the beliefs, practices, or knowledge assertions of those per -
sons. Persons are to be treated with respect. In contrast, the actions, belief, and 
assertions of knowledge of all persons are to be subjected to ongoing critique, and 
continual testing, through modern scientific inquiry, for evidence of truth. Such cri-
tique is important if social problems are to be ameliorated; and, such critique is 
itself a form of respect for others as rational persons.7
Given the multi-logicality and multi-science commitments of CSSE curricula, 
students are likely to accept that making legitimate value judgments with respect to 
belief systems is not possible, and that efforts at evaluation are morally deplorable. 
This is a mistake. Comparative evaluative judgments of belief systems are possible, 
via scientific method (see Sect. 4.3).
Gellner identifies two approaches to the evaluation of socially accepted beliefs: 
re-endorsement theories and selector theories. Re-endorsement theorists “after pro-
found reflection, reach the conclusion that all is well with [the] existing bank of 
beliefs, or at least with a substantial part of it, simply in virtue of it being the exist-
ing bank of beliefs” (Gellner 1974, p.  46). Gellner gives an example of a re-  
endorsement form of evaluation, built upon the principle of natural selection. The 
argument “could run as follows: beliefs only survive if true. Hence the bulk of time- 
tested beliefs of any society must be correct. Hence it is wrong to be doubtful of the 
whole bulk of local convictions. All in all, they must be sound” (Gellner 1974, 
p. 47). Re-endorsement theorists “claim to have found some reasons for supposing 
that current beliefs, simply in virtue of being part of the existing bank of ideas, are 
sound. No outside endorsement is required, they claim” (Gellner 1974, p. 47).
This is the reasoning that underlies the CSSE view of the assessment of claims to 
have knowledge. Gellner argues against such reasoning, and concludes that evalua-
tion of the cognitive legitimacy of socially accepted banks of belief requires the 
selector theory approach. Selector theories:
set up some criterion, some touchstone or sifter, which is to sort out the cognitive sheep 
from the goats. It is of the essence of this approach that the principle of selection claims to 
be independent of the current and local set of beliefs, to stand outside them and to be 
endowed with an authority external to that set (Gellner 1974, p. 47).
7 On this issue of respectful disagreement see, among others, Siegel (1997).
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 131 ---
108
Gellner give an example of a selector theory: “beliefs are sound in so far as they are 
arrived at by the methods of natural science, which consist of (let us say) accurate 
observation, and the acceptance of theories only if well-supported by such observa-
tions” (Gellner 1974, p.47). Gellner’s distinction captures the difference between 
the cultural studies mode of evaluation of bodies of belief and the evaluation of 
bodies of belief characteristic of modern science.
4.2.3  The “Sciences” of Culturally Distinct Peoples
The CSSE thesis of “multi-cultural science“, or, alternatively, “multi-science”, is 
problematic. One problem with adopting this re-construction of science is that the 
move is thoroughly destructive of the communicative usefulness of the term ‘sci -
ence’. This is because when a term is given an extension that includes radically 
different and mutually exclusive activities and things/events in the world, the term 
loses its meaning. It can no longer serve to refer to some particular sort of thing/
event, nor can it indicate a particular meaning to other persons. The term loses its 
intellectual function of marking a particular concept that has a place in a logically 
connected network of meanings.
It might be argued that this is a mere inconvenience, easily remedied by system-
atically qualifying the term ‘science’—e.g., to speak of “modern Eurocentric sci -
ence” and contrast this science with any number of culturally specific sciences, e.g., 
indigenous Blackfoot science, or indigenous African science. But this misses the 
point. If “science” is the overarching linguistic/cultural category, its subcategories 
should share features in common that mark them as forms of the broader category 
of science. When there are fundamental differences in meaning of the subcatego -
ries, the meaning of the term ‘science’ is attenuated to the point of near vacuity. 
Once the extension of the term ‘science’ is accepted, the body of religious dogma of 
various Christian fundamentalists can legitimately be called “creation science”, 
even though there is nothing in the methods of inquiry that qualifies this body of 
religious belief as a science.
The term ‘science’ has long served as a technical term with a specific meaning. 
With the cultural studies of science education’s revision of the meaning, we now 
have two mutually exclusive alternative meanings, the standard meaning, and the 
cultural studies of science education meaning. The CSSE reconceptualization brings 
to the term ‘science’ an indefinitely large number of possible specific meanings. The 
term ‘science’ has been associated in the cultural studies usage with so many funda-
mentally different specific meanings that, to be useful at all, the term must be quali-
fied. I will use the term ‘modern science’ to mark one conception of science, and the 
term ‘post-modern science’ to mark the indefinitely ambiguous re-conception 
developed in the cultural studies of science education field. The same point applies 
to the term ‘knowledge’; it is necessary to distinguish “modern scientific knowl -
edge” from other forms of “knowledge” that are claimed, e.g., beliefs one accepts 
on the strength of dreams or scriptures, etc..
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 132 ---
109
The CSSE re-construction, along with the adoption of a re-endorsement approach 
to evaluation of cultural beliefs, brings an evaluative relativism to the classic demar-
cation question in the philosophy of science. The demarcation question asks, by 
what criteria is genuine science to be distinguished from pseudo-science, from non- 
science, and from just plain nonsense? With the cultural studies conceptual innova-
tion of multi-science, and more recently, multi-logic, the demarcation question is 
abandoned. In the cultural studies of science education, there are no criteria that 
allow the demarcation of modern scientific inquiry and knowledge about the 
dynamic causal inter-relations in the world from culturally accepted belief-systems 
that are inconsistent with modern science.
4.2.3.1  Indigenous Knowledges
Modern science, which is often said to have begun in Europe, (a view which disre-
gards the myriad outside cultural influences on European cultural development) is 
considered in the cultural studies of science education to be a form of thinking that 
is deeply alien to persons of non-Western cultural origin. This diverse group includes 
all indigenous peoples,8 and all persons of a non-European, non-Caucasian ancestry. 
It includes even “indigenous” persons and persons of non-Western ancestry who 
were born, raised, live and/or work in Western cultures. (See McCarthy 2014, 
p. 1938–1946.)
This is the thesis of cognitive essentialism. The assumption of this thesis is that 
human beings are essentially different, constitutionally different, from one another, 
in many ways, but in particular with respect to cognition and affect. There are 
thought to be “different ways of knowing” that are characteristic of distinct sub -
classes of the general biological category of homo sapiens. In the cultural studies 
view, the cognitive/affective differences are not merely culturally learned, and thus 
familiar, ways of thinking, feeling and valuing. These differences are genetically 
inherited, due to the long-standing cultural isolation of certain peoples. But this is a 
belief that is not warranted by modern science.
The thesis is, moreover, morally odious. The practical consequences of wide -
spread adoption of and action on the thesis would be harmful, in major respects, to 
those persons deemed to be culturally and/or constitutionally ill-suited to the study 
of modern science. The science education offered to non-Caucasian persons would 
be limited by the perceived need to provide a culturally relevant curriculum, one 
that incorporates the culturally accepted beliefs—the “knowledge”—of each per -
son’s culture. This would have the further effect of denying to non-Caucasian per-
sons equitable access to participation in science-based economic and cultural 
opportunities. The differentiation of science education curriculum would also likely 
8 The meaning of the term ‘indigenous’ is conveniently left vague, so much so that the term can be 
applied to virtually any group of people. The connotation is that indigenous peoples somehow 
belong to a particular geographical area, by virtue of having occupied that area in relative isolation, 
from time immemorial.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 133 ---
110
have deleterious effects on the self-conception of those who arset out their view 
succinctlye provided with “special” science education. The “multi-science” curricu-
lum, promulgated as a special benefit, designed to assist the non-Caucasian student 
to understand and to be able to function within the constraints of “Western” modern 
science, is actually a particularly detrimental form of crypto-racism.
But it is clear that this is the position generally accepted by scholars in the cul -
tural studies of science education field. For example, Elmesky ( 2011) takes it as 
given that persons of African ancestry, even those whose families have been long 
resident in cultures advanced in the practice of modern science, are alienated on a 
fundamental level from the patterns of thinking that characterize modern science.9
In Theory of African Metaphysics,  Nichodemus provides details about the sup -
posed “African” way of knowing. It is inconsistent with modern science. The author 
focuses considerable attention on the African commitment to the principle of causa-
tion. And gives a chilling example:
In the African context, when the African asserts that the witch has killed her (the African) 
child what she is merely asserting is that the death of her child is an effect traceable to a 
cause in this case, the witch. The African understands that there must have been contact 
between her child and the witch. This contact is believed to be metaphysical. Among 
Africans, it is widely believed that the witch makes her contact by the help of an “invisible” 
rope…only the ‘gifted’ or the ‘seers’ can see this invisible rope used by witches. (Nicodemus 
2013, p. 71.)
Nichodemus quotes Omoregbe ( 1990), to generalize the African causal principle: 
“There is no action without a cause, and the cause is always an agent or some agents 
utilizing some forces” Nichodemus 2013, p. 108). African philosophy involves the 
rejection of modern science. It is, she writes,
a fundamental error of modern science, which is at the basis of modern medicine to assume 
that it has a comprehensive grasp of all that there is in reality, so it can state that whatever 
is not analyzable and explicable by its standards is not real or does not exist. (Nichodemus 
2013, p. 109).
The African healer is reported to have access to important other ways of knowing, 
that go beyond the evidence of the sensory mode, and into the clairvoyant mode, 
where telepathy, clairvoyance and precognition are the principal means of divina -
tion. (Nichodemus 2013, p. 110). The author’s use of the term ‘African’ makes it 
clear that every person native to the continent of Africa, who is raised in a traditional 
community, is taken to share the same cognitive stance.10
It is asserted that the incompatibility of modern science with the ways of think -
ing, being and doing of Indigenous peoples is so severe that to teach modern science 
to these peoples can constitute a form of intellectual colonialism. “[I]n many educa-
tional settings where Western modern science is taught, it is taught at the expense of 
indigenous science, which may precipitate charges of epistemological hegemony 
and cultural imperialism” (Snively and Corsiglia 2001, p. 7). Avoiding such charges 
9 For similar views, see Meyer and Crawford ( 2011), Ogawa (1995 and 1998), Roth (2009), Sefa 
Dei (2011) and Ritskes (2011).
10 See also Metallic (2009).
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 134 ---
111
while teaching modern science would be difficult, since Snively and Corsiglia fol -
low Ogawa’s (1995) view that “every culture has its own science”, which is the 
culture’s indigenous science (Snively and Corsiglia 2001, p.  7). I will examine 
below several representative examples of the belief-systems of Indigenous peoples, 
in the process of revealing the inconsistency of those belief systems with the knowl-
edge resulting from methods of modern scientific inquiry.
Pavlik (2014) provides a thorough explication of the orthodox traditional cultural 
belief system of the Navaho people. His account, he states, is vouchsafed by Navaho 
traditionalists, and arises from Pavlik’s 19 years of immersion in the Navaho cul -
ture, as teacher and student and participant. The orthodox traditional Navaho knowl-
edge system, according to Pavlik, derives from a time before contact with outside 
cultural forces and Judeo-Christian religions. Drawing on early anthropological 
research, Pavlik writes that “It was a time when the Navaho people followed only 
the teachings of the ‘Holy People’, the Yeis. It was a time when they saw themselves 
intimately connected to, and part of, their sacred land and the other living beings 
with which they shared that land” (Pavlik 2014, p. 7).
Pavlik describes his work as “a study in the traditional [ecological] knowledge 
(TEK) of the Navaho people…how they viewed the natural world, their relation 
with the Animal People, and very specifically, with carnivores or predators” (Pavlik 
2014, p.15). Pavlik quotes Berkes’ (1999) definition of TEK; it is the “‘cumulative 
body of knowledge, practice, and belief, evolving by adaptive processes and handed 
down through generations by cultural transmission, about the relationship of living 
beings (including humans) with one another and their environment” (Berkes  1999, 
p.  8, quoted in Pavlik 2014, p.  15). Pavlik distinguishes the traditional Native 
American relationship with all living things from that of western society: “Unlike 
western society, whose relationship with all life is based on competition and exploi-
tation, the tribal relationship with all life—including the Animal People—was based 
on cooperation and reciprocal exchange” (Pavlik 2014, p. 15).
According to Pavlik, Navaho TEK has two forms: “the sacred (spiritual) knowl-
edge handed down to them through the creation stories, and the experiential knowl-
edge acquired through centuries of observation, inventiveness, and practice” (Pavlik 
2014, p. 16). The creation stories are attended by a strong emotional component, 
which gives rise to the Navaho ethical system. Pavlik writes that TEK is gaining 
attention in western society, but that “[i]n general, the western scientific community 
continues to dismiss or disparage indigenous wisdom”(Pavlik 2014, p.  16). This 
rejection of TEK by western scientists occurs “because it is often not ‘testable’ in 
the scientific sense”(Pavlik 2014, p.17), and because “western science steadfastly 
tends to not take seriously any spiritual knowledge—the foundation of TEK.” 
(Pavlik 2014, p.17).
Pavlik asserts that the Navaho have always known what is just now being discov-
ered by modern science in the field of cognitive ethology, that animals have  emotions 
and thoughts. The traditional knowledge of cognitive ethology, though, differs from 
that of modern science. “The fact that Navaho TEK stems from the sacred creation 
stories—from the spiritual realm—distinguishes it from mainstream cognitive 
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 135 ---
112
ethology that accepts only a scientific evolutionary cause for animal behavior.” 
(Pavlik 2014, p. 19).
It is clear, from Pavlik’s account of TEK, and from the traditional stories and 
beliefs collected and discussed in the text, that TEK is based upon a tradition of 
divinely given stories, passed down through the generations. These sacred stories 
were used to provide interpretations of the meanings of the relations of the Navaho 
with the world they experienced. This store of divinely given statements stands as 
the set of foundational, indisputable statements, which are believed to constitute a 
foundation that justifies further knowledge claims. (See also Ritskes ( 2011) on the 
inclusion of Indigenous spirituality in science education.)
Deloria sets out the Native American world-view in great detail (Deloria 2002, 
1997), and stresses the Native American concept of “power”, as a spiritual living 
energy that pervades the universe. Pavlik ( 2014) follows Deloria in this, writing 
“The Navahos have long known that the universe is spiritually alive. Everything is a 
living breathing, spiritual entity. Every mountain and river, for example, possesses 
a spiritual essence” (Pavlik 2014, p. 45). Moreover, “The Navahos also know that 
there are wholly spiritual beings that reside at these places and protect them. The 
Navahos refer to these energetic entities as the Yeis, or the Holy People” (Pavlik 
2014, p. 460).
It should be clear that dogmatic acceptance of traditional spiritual beliefs, derived 
from stories taken to be sacred, has nothing in common with the methodological 
norms of modern science. The case is the same as for the current fundamentalist 
Christian beliefs in young earth creationism. In each case, the belief system is reli -
gious dogma, not scientific knowledge. If scientific knowledge is understood as a 
set of statements that is well-warranted by evidence acquired via a rigorous process 
of experimental inquiry (as I shall argue in Part III that it should be), then the tradi-
tional spiritual beliefs that largely comprise TEK do not count as scientific 
knowledge.
The mixing together of the immutable doctrines of religious belief systems with 
the fallible results of modern scientific inquiry, held subject to continuous critical 
examination and testing, creates a serious problem of intellectual coherence, 
because the two world-views, the scientific and the religious, are incompatible in 
fundamental respects.
Mahner and Bunge (1996) argue that science and religion are factually, method-
ologically, attitudinally, ethically, and metaphysically incompatible, and that sci -
ence education and religious education are, as a corollary, incompatible. Mahner 
and Bunge’s analysis provides clear criteria that separate the religious from the 
scientific. Even a cursory inspection of the contents of what are said in CSSE circles 
to be systems of “indigenous science” reveals that the belief systems in question are 
religious, and bear no relation to science. “[I]f one is concerned with the education 
of the public, then the teaching of the religious attitude and value system can only 
have detrimental effects for adopting a comprehensive scientific outlook or critical 
attitude” (Mahner and Bunge 1996, p.118).
Peat, in Blackfoot Physics: A Journey into the Native American Universe (2005) 
asserts that modern science deals only with what can be measured and treated math-
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 136 ---
113
ematically, and thus excludes from reality such things as love, beauty and mystical 
ecstasy, and is therefore problematic. Peat asserts that there is an alternative way of 
thinking about the world, an indigenous science that is distinctly different from 
modern science. Peat states: “Indigenous science does not need to explain itself to 
anyone. It has no need to compare or authenticate itself against the standard of 
Western science” (Peat 2005, p. 241). In comparing the “two sciences”, Peat argues 
first that modern science does not live up to its own standards. Peat notes, correctly, 
that modern science is supposed to be guided and arbitrated by nature, but then 
asserts, incorrectly, that “scientific theory is supposed to stand or fall according to 
the results of a single critical experiment” (Peat 2005, p. 242).
Recounting the Pons and Fleischman experimental efforts to demonstrate cold 
fusion, and the negative reaction of the scientific community to their claims to have 
done so, Peat asserts that “far from all experiments [are] reproducible…it is well 
known that some individuals can get a particular experiment to work, while others 
never will” (p. 246). Peat concludes, “Hence, the very basis of science, its objective, 
repeatable, quantitative observations and experiments, is an unattainable ideal, for 
the way scientists are able to design experiments and carry them out is influenced in 
so many subtle ways by their feelings and sensitivity to the complex universe around 
them” (Peat 2005, p. 246).
Peat’s implication is that certain persons are more attuned to the universe, in a 
direct, personal, spiritual way, and this special relation enables such persons to 
achieve experimental results that are not possible for ordinary persons. It is Peat’s 
view that modern science is a cultural product of the West, and as such is merely one 
human response to the world, one science among many other sciences that are 
equally legitimate, or perhaps more legitimate. “The fact is that Western science, 
and the way we pursue it, is a product of our value-system and our worldview. 
Societies with other values and other worldviews may choose to carry out their sci-
ence in radically different ways” (Peat 2005, p. 248). But, contra Peat, the develop-
ment of modern science is in fact a global accomplishment, both now and in its 
historical development. To treat modern science as if it were an ineluctably culture- 
based belief system, just one among many other equally valuable “ways of know -
ing”, is not justified.
In Blackfoot Physics, Peat is explicit about the nature of Blackfoot cultural belief 
system, and makes it clear that that belief system is fundamentally inconsistent with 
the belief system warranted by modern scientific inquiry. Peat also makes it clear 
that the methods of fixing belief in Blackfoot culture are incompatible with the 
method of modern scientific inquiry. Moreover, according to Peat, the Blackfoot 
epistemological model and worldview is representative of all indigenous belief sys-
tems. Peat sets out 29 major ways that Indigenous belief systems and methods differ 
from those of modern science. A few quotations with respect to key differences will 
have to suffice to indicate the incompatibility that Peat quite effectively establishes.
Objectivity “If objectivity implies the ability to abstract and distance oneself from 
nature, then this is definitely missing within Indigenous science. In its place, how -
ever, stand consistency, integration, harmony and balance” (Peat 2005, p.  255). 
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 137 ---
114
According to Peat, in Native science, “stress is laid upon direct subjective experi -
ence and upon closeness to nature. The powers, energies, and spirits of the world are 
personified to the extent that it is possible to enter into direct relationship with these 
elements and negotiate pacts, compacts and ways of living together with them” 
(Peat 2005, p. 255).
Prediction “The concept of what, within Western science, would be called predic-
tion is profoundly different within a metaphysics that is not based upon the notion 
of causality….There is a sense in which dreams can have a predictive quality…the 
dreamer is not confined to a single present but can move back and forth along the 
curve of time” (Peat 2005, p. 255).
Experiment Peat states: “Analogies can be drawn between…contemplative practices 
of the East and the observational/experimental approaches of Indigenous science. So, 
while Indigenous science does not employ experiment in the Western scientific sense, 
it does employ a disciplined approach to merging horizons with the inner reality of 
the world and revealing its different levels of process” (Peat 2005, p.252).
Observation “For observations to be of use they must be recorded and passed on…
[in Indigenous cultures] knowledge is generally passed on through markings on 
rocks, mnemonics, songs, ceremonies, practices, artifacts and such things as earth -
works. In particular, much knowledge about the world is enfolded within traditional 
stories” (Peat 2005, p. 250).
Control “Although it could not be said to be a form of control in the Western sense 
of the word, Indigenous peoples are also able to make use of certain processes in 
order to bring about desired effects … Examples include the ability to heal and to 
extract diseases from the body, or to negotiate with clouds in order to produce rain. 
Songs could also be thought of as processes, or scientific instruments, that bring 
about certain effects” (Peat 2005, p. 254).
Instrumentation In Indigenous science “knowledge goes beyond what can be appre-
hended through the normal senses…ceremonies and practices such as fasting, acts of 
sacrifice, dancing, ingestion of various preparations, dreams and visions all serve to 
refine the instruments of perception and allow direct contact with extended realms of 
reality” (Peat 2005, p. 260). “Indigenous science also makes use of technological 
instruments. For example, the Cherokee people utilize crystals in many different 
ways. One is in the preparation of medicine, where sunlight is guided through the 
crystal and onto the preparation to potentiate its power” (Peat 2005, p. 260).
Truth According to Peat, “Western science seeks ultimate truth, for it believes in a 
rational universe that can be understood by experimentation and reason….Truth in 
Native science is of a very different order. Truths…depend on tradition and social 
and spiritual sanctions. Dreams and visions are systems of validation. Truth is con-
tained within origin and migration stories, songs and ceremonies…the source of 
truth is found in nature and in the direct experience of individuals through dreams 
and visions; conversations with rocks, trees, and animals; and patient observation of 
the world around them” (Peat 2005, p. 265).
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 138 ---
115
Spirit and Energies “The animation of nature and the energies or spirits that reside 
in plants, animals, rocks and trees are characteristic of Native science. The acknowl-
edgement of powers and the renewal of alliances through a variety of ceremonies 
also play a key role in Native Science. This notion of spirit, or numinous energy, is 
missing in Western science” (Peat 2005, p. 271).
Observer-Created Reality “The transforming, animating energies of Western sci -
ence are strictly impersonal and move according to the objective laws of physics. 
These laws are pictured as being totally indifferent to human wishes and desires” 
(Peat 2005, p. 285). “In contrast, the Indigenous world is alive….Far from being 
indifferent to the existence of humans, it is possible for The People to negotiate with 
the world of spirits and form alliances with the powers that animate the universe. As 
an example, when drought occurs The People may carry out a rain dance.” (Peat 
2005, p. 285).
In this uncommonly detailed account, Peat makes it abundantly clear that the 
indigenous belief systems he describes are fundamentally inconsistent with modern 
science. The illusion of compatibility is created by nothing more than an extended 
trick of verbal magic. The terms that carry a specific technical meaning in modern 
science are lifted from the modern scientific context, and are applied to certain ele-
ments of the traditional Indigenous systems of belief and methods of fixing belief. 
But, in the new context, the borrowed terms no longer mean what they meant in the 
original context. So, for example, the meaning of the term ‘observation’ in the con-
text of modern experimental inquiry entails empirical observations--persons noting 
events in the natural world, and especially, the events that occur following inten -
tional interaction of person and environment. In the context of indigenous culture, 
the term ‘observation’ is used to include experiences that are had during sleep 
(dreams) or in altered states of consciousness (visions). This difference in meaning 
is glossed over; it is stated that both ways of fixing belief employ “observation”, 
therefore both systems are equivalent in this respect. But, clearly, both systems in 
actuality rely upon quite different forms of practice. 11 The missing feature in all of 
the proposed “alternative sciences” is the scientific method itself.
Aikenhead and Ogawa set out “three diverse cultural ways of understanding 
nature: an Indigenous way…a neo-indigenous way…and a Euro-American scien -
tific way (Aikenhead & Ogawa 2007, p. 539). The intent is to “better represent each 
culture’s collective, yet heterogeneous, worldview, metaphysics, epistemology, and 
values” They also attempt to show that Indigenous knowledge systems share impor-
tant features with scientific knowledge systems, namely, “empiricism, rationality, 
and dynamic evolution” (Aikenhead and Ogawa 2007, p.539).
11 For further explanations of the nature of “Indigenous science”, and calls for the inclusion of such 
science in science education, see: Aikenhead (2001), Boyer (2010), Cajete (2000), Deloria (1997, 
2002), Langdon ( 2009), Medin and Bang 2014), Meyer and Crawford ( 2011), Ogawa ( 1995, 
1998), and Snively and Corsiglia ( 2001). In 2017 there is a proposal before the U.S.  National 
Association for Research in Science Teaching (NARST) to include Traditional Ecological 
Knowledge as a research strand in the organization.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 139 ---
116
Aikenhead and Ogawa define the term ‘science’ as: “ a rational empirically 
based way of knowing nature that yields, in part, descriptions and explanations of 
nature” (Aikenhead and Ogawa 2007, p. 544). They follow Elkana (1971), in defin-
ing rationality as culturally relative, and explicitly reject any sense of universalist 
rationality. They take perceiving to mean “both the process of constructing what is 
perceived to be reality through the participation of a group of people, and their 
resultant mental constructions of reality” (Aikenhead and Ogawa 2007, p.  543). 
Further, they adopt “a multi-science perspective” (Aikenhead and Ogawa 2007, 
p. 544). 12
In modern scientific inquiry, suggestions as to possible meanings can arise from 
any source, even from a dream or a trance. But, regardless of their origin, it is de 
rigueur in modern science that suggested meanings be subjected to a continual pro-
cess of empirical, experimental testing, by a global community of scientists. The 
scientific testing of the suggested meanings is the key characteristic distinguishing 
science from fanciful non-critical belief.
Shahjahan and Haverkos present Indigenous systems of knowledge as instances 
of “spiritual epistemology”, and argue that the academy unjustly takes knowledge 
to require a Eurocentric secular epistemology. The academy thus serves Western 
colonialism, unjustly fencing out all spiritually based systems of knowledge. “In the 
secular epistemological vision, rationality, anthropocentrism, and empiricism are 
lauded over many other ways of knowing (e.g., emotions intuition, metaphysical, 
and ancestral connections) (Shahjahan and Haverkos 2011, p. 377). Shahjahan and 
Haverkos argue that the dominant secular epistemology must be resisted, that the 
academy should accept spiritual epistemologies, and the “other” ways of knowing 
the world, as equal to modern naturalistic science in value. Ritskes goes a bit fur -
ther: “In the Western academy there is currently no use for this kind of knowledge 
which flies in the face of everything that it stands for” ( 2011, p. 417.) While this 
should be true, it is apparently not true in the CSSE conception of science 
education.
Those who call for the inclusion of Indigenous “ways of knowing” in science 
education classrooms would seem to be either uninformed as to the actual substance 
of the body of belief that they extoll, or lacking in an understanding of the distinc -
tive character of scientific inquiry and of scientific knowledge. But, it is also possi-
ble that advocates of inclusion of Indigenous “science” in science education are 
indeed aware of the difference, but for some reason are antagonistic to modern 
 science and seek to “re-enchant” the world with the introduction of ancient, and still 
occurrent, superstitions.13 In any case, the results of the infiltration of science educa-
tion by this and other forms of anti-science can only have deleterious effects on the 
already poor public understanding of scientific knowledge, and the public disposi -
tions to use scientific knowledge in addressing critical social problems.
Critical social problems are undeniably present. The problem of global climate 
change is one example, but it is drawn from a large array of such problems. That 
12 See also Aikenhead (2014).
13 See Griffin 1988a, b.
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 140 ---
117
global warming is occurring, and that it is one of the consequences of human inter-
action with the environing conditions, is well established by the community of mod-
ern science. 14 Given the vast number of causal conditions, among  which one 
must  include global human activities, that together constitute the conditions of 
occurrence of global warming, there is a pressing need to employ scientific knowl-
edge of the dynamics of interaction in the natural world so that successful mitiga -
tion practices might be begun.
But, a shared societal consensus on the necessity of modern scientific knowledge 
is difficult to achieve, and becomes more difficult to the extent that science educa -
tors teach that traditional indigenous belief systems, and other alternate ways of 
knowing, are the cognitive equivalent of modern scientific knowledge. When, in the 
U.S., politicians facing drought conditions lead public rain dances, or public prayers, 
the causal conditions for climate catastrophe are enhanced.
4.2.3.2  Seeking Alternatives to the Scientific Way of Knowing
The claim that Indigenous cultural systems of belief are acceptable as alternative 
forms of knowledge for the science classroom is, on inspection, implausible. But 
additionally various other ways of knowing, also in opposition to the way of modern 
scientific inquiry, are commonly promoted in the cultural studies of science 
literature.
One prominent thesis, developed in the field of feminist epistemology, is that 
there are natural female ways of knowing, which are different in kind from the ways 
of knowing of males. Science, on this view, having been (largely) developed by 
male persons, is well fitted to the thinking patterns of males but is significantly less 
well suited to female persons. Science education, it is concluded, should, for the 
sake of social justice, incorporate the distinctive “women’s ways of knowing”. But 
to do so would require a radical reconstruction of the practices and theses of modern 
science.15
It is sometimes claimed that modern scientific inquiry is fundamentally alien to 
all persons, which is thought to explain why it is difficult for all persons to learn 
modern science; this thesis is sometimes used to justify calls for the re-enchantment 
of the world. Curiously, this is the least objectionable position. Peirce ( 1986/1878) 
famously noted that, for most people, it is not true belief that is actually desired. 
What is desired is simply the fixation of belief, which puts to an end the onerous 
process of thinking about beliefs and evaluating them with respect to the evidence 
of their being true. Wolpert, in The Unnatural Nature of Science (1992), argues that 
the way of thinking of modern science does not come naturally to people. To acquire 
the way of scientific thinking, an extensive period of science education is required 
by all. It is to be expected that to become adept in scientific thinking is difficult. But 
14 See Cook et al. 2016.
15 For affirmations of this view, see Harding (1996) and Brickhouse (2001); for critiques of it, see 
Landau (2008) and McCarthy (2014).
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 141 ---
118
this does not mean that the meaning of science should be changed to include within 
“science” the ordinary human approaches to fixing belief. It instead underscores the 
need for a science education that engages the students intellectually, and that helps 
them to develop a disposition to think scientifically.
The charge of “scientism“is frequently brought against modern scientific inquiry. 
The term ‘scientism’ can be defined as the belief that the methods and norms of 
modern science should be brought to bear on a wide range of problem situations, as 
the only legitimate means of attaining genuine knowledge of the real thing/events 
that constitute the problem. It is held that only through modern scientific inquiry 
that understanding of the dynamics of the problem situation can be attained. And it 
is only through modern scientific inquiry that effective means of ameliorating the 
situation can be devised. On this view, modern scientific inquiry should be applied 
to social, moral, political, economic and educational policy, in order to provide the 
best possible knowledge of such problems.
But scientism is also widely understood as a deplorable over-reaching of modern 
science, as an inappropriate intrusion of science into humanistic realms. Modern 
scientific inquiry is considered inappropriate, ineffective, and, indeed, strongly 
counterproductive when applied to the domain of human concerns. Smith ( 2013), 
for example, condemns scientism on the grounds that it conflicts with and under -
mines the ancient wisdom of religious revelations. “It is no wonder…that this pre -
sumed scientific wisdom runs aground when it comes to the understanding of man 
himself; that it has in fact shown itself categorically incapable of accounting for 
even the most rudimentary act of cognitive sense perception, let alone for the higher 
modes of sensory and intellective knowing” (Smith 2013, p. 10). 16 Rescher con -
cludes “no matter how far we push science forward along the physical, chemical, 
biological, and psychological fronts, there are issues about humanity and its works 
that will remain intractable by scientific means … because these issues lie outside 
it” (Rescher 1999, p. 244–245).
Williams states “that scientism entails a metaphysical commitment to a natural-
ist, reductive, or emergent materialism and tries to define science in a way that 
includes not only a commitment to empirical methods, but also to this particular 
metaphysics….the propriety of any method is evaluated primarily in terms of 
whether it deals with the world as if it really is as naturalist materialist metaphysics 
claims it is” (Williams 2015, pp. 3,4).
Williams acknowledges that the methods of naturalistic and materialistic science 
“seem relatively compatible with the natural world” (Williams 2015, p. 8). Williams 
believes a problem arises, though, when such methods are applied to the human 
world. To do so would be to explain the fundamentals of human being “in terms of 
things outside of themselves, and to explain them in that way is to destroy them” 
(Williams 2015, p. 8). What Williams fears will be lost, it seems, is the conception 
of a uniquely human spirituality, that is outside the bounds of the natural material -
istic world.
16 See also Nagel (2012) and Sorell (1994).
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 142 ---
119
But, the general method of modern scientific inquiry is the only way of providing 
the strong warrant for the truth of a proposition that is necessary for knowledge. 
Because human beings are themselves dynamic, interactive thing/events in the 
world, a part of the natural world, as are the social/cultural products of human inter-
action, a genuine knowledge of their interactivities is possible via scientific inquiry. 
There is no alternative way to acquire knowledge about the world. Bunge conceives 
scientism as “methodological realism”, the thesis that “[t]he best strategy for under-
standing the world is the scientific method” ( 2006, p. 30), and links scientism to 
both scientific realism and materialism ( 2006, p.  280). This triad is the core of 
Bunge’s scientific hylorealism, a position which, like Dewey‘s view of scientific 
inquiry, indicates the possibility of a science of ethics and social justice, generating 
knowledge in the sense of well-warranted assertibility.
4.2.4  Constructivism and Scientific Knowledge
Michael Devitt (2012) describes constructivism in this way: it is the thesis that “sci-
entific entities are not independent but are somehow ‘constructed’ by the theories 
we have of them. This ‘constructivism‘has its roots in the philosophy of Kant and is 
extremely influential” (Devitt 2012, p.  101). 17 This ontological constructivism is 
widespread in education.18 John Staver, a prominent science educator and construc-
tivist, stated it as follows:
…For constructivists, observations, objects, events, data, laws, and theory do not exist inde-
pendently of observers. The lawful and certain nature of natural phenomena are properties 
of us, those who describe, not of nature, that is described. (Staver 1998, p.503)
Tobin and Tippins, in 1993, present constructivism as an epistemological thesis 
that has skeptical implications, but that does not deny that the world in all its inter-
actions exists. “[T]he existence of a reality is acknowledged from the outset. What 
constructivism has to say about that reality, however is that we can only know about 
it in a personal and subjective way.” (Tobin & Tippins 1993, p. 3). Tobin and Tippins 
give an example: they acknowledge that gravity exists, but assert that human beings 
can only come to know about what gravity is by individual personal experience of 
the phenomenon, supplemented by a social process of negotiation of meaning. 
Through social negotiation, they continue, “agreement is reached within our social 
system that the concept of gravity has numerous verifiable properties. We construct 
a model of gravity that is viable in that the model fits experience” (Tobin and Tippins 
1993, p. 3).
But Tobin and Tippins explicitly deny that the model can be considered “to be an 
absolute truth”(Tobin and Tippins 1993, p. 4). They do not make clear what the 
conceptual distinction might be between “absolute truth” and truth simpliciter, truth 
17 See also Devitt (1991)
18 For examples and discussion, see Matthews (2015, chap. 8).
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 143 ---
120
as the correspondence of statements of interactions in the world with actual interac-
tions in the world. It is possible that they use the term ‘absolute truth’ to refer to 
statements claimed to be indubitably true. But no modern scientist makes claims 
about scientific truth in the sense of indubitable truth, because scientific knowledge 
is understood as fallible, and only to be held subject to further evidence that brings 
the knowledge claim into doubt.
In Tobin and Tippins’ view, knowledge begins with a subjective interaction, not 
with the real world, but with our constructions of the world. “Our constructions are 
constrained by experiences, which comprise subjective interactions with the real 
world as we have constructed it” (p. 4). If the term ‘constructions’ denotes imagina-
tive conjectures about interactive events in world, this is a reasonable account of an 
early phase of every modern scientific inquiry. Our conjectures are imaginative. 
But, Tobin and Tippins seem not to notice that our experiences, i.e., our interactions 
in the world, are fully objective. That is so because the organism, including all its 
internal interactions, is no less a real interactive thing/event than is an inorganic 
interactive thing/event. We develop conjectures about the world, and expectations 
about the effects of our interactions with the world. But what we interact with is the 
world as it is, not the world as we have “constructed” it imaginatively.
Given that our interactions are objective real events, we can learn about the world 
by taking actions based on our conjectures about the world. Should our expectations 
about the observable state of the world following those actions be disappointed, we 
have learned that something is wrong in our conjectures about the world. 19 The 
hypothesis has been put to the test, and has been disconfirmed. Disconfirmation, in 
Popper’s view, is strong evidence that our “construction” is not right, that it is false, 
in that it does not correspond to the world.
But, what about evidence of a positive sort? What if after action guided by a 
hypothesis we do observe the state of the world we had expected? Given severe test-
ing of the hypothesis, the failure to observe disconfirmation, according to Popper, 
provides corroboration for the hypothesis. Corroboration is a matter of the appraisal 
of the hypothesis, and is a matter of degree. A hypothesis can be judged to be highly 
corroborated, or less well corroborated, by a scientific inquiry process (Popper 
2002, p. 264–265).
Tobin and Tippins continue: “Since there is no objective account of what gravity 
really is, we cannot tell whether our model for gravity gets closer and closer to an 
absolute reality…we can only know gravity in a personal, socially mediated way.” 
Tobin and Tippins seem to be supposing that an objective account of the actual 
workings of gravity must be available, independent of human inquiry, to which the 
results of human inquiry can be compared for accuracy. Something like a teacher’s 
answer book. Since, obviously, there is no such extra-human account  – because 
accounts of thing/events are all of human origin – there is no possibility of compar-
ing one’s conjectured account of gravity, or any interaction, to some imaginary 
“given” extra-human account. Though some persons purport to have received 
19 Or, that something is wrong with our background assumptions, or our experimental procedures, 
or our instrumentation, etc..
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 144 ---
121
authoritative extra-human accounts of the world from a putative divine source, the 
evidence for this is underwhelming.
But, there is no need for such a pre-existing account, since what we do have is 
the actual world with which to interact. Popper‘s account of the logic of scientific 
discovery allows for both the disconfirmation of theories, and for the corroboration 
of theories, through experimental inquiry. As long as one is willing to discard the 
conception of knowledge as entailing absolute certainty of truth, no problem arises. 
Through interaction, designed to subject hypotheses to severe testing, we have the 
resources needed to assess the claim that the judgments reached about the world are 
true.
It is true that, initially, prior to cognition, we experience our interactions in the 
world in a direct, and qualitative way. But this primary qualitative experience, 
because it is immediate (i.e., unmediated by thought) and qualitative, is not knowl-
edge. Achieving knowledge requires considerable cognitive mediation. It requires 
well-tested processes of testing prospective beliefs via active experimental inquiry.
The practice of modern science does have a social aspect; scientific inquiry must 
be associated with a cultural milieu that supports the search for true belief about the 
world through experimental inquiry into the puzzles, the “problem situations” that 
arise. The scientific search for knowledge, for well-warranted beliefs about the 
world, requires a cultural commitment of resources to the maintenance of a com -
munity of scientists, who will be working collaboratively over an extended period 
of time on the development of theories about the world, and the experimental testing 
of those theories. Modern scientific knowledge is a set of well-warranted judgments 
that result from the collective and continuing social process of scientific inquiry.
Truth is conceived in the cultural studies of science education literature as a mat-
ter of viability, either in von Glaserfeld’s sense of holding up in practice, or in the 
broader sense of being culturally accepted over long periods of time. But, the simple 
persistence of belief over time is not a reliable indicator of the probable truth of the 
belief. Conceiving truth as a matter of a correspondence between statements about 
the events of the world and the actual events of the world, scientific inquiry allows 
the development of a set of theoretical statements about the world that are well war-
ranted to be true.
Tobin and Tippin’s epistemological constructivism is deeply embedded in the 
cultural studies of science education field. It is this position that supports the accep-
tance of all culturally established20 belief systems as equally legitimate knowledge. 
This leads to the conviction that all cultures have their own forms of science, and 
then to the notion that all cultural belief systems must be equally respected, and 
equally welcomed, and for some, equally affirmed in the science classroom.
20 In the cultural studies of science education literature, the cut-off date for “long-standing” belief 
is never specified, leaving the notion empty. Moreover, the age of a set of beliefs is entirely irrel -
evant to the truth of the belief, and is equally irrelevant to the warrant of the belief to be true.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 145 ---
122
4.2.4.1  Social Justice and CSSE
It is difficult to see why anyone would seek to acquire knowledge, in the post-  
modern/cultural studies sense of the term. It is certainly possible to alter the mean-
ing of the term ‘knowledge’, in such a way that any system of belief about the 
dynamic interactions of the world will count equally as knowledge. But what will 
have been gained?
Knowledge, if it is to be a goal worth pursuing, must be conceived as a coordi -
nated set of judgments about the real dynamics of the natural physical and social 
world, judgments that are thorough enough, accurate enough, close enough to being 
fully true, that we can act effectively to achieve the individual and social ends we 
value. Should our knowledge of human social dynamics and human valuings ever 
become thorough enough, and true enough, it is possible that that social knowledge 
might allow us to effectively critique our valuings, as well as our beliefs. If so, we 
may manage to choose our ends wisely, so that our pursuing and achieving of imme-
diate goals does not lead us to destroy the more essential values we eventually come 
to see.
Reforming our human-to-human inter-relationships, and our human inter-  
relationships with rest of nature, requires action, and action requires knowledge, in 
the modern scientific sense. Conferring the title of “knowledge” on every belief 
system, as a way of according respect to persons, is not a step in the right direction. 
The consequence of such a move is that we develop societies that pay no special 
heed to the scientific knowledge so far achieved, not even when making momentous 
and perhaps irreversible decisions about social action.
The solution to, or the amelioration of, the urgent social problem of global warm-
ing depends on scientific knowledge of the problem, the conditions of occurrence of 
the problem, and consequences to be expected from our actions, given its occur -
rence. The problem of global warming is but one of the many potentially disastrous 
consequences of past and current human action in the real world, which will interact 
with us, responding to our actions, as it must, regardless of our expectations, our 
wishes, or our regrets.
The social structure that has emerged in the democracy of the U.S. has brought 
into positions of power the sort of persons who, for reasons of ideology, or religious 
belief, of personal greed, of hubris, or of sheer ignorance, refuse to make use of the 
best scientific knowledge of the day as a basis for political/economic/social action. 
Those who have the least, in every global village, can be expected to be those who 
suffer first the ill effects of unmitigated global warming. Given this, the develop -
ment and employment of modern scientific knowledge is a matter of social justice.
It would go too far to lay the blame for the scientific somnambulence of the 
populace solely on the schools and on science education. It would go too far, too, to 
blame this solely on the current popularity of a thesis which holds that genuine 
knowledge of the world dynamics is impossible, and that it is therefore only fair to 
confer upon every belief system, however generated, however likely or unlikely to 
be true, the title of knowledge, or better yet, science. But, the misrepresentation of 
the nature of modern science, and its distinctive cognitive value, in the course of 
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 146 ---
123
science education, cannot have good consequences for the scientific literacy of a 
culture. It prepares the way for the acceptance of “alternative facts” and “alternative 
truths” in Donald Trump’s presidential-advisory circles.
The cultural studies of science education theses appear to be motivated in large 
measure by misguided conceptions of social justice. The achievement of social jus-
tice is taken to require giving equal respect to all cultural systems of belief and 
methods of fixing belief. However, social reform, to be effective, requires a highly 
developed scientific knowledge, knowledge of the complex dynamic conditions that 
generate and maintain the pervasive systems of social injustice currently dominant 
across much of the world. Critical evaluation of the cognitive worth of conflicting 
systems of beliefs claimed to be knowledge is a necessary condition for the reform 
of the current situation of rampant social injustice.
Social justice should be conceived as a matter of actually achieving, in the real 
world, a just distribution of social goods and social opportunities, along with the 
freedom and ability to effectively pursue valued ends, through socially just means. 
In this sense, social justice is a critically important goal. But social justice is not 
achieved simply by asserting that equality exists, not even when that assertion is 
backed up by elaborate word magic. Re-conceiving scientific knowledge and scien-
tific inquiry so as to be inclusive of any and all cultural belief systems, no matter 
how the system is achieved, no matter how inefficacious the supposed knowledge is, 
is not a means of actually achieving social justice.
Modern scientific knowledge is fundamentally different from other belief sys -
tems, in that the process of scientific inquiry provides a way of assessing the truth, 
in the sense of correspondence, of the beliefs about the world that science generates. 
A scientifically produced belief system is demonstrably more efficacious than other 
belief systems in facilitating successful interactions in the world, and progress 
toward the achievement of desired future states.
4.3  The Basics of Modern Science
A well-established body of scientific knowledge is a body of logically inter-related 
statements about the interactive dynamics of the natural world, which together con-
stitute theoretical knowledge of the world. The theories, and the statements which 
comprise them, are understood to be true of the world, in the correspondence sense. 
The processes of interaction in the world, guided by theory, provide a continual test-
ing of the truth of the scientific theory.
Well-established knowledge, understood in this sense, is a valuable outcome 
when achieved, and well worth the pursuing. It is the function of a body of knowl -
edge to guide action in the world, in such a way as to solve problems set in and by 
the world, i.e., in the natural situations in which organic actions occur.
The process of scientific inquiry is the interactive process through which hypoth-
eses, statements of possible interactivities, possible meanings of events, are gener -
ated, elaborated and tested by action in the world. The goal of scientific inquiry is to 
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 147 ---
124
pursue true beliefs about the world. The continual social process of scientific inquiry 
leads to the progressive development of knowledge of the world.
If modern science cannot reach knowledge of an existing and operative set of 
dynamic interactions, and the probabilities thereof, then there is no point to doing 
modern science. There is little advantage to be gained by achieving a cultural con -
sensus in beliefs about the world, if those beliefs are not well-warranted to be true 
of the world, in the correspondence sense. The only advantage in arriving at and 
maintaining a fixed belief system which is not well-warranted to be true of nature is 
the fostering of a feeling of solidarity, of community of belief. But false beliefs 
about the world are likely to lead at some point to actions in the world that fail mis-
erably in achieving the desired goal.
The statements that are well-warranted by experimental scientific inquiry to be 
true may, on further scientific inquiry, be shown to be false. But, as part of the ongo-
ing process of scientific inquiry, the early judgments of truth, though later falsified, 
are valuable. They set the stage for further inquiry. The continual process of testing 
the results of prior scientific inquiry leads to the continual correction of errors, and 
improvement over time of knowledge of the world.
Even true beliefs can lead to failure in action, when combined with false subsid-
iary statements, or unrecognized complications in the situation. Nevertheless, a set 
of mostly true beliefs will generally  be better as a guide to action than a set of 
mostly false beliefs. It should also be stressed that scientific inquiry provides no 
guarantee that the resulting judgment about the world is true. All that can be pro -
vided is a strong warrant to believe that the judgment is true.
The epistemic goal of having true beliefs (correspondence sense) about the world 
is justified by its contribution to achieving valued end states of action. But, this 
practical consideration of the usefulness of scientifically generated belief should not 
be mistaken for the criterion of truth. The criterion that permits the assertion that a 
judgment is true is the scientific inquiry process itself.
4.3.1  Scientific Inquiry, Correspondence Theory of Truth, 
and Knowledge
Mario Bunge sets out an account of the scientific method, in general, of the meaning 
of ‘scientific knowledge’, and of the correspondence conception of truth regarding 
the world (Bunge 1967/1998). The scientific method, in Bunge’s view, requires first, 
a problem situation, second, a more precise statement of the problem (p. 9), a set of 
hypotheses (guesses) as to the actual dynamic interactions constituting the problem, 
and a testing of the hypotheses, through deduction of some of the observable conse-
quences of the hypotheses, and then action on the basis of the hypotheses, to test the 
agreement of the predicted results of the action with the actual results of the action.
Bunge’s account of the scientific method (see Bunge 2006) is remarkably similar 
to that of John Dewey. That the two descriptions are similar is remarkable, given the 
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 148 ---
125
prominence of long-standing misinterpretations of Dewey’s philosophy, which take 
Dewey to have followed the subjectivism of William James, and/or the idealism of 
Hegel.21
The process of scientific inquiry leads to judgments about the interactions of the 
world. Judgments, as such, are always reached under conditions of uncertainty. 
What is desired, then, in addition to the judgment itself, is an assessment of the 
strength of the reasons to accept the judgment, tentatively, as true of the world. The 
process of inquiry itself provides such reasons. To the degree that the inquiry pro -
cess is competent, the warrant for the truth of the judgment is strong. Assessing the 
quality of the inquiry process, clearly, is itself a matter of judgment. The ineluctabil-
ity of human judging in inquiry is the reason that scientific conclusions must always 
be held tentatively, and are always in principle fallible. Dewey conceives knowledge 
as warranted assertibility, in this sense.
The lack of certainty in scientific inquiry does not affect the concept of truth. The 
pursuit of true belief about the dynamic interactions of the world, if truth is to be 
worth pursuing, requires a correspondence conception of truth. Vision presents the 
conception of truth as correspondence to the world in this way: “the truth of a prop-
osition is constituted by a state of the world being such that were the proposition 
stated, it would state the world to be that way…” (Vision 2004, p. 87). On this view, 
a proposition is true if and only if the proposition refers to and accurately represents 
certain of the dynamic interrelationships of nature. This definition may seem to have 
a built-in circularity that makes it tautologically true, in so far as the term ‘accu -
rately’ has the same meaning as ‘truthfully’. But this is characteristic of definitional, 
analytic, statements. (Every dog is a member of the genus Canidae; the genus 
Canidae is the genus including all dogs.) What is required is more than a definition; 
what is required is a fuller account of the meaning of the concept of truth, and an 
operational definition, i.e., an account of what activities should be undertaken if a 
statement is to be rationally considered to be true.
The correspondence conception of truth is controversial, and often rejected. In 
Nonsense on Stilts , Pigliucci develops a strong indictment of pseudoscience and 
non-science masquerading as modern science. Yet, Pigiucci rejects the correspon -
dence conception of truth, and links the correspondence conception to “scientism“, 
by which Pigliucci means the intrusion of scientific inquiry into non-scientific ques-
tions. “[T]he entire scientistic attitude rests on a specific philosophical theory 
known as the ‘correspondence theory of truth’”(Pigliucci 2010, p. 236). Pigliucci 
states that “the correspondence theory of truth essentially assumes that somehow 
we can step outside of what philosophers call our ‘epistemic limitations’…and 
access a ‘God’s eye view’ of things” (p. 237). However, Pigliucci accepts that it is 
possible to “show that the claims scientists make about science are in fact correct” 
(p. 264). But, what does the term ‘correct’ mean here, if not “true”, in the correspon-
dence sense of truth?
Truth, in the correspondence sense, is an absolute—a proposition is either true or 
false, and the world is the truth-maker. To attain “the truth, the whole truth, and 
21 See McCarthy 1996a, b, 2000, 2002, 2007a, b, and McCarthy and Sears 2000.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 149 ---
126
nothing but the truth”, would be nice, but unfortunately is impossible. This is in part 
due to practical human limitations of time and effort, but, more importantly, it is 
impossible because attaining the “whole truth” about nature would require knowing 
every possible interactive event in nature. And this is logically impossible, because 
the set of all possible interactions is infinite, since every concatenation of actual or 
possible interactions, past, present and future, must be accurately represented.
The key to resolving this conundrum is to conceive of an all-true belief-system 
as a goal of inquiry. As a goal, it is an ideal, in the sense that it is a desirable and 
desired future state of affairs, not currently present, toward which we choose to 
work. If it were not humanly possible to even assess our progress toward that goal, 
the goal should be revised and/or rejected. The relevant question then is: Is there a 
way that a human being can assess the correspondence truth of a proposition, or of 
a theory? The answer to this question, I will argue, is “Yes.”
But, how? In what sense? By what method? The Deweyan conception of experi-
mental inquiry sets out a means to pursue the goal of a belief system that is increas-
ingly true in the correspondence sense of the term ‘true’. Dewey raises, and responds 
to, the question: “What is the experience in which the survey of both idea and exis-
tence is made and their agreement recognized?” (Dewey 1907, p. 79). Dewey pres -
ents the standard conundrum: in any experience, either both idea and fact are 
present, or only one, the idea or the fact, is present in experience. If 1: both fact and 
idea are present, no comparison of the two is necessary, for the facts are there in 
propria persona. If 2: only ideas are present, there can be no comparison, by defini-
tion. And if 3: only facts are present in experience, a comparison of idea and fact to 
check their agreement, their correspondence, is both impossible and unnecessary. 
This analysis would seem to be sufficient grounds for rejecting the correspondence 
conception of truth.
Dewey offers a solution to the apparently inescapable dilemma. But, it is a hard 
one to accept. The solution is that one must reject, completely, the metaphysical 
position of dualism. Dualism is the notion that there is one sort of thing called an 
“idea”, which belongs to a “mental” realm, and another sort of thing, called a “fact,” 
which belongs to a material realm. It is the assumption of dualism that leaves the 
correspondence conception of truth seeming untenable.
Dewey argues that having an idea is an existing occurrent thing/event, an interac-
tive happening between a human thing/event and other, non-human, thing/events, in 
a situation. Both the idea and the fact of the matter are equally present in a situation 
of scientific inquiry, and thus can readily be compared. But, why would one do so? 
Why even form ideas, if, when one is fully immersed in the factual situation, the 
agreement or disagreement of idea and world is obvious?
One forms ideas because one’s present situation is problematic. A necessary con-
dition of a situation being “problematic” is that a person in the situation has a goal, 
an end-in-view, a future state of affairs that is desired, but that is not actually pres -
ent, not currently existent. Action must be taken to bring about the desired future 
state (unless one chooses to wait for the chance occurrence of the desired state, or 
to hope for the action of others). If, given the person’s history, and thus the person’s 
present (physical) cognitive state, the course of action needed is clear, then no 
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 150 ---
127
 thinking process is needed; one simply acts on one’s knowledge. What makes a situ-
ation problematic is that, in it, the person’s current knowledge has proven to be 
inadequate. The person sees no clear connection between: the present situation; his 
or her action; and the occurrence of the desired situation. The person cannot effec -
tively act, and so must stop, and think.
In such a situation, i.e., a situation requiring the activity of thinking to guide 
one’s future action, the conception of correspondence truth makes sense. One has a 
present engagement with the problematic situation, open to inspection. One devel -
ops an idea, which is a potentially useful plan of action. An idea is an organismic 
state, a representation, which has two parts: (a) what is thought to be the nature of 
the problematic situation; and, (b) what is thought to be the active interventions that 
will change the existing situation, over time, into the desired situation.
Over the period of time while one acts guided by the idea, one is, clearly, fully 
present, physically/cognitively, in the developing situation. And one is fully present 
in the situation that results from one’s acting. The idea one has formed can thus be 
tested through one’s action. The idea leads one to expect a new situation of a par -
ticular sort to occur as an effect of certain actions taken under certain conditions.
Following action, one is in a position to compare (a) one’s idea of the dynamic 
interactive relations constituting the problem situation to (b) the results achieved 
through the actions that are based on that idea. The result expected is compared to 
the result that occurs. If the two are different, there is something wrong, and the 
inquiry should continue.
For example, suppose one is lost in the woods, and desires not to be lost. One 
examines the current situation in light of one’s existing knowledge, and develops an 
idea, a course of action thought likely to resolve the problem, to get one out of the 
woods. One acts, to test the truth of the idea, and discovers through action whether 
or not one’s idea was adequate to solve the problem. If one succeeds, there is reason 
to think that one’s idea of the environment, of one’s position in it, and of the actions 
that will take one from the present situation to the desired situation, was true, in the 
correspondence sense. It is possible that the idea was false, and one just experienced 
epistemic luck. Because epistemic luck is always a possibility, genuine scientific 
inquiry must be a continual process, undertaken by an extensive community of 
inquirers. Given this, the epistemic luck, if a factor, is likely to be eventually 
discovered.
This is the basic structure of scientific inquiry. One faces a problem, a puzzle of 
some sort. In light of one’s knowledge (best current theories), one forms an idea, a 
hypothesis, i.e., “If the dynamic relations constituting the situation are as I now 
think them to be, then, if certain actions are taken, the resulting situation will be the 
one I predict will occur”. One acts on the hypothesis, and discovers whether or not 
the hypothesis (the idea about the consequences of particular actions in the particu-
lar situation) agrees with, i.e., corresponds to, the actually observed consequences 
that result from action in the problem situation. New evidence is thereby generated 
about the agreement or disagreement of idea and world. As a result of experimental 
reflection and action, an advance toward the epistemic goal of true belief has been 
made, and new knowledge has been acquired.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 151 ---
128
The disagreement of the hypothesis, in some respects, with the situation in ques-
tion, is the usual result. This result leads to a re-thinking of the nature of the actual 
dynamic interactions of the situation. A new or revised hypothesis (idea) is formu -
lated, and one acts to test the new hypothesis. The process of experimental inquiry 
is repeated again and again by a large community of inquirers who are acting, as a 
practical necessity, in a social and cultural framework that supports the scientific 
inquiry process. Over time, a body of established scientific knowledge is 
developed.
It is the ongoing process of scientific inquiry that stands as the warrant, the justi-
fication, of the claim that the belief-system built up over time counts as genuine 
knowledge. For the sake of clarity, Dewey uses the new term ‘warranted assertion’ 
in place of the customary but ambiguous term ‘knowledge’. A “warranted” asser-
tion is an assertion that is supported by strong reasons, provided by the results of 
continual scientific inquiry, to accept the assertion as true, in the correspondence 
sense of truth set out by Dewey.
Dewey makes it clear that this correspondence sense of the meaning of the term 
‘true’ is the one that he employs in his theory of knowledge, which he calls 
“instrumentalism”.22 Dewey writes: “Instrumentalists …do not believe the test of 
truth is coherence; in the operational sense …they hold a correspondence view.” 
(1941, p. 172, fn. 7).
A correspondence conception of truth makes sense when correspondence 
is understood in the operational sense describe above. The operations of experimen-
tal scientific activity make it possible to assess the correspondence truth of a hypoth-
esis by means of experimental evidence, and to build a strong warrant for belief that 
the dynamics of the occurrent situation are as they are stated to be. The  well- warranted 
assertions that result are knowledge. Scientific inquiry is an ongoing, organized 
social activity, with a large community of scientists engaged in experimental activ-
ity to test the truth of various ideas about the world, and to test and improve the 
experimental means of testing ideas. The result of scientific inquiry is a set of well-
warranted judgments about the correspondence of ideas to the dynamic interactions 
of the world. Scientific inquiry in this sense is a necessary condition for develop -
ment of a high-quality body of knowledge, understood as a set of statements strongly 
warranted to be true of the world.
The term ‘knowledge’ is ambiguous, as it is used to refer to at least three funda-
mentally different things. Disambiguation is needed. To refer to well-warranted 
beliefs about the world developed through scientific inquiry, the term ‘modern sci-
entific knowledge’ seems a propos. To refer to a set of beliefs that has arisen from 
everyday concourse with the world, though without the benefit of scientific inquiry, 
it seems that the term ‘common-sense beliefs’ would serve well. To refer to a set of 
beliefs not tested by modern scientific inquiry, that are longstanding culturally 
22 The term ‘instrumentalism’ in Dewey’s philosophy refers to the instrumental use of propositions 
in scientific inquiry, as essential tools of the inquiry process. Dewey’s choice of term was unfortu-
nate, as the term ‘instrumentalism’ has come to denote an epistemological anti-realism, a view that 
is inconsistent with Dewey’s epistemological position, and with modern science.
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 152 ---
129
accepted beliefs about the world, what term should be used? The term ‘culturally 
established belief-system’ would seem to be appropriate.
This terminology would be controversial, for the term ‘knowledge’ has a strong 
normative connotation. Whatever beliefs are taken to count as knowledge about the 
dynamic inter-relations in the world are generally understood to be beliefs that are 
true. Dewey puts it this way: “My analysis of ‘warranted assertibility’ is offered as 
a definition of the nature of knowledge in the honorific sense according to which 
only true beliefs are knowledge” (Dewey, lw.14.169).
Hence, to use the term ‘knowledge’ only in connection with scientifically war -
ranted beliefs will be unpopular in some quarters—whatever the source of belief, 
and to whatever extent the truth of that belief has been tested, it seems that most 
persons wish their belief-set, however obtained, to be referred to as their “knowl -
edge”. But, epistemologically, the distinction between knowledge and belief is fun-
damental, and should be distinctly marked terminologically. (The term ‘scientific 
knowledge’ is thus redundant, but makes up for that by being very clear.)
It may be that the term ‘knowledge’ has accumulated too many conceptualiza -
tions disparate to the meanings implicit in modern scientific knowledge to be useful. 
It was this consideration that moved Dewey to introduce the term ‘warranted asser-
tion’ to refer to a modern scientific statement of knowledge, and ‘warranted assert-
ibility’ to refer to knowledge in the abstract.
4.3.2  Reality and the Objects of Modern Science
Baggott (2013) sets out an informative account of quantum theory in modern phys-
ics. Baggott adopts six principles that he asserts are the “Authorized Version” of the 
fundamental concepts related to modern science. Several of these theses, however, 
are problematic. Baggott’s “Reality Principle” follows a Kantian track: he accepts 
that “Reality consists of things-in-themselves of which we can never hope to gain 
knowledge” (Baggott 2013, p.8). We must then, Baggott accepts, “content ourselves 
with knowledge of empirical reality, of things-as-they-appear or things-as-they-are-
measured” (Baggott 2013, p.8). Given the belief that “reality” is inaccessible, 
Baggott believes that scientific realists can only “assume” that “reality (and its enti-
ties) exists objectively and independently of perception or measurement” (Baggott 
2013, p. 8). But, having to merely assume this fundamental claim is an unacceptably 
weak position. The conceptualization of reality given by Baggott needs revision.
Baggott’s “Fact Principle” is similarly flawed, leaving modern science inade -
quately conceived. The statement of this principle begins well: “Our knowledge and 
understanding of empirical reality are founded on verified scientific facts derived 
from careful observation and experiment”(Baggott 2013, p. 12). Baggot then adds: 
“But the facts themselves are not theory-neutral. Observation and experiment are 
simply not possible without reference to a supporting theory of some kind” (Baggott 
2013, p.12).
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 153 ---
130
This principle founders on an ambiguity inherent in the term ‘facts’. The term 
‘the facts’ can be used to refer to the actual interactive relations that constitute the 
world—the dynamic relations of thing/events. The facts, in this sense, will be just 
what they are, regardless of human beliefs about them, and independent of theories 
about them. It is only when humans interact with the facts that human beings can 
bring about changes in a factual situation.
In a different sense, the term ‘the facts’ can be used to refer to the theoretical 
interpretations of the interactions of the world, as they are believed to be. In this 
sense, it is trivially true that “the facts”—the well-tested and well-warranted asser -
tions—are related to the theories one accepts. Because of this ambiguity, it seems 
advisable to refer to “what is” using the terms ‘nature’, or ‘the world’, or the set of 
‘dynamic interactive events’ currently of interest.
Experimental research projects are guided by tentative theories, and are designed 
to test the theory in question. One can truly say that experimental work is, by defini-
tion, and should be, theory-guided. But, the interactive dynamic relations that con-
stitute reality will occur regardless of the desire of the scientist to see his or her 
guiding theory confirmed. The results of the testing are independent of the theory 
being tested, which is to say that the actual interactions undergone are not theory 
dependent. Expected results are, by definition, theory-dependent, but actual results 
are not.
4.3.3  Reality, as “What Is”, and Truth
An entrée to the ontological question of reality may be made by considering the 
nature of human beings, and our experience, or, more broadly viewed, the nature of 
living organisms and our experiences. Living organisms, at a basic level of analysis, 
are simply certain sorts of happenings, that is, they are things/events which share 
certain kinds of dynamic interactions with their environment that warrant the clas -
sification as “living”. Living organisms are simply a subset of the dynamic interac-
tive things/events that, in their entirety, constitute nature, or reality, or “what is”. 
The experience of a living organism is not in any way separate, or separable, from 
the rest of nature, from the dynamic interactions that are natural things/events. The 
term ‘environment’ refers to the subset of the surrounding natural thing/events with 
which the organism is, at a particular time, in interaction with. The environment 
includes other organisms, as well as every other sort of interactions For example, a 
human creature is normally in interaction with “breathable air”, this being air hav -
ing the concentration of oxygen and carbon dioxide (along with a vast number of 
other molecules) that is consistent with the continuing life of the creature. But, the 
environment can change, and that change can be caused by interactive events that 
seem far removed from the creature. The organism’s environing conditions thus 
actually extend far beyond the location of the organism.
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 154 ---
131
This view is ontologically naturalistic, in the sense that there is held to be no such 
thing as a separate other-than-natural sort of Being. On this view, the interactions 
commonly termed ‘mental’ are simply a designated subset of natural organismic 
interactions. The term ‘mind’ refers to a certain subset of interactions internal to the 
creature that contribute to determining the activities of the creature. Mind, in this 
sense, includes cognitive, affective and volitional dynamic interactivities internal to 
the creature, that tend to guide its action in the environment.
Every organism is in continual interaction with its environing conditions. When 
the organism is complex enough to respond to certain interactions as signs, taking 
certain things/events to have significance for action, then the organism has the 
beginnings of mind. If the significance, the meaning, of the interactive experience is 
retained in the organism, so that past experiences can become operational factors in 
guiding future actions, then the organism has a full-fledged mind. Mind, in this 
interpretation, is simply a system of organismically conserved beliefs and disposi -
tions. When intentional social communication of meanings comes into being as an 
elaborate form of interaction, a language evolves, and a culture begins to develop. 
When the communicative organisms in a cultural setting are of sufficient social 
complexity, then, the system of meanings that is mind can be given an extra-  
organismic place in the world, e.g., in books.
This understanding of organisms, of experience, and of mind, is central to 
Dewey‘s naturalistic realism. The “mental” is simply one subset of the dynamic 
interactions that contribute to determining the actions of the organism.
This view is also ontologically realist, in the sense that the interactions that con-
stitute nature are for the most part not dependent upon the beliefs, wishes or desires 
of living organisms. The exception is obvious: this “independence of nature from 
organismic belief” obtains, except when the organism itself is one of the causal fac-
tors in interaction. As an organism acts, it will, being a natural concatenation of 
interactive events, participate in the determination of the interactive events that con-
stitute the emerging situation.
But, if an organism fails to (more-or-less) accurately represent the current state 
of dynamic affairs, the organism will be less able to act in pursuit of its goals, e.g., 
maintaining its living state. So, for example, in the event of a tornado, the organ -
ism’s taking shelter will affect the developing situation. But, the organism’s belief 
that it is safely sheltered does not mean that it is safely sheltered. A belief about the 
world, by itself, does not affect the dynamic interactions of the world. It is in this 
particular sense that reality is independent of belief.
Beliefs are only useful to the organism when they do shape the organism’s action. 
The organism’s beliefs, and its linguistic statements of belief, if applicable, are only 
likely to successfully guide action if they are true in the correspondence sense of 
truth. Modern science is the highly elaborated and rigorously tested process of the 
testing of tentative, potential beliefs. The goal is to develop knowledge, a set of 
beliefs about the interactive events of the world, and the conditions and conse -
quences of their occurrence that is well warranted to be true to the world.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 155 ---
132
4.4  Conclusion
In Experience and Nature Dewey wrote, “To entertain and believe fancies which once 
were spontaneous and general is today a sign of failure, of mental dis-equilibration.  
Inability to employ the methods of forming and checking beliefs which are available 
at a given time, whatever be the source of that inability, constitutes a disorientation” 
(Dewey 1925, lw.1.175).
Respect for persons does not entail respect for the belief-systems of those per -
sons. Respect for persons entails respect for the capacity of those persons to engage 
in the fundamentally human activities, among which is capacity to search for true 
belief. Respect for persons thus entails commitment to the support of each person in 
their quest for true belief. Respect for persons entails, among other things, a com -
mitment to the equal distribution of the social good of education. It means respect-
ful, and mutual, critiques of one another’s belief-systems, leading to mutual thought 
and the self-critique that is essential to the individual’s growth in cognition and in 
all other capacities.
To fail to teach to one’s students the critical evaluation of their own current 
belief-systems, which is necessary in the effort to maximize true belief and to reduce 
false belief, is a matter of fundamental disrespect for persons, and constitutes a 
profound mis-education. No culture is free from error, and none is immune to an 
overgrowth of destructive superstition. Growth in scientific knowledge – a genuine, 
modern, and growing scientific knowledge – is a necessary condition of effective 
human action to counter the destructive effects of human action on the global envi-
ronment, and hence, increasingly, on ourselves.
The state of cultural antagonism, of personal disrespect, and all too often, of 
hatred for the “other”, the different, is one of humanity’s chief problems. But, the 
thesis promoted in cultural studies of science education literature, that respect for 
others requires according equal respect to non-scientific methods of inquiry and to 
systems of belief about the world not warranted by scientific inquiry, is a recipe for 
social injustice. The essential goal of science education should be to advance social 
understanding of the methods of science and scientific knowledge about the dynam-
ics of the world. This is of critical importance if we are to effectively respond to the 
urgent issues we currently face.
References
Aikenhead, G. (2001). Integrating western and aboriginal sciences: Cross-cultural science teach -
ing. Research in Science Education, 31, 337–355.
Aikenhead, G. (2014). Enhancing school science with indigenous knowledge: What we know from 
teachers and research. Saskatoon: Saskatoon Public School Division.
Aikenhead, G., & Ogawa, M. (2007). Indigenous knowledge and science revisited. Cultural 
Studies of Science Education, 2, 539–620.
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 156 ---
133
Baggott, J. (2013). Farewell to reality: How modern physics has betrayed the search for scientific 
truth. New York: Pegasus Books.
Berkes, F. (1999). Sacred ecology: Traditional ecological knowledge and resource management. 
Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis Publishers.
Boyer, P. (Ed.). (2010). Ancient wisdom, modern science: The integration of Native knowledge 
in math and science at tribally controlled colleges and universities . Pablo: Salish Koottenai 
College Press.
Bradley, R. S. (2011). Global warming and political intimidation: How politicians cracked down 
on scientists as the earth heated up. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Brickhouse, N.  W. (2001). Embodying science: A feminist perspective on learning. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 38(3), 282–295.
Bunge, M. (1967/1998). Philosophy of science: From problem to theory . New Brunswick: 
Transaction Publishers.
Bunge, M. (2006). Chasing reality: Strife over realism. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Cajete, G. (2000). Native science: Natural laws of interdependence . Santa Fe: Clear Light 
Publishers.
Cook, J., Oreskes, N., Doran, P., Anderegg, W., Verheggen, B., Maibach, E.  Carlton, 
J.  Lewandowsky, S., Skuce, A., Green, S., Nuccitelli, D., Jacobs, P., Richardson, M., 
Winkler, B., Painting, R., & Rice, K. (2016, April 13). Consensus on consensus: A synthe -
sis of consensus estimates on human-caused global warming . http://iopscience.iop.org/
article/10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/048002/pdf
Cordero, A. (2001). Scientific culture and public education. In F.  Bevilacqua, E.  Giannetto, & 
M. R. Matthews (Eds.), Science education and culture: The contribution of history and phi -
losophy of science. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Deloria, V . (1997). Red earth, white lies: Native Americans and the myth of scientific fact. Golden: 
Fulcrum Publishing.
Deloria, V . (2002). Evolution, creationism, and other modern myths: A critical inquiry . Golden: 
Fulcrum Publishing.
Devitt, M. (1991). Realism and truth (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell Press.
Devitt, M. (2012). Scientific realism. In P. Greenough & M. P. Lynch (Eds.), Truth and realism. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dewey, J. (1907). The control of ideas by facts. In J. Boydston, (Ed.), Collected works of John 
Dewey (Middle works 4, pp. 78–90). Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Dewey, J. (1925). Experience and nature. In J. Boydston, (Ed.), Collected works of John Dewey: 
(Later works 1, pp. 3–437). Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Dewey, J. (1941). Propositions, warranted assertibility, and truth. In J.A. Boydston, (Ed.), Collected 
works of John Dewey: (Later works 14. pp. 168–188. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University 
Press.
Dunlap, R., & McCright, A. (2014). A widening gap: Republican and democratic views on climate 
change. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, 50(September/October 
2008), 26–35.
Elkana, Y . (1971). The problem of knowledge. Studium Generale, 24, 1426–1439.
Elmesky, R. (2011). Rap as a roadway: Creating creolized forms of science in an era of cultural 
globalization. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 6, 49–76.
Farrell, F.  B. (1996). Subjectivity, realism, and postmodernism: The recovery of the world . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gellner, E. (1974). The legitimation of belief. London: Cambridge University Press.
Griffin, D. (Ed.). (1988a). The reenchantment of science: Postmodern proposals . Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Griffin, D. (1988b). Introduction: The reenchantment of science. In D. Griffin (Ed.), The reen-
chantment of science: Postmodern proposals. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Harding, S. (1996). Gendered ways of knowing and the “epistemological crisis” of the West. In 
N. Goldberger, J. Tarule, B. Clinchy, & M. Belenky (Eds.), Knowledge, difference and power: 
Essays inspired by women’s ways of knowing (pp. 431–454). New York: Basic Books.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 157 ---
134
Harman, W. (1988). The postmodern heresy: Consciousness as causal. In D. Griffin (Ed.), The 
reenchantment of science: Postmodern proposals (pp. 115–128). Albany: State University of 
New York Press.
Irwin, A., & Bednarz, N. (1998). Constructivism and education: Beyond epistemological cor -
rectness. In M. Larochelle, N. Bednarz, & J. Garrison (Eds.), Constructivism and education  
(pp. 3–20). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Landau, I. (2008). Problems with feminist standpoint theory in science education. Science & 
Education, 17, 1081–1088.
Langdon, J. (Ed.). (2009). Indigenous knowledges, development and education. Rotterdam: Sense 
Publishers.
Larochelle, M., Bednarz, N., & Garrison, J.  (Eds.). (2009). Constructivism and education . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mahner, M., & Bunge, M. (1996). Is religious education compatible with science education? 
Science & Education, 5(2), 101–123.
Matthews, M. R. (2004). Reappraising positivism and education: The arguments of Philipp Frank 
and Herbert Feigl. Science & Education, 13(1–2), 7–39.
Matthews, M.R. (2015). Science teaching: The contribution of history and philosophy of science, 
2nd Updated Edn, New York: Routledge.
McCarthy, C. (1996a). When you know it and I know it, what is it we know? Pragmatic realism 
and the epistemologically absolute. The Proceedings of the Philosophy of Education Society, 
1996, 21–29.
McCarthy, C. (1996b). Does “the knowing” alter “the known”? On the troubling relation of facts 
and ideas in a Deweyan epistemology. Education and Culture: The Journal of the John Dewey 
Society, 13(2), 18–28.
McCarthy, C. (2000, Spring). Deweyan pragmatism and the quest for true belief. Educational 
Theory, 2000, pp. 217–227.
McCarthy, C. (2002). Claiming to know: Objectivity, truth and science. Philosophy of Education 
Yearbook, 2001, 346–348.
McCarthy, C. (2007a). Meaning, mind and knowledge: A pragmatic view. Philosophy of Education 
Yearbook, 2007, 421–429.
McCarthy, C. (2007b). The quest for transcendence in Dewey’s pragmatism, or, the view not held. 
Studies in Philosophy and Education, 26, 345–362.
McCarthy, C. (2014). Cultural studies in science education: Philosophical considerations. In M. R. 
Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philosophy and science teach-
ing (pp. 1927–1964). Dordrecht: Springer.
McCarthy, C. (2017). Chapter 17: Science in the course of study. In L. Waks (Ed.), Centennial 
handbook on Dewey’s democracy and education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCarthy, C., & Sears, E. (2000). Science education: Constructing a true view of the real world? 
Philosophy of Education Yearbook, 2000, 369–377.
Medin, D., & Bang, M. (2014). Who’s asking? Native science, western science and science educa-
tion. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Merchant, B. (2015). The most anti-science congress is recent history is now in session . http://
motherboard.vice.com/read/meet-the-most-anti-science-congress-in-modern-history
Metallic, J. (2009). Exploring Indigenous ways of knowing, being and doing in developing a cross- 
cultural science curriculum. In J.  Langdon (Ed.), Indigenous knowledges, development and 
education (pp. 97–108). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Meyer, X., & Crawford, B. (2011). Teaching science as a cultural way of knowing: Merging 
authentic inquiry, nature of science, and multicultural strategies. Cultural Studies of Science 
Education, 6, 525–547.
Nagel, T. (2012). Mind & cosmos: Why the materialist neo-Darwinian conception of nature is 
almost certainly false. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nicodemus, Y . (2013). Theory of African metaphysics. Copyright: Yongho N. Nichodemus.
C.L. McCarthy

--- PAGE 158 ---
135
Ogawa, M. (1995). Science education in a multiscience perspective. Science Education, 79 (5), 
583–593.
Ogawa, M. (1998). Under the noble flag of ‘developing scientific and technological literacy’. 
Studies in Science Education, 31(1), 102–111.
Omoregbe, J.  (1990). Knowing philosophy: A general introduction . Lagos: Joja Educational 
Research and Publishers, Ltd..
Pavlik, S. (2014). The Navaho and the animal people: Native American traditional ecological 
knowledge and ethnozoology. Golden: Fulcrum Publishing.
Peat, F. D. (2005). Blackfoot physics: A journey into the native American universe. Boston: Weiser 
Books.
Peirce, C. (1986/1878). The fixation of belief. In Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A chronological 
edition, Vol. 3: 1872–1878 (pp. 242–256). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Pigliucci, M. (2010). Nonsense on stilts: How to tell bunk from science . Chicago: The University 
of Chicago Press.
Popper, K. (2002/1935). The logic of scientific discovery. New York: Routledge (first published 
1935, as Logic der Forschung, Verlag von Julius Springer, Vienna, Austria)
Rescher, N. (1984/1999). The limits of science  (Rev. Edn). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh 
Press.
Ritskes, E. (2011). Indigenous spirituality and decolonization: Methodology for the classroom. 
In G. Sefa Dei (Ed.), Indigenous philosophies and critical education: A reader (pp. 367–385). 
New York: Peter Lang.
Roth, W. (Ed.). (2009). Science education from people for people: Taking a stand(point). New York: 
Taylor & Francis Books.
Roth, W., & Barton, A. C. (2004). Rethinking scientific literacy. New York: Taylor and Francis 
Books.
Roth, W., Tobin, K., & Ritchie, S. (2001). Re/constructing elementary science. New York: Peter 
Lang.
Sefa Dei, G. (Ed.). (2011). Indigenous philosophies and critical education: A reader  (pp. 367–
385). New York: Peter Lang.
Shahjahan, R., & Haverkos, K. (2011). Revealing the secular fence of knowledge: Towards rei -
magining spiritual ways of knowing and being in the academy. In G. Sefa Dei (Ed.), Indigenous 
philosophies and critical education: A reader (pp. 367–385). New York: Peter Lang.
Siegel, H. (1997). Science education: Multicultural and universal. Interchange, 28(2–3), 97–108.
Smith, W. (2013). Ancient wisdom and modern misconceptions: A critique of contemporary sci -
entism. Kettering: Angelico Press.
Snively, G., & Corsiglia, J. (2001). Discovering indigenous science: Implications for science edu-
cation. Science Education, 85, 6–34.
Sorell, T. (1994). Scientism: Philosophy and the infatuation with science. New York: Routledge.
Staver, J. (1998). Constructivism: Sound theory for explicating the practice of science and science 
teaching. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(5), 501–520.
Stocker, T. F., Qin, D., Plattner, G. K., Tignor, M., Allen, S. K., Boschung, J., Nauels, A., Xia, Y ., 
Bex, V ., & Midgley, P. M. (Eds.). (2014). Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. 
contribution of working group I to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel 
on climate change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tobin, K. (2015). Connecting science education to a world in crisis. Asia-Pacific Science 
Education, 1, 1–21.
Tobin, K., & Tippins, D. (1993). Constructivism as a referent for teaching and learning. In K. Tobin 
(Ed.), The practice of constructivism in science education . Washington, DC: American 
Association for the Advancement of Science Press.
Vision, G. (2004). Veritas: The correspondence theory and its critics. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
von Glaserfeld, E. (1993). Questions and answers about radical constructivism. In K. Tobin (Ed.), 
The practice of constructivism in science education . Washington, DC: American Association 
for the Advancement of Science Press.
4 Cultural Studies of Science Education: An Appraisal

--- PAGE 159 ---
136
Williams, R. (2015). Introduction. In R.  Williams & D.  Robinson (Eds.), Scientism: The new 
orthodoxy. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Wolpert, L. (1992). The unnatural nature of science: Why science does not make (common) sense. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2013/12/11/3045841/house-science-hearing-weather-climate/
http://thinkprogress.org/climate-denier-caucus-114th-congress/
http://www.joanneoellers.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Republican-and-Democratic-Views-
on-Climate.pdf
http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/11/james-inhofe-republican-climate-denier-
pope-francis
https://www.texastribune.org/2015/03/24/ted-cruz-texas-tribune-interview/
https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2016/03/21/a-transcripteditorial 
board -of-donald-trumps-meeting-with-the-washington-post-editorial-board/
C.L. McCarthy