Title: Epistemic Practices and Science Education
Pages: 161-187

--- PAGE 161 ---
139
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_5
Chapter 5
Epistemic Practices and Science Education 
Gregory J. Kelly and Peter Licona
This chapter draws from the empirical studies of scientific practice to derive impli-
cations for science teaching and learning. There has been considerable empirical 
work from multiple disciplines (cognitive science, sociology, anthropology, rheto -
ric) informing perspectives about science and the inner workings of scientific com-
munities and institutions. These interdisciplinary science studies examine the 
practices, discourses, and cultures of scientists and scientific communities. While 
the empirical study of science has a considerable history, including informing a 
naturalized philosophy of science, it is an area often less emphasized for informing 
education. Such empirical studies of science offer insights about science, provide 
implications for science learning, and model ways of investigating knowledge in 
action. These studies of disciplinary practices have parallels in education where 
ethnographic studies of the everyday work of teaching, learning, and schooling have 
a long tradition. Such studies examine the cultural practices of educational phenom-
ena in various settings, and similarly provide insights into the ways that knowledge 
is proposed, communicated, evaluated, and legitimized through sociocognitive 
practices.
G.J. Kelly (*) 
College of Education, The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, USA
e-mail: gkelly@psu.edu
P. Licona 
Elizabethtown College, PA, USA
e-mail: liconap@etown.edu
The authors would like to thank Richard Duschl and the members of the Penn State Education 
Discourse Group (Matthew Johnson, Yann Shiou Ong, Arzu Tanis Ozcelik, Jisun Park, Amy 
Ricketts, Lucia Sasseron, Carmen Vanderhoof) for comments on an earlier draft of this chapter.

--- PAGE 162 ---
140
A key contribution of this empirical work on the practice of knowledge construc-
tion is the shift in the consideration of the epistemic subject from the individual 
knower to that of a relevant social group. This research adds to the work in philoso-
phy identifying limitations of epistemologies based in, or assuming, a Cartesian 
subject. This shift suggests the need to examine the social processes determining 
what counts as knowledge, to consider a communal understanding of meaning, to 
evaluate ideas set in historical and public contexts, and to recognize the importance 
of the assessment of knowledge claims by relevant groups. Such social processes 
can become routinized and patterned over time becoming epistemic practices. 
These epistemic practices include public reasoning and adjudication of competing 
claims for knowledge.
Epistemic practices are the socially organized and interactionally accomplished 
ways that members of a group propose, communicate, evaluate, and legitimize 
knowledge claims. Drawing from studies of science and education, this chapter 
argues that epistemic practices are interactional (constructed among people through 
concerted activity), contextual (situated in social practices and cultural norms), 
intertextual (communicated through a history of coherent discourses, signs and 
symbols), and consequential (legitimized knowledge instantiates power and cul -
ture). Through application of these epistemic practices, communities justify knowl-
edge claims.
Through a review of research from education and science studies, the argument 
for the relevance of a focus on epistemic practices is developed. From this point of 
view, a number of implications for developing conceptual understanding, for learn-
ing, and for research methodology in science education are derived. The chapter 
shows how the use of empirical studies of scientific knowledge and knowledge con-
struction processes in schools offers contributions to thinking about science educa-
tion. This perspective complements the important normative work in epistemology 
to provide a balanced view of history, philosophy, and sociology of science in sci -
ence education.
5.1  Education Goals for Science and Engineering Education
In a review of major reforms in science education over the past 50 years, Duschl 
(2008) drew from learning science and science studies to propose that science edu-
cation be organized around conceptual, epistemic, and social learning goals. While 
these goals can be delineated, they do not appear as separate objectives of a given 
science lesson. Rather, they are to be integrated into lessons and experiences with 
each building off and supporting the others. For example, Duschl notes the impor -
tance of building models, constructing arguments, and using specialized forms of 
language in scientific communities. Such social practices involve and are dependent 
on cognitive processes and a history of conceptual knowledge that is brought to bear 
on decisions about argument and models (Toulmin 1972). Recognizing these goals 
are integrated and central to effective science education makes a shift away from 
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 163 ---
141
only the products of science, to a view of science that includes the evidentiary bases 
for knowledge and need for participation in the cultural practices leading to knowl-
edge construction (Kelly 2008, 2016; Longino 2002). The construction and assess-
ment of models, reasoning, and communication each entail use of specialized 
discourse (Kelly 2014a), and lead to ways that educational goals for science instruc-
tion tie to scientific literacy.
Debates about scientific literacy have a history with many educational goals 
and purposes (DeBoer 2000). Conceptual, epistemic, and social goals all entail the 
uses of discourses (spoken, written, symbolic) and pose communicative demands 
on  students. Building on these goals for science education is a set of considerations 
around the uses of language for learning. Norris and Phillips (2003) identified two 
broad forms of scientific literacy, fundamental and derived. Derived scientific liter-
acy refers to the knowledge to be an informed citizen about science and socioscien-
tific issues. These authors argue that to develop effective knowledge about 
socioscientific issues (derived sense of literacy), students need to be proficient in 
reading and writing scientific texts (fundamental sense). The argument we develop 
builds on this importance of language, but further considers how discourse pro -
cesses are central to the work of constructing, communicating, evaluating, and legit-
imizing knowledge claims (Kelly 2011). Discourse refers to language-in-use, 
including verbal and non-verbal communication and uses of inscriptions, signs, and 
symbols. Discourse positions people in social groups and identities. Social norms, 
expectations, and practices are constructed through such discourse processes over 
time, and in turn shape uses of discourse; thus, discourse both shapes and is shaped 
by sociocultural practices. Discourse practices are central to the processes of seek -
ing, building, and refining knowledge claims in science.
Across views of scientific literacy there is a common commitment to the need to 
develop understandings of science in context and to bring ethical and moral consid-
erations to bear on socioscientific decision-making. For example, Aikenhead et al. 
(2011), aim to develop capacity to engage with issues from a scientific perspective. 
They suggest that this capacity focus on knowing how to learn and developing 
knowing-in-action. From this perspective, propositional knowledge of science is too 
limited a goal. They propose rather that curricular goals for science build on a triad 
of content, processes, and contexts. Through a review of perspectives on scientific 
literacy, Norris, Phillips, and Burns (2014) characterize intended outcomes of scien-
tific literacy into three categories: values regarding states of knowing, values regard-
ing capacity to engage with science in context, and values regarding moral and 
intellectual development of learners.
These arguments for scientific literacy build a view of learning that entails a 
“mastery of a range of epistemic practices” (Saljo 2012, p. 10) that require knowing 
how to draw from the texts, signs and symbols of relevant communities and employ 
concepts in the processes of knowledge construction. Learning the discourse pro -
cesses of epistemic cultures occurs through acculturation into the ways of being 
instantiated by members of local communities (Kelly and Green 1998). Such local 
communities develop social language with unique features. For science, there are 
commonalities across social languages, for example the formalization of certified 
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 164 ---
142
propositional knowledge, and variations, such as ways such knowledge is talked 
into being in local contexts (e.g., field-based ecology research group, after school 
science club). Learning science requires participation in a community of more 
knowing others that provides contexts for use of social languages where acquisition 
of scientific social languages is possible (Leach and Scott 2003).
Such participation holds regardless of the diversity of emphases in science learn-
ing—products or processes of science. Different science curricula will place empha-
sis on different aspects of the conceptual, social, and epistemic goals for education. 
To illustrate some of these differences we consider three types of curricula, science 
as inquiry (Kelly 2014b), engineering education (Cunningham and Carlsen 2014), 
and socioscientific issues (Sadler 2004; Zeidler 2014). These orientations toward 
knowledge and products of knowledge across the three types of educational goals 
(conceptual, epistemic, social) are presented in Table  5.1. This table demonstrates 
the ways educational goals vary across three approaches to teaching science. In each 
disciplinary approach, different conceptual, epistemic, and social practices are 
foregrounded.
Developing knowledge, values, and capacity to apply knowledge in action 
requires a recognition by educators of a commitment to “certain paths and goals of 
development and growth” that are more valuable than others (Norris et al. 2014, 
p. 1319). The argument we develop here is that this commitment is not just to learning 
the products of science, but rather involves understanding the importance and value 
Table 5.1 Variation in foregrounding of the articulation of three educational goals across three 
approaches to teaching science
Disciplinary 
approach: Science Engineering Socioscientific issues
Educational goals:
Conceptual Construction and 
understanding of 
plausible models for 
representing and 
making sense of 
natural world
Design, analysis, and 
construction of models 
and technologies for 
specified purposes
Construction and 
understanding of science 
concepts and moral, 
personal, religious 
perspectives
Epistemic Understanding of the 
reasons, evidentiary 
bases for conceptual 
knowledge and 
models
Understanding and 
optimizing the 
functioning of 
technologies and 
evidentiary bases for 
measures of success
Understanding the multiple 
perspectives (e.g., scientific, 
moral, personal, religious) 
for the construction of 
coherent line(s) of 
reasoning supporting a 
position(s) on a 
controversial issue
Social Recognize the 
procedures used by 
epistemic cultures to 
generate, 
communicate, and 
evaluate knowledge 
claims
Recognize the 
procedures used by 
design and analysis 
teams and role of client 
in generating, 
communicating, and 
evaluating technological 
designs
Recognize the procedures 
for generating, 
communicating, and 
evaluating arguments 
supporting particular 
position(s) on an issue
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 165 ---
143
of the disciplinary nature of science and engineering fields. This means that our 
view of epistemology is not one of a personal way of knowing, but rather that there 
are disciplinary ways of knowing that can be empowering for learners and recog -
nized by legitimizing institutions. Thus, we turn to studies of science in action (his-
tory, philosophy and sociology of science, plus anthropology and rhetoric of 
science), to examine the processes and values associated across four categories of 
epistemic practices  - proposing, communicating, evaluating, and legitimating 
knowledge claims.
5.2  History, Philosophy, and Sociology of Science (HPS) 
and Epistemic Practices
Studies in the History, Philosophy, and Sociology (HPS) of science and science 
teaching have drawn largely from the fields of history and philosophy. For example, 
a recent comprehensive HPS handbook (Matthews 2014) leaves sociology out of the 
title and largely out of the series of chapters. The perspectives in this handbook and 
elsewhere drawing from history and philosophy of science are valuable and have 
advanced thinking in education in a number of ways (e.g., Duschl 1990; Matthews 
2015), including setting a prominent role for disciplinary knowledge in consider -
ations of educational aims. To complement such perspectives, in this chapter we 
draw from an alternative body of literature that sets scientific knowledge and prac-
tice (i.e., science-in-the-making, Kelly et al. 1998) as the foci of empirical investi-
gation. Studies from anthropology, sociology, and rhetoric of science have been 
introduced into conversations about science education in a number of ways over an 
extended period of time.1
Studies from the sociology of science have been ignored and often criticized in 
science education (e.g., Koertge 1998; Slezak 1994a, b; for alternatives, see Allchin 
2004; Kelly 2005). Such criticisms often focus on the ways that sociology of sci -
ence can be interpreted to offer a debunking critique of science. The emphasis on 
the social, causal explanations for the success for scientific theories and scientists 
by sociologists (Collins 1985) appears to run counter to not only the value of epis -
temology as a discipline, but also to a central educational goal of developing ratio-
nality among students. In a more recent book, Collins ( 2014) noted how a 
sociological understanding of science has identified the unique values, commit -
ments, and expertise of scientific communities (p. 124), which cohere with educa -
tional goals. While we recognize problems in the sociology of science, we make 
three counter arguments to such criticisms, and in doing so leave open the possible 
value of the empirical study of scientific practices.
First, it is important to differentiate normative from descriptive accounts of social 
practice. Translating descriptions of actual practice to normative goals misses the 
central point of the empirical studies of practice. Normative goals may be informed 
1 See: Collins 2007; Ford 2008; Heckler 2014; Kelly and Bazerman 2003; Kelly et al. 1993; Kelly 
and Crawford 1997; Roth et al. 1996; Stewart and Rudolph 2001.
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 166 ---
144
by studies of everyday life in social settings, but such educational goals are depen-
dent on deontological arguments that include a range of considerations beyond a 
replication of current practice. Empirical studies of practice identify how knowl -
edge is constructed in situ ; this may expand the range of understanding about 
knowledge construction, but not every behavior needs to contribute to normative 
goals. Second, for the purposes of educational theory, sociology of science and 
other empirical studies of science need to be read and understood from an educa -
tional point of view. Such studies may expand the range of knowledge about sci -
ence, bring to light inner workings of epistemic cultures, and identify ways that 
claims are modified through experimental and textual work. These valuable insights 
can contribute to the development of educational programs without suffering from 
excesses of a relativist epistemology (Allchin 2011). Third, ethnographic studies of 
science from sociology and anthropology offer a range of methodological orienta -
tions and approaches to understanding cultural practices of science. The overall 
stance of investigating science-in-the-making through inquiry into how knowledge 
is produced offers a model for studies of education (Kelly et al. 1998). This approach 
asks similar questions about what counts as knowledge in school settings. The 
examination of the ways that groups produce knowledge offers a model that can be 
taken up in education.
5.2.1  Illustrative Examples of Epistemic Practices 
from Education Informed by Science Studies
We define epistemic practices as the socially organized and interactionally accom-
plished ways that members of a group propose, communicate, evaluate, and legiti -
mize knowledge claims (Kelly 2008, 2016). Social practices are patterned actions 
that are recognizable among members of a group. Epistemic practices are central to 
both science and education. Practices are learned through participation and often 
entail extended interactions with members already familiar with the ways that prac-
tices are recognized as socially significant. Such practices are not static over time 
and may be contextualized to relatively local groups – for example, a laboratory 
technique may be invented and used in a local context of research before being 
spread with various dissemination activities. Thus, epistemic practices are defined 
and acknowledged in a group that can be very localized and mutable, or extend to 
large membership through formulation (e.g., Hamiltonian function, standardized 
laboratory protocols). These epistemic practices are formed in endogenous com -
munities and may be constructed and extended, modified and changed, and are 
based in substantive assumptions, such as the ontological categories of a discipline. 
Furthermore, in education, there are various forms of epistemic practice that vary 
with relevant pedagogical goals. For example, epistemic goals of an inquiry lab may 
be significantly different than those of a debate regarding socioscientific issues.
Since epistemic practices are field- and time-dependent (changing due to the 
challenges of knowledge production), there is not a limited set of “science practices.” 
This contrasts with how “the scientific method” is often interpreted in education as 
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 167 ---
145
a set of linear steps. Rather, there are disciplinary (and other!) ways of knowing 
that vary across the multiple ways that humans make sense of their experience. 
The point is not to define a given set of eight practices (NGSS Lead States 2013), 
or the five steps of the scientific method. Rather, the idea is to identify the ways 
people come to know and recognize the value of making sense in systematic ways 
that render evidence open for public scrutiny and evaluation.
To illustrate the four categories of epistemic practices (ways of proposing, 
communicating, evaluating, and legitimizing knowledge), we draw from a series of 
education studies of Kelly and his colleagues. These studies represent an empirical 
program of epistemology – that is, they focused on what counts as knowledge, rea -
soning, justification, and representation in science education settings. The studies 
were informed by science studies and educational ethnography.
One dimension of epistemic practices concerns the value of proposing knowl-
edge claims. Kelly et al. ( 2001) examined the discourse processes of four physics 
groups studying oscillatory motion. The student discourse was analyzed from a 
sociolinguistic perspective that considered the verbal and non-verbal communica -
tion, which included the signs and symbols, proxemics, and prosody of the conver-
sations (Green et al. 1988; Gumperz 2001). The student groups made a series of 
knowledge claims. In this example, students needed to make interpretation of the 
physical events (oscillating masses), symbols (real-time, computer generated 
graphs), verbal and written prompts (student talk,  teacher lab guide sheet), and 
embodied motion (student imitation of motion through physical movement of 
hands). The basis for much of the generation of knowledge claims was produced by 
the data acquisition and representation technologies. The computer generated visual 
texts were a consequence of the live complex physical phenomena and offered suf-
ficient interpretative flexibility (Knorr-Cetina 1995) to provoke sustained conversa-
tion. Thus, a series of knowledge claims, often as false starts and initial thinking, 
were central to the activity by providing a focus for the students’ processes of delib-
eration about the phenomena. The knowledge gleaned from the educational experi-
ence was supported by these knowledge claims  – that is, ways of proposing 
assertions about the physical phenomena.
The methodological orientation was supported by studies of scientific practice, 
including Garfinkel et al. ( 1981) analysis of the “local, interactionally produced, 
recognized, and understood embodied practices” (p. 135) of astronomers through 
the processes of discovering, naming, and textually identifying a pulsar. Much like 
the astronomers, the physics students made sense of the phenomena by proposing a 
series of claims that were considered and modified over time by the group 
members.
Kelly and Brown (2003) examined the communicative demands of learning sci-
ence through technological design. In this case, third grade students were tasked 
with using science to inform the design of functioning solar energy devices. 
Communicating knowledge claims is central to the development of knowledge gen-
eration. In this instance, the knowledge claims emerged from a series of events that 
required the students to work together in teams to study designs, brainstorm ideas, 
negotiate and renegotiate design strategies, and test and evaluate their solar devices. 
The students participated in multiple speech situations, where knowledge of science, 
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 168 ---
146
materials, and phenomena were in question. Knowledge claims were forwarded 
to multiple audiences (e.g., small student groups, presenting ideas to classmates, 
student “scientific” reporter). The technological design challenge offered students 
multiple forums for drawing from extant knowledge and for advancing their own 
thinking. In this study, the students were situated in forums where discourse was 
central to the academic and scientific task. They needed to use sense making, per -
suasion, and representation of their thinking. While the substance of the communi-
cation differed from the formalization often found in scientific texts, the epistemic 
practices and the need for formulating evidence in particular ways is analogous to 
the discursive work of scientists (Bazerman 1988; Traweek 1988). The inquiry 
processes and engineering designs necessitating communication and, in particular, 
forwarding knowledge claims deemed persuasive by the relevant audience.
Takao and Kelly (2003) applied rhetoric of science and argumentation analysis 
to consider ways of recognizing and evaluating adherence to scientific genres in 
writing. Assessing the merits of the presentation of evidence is one way that knowl-
edge claims can be evaluated. Drawing from rhetoric of science (Bazerman 1988; 
Gross 1989) and theories of argumentation (Kuhn 1992), this study first reviews key 
features of evidentiary-based arguments in science. Scientific evidence is presented 
in particular genres (patterned uses of language) with unique features—that is, 
knowledge claims are justified through socially accepted ways of presenting evi -
dence. The study focused on methods of assessment of university students’ uses of 
evidence regarding plate tectonics. Through a review of the literature and the analy-
sis of the students’ written arguments, key features of the situated nature of the 
genre of writing evidence were examined. In this case, the formulation of evidence 
entailed building from low inference claims to progressively higher order theoreti -
cal claims, while identifying coherence across epistemic levels of generality. The 
analysis of the students’ papers identified this genre-specific feature of using evi -
dence in geology. These features were difficult for even experienced graduate stu -
dent instructors to recognize in others’ writing. The example shows while the 
assessment of knowledge claims is important in science, the processes often remain 
tacit and unrecognizable for participants. This is an example of how science studies 
can make visible the epistemic practices associated with assessment knowledge claims.
In a study by Reveles et al. (2004), the teacher (Cordova) positioned his students 
to legitimize a scientific point of view  amidst competing ways of thinking about 
natural phenomena. In this third grade classroom the students are introduced to a set 
of epistemic practices (organized around investigating, communicating, and using 
evidence). In this case, the goal of developing improved scientific literacy required 
more than learning the conceptual knowledge of science, or even the abilities to 
read and write science (Norris and Phillips 2003) – although the uses of language 
was an important component. In this example the teacher made reference to science 
and scientists in an effort to develop students’ knowledge of disciplinary practices. 
He was able to accomplish this through meta-discourse, talk about the classroom 
talk. In doing so, he built on students’ initial ideas and made reference to how they 
were using scientific concepts to understand phenomena. This is an example of how 
fostering epistemic practices among young students differs from the uses of such 
practices in science fields.
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 169 ---
147
In the educational context, a key piece of the learning experience entailed devel-
oping students’ identities as science learners capable of participating and making 
sense of scientific practices. This is just one way that knowledge can be legitimized 
in and through classroom discourse. There are multiple ways that knowledge can be 
legitimized in science and engineering fields (Pinch 1986). These legitimation pro-
cesses often entail uses of texts and peer review and many agonistic struggles and 
competition (Latour 1987; Myers 1989, 1997). Knowledge claims can be proposed, 
communicated, and assessed, without entering into the socially recognized public 
knowledge and thus through the processes of legitimation such knowledge claims 
can become scientific knowledge.
5.2.2  Emerging Themes from Study of Epistemic Practices 
in Science and Education
5.2.2.1  Contexts of Knowledge Claims
Across the four studies mentioned in the previous section, and others in education 
building on science studies (Jiménez-Aleixandre 2014), an important feature of the 
learning process is a focus on knowledge across three types of contexts. In philoso-
phy of science, there was a distinction made between the (often messy and confus-
ing) context of discovery and the (inferentially tight) context of justification. Both 
of these are important for science learners. The context of discovery provides 
opportunities to learn about instrumentation, how ideas connect to phenomena, and 
how knowledge claims change through inquiry. The context of discovery also pro-
vides opportunities to learn about how seemingly subject-dependent processes such 
as observation, require cultural knowledge to learn how to observe (Norman 1998). 
The context of justification remains important, not only to understand how theories 
change over time (e.g., Duschl 1990; Matthews 2015), but also to understand the 
ways that evidence gets marshaled in science (Duschl and Grandy 2008). Another 
context of equal importance is the context of communication and presentation. This 
context does not occur after the inquiry processes, when the knowledge claims are 
completed, but throughout the contexts of discovery and justification, as knowledge 
claims are conceived, put forth, debated, formulated, reviewed, critiqued, and 
revised. For this, context issues of persuasion and audience play a central role.
5.2.2.2  Epistemic Subject as Local Endogenous Community
Studies of epistemology in science education have been based on the epistemology 
of scientific knowledge (e.g., views of theory change and rationality), or personal 
epistemologies of individual learners (e.g., how views of knowing influence learning). 
An alternative view informing this chapter emerges from studies of epistemology 
in situ , focusing on the situated contextual practices of knowledge construction 
(Kelly et al. 2012). From this point of view, the locus of attention centers on how 
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 170 ---
148
participants in an epistemic culture decide what counts as evidence, knowledge, and 
justification. The practices view of epistemology can be informed by both the study 
of disciplinary knowledge or of learners’ views of knowing, but also reorganizes the 
research approaches to actual practices of knowledge construction. From this point 
of view, a key feature of knowing is the recognition of the local endogenous com -
munity as the relevant epistemic subject (Kelly 2008; Longino 1993).
Situating the epistemic subject in a relevant community of knowers suggests a 
view of learning as socialization into ways of being, knowing, interacting, and par-
ticipating. Learning occurs through participation and engagement. Central to such 
participating is developing social meanings for terms, concepts, processes, and 
ways of being in a field. Under this orientation, teachers aim to engage students in 
epistemic practices through knowledge constructing activities. From theories of lan-
guage socialization, it is clear that it takes significant socialization and acculturation 
to have meaningful conversations about substantive scientific concepts and proce -
dures (e.g., s and p orbitals in atoms, mass spectroscopy).
As proposers of knowledge claims seek greater generality, claims migrate 
through increasingly broader levels of critique and legitimation. Longino ( 1990, 
2002) proposed a set of social norms for the development of social (scientific) 
knowledge. Longino recognized the important role of social processes and values in 
the evaluation and legitimation of knowledge claims. The four norms are the follow-
ing: The venue refers to the need for publicly recognized forums for the criticism of 
evidence, methods, assumptions, and reasoning (e.g., research meetings, conference 
presentations, and publications). Uptake refers to the extent to which a community 
tolerates dissent, and subjects its beliefs and theories to modification over time in 
response to critical discourse. A basis for criticism of the prevailing theories occurs 
through publicly recognized standards. These standards frame debates and criticism 
and evolve over time as research groups, communities and disciplines develop new 
knowledge and practices. Finally, Longino (2002) argued for communities charac-
terized by equality of intellectual authority, tempered by relevant levels of expertise 
and knowledge.
Longino’s argument is that such social norms are prescriptive – offering a nor -
mative account for public discourse in science. Such norms may be adaptable for 
learning contexts in education (Kelly 2014b). Longino’s perspective offers ways 
of integrating the results from the practices of inquiry into the social knowledge 
recognized and legitimized by an epistemic culture, thus showing the importance of 
normative considerations for epistemology.
5.3  Epistemic Practices in Science and Engineering 
Education
Studies of scientific and engineering practices offer a number of implications for 
science and engineering education. These studies contribute to the important 
dimension of curriculum validity by considering the epistemological dimensions of 
education. By identifying what counts as science, design, engineering, experiment, 
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 171 ---
149
and so forth, these studies open a range of possibilities for inventive, creative cur -
riculum development. The study of professional practice and the epistemic cul -
tures producing knowledge provides insights into not only how science and 
engineering are conducted, but also the ways in which knowledge is proposed, 
communicated, evaluated, and legitimized. Furthermore, ethnographic, sociological, 
and rhetorical studies of the actions, practices, and texts of professional practice 
offer models for the study of knowledge in education settings. These implications 
are noteworthy and complement the work that has emerged from the history and 
philosophy of science. Nevertheless, studies of professional practices cannot be 
taken without careful consideration of the educational contexts (McDonald and 
Songer 2008). Students often have considerably less knowledge and fewer and less 
developed habits of mind to bring to bear on issues of inquiry. Although when work-
ing under conditions with proper scaffolding, students have been shown to engage 
in knowledge building and reasoning (Lehrer and Schauble 2012), ethnographies of 
science also identify the highly competitive and sometimes ruthless rivalries in pro-
fessional communities that would be detrimental to educational purposes. So, while 
HPS, and in particular the empirical study of science and engineering practice, 
has demonstrable value for science education, such studies must be read from an 
educational point of view where issues of ethics, pedagogy, and human development 
outweigh views of authenticity. There are a number of emerging research programs 
in education that build on science studies, taking carefully considered readings of 
this work into the study of epistemic practices in education.
5.3.1  Research Programs Regarding Epistemic Practices 
in Science Education
Science studies have been taken up and applied to science education in a number of 
contexts and across a range of educational purposes (e.g., Kelly et al. 1993; Kelly 
and Crawford 1997; Roth et al. 1996). We now turn to research in science and engi-
neering education that brings science studies perspectives to education. These stud-
ies have a common orientation to consider epistemological issues as interactionally 
accomplished among members of an educational community for specific goals 
(Kelly et al. 2012). In this section we answer the question: What does a focus on 
epistemic practice contribute to the field of history, philosophy, and sociology of 
science and science teaching (HPS&ST)?
5.3.1.1  Nuanced Understandings of Language and Its Relationships 
to Meaning
As we view epistemic practices as the socially organized and interactionally accom-
plished ways that members of a group propose, communicate, evaluate, and legiti -
mize knowledge claims, engaging in epistemic practices involves making meaning 
among people through discourse. Discourse is language-in-use and includes spoken 
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 172 ---
150
and written language, uses of signs and symbols, and non-lexical elements of com-
munication such as body language and eye gaze. A number of studies in science 
education address epistemological questions through the study of discourse pro -
cesses. One such research program follows an approach labeled the practical episte-
mology analysis (Lidar et  al. 2010; Ostman and Wickman 2014). Rather than 
consider the epistemology of science as a known entity, and seeking to inculcate 
students into this perspective, a practical epistemology analysis focuses rather on 
the everyday practices of students and teachers making sense of phenomena and 
developing knowledge. This view takes epistemology as situated “in on-going com-
munication, action, and practice” (Ostman and Wickman 2014, p. 375) and is con -
sistent with the view of epistemic practices developed in this chapter. These studies 
examine meaning making, in situ, through analysis of the talk and action of mem -
bers of a group. As the focus is on the work of deciding what counts as knowledge, 
the authors refer to the perspective as practical epistemologies.
Practical epistemologies focus on what counts as knowledge and how partici -
pants construct knowledge in educational events (Wickman 2004). To examine such 
issues in learning contexts, the researchers draw from Wittgenstein (1958) and focus 
on the language games of science learning. In this case, language games identify 
how meanings are constructed in situated actions and tied to ways of life (Heckler 
2014). That is, the meanings of key terms are not taken for granted, but examined as 
either plausibly assumed or at stake in any given conversation. To examine practical 
epistemologies the research group has developed practical epistemological analysis 
(PEA). This approach considers those concepts that stand fast (assumed communal 
meaning) and the gaps (lack of initial understanding) that occur when students 
encounter challenges through talk or action (Wickman 2004). Students build rela -
tions with understood and effectively useful constructs across gaps in understand -
ing. This approach allows for a close examination of how students’ epistemologies 
in action account for the development of meaning. An example of this approach is 
provided by Lidar et al. ( 2010) who examined children’s discussion about gravity 
and the shape of the Earth. The study showed how children made different meaning 
from a shared situation. These meanings were mediated by relevant artifacts such as 
a celestial globe and maps, and were varied in their adherence to normative 
interpretation.
5.3.1.2  Disciplinarity and Variation in Epistemic Practices
Science may refer to a body of knowledge, a set of disciplines, or even a way of 
making sense of nature. The potential for commonality and differences across 
different substantive disciplines remains an open question for considerations of 
epistemic practices. That is, we would expect commonality, at least in a family 
resemblance manner, for some portions of science disciplines, but also recognize 
that considerable variation is likely. In this section we review some of the ways that 
epistemic practices are manifest in various science disciplines. Our purpose is to 
provide illustrative examples of how different disciplines make sense of those 
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 173 ---
151
aspects of nature studied, and what can be learned by looking across such 
perspectives.
The individual scientific disciplines – across the life sciences, physical sciences, 
and earth and space sciences  – are often conveniently grouped as “science” and 
naively assumed to represent common ways of knowing and epistemic practices. 
While there may be some commonality among general epistemic practices, each of 
the individual sciences may require students to engage in different ways of making 
sense and building knowledge (Rudolph 2000). For illustrative purposes we con -
sider some of the research around the disciplinarity in science education and exam-
ine the commonalities, but, more importantly, the differences across disciplines. 
Three examples make the point.
Ault (1998) used the term “domains of inquiry” in order to acknowledge that the 
different sciences ask different questions and use different data sets. What counts as 
a legitimate question, evidence, and reasoning varies according to each domain of 
inquiry. For example, Ault noted that the earth and space sciences seek to retrodict, 
or answer questions about the past, as opposed to other domains that seek to predict. 
What counts as data, evidence, and reasoning about past geological events differs 
from the data, evidence, and reasoning relevant to development of knowledge about 
biological organisms. Given such disciplinary differences, the epistemic practices in 
these domains may vary. This is evident in a set of discipline-specific criteria geol-
ogy education derived by Ault ( 1998). To engage in geological inquiry students 
need to draw from specific epistemic practices such as understanding constraints on 
ambiguity; drawing from independent, converging lines of inquiry; identifying 
proper taxonomies; extrapolating systems through time; and integrating across tem-
poral and spatial scales. This attention to domain specific epistemic practices would 
necessitate different pedagogical methods.
In the life sciences, Jimenez-Aleixandre ( 2014) sought to examine the connec -
tions between science learning and the epistemology of science and noted three 
interrelated dimensions: domain-general and domain-specific features of epistemol-
ogies, correct versus productive students’ epistemological positions, and comple -
mentary approaches to the relationships between epistemology and science learning. 
Relevant to our work is her attention to domain-general versus domain-specific 
epistemologies, most specifically her treatment of genetics and the three aspects of 
relevance for engaging students: understanding what counts as acceptable science, 
identifying patterns in data, and recognizing the differences between probabilism 
and determinism. Such understandings develop through student engagement with 
genetics and in particular, learning to use and critique evidence through argumenta-
tion. Her argument is that the goal of teaching genetics is to support students in 
developing the capacity to understand and evaluate pieces of information related to 
genetics. Thus, building the capacity to use and evaluate evidence develops in stu -
dents the abilities to learn and decipher socioscientific issues such as cloning, 
genetic screening, and commercial interests in genetics. This study shows how ways 
of engaging students in epistemic practices can develop scientific literacy in 
students.
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 174 ---
152
Erduran (2007) and Erduran and Duschl (2004) argued for domain specific epis-
temological considerations in the analysis of specific features of laws in sciences 
and models in chemistry. Erduran (2007) made the case that laws in chemistry, such 
as the periodic law, are not exact and deducible in the ways that laws, such as 
Newton’s law of gravitation, in physics are. She recommended a consideration of 
the application of philosophy of chemistry to chemical education in three distinct 
ways. First, she sought to develop ways that an epistemology of chemistry can be 
related to developmental patterns in students’ thinking with respect to understand-
ing how laws in chemistry are generated and evaluated. Second, she found ways that 
disciplinary-specific epistemology can be used to inform curriculum design. And 
third, epistemology of chemistry can be used to inform current and future chemistry 
teachers about how knowledge is structured in the discipline and how this structur-
ing is related to the teaching of chemistry.
While epistemic practices such as argumentation and evidence-based explana -
tions do indeed cross the boundaries of the science domains, such practices may be 
taken up and applied in domain specific ways that distinguish science and engineer-
ing disciplines from each other. Furthermore, the individual science subsumed 
under the large umbrellas of the life, physical, and earth and space sciences may 
also differ. Erduran ( 2007) made an argument noting the difference of the term 
“law” between chemistry and physics, both physical sciences. Similar inspection is 
needed in the individual life sciences (e.g. botany, zoology, mycology) as well as 
within earth and space science in order to consider how what counts as knowledge 
differs between the sciences.
5.3.1.3  Student Learning About Science Through Engagement 
in and with Science
One advantage of engaging students in epistemic practices of science and engineer-
ing is that they may be able to learn about the nature of the disciplines through 
participation. This is not to suggest that merely going through the motions of labo-
ratory procedures develops knowledge. Rather, the processes of inquiry, reasoning, 
and engineering design, among other ways of knowing, offer students insights into 
disciplinary approaches to knowledge construction if properly organized and 
reflected upon (Rudolph 2000). We have argued throughout this chapter that the 
epistemic practices we describe are illustrative examples of the kinds of ways vari-
ous science and engineering disciplines construct knowledge.
Irzik and Nola (2011) have applied Wittgenstein’s notion of family resemblances 
to the nature of science, or more properly, the natures of the sciences. They argue 
that across multiple disciplines of science there is a family resemblance of the kinds 
of activities, values, methodologies, and products. This approach has the advantage 
of not limiting the nature of knowing, recognizing the value of disciplined 
approaches to knowledge construction, and combined with reflective practices 
about activities, values, methodologies, and products may improve students’ under-
standings of and about science. Our examples of epistemic practices have largely 
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 175 ---
153
fallen into the category of activities, but this does not mean that values, methodolo-
gies, and products do not need to be examined and integrated into education as well. 
Furthermore, any choice of representation of epistemic practices requires a selec -
tion of the range of real-world practices of science (Rudolph 2002).
Science learning often situates students in sense making situations, with goals of 
developing propositional and procedural knowledge. The focus on knowledge con-
struction in student reasoning has led to the practical epistemology employed by 
students through engagement (Wickman 2004; Sandoval 2005). Wickman (2004) 
identified the ways that students learned what counted as a valid observation in 
chemistry. Students drew from the chemical phenomena, prior experience, and the 
expertise of the teacher. Through these processes, the students addressed gaps in 
their understanding by patching together meanings derived from use in the contexts 
of the learning situations. Sandoval (2005) took a similar approach, noting the ways 
that teaching about science (nature of science) has not been successful at developing 
robust understandings about science. He noted that engagement in inquiry does not 
develop an understanding about the epistemology of science. Rather, students are 
guided by the practical experiences of their locally relevant situation. They develop 
ways of knowing, or a practical epistemology, that are unlikely to be coherent and 
explicitly recognized by learners.
Other studies consider how students can learn about science through engagement 
in scientific activities. Ford (2008) drew from science studies and the psychology of 
learning to show how students come to understand roles as “constructors and criti-
quers” (p. 159) of claims. These are important roles that embody epistemic practices 
of scientists, and may help students take on the role of a skeptical observer. Ford is 
concerned with developing students’ capacity to assess claims as citizens. He argued 
that through engagement, students develop a grasp of practice, and while this may 
not develop immediately into declarative knowledge about science, it can inform 
reasoning in the public sphere about science issues.
One important dimension of constructing and critiquing claims is the epistemic 
criteria brought to bear on the decisions regarding evidence. Pluta et  al. ( 2011) 
examined middle school students’ criteria for judging the quality of scientific mod-
els. The students were shown to be able to generate epistemic criteria such as the 
explanatory functions of models, the role of evidence in making decisions about 
uses of models, the inclusion of appropriate details in the models, and the accuracy 
of the models as related to empirical observations. Given the prominent role of 
models in scientific reasoning (Giere 1999), these criteria are important parts of 
learning how to engage in the construction and critique of knowledge claims.
A number of studies of epistemic practices in education consider the ways that 
messages about science are communicated through engagement in activity. While 
such messages about science may not lead to robust understandings of professional 
practice (Sandoval 2005), often misconceptions about science are promulgated 
(Lemke 1990). For example, Oliveira et  al. ( 2012) examined teachers’ uses of 
hedges and boosters in conversations that implied different levels of certainty in 
science and thus reflect an implicit view of the nature of science. As teachers often 
followed the stepwise progression of ideas in textbooks, students received messages 
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 176 ---
154
about the authoritarian nature of science. In this study, the teachers’ choices of how 
to frame knowledge and draw on only specific practices limited students’ under -
standing of science. Interestingly, while science often publically views itself as open 
to revision and evidence, this value co-exists with the need to acculturate novices 
into the ways of being and knowing of the relevant epistemic community (Fleck 
1935/1979; Kuhn 1962/1996). While messages are communicated about science 
through practice, across these studies and others (Akerson et al. 2000), students are 
shown to need reflective meta-discourse about inquiry activities to develop under -
standings about science (Reveles et al. 2004). Engagement in epistemic practices 
provides a basis for such discussions and can offer insights into the processes of 
knowledge construction.
5.3.1.4  Broadening Uses of Knowledge to Social and Ethical Domains
Inquiry science and socioscientific issues are two approaches to science education 
that have gained prominence in recent years. These approaches share a common 
goal in the move away from a traditional approach in which science content is deliv-
ered from the teacher to the students with little attention to how this content was 
produced. While both of these approaches share a common goal, the epistemic prac-
tices necessitated by each approach differ. In order to focus on the different epis -
temic practices promoted by these approaches, it is necessary to consider the 
separate goals of each approach. Goals of an inquiry approach include promoting 
students to ask authentic questions, plan authentic investigations, and use the results 
of the investigations to provide answers to the questions. As students attempt to 
answer a scientific question, they bring to bear scientific evidence and reasoning. 
Engineering education is another approach that engages students in science, but for 
the purposes of technical design or analysis. Across these approaches are variations 
in the extent of the scope of the relevant ethical domains. In inquiry science, issues 
of ethics and values often center on the integrity of the research approach. 
Engineering entails ethics around the application of design and analysis to serve a 
human purpose, and often the concerns are safety, function, and cost.
The goal of a socioscientific approach is to develop scientific literacy by promot-
ing the exercise of informal reasoning in which students are compelled to analyze, 
evaluate, discuss, and argue varied perspectives on complex issues that are 
 ill- structured but fundamentally important to the quality of life in social and natural 
spheres (Sadler 2009; Zeidler 2014). As students consider and attempt to respond to 
the issue at hand, they may bring scientific, ecological, moral, religious, personal, 
and/or economic perspectives to bear on the issue. In contrast to an inquiry science 
approach, a socioscientific approach does not constrain explanations, arguments, 
evidence, or reasoning to only a scientific perspective. In addition, a socioscientific 
approach often requires students to take a position on or make a decision about a 
specific issue. In contrasting across approaches, we can consider the concept of 
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 177 ---
155
genetically modified organisms (GMO), in this case GMO corn. An inquiry approach 
might ask, “Does genetically modified corn grow better than wild corn?” On the 
other hand, a socioscientific issues approach might ask, “Should genetically 
modified corn be introduced into the natural ecosystem?” An engineering question 
might be “how can corn be modified to conform to a set of social and economic 
constraints?” While these approaches use the concept of genetically modified organ-
isms, each asks a different question, thus promoting different epistemic practices in 
answering the different questions.
In considering the epistemic practices promoted by these approaches we return 
to the four epistemic practices of proposing, communicating, evaluating, and legiti-
mating knowledge as proposed by Kelly (2008). While an inquiry approach focuses 
on the use of scientific knowledge, a socioscientific approach also considers knowl-
edge from other domains (e.g., ethical, economic, and religious). As such, students 
are required to engage in epistemic practices from various perspectives, some of 
which may be competing. The epistemic practices foregrounded by an inquiry 
approach would center on the construction, communication, evaluation, and legiti -
mization of a scientific explanation that answers a scientific question. The epistemic 
practices foregrounded by a socioscientific approach would require students to 
engage in these practices while attempting to answer the original socioscientific 
question that often involves taking a position. These arguments are multiple and 
originate from not only the scientific perspective but also ethical, moral, economic, 
and religious perspectives. In this way, each perspective may require students to 
construct, communicate, evaluate, and legitimate (or not) multiple and often com -
peting arguments.
What counts as evidence or reasoning from each perspective may vary, thus 
requiring students to engage in epistemic practices that go beyond the scope of the 
scientific content of the argument. For example, a student arguing from the scientific 
perspective may provide an argument regarding the ecological implications of intro-
ducing a GMO into the natural ecosystem. On the other hand, another student may 
provide an argument from a purely economic perspective regarding the increased 
yield of GMO crops. In yet a third case, a student may provide an ethical argument 
stating that it is wrong to introduce an organism produced in a lab into the ecosys -
tem. Each argument originates from a different perspective and would require stu -
dents to consider what counts as a strong (or weak) argument in each of these 
perspectives. While both inquiry science and socioscientific issues approaches to 
science education promote a move away from content-delivery pedagogy, each 
approach differs in the epistemic practices foregrounded. Engineering provides yet 
another set of practices that concern identifying the problem, assessing constraints, 
considering multiple solutions, and providing analysis. In each of these ways of 
drawing from science and engaging in knowledge building require that students 
appropriate and take up various epistemic practices.
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 178 ---
156
5.4  Characteristics of Epistemic Practice in Science 
and Engineering Education
Epistemic practices may be appropriated and taken up differently across a range of 
educational goals for STEM education. While there is no finite set of epistemic 
practices characterizing science or engineering, we present some illustrative 
examples across a range of educational goals in Table  5.2. For comparison sake we 
consider inquiry science (Kelly 2014b), engineering education (Cunningham and 
Carlsen 2014), and a socioscientific issues approach (Zeidler 2014). Some key dif-
ferences in educational goals and the nature of epistemic practices are evident in 
Table 5.2 Illustrative examples of epistemic practices three orientations toward science and 
engineering education
Disciplinary 
approach: Inquiry Science Engineering Socioscientific issues
Epistemic practices:
Propose Posing scientific 
questions
Designing scientific 
investigations to 
answer questions
Making observations
Envisioning relevant 
evidence based for an 
investigation
Building and refining 
models
Identifying problems
Considering problems 
in context
Applying scientific 
concepts and 
reasoning
Applying mathematical 
reasoning
Envisioning multiple 
solutions
Persisting and learning 
from failure
Using systems thinking
Posing questions – 
scientific, 
economic, moral, 
religious, ecological
Designing 
investigations to 
answer questions
Balancing multiple 
lines of reasoning
Constructing a rebuttal
Communicate Developing a scientific 
line of reasoning
Providing disciplinary- 
specific justification 
for knowledge claims
Writing a scientific 
explanation (lab 
report)
Communicating a verbal 
scientific explanation
Constructing a scientific 
explanation based on 
evidence and 
reasoning
Communicating 
effectively in working 
teams
Justifying project 
designs for given 
constraints
Communicating to the 
client
Constructing evidence 
based on 
investigations
Taking a position
Constructing 
(multiple) 
arguments based on 
evidence and 
reasoning
Presenting an 
argument
Engaging in a debate 
or role-play
(continued)
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 179 ---
157
this table. For example, inquiry science generally seeks to develop students’ capac-
ity to conduct investigations and, through this process, learn the knowledge and 
practices of a disciplinary community. The approach situates the students as inquir-
ers and seeks to develop ways of building knowledge through engagement, thereby 
developing over time the capacity among students to make sense of their world. 
Engineering education focuses on developing the knowledge of design and analysis 
through project-based approaches that require understandings of relevant science, 
math, and the cultural contexts of the client. This approach finds its solution in real 
world applications that are optimized given a set of constraints. A socioscientific 
issues approach situates science in a social problem and requires that students draw 
from current knowledge, build on this knowledge, and apply moral and ethical rea-
soning to taking a position regarding a controversial issue. In each of these three 
orientations to learning science, there are shared and mutually exclusive epistemic 
practices. As previously discussed (Kelly 2016), epistemic practices are interac -
tional, contextual, intertextual, and consequential.
Table 5.2 (continued)
Disciplinary 
approach: Inquiry Science Engineering Socioscientific issues
Evaluate Assessing merits of a 
scientific claim, 
evidence or model
Assessing a line of 
scientific reasoning
Evaluating scientific 
explanation
Considering alternative 
explanations
Making tradeoffs 
between criteria and 
constraints
Using data to drive 
decision making
Placing value on 
constraints and client 
needs
Assessing merits of a 
scientific claim
Evaluating evidence 
(what counts as 
evidence – moral, 
ethical, scientific, 
etc.)
Assessing lines and 
types of reasoning
Evaluating arguments 
holistically
Legitimize Building group 
consensus for 
scientifically sound 
explanations
According value to the 
explanation that most 
closely matches the 
preexisting 
scientifically accepted 
theories
Recognizing knowledge 
by relevant epistemic 
community
Considering 
implications of 
solutions
Making evidence- based 
decisions
Acknowledging 
evaluation of 
successful technology 
by client
Building consensus or 
acceptance of the 
most convincing 
argument
Recognizing value of 
positions taken in 
debate
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 180 ---
158
Each action in the world occurs in a time and place. As these actions are 
developed and routinized, they can be recognized as patterns. Such patterns begin 
as actions members of a group take through social interaction. Engaging in social 
practices defines what counts as knowing and knowledge, such as proposing ideas, 
testing hypotheses, representing concepts, evaluating merits of candidate solutions, 
recognizing alternatives, justifying knowledge claims, and legitimizing conclusions 
(see Table  5.2). Thus, in any instance, epistemic practices are constructed in the 
moment, as they are interactionally accomplished, among people, texts, and tech -
nologies. While each interaction is situated and contextualized, participants of a 
group draw from common knowledge, and make reference to previous knowledge 
and ways of participating. Research in science education has demonstrated how 
discourse processes are central to knowledge construction (e.g., Kelly and Crawford 
1997; Wickman 2004). The ways of talking and being, including uses of signs and 
symbols are characteristic of epistemic cultures (Kelly 2014a, b).
Epistemic practices are contextualized in time, space, social practices, and cul -
tural norms. Knowledge is constructed through specific processes with variations 
across disciplines and ways of knowing (Knorr-Cetina 1999; Longino 1990). 
Knowledge construction occurs over time through a series of interactions from 
interactions around data collection, to conversations about interpretation, to forms 
of representation, and to processes of communication, evaluation, and legitimation 
(Bazerman 1988; Lynch 1992). Engaging in epistemic practices thus occurs in vari-
ous venues and settings and such practices need to be examined as they occur in the 
making (Kelly et al. 1998). Thus, the study of epistemic practices needs to be situ -
ated in specific contexts. This suggests that the study of knowledge construction 
needs to occur in situ, through an examination of the processes leading to socially 
agreed-upon knowledge. The study on such micro-moments of interaction needs to 
take into consideration the ways that cultural practices are established over longer 
time scales and how such cultural practices enter into moments of interaction. 
This suggests looking across time scales to consider how epistemic practices 
emerge, vary, change, and influence social processes (Kelly 2008; Lemke 2000; 
Wortham 2003). Events constructed in the moment (e.g., a decision regarding 
anomalous data, consideration of ethical implications regarding a socioscientific 
issue) draw from contexts, practices, texts, and artifacts created at longer time scales 
(Goodwin 2000). For example, the genre of an experimental article in science 
(Bazerman 1988) becomes a cultural model that can be taken up and used to create 
new texts within this patterned use of language (Kelly and Bazerman 2003; Takao 
and Kelly 2003).
Discourse processes make use of and reference to previous discourse, both 
spoken and written texts, including the various signs and symbols characteristic of 
disciplinary knowledge, and are thus intertextual (Bazerman 2004; Green and 
Castanheira 2012). Reference to previous texts builds continuity and common 
knowledge as members of a social group (e.g., student laboratory group, profes -
sional research team, environmental activists) define and make use of shared 
assumptions of meaning (Wittgenstein 1958). Intertextuality serves as a method to 
identify socially salient concepts comprising common histories and cultural 
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 181 ---
159
experiences (Vygotsky 1978). For example, students taking a stand regarding a 
socioscientific issue (Licona and Kelly 2015) may make reference to relevant 
published facts of the matter (e.g., characteristics of the ecology of an endangered 
species) and to definitions and policies (e.g., legal definitions). These texts serve as 
reference to decisions regarding how to use science to reason through a problem.
Knowledge claims are proposed, communicated, evaluated, and legitimized 
through social processes. Thus, epistemic practices have consequences for what 
knowledge counts for participating members of a group. Members entering into a 
knowledge generating culture bring ways of knowing with them that may or may 
not count or be recognized (Traweek 1988), as often in science and education 
knowledge claims need to be modified to build acknowledgement as legitimate 
(Kelly et al. 2001; Myers 1997). The empirical study of ways that knowledge is 
legitimized identifies how power, culture, and social processes are tied to what gets 
taken for knowledge in certain contexts (Kelly 2016).
5.5  Research Directions for the Study of Epistemic Practices 
in Education
We have argued that a focus on epistemic practices should be part of the pedagogy 
for science and engineering education across a range of educational goals. Education 
seeks to develop knowledge, skills, values, and ways of knowing and learning. 
Importantly, while substantive, conceptual knowledge plays a role in learning ways 
of knowing (i.e., epistemic practices depend on substantive knowledge), developing 
the capacity to learn and know should be a major goal of education. In this section 
we draw from the literature considered in previous sections of the chapter to con -
sider plausible research directions for the study of epistemic practices in education. 
We propose following four directions: (a) development of learning of epistemic 
practices, (b) disciplinarity and learning, (c) cultural and linguistic diversity and 
learning epistemic practices, and (d) learning about science through engagement 
in practice.
A number of studies have begun to show the value of a focus on epistemic prac-
tices for science education (Manz 2014; Sandoval 2005; Wickman 2004). This posi-
tive direction opens up questions for further research. Kelly (2014b) argued that the 
learning of epistemic practice in science inquiry settings depends on and requires 
understanding of relevant concepts to the problem at hand. This means that, rather 
than learning domain general science process skills, students learn epistemic prac -
tices (e.g., posing questions, justifying claims) through engaging in problems where 
conceptual knowledge is evoked and applied. This poses research questions for the 
field. For example, what is the interaction of particular types of epistemic practices 
with substantive, disciplinary knowledge? What knowledge do students need to 
effectively employ epistemic practices in inquiry settings? How can the develop -
ment of conceptual and epistemic knowledge co-occur and develop synergies? 
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 182 ---
160
We know that students bring a variety of experiences and knowledge to educational 
situations (González et al. 2006). These previous experiences may be resources for 
developing and learning epistemic practices.
Questions relevant to this topic include: What knowledge do students bring? 
How are students’ outside of school ways of knowing relevant and helpful for devel-
oping disciplinary practices? Each learner and group of learners brings different 
experiences and thus offers a unique set of opportunities for learning, both for indi-
viduals within a group, but also how the group learns over time to function and 
become an epistemic community (Kelly 2008). Finally, there may be ways that 
maturation and development are related to ways that students learn to engage in 
epistemic practices: What are the learning progressions for epistemic practices? 
How can school science and engineering be designed to gauge students’ develop -
ment trajectories and potential?
Scholars focusing on epistemology and learning have identified the ways that 
disciplinary knowledge and ways of knowing vary across the sciences (Ault 1998; 
Erduran 2007; Jimenez-Aleixandre 2014). While often grouped together, each of 
the sciences, and even more so, fields of engineering, vary in the ways that they 
investigate and solve relevant problems in their respective fields. While we recog -
nize these differences, and acknowledge that such differences should not be glossed, 
science teachers face the problem of developing the knowledge, inquiry abilities, 
values, and applications of science and engineering in real settings. Furthermore, 
nuances in disciplinarity may be lost on students. This poses a number of research 
questions about disciplinarity and learning: What are the ways that understandings 
about the sciences and engineering fields can be refined through empirical inquiry? 
How is knowledge gained about such practices relevant to teaching? To what extent 
do students learn to transfer epistemic practices gained in one discipline (e.g., rec -
ognizing anomalies to a distribution of data) to another discipline with different 
substantive knowledge (e.g., epidemiology and atmospheric sciences)?
We live in an increasingly multilingual and multicultural world. Different ways 
of knowing offer opportunities to learn about and draw from alternative ways of 
making sense and learning (Varelas et al. 2008; Varelas et al. 2012). Students bring 
ways of sense making to educational events that can be drawn into school activities, 
thus serving as resources for learning. Furthemore, various sciences produce their 
own cultural ways of being with particular ways of communicating, producing 
knowledge, and being a member of the group (Knorr-Cetina 1999; Watson-Verran 
and Turnbull 1995). Thus, learning science or engineering can be viewed as a pro -
cess of acculturation in which new members both learn the extant ways of being and 
doing, but also transform the current practice through innovation and change. 
Research questions emerging from this area include: What sorts of ways of knowing 
do students bring to educational events? How can these ways of knowing contrib -
ute? How can access to the practices of epistemic cultures be made visible and 
opened to learners?
Finally, engaging in epistemic practices offers contexts for discussion and reflec-
tion about science and engineering fields (Akerson et  al. 2000; Kelly 2014a, b). 
While it is generally recognized that merely engaging in activity does not produce 
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 183 ---
161
propositional knowledge about science (Abd-El-Khalick 2012; Sandoval 2005), 
learning to propose, communicate, evaluate, and legitimize knowledge claims can 
provide a basis for discussions, reflection, and further reading about how science 
and engineering operate, the values in these disciplines, and limitations of these 
ways of approaching problems. Research in these areas may consider the following 
questions: What are the relationships between competency in certain epistemic 
practices and learning science and engineering? How are epistemic practices gen -
erative of new knowledge of and about science and engineering? What sorts of 
engagement and reflection leads to learning of and about science and engineering 
that support decision making for socioscientific issues?
5.6  Conclusion
Our argument in this chapter is that engagement in epistemic practices is an impor-
tant part of a robust science education. Part of the need to engage in epistemic prac-
tices is to learn values of knowledge-producing communities  – the value of 
persuasion over force, open-mindedness over dogma, and consideration of alterna-
tive solutions, and so forth (Rorty 1991). Scientific explanation and argument are 
not technical procedures, as they do not have specific formulas that can be translated 
easily to the pedagogy of science education. We drew from three types of educa -
tional approaches (inquiry, engineering, socioscientific issues), each with different 
goals, to identify illustrative examples of epistemic practices across these contexts. 
Each of these approaches can support goals for scientific literacy, suggested by 
Aikenhead et al. ( 2011): developing the capacity to engage with issues from a sci -
entific perspective. Central to such engagement is an understanding of the disciplin-
ary ways of proposing, communicating, evaluating, and legitimizing knowledge 
claims. Through such engagement, connected to carefully organized pedagogy, stu-
dents may build capacity to participate as informed citizens in the public sphere.
References
Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2012). Examining the sources for our understandings about science: 
Enduring conflations and critical issues in research on nature of science in science education. 
International Journal of Science Education, 34, 353–374.
Aikenhead, G., Orpwood, G., & Fensham, P. (2011). Scientific literacy for a knowledge society. 
In C.  Linder, L. Östman, D.  A. Roberts, P.  Wickman, G.  Erikson, & A.  McKinnon (Eds.), 
Exploring the landscape of scientific literacy (pp. 28–44). New York: Routledge.
Akerson, V . L., Abd-El-Khalick, F., & Lederman, N. G. (2000). Influence of a reflective explicit 
activity-based approach on elementary teachers' conceptions of nature of science. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 37, 295–317.
Allchin, D. (2004). Should the sociology of science be rated X? Science Education, 88, 1–13.
Allchin, D. (2011). Evaluating knowledge of the nature of (whole) science. Science Education, 
95, 518–542.
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 184 ---
162
Ault, C.  R. (1998). Criteria of excellence for geological inquiry: The necessity of ambiguity. 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35, 189–212.
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge: The genre and activity of the experimental arti-
cle in science. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Bazerman, C. (2004). Intertextualities: V olosinov, Bakhtin, literary theory, and literacy studies. In 
A. F. Ball & S. Warshauer Freedman (Eds.), Bakhtinian perspectives on language, literacy, and 
learning (pp. 53–65). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Collins, H. M. (1985). Changing order: Replication and induction in scientific practice. London: 
Sage.
Collins, H. M. (2007). The uses of sociology of science for scientists and educators. Science & 
Education, 16, 217–230.
Collins, H. M. (2014). Are we all scientific experts now? New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Cunningham, C.  M., & Carlsen, W.  S. (2014). Precollege engineering education. In N.  G. 
Lederman & S. K. Abell (Eds.), Handbook of research on science education (V ol. 2, pp. 747–
758). Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
DeBoer, G. E. (2000). Scientific literacy: Another look at its historical and contemporary mean -
ings and its relationship to science education reform. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 
37(6), 582–601.
Duschl, R.  A. (1990). Restructuring science education: The importance of theories and their 
development. New York: Teacher's College Press.
Duschl, R. A. (2008). Science education in three-part harmony: Balancing conceptual, epistemic, 
and social learning goals. Review of Research in Education, 32, 268–291.
Duschl, R., & Grandy, R. (2008). Consensus: Expanding the scientific method and school science. 
In R. Duschl & R. Grandy (Eds.), Teaching scientific inquiry: Recommendations for research 
and implementation (pp. 304–325). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Erduran, S. (2007). Breaking the law: Promoting domain-specificity in chemical education in the 
context of arguing about the periodic law. Foundations of Chemistry, 9(3), 247–263.
Erduran, S., & Duschl, R. A. (2004). Interdisciplinary characteristics of models and the nature of 
chemical knowledge in the classroom. Studies in Science Education, 40, 105–138.
Fleck, L. (1935/1979). Genesis and development of a scientific fact. (F. Bradley & T. J. Trenn, 
Trans.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ford, M. (2008). Disciplinary authority and accountability in scientific practice and learning. 
Science Education, 92, 404–423.
Garfinkel, H., Lynch, M., & Livingston, E. (1981). The work of discovering science construed with 
materials from the optically discovered pulsar. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 11, 131–158. 
Giere, R. (1999). Science without laws. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
González, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (Eds.). (2006). Funds of knowledge: Theorizing practices 
in households, communities, and classrooms. New York: Routledge.
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 32, 1489–1522.
Green, J., & Castanheira, M. L. (2012). Exploring classroom life and student learning: An inter -
actional ethnographic approach. In B.  Kaur (Ed.), Understanding teaching and learning: 
Classroom research revisited (pp. 53–65). Rotterdam: Sense.
Green, J. L., Weade, R., & Graham, K. (1988). Lesson construction and student participation: A 
sociolinguistic analysis. In J. L. Green & J. O. Harker (Eds.), Multiple perspective analyses of 
classroom discourse. Norwood: Ablex.
Gross, A. (1989). The rhetoric of science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gumperz, J.  J. (2001). Interactional sociolinguistics: A personal perspective. In D.  Schiffrin, 
D. Tannen, & H. E. Hamilton (Eds.), Handbook of discourse analysis (pp. 215–228). Malden: 
Blackwell.
Heckler, W. S. (2014). Research on student learning in science: A Wittgensteinian perspective. 
In M. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philosophy and science 
teaching (pp. 1381–1410). Dordrecht: Springer.
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 185 ---
163
Irzik, G., & Nola, R. (2011). A family resemblance approach to the nature of science for science 
education. Science & Education, 20, 591–607.
Jiménez-Aleixandre, M. P. (2014). Determinism and underdetermination in genetics: Implications 
for students’ engagement in argumentation and epistemic practices. Science & Education, 23, 
465–484.
Kelly, G. J. (2005). Discourse, description, and science education. In R. Yerrick & W.-M. Roth 
(Eds.), Establishing scientific classroom discourse communities: Multiple voices of research on 
teaching and learning (pp. 79–108). Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kelly, G. J. (2008). Inquiry, activity, and epistemic practice. In R. Duschl & R. Grandy (Eds.) 
Teaching scientific inquiry: Recommendations for research and implementation (pp. 99–117; 
288–291). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Kelly, G. J. (2011). Scientific literacy, discourse, and epistemic practices. In C. Linder, L. Östman, 
D. A. Roberts, P. Wickman, G. Erikson, & A. McKinnon (Eds.), Exploring the landscape of 
scientific literacy (pp. 61–73). New York: Routledge.
Kelly, G.  J. (2014a). Discourse practices in science learning and teaching. In N.  G. Lederman 
& S. K. Abell (Eds.), Handbook of research on science education, volume 2  (pp. 321–336). 
Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kelly, G. J. (2014b). Inquiry teaching and learning: Philosophical considerations. In M. Matthews 
(Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philosophy and science teaching  
(pp. 1363–1380). Dordrecht: Springer.
Kelly, G. J. (2016). Methodological considerations for the study of epistemic cognition in prac -
tice. In J. A. Greene, W. A. Sandoval, & I. Braten (Eds.), Handbook of epistemic cognition  
(pp. 393–408). New York: Routledge.
Kelly, G. J., & Bazerman, C. (2003). How students argue scientific claims: A rhetorical-semantic 
analysis. Applied Linguistics, 24(1), 28–55.
Kelly, G. J., & Brown, C. M. (2003). Communicative demands of learning science through tech -
nological design: Third grade students’ construction of solar energy devices. Linguistics & 
Education, 13(4), 483–532.
Kelly, G. J., & Crawford, T. (1997). An ethnographic investigation of the discourse processes of 
school science. Science Education, 81(5), 533–559.
Kelly, G. J., & Green, J. (1998). The social nature of knowing: Toward a sociocultural perspec -
tive on conceptual change and knowledge construction. In B.  Guzzetti & C.  Hynd (Eds.), 
Perspectives on conceptual change: Multiple ways to understand knowing and learning in a 
complex world (pp. 145–181). Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kelly, G. J., Carlsen, W. S., & Cunningham, C. M. (1993). Science education in sociocultural con -
text: Perspectives from the sociology of science. Science Education, 77, 207–220.
Kelly, G. J., Chen, C., & Crawford, T. (1998). Methodological considerations for studying science- 
in- the-making in educational settings. Research in Science Education, 28(1), 23–49.
Kelly, G.  J., Crawford, T., & Green, J.  (2001). Common tasks and uncommon knowledge: 
Dissenting voices in the discursive construction of physics across small laboratory groups. 
Linguistics & Education, 12(2), 135–174.
Kelly, G.  J., McDonald, S., & Wickman, P.  O. (2012). Science learning and epistemology. In 
K. Tobin, B. Fraser, & C. McRobbie (Eds.), Second international handbook of science educa-
tion (pp. 281–291). Dordrecht: Springer.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1995). Laboratory studies: The cultural approach to the study of science. In 
S. Jasanoff, G. E. Markle, J. C. Peterson, & T. Pinch (Eds.), Handbook of science and technol-
ogy studies (pp. 140–166). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic cultures: How the sciences make knowledge. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Koertge, N. (1998). Postmodernisms and the problem of scientific literacy. In N. Koertge (Ed.), 
A house built on sand: Exposing postmodern myths about science  (pp. 257–271). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962/1996). The structure of scientific revolutions (3rd ed.). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education

--- PAGE 186 ---
164
Kuhn, D. (1992). Thinking as argument. Harvard Educational Review, 62(2), 155–178.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society . 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leach, J., & Scott, P. (2003). Individual and sociocultural views of learning in science education. 
Science & Education, 12, 91–113.
Lead States, N.  G. S.  S. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States . 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (2012). Seeding evolutionary thinking by engaging children in model-
ing its foundations. Science Education, 96, 701–724.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning and values. Norwood: Ablex.
Lemke, J. L. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial 
systems. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 7(4), 273–290.
Licona, P. & Kelly, G. J. (2015, April). Arguing from evidence in an English/Spanish dual lan -
guage middle school science classroom . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
NARST. Chicago, IL.
Lidar, M., Almqvist, J., & Ostman, L. (2010). A pragmatist approach to meaning making in chil -
dren’s discussions about gravity and the shape of the earth. Science Education, 94, 689–709.
Longino, H. E. (1990). Science as social knowledge: Values and objectivity in science inquiry . 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Longino, H. E. (1993). Subjects, power, and knowledge: Description and prescription in feminist 
philosophies of science. In L. Alcoff & E. Potter (Eds.), Feminist Epistemologies (pp. 101–
120). New York: Routledge.
Longino, H. E. (2002). The fate of knowledge. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lynch, M. (1992). Extending Wittgenstein: The pivotal move from epistemology to the sociology 
of science. In A.  Pickering (Ed.), Science as practice and culture  (pp.  215–265). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Manz, E. (2014). Representing student argumentation as functionally emergent from scientific 
activity. Review of Educational Research.
Matthews, M. (Ed.). (2014). International handbook of research in history, philosophy and science 
teaching. Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. (2015). Science teaching: The contribution of history and philosophy of science, 20th 
anniversary revised and (expanded ed.). New York: Routledge.
McDonald, S., & Songer, N. B. (2008). Enacting classroom inquiry: Theorizing teachers' concep -
tions of science teaching. Science Education, 92, 973–993.
Myers, G. (1989). The pragmatics of politeness in scientific articles. Applied Linguistics, 10, 1–35.
Myers, G. (1997). Texts as knowledge claims: The social construction of two biology articles. In 
R. A. Harris (Ed.), Landmark essay on the rhetoric of science: Case studies  (pp. 187–215). 
Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Norman, A. (1998). Seeing, semantics and social epistemic practice. Studies in the History and 
Philosophy of Science, 29, 501–513.
Norris, S. P., & Phillips, L. M. (2003). How literacy in its fundamental sense is central to scientific 
literacy. Science Education, 87, 224–240.
Norris, S., Phillips, L. M., & Burns, D. P. (2014). Conceptions of scientific literacy: Identifying 
and evaluating their programmatic elements. In M. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook 
of research in history, philosophy and science teaching (pp. 1317–1344). Dordrecht: Springer.
Oliveira, A.  W., Akerson, V .  L., Colak, H., Pongsanon, K., & Genel, A. (2012). The implicit 
communication of nature of science and epistemology during inquiry discussion. Science 
Education, 96, 652–684.
Ostman, L., & Wickman, P.-O. (2014). A pragmatic approach on epistemology, teaching, and 
learning. Science Education, 98, 375–382.
Pinch, T. (1986). Confronting nature. Dordrecht: R. Reidel.
Pluta, W. J., Chinn, C. A., & Duncan, R. G. (2011). Learners' epistemic criteria for good scientific 
models. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 48, 486–511.
G.J. Kelly and P. Licona

--- PAGE 187 ---
165
Reveles, J. M., Cordova, R., & Kelly, G. J. (2004). Science literacy and academic identity formula-
tion. Journal for Research in Science Teaching, 41, 1111–1144.
Rorty, R. (1991). Objectivity, relativism, and truth. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Roth, W. M., McGinn, M. K., & Bowen, G. M. (1996). Applications of science and technology 
studies: Effecting change in science education. Science, Technology & Human Values, 21 , 
454–484.
Rudolph, J. L. (2000). Reconsidering the ‘nature of science’ as a curriculum component. Journal 
of Curriculum Studies, 32, 403–419.
Rudolph, J.  L. (2002). Portraying epistemology: School science in historical context. Science 
Education, 87, 64–79.
Sadler, T.  D. (2004). Informal reasoning regarding socioscientific issues: A critical review of 
research. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41, 513–536.
Sadler, T. D. (2009). Situated learning in science education: Socio-scientific issues as contexts for 
practice. Studies in Science Education, 45(1), 1–42.
Saljo, R. (2012). Literacy, digital literacy and epistemic practices: The co-evolution of hybrid 
minds and external memory systems. Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 7(1), 5–19.
Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students’ practical epistemologies and their influence on 
learning through inquiry. Science Education, 89, 634–656.
Slezak, P. (1994a). Sociology of science and science education: Part I. Science & Education, 3(3), 
265–294.
Slezak, P. (1994b). Sociology of science and science education. Part 11: Laboratory life under the 
microscope. Science & Education, 3(4), 329–356.
Stewart, J., & Rudolph, J. L. (2001). Considering the nature of scientific problems when designing 
science curricula. Science Education, 85, 207–222.
Takao, A. Y ., & Kelly, G. J. (2003). Assessment of evidence in university students' scientific writ-
ing. Science & Education, 12, 341–363.
Toulmin, S. (1972). Human understanding (V ol. 1: The collective use and evolution of concepts). 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Traweek, S. (1988). Beamtimes and lifetimes: The world of high energy physicists . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Varelas, M., Pappas, C. C., Kane, J. M., Arsenault, A., Hankes, J., & Cowan, B. M. (2008). Urban 
primary-grade children think and talk science: Curricular and instructional practices that nur -
ture participation and argumentation. Science Education, 92, 65–95.
Varelas, M., Kane, J. M., & Wylie, C. D. (2012). Young black children and science: Chronotopes of 
narratives around their science journals. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 49, 568–596.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes . 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard.
Watson-Verran, H., & Turnbull, D. (1995). Science and other indigenous knowledge systems. In 
S. Jasanoff, G. E. Markle, J. C. Peterson, & T. Pinch (Eds.), Handbook of science and technol-
ogy studies (pp. 115–139). Sage: Thousand Oaks.
Wickman, P.-O. (2004). The practical epistemologies of the classroom: A study of laboratory 
work. Science Education, 88, 325–344.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical investigations (3rd ed.). (G.  E. M.  Anscombe, Trans.). 
New York: Macmillan Publishing.
Wortham, S. (2003). Curriculum as a resource for the development of social identity. Sociology of 
Education, 76, 229–247.
Zeidler, D. L. (2014). Socioscientific issues as a curriculum emphasis. In N. G. Lederman & S. K. 
Abell (Eds.), Handbook of research on science education  (V ol. 2, pp.  697–726). Mahwah: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
5 Epistemic Practices and Science Education