Title: Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective from Educational Psychology
Pages: 188-214

--- PAGE 188 ---
167
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_6
Chapter 6
Strategies for Learning Nature of Science 
Knowledge: A Perspective from Educational 
Psychology
Erin E. Peters-Burton
6.1  Introduction
Learning how to think scientifically is an important skill for citizens in modern 
democratic states, and perhaps even more importantly in authoritarian states where 
serious and critical thinking is not encouraged. In order to have a democratic com -
munity of people who can make knowledgeable decisions, citizens need to be able 
to evaluate the reliability of evidence and be able to use logic and reason, particu -
larly when voting on scientific issues but on many other matters as well. This paper 
examines parallels between nature of science instruction and the processes explained 
by self-regulated learning theory, with a particular emphasis on the extension of 
effective strategies for learners which can be enhanced by the use of self-regulated 
learning cycles in a classroom setting.
6.2  Influence of Epistemological Stance on Science Learning
Epistemic cognition is the foundation for scientific thinking. Formal scientific epis-
temologies are those that express beliefs about how knowledge is generated by pro-
fessionals in science which can be derived from the activities within a discipline 
(Sandoval 2005; Knorr-Cetina 1999). Practical epistemologies consist of beliefs 
that organize the ideas students have about the natural world. This paper focuses on 
ways to develop student practical epistemologies so that they are more aligned with 
formal scientific epistemologies. Over 20 years of accumulated evidence has dem-
onstrated that a person’s own epistemology plays a role in developing reasoning, 
connecting evidence and claims, and setting the foundation for learning 
E.E. Peters-Burton (*) 
College of Education, George Mason University, Fairfax, V A, USA
e-mail: epeters1@gmu.edu

--- PAGE 189 ---
168
approaches.1 Students’ views of their understanding of science are often not influ -
enced until they examine their own scientific epistemology (Kalman 2009). Further, 
supporting the growth of epistemological understandings can improve student sci -
entific conceptions (Monk and Osborne 1997) and expand a student’s scientific 
mindset (Kalman and Aulls 2003).
The ways that curriculum materials communicate an epistemic stance are also 
influential in supporting learning in science. The choices made by curriculum 
designers in communicating the epistemological authenticity in the activities have 
influence over the student epistemologies developed during the lessons (Chinn and 
Malhotra 2002). Curriculum materials that clearly communicate the epistemic stance 
of the activity by explaining the purposes of investigations have led to well- designed 
student investigations (Schauble et al. 1995) and more systematic explanations of 
investigation results by students (Dunbar 1993). Conversely, simply engaging in 
inquiry may not be sufficient to develop ideas about the nature of science.2 Because 
it is important to actively engage student epistemological orientation, curriculum 
materials must communicate well-informed epistemic stances in science to promote 
continued learning in science. Students studying maths who believe that knowledge 
is a collection of isolated facts that must be given to them by an authority that will 
never change will most likely have shallow strategies for learning and little ability to 
think critically (Muis 2004). Students who are aware of their constructivist epistemic 
cognition have deeper processing strategies in learning (Muis 2004).
6.3  Views of NOS for Curricular Purposes
Although there is some disagreement among philosophers of science about what 
ideas comprise the nature of science (Alters 1997), there is considerable agreement 
among science curriculum reform documents in the United States, Canada, United 
Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand about what NOS views should be included in 
the curriculum (McComas et al. 2009). Osborne et al.  (2003) conducted a study to 
determine the agreement of scientists, historians, philosophers, and sociologists 
about what ideas about science should be taught in schools. The themes found in this 
study are resonant with the science education reform documents analyzed by 
McComas and Olson (1998): scientific method and critical testing, creativity, histori-
cal development of scientific knowledge, science and questioning, diversity of scien-
tific thinking, analysis and interpretation of data, science and certainty, hypothesis 
and prediction, and collaboration (Osborne et al. 2003). These themes are also simi-
lar to the aspects of NOS employed by Lederman  et  al. ( 2014) and colleagues. 
However, more recently these consensus lists have been criticized for being oversim-
plified (Clough 2007) and for not representing NOS as contextual and heterogeneous 
features of science (Matthews 2012). Hodson (2014), Allchin (2011), and Irzik and 
1 Hofer and Pintritch (2002), King and Kitchener (1994), Kuhn (1999), Tsai (2000).
2 Khishfe and Abd-El-Khalick (2002), Meichtry (1992), Sandoval and Morrison (2003).
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 190 ---
169
Nola (2014) have called for revisions that would broaden the view of nature of sci-
ence knowledge, keeping what is relevant from the consensus lists (such as rigorous 
testing) while embracing new concepts of science (such as sociocultural dynamics). 
The Family Resemblance Approach (Erduran and Dagher 2014) further consolidates 
epistemic, cognitive, and social aspects into a holistic model that characterizes sci-
ence as a “range of practices, methodologies, aims and values, and social norms that 
have to be acknowledged when teaching science” (p.  19). As shifts occur in the 
conceptualization of the nature or features of science, it becomes even more impera-
tive to consider the implications of how students may learn these constructs. The 
model for learning NOS proposed in this paper is responsive to the configuration of 
NOS as broad contextualized understanding of NOS, NOS approaches that help stu-
dents demarcate what is science and what is not science (Smith and Scharmann 
2008), and those that are more performance based (see Irzik and Nola 2014).
Augmenting typical content instruction with nature of science knowledge can 
add to the intrinsic value of the course, generate student interest, and equip students 
to make decisions regarding socio-scientific issues (Driver  et al. 1996). To more 
faithfully represent the scientific discipline to students, teachers must know what 
constitutes an authentic view of scientific practices, such as those outlined in the 
Next Generation Science Standards, and how this view can be effectively commu -
nicated to students (Wong and Hodson 2009). However, many science teachers do 
not have adequate knowledge about the discipline or are not familiar with a scientist 
(Hogan 2000), and they must rely on curriculum materials to communicate 
NOS. This situation is complicated because curricular materials and textbooks often 
portray the discipline of science as stereotypical (Hodson 1993; McComas 2008), 
such as portraying a singular way scientists investigate questions as a rigid step-by- 
step progression through the scientific method. Another difficulty for teachers 
teaching about NOS effectively is that some teachers may regard NOS standards as 
discrete list of components and not demonstrate the interaction of the aspects of 
NOS because of their limited exposure to the scientific discipline. Additionally, it is 
a concern that teachers may teach aspects of NOS in a solely decontextualized fash-
ion, such as presenting the model of the tentativeness of science as a puzzle without 
addressing any authentic situations in science where there are competing theories 
(Allchin 2011). Given the various science education reforms that include a focus on 
NOS, it is clear that teaching and learning the nature of science in elementary and 
secondary classrooms is valued. However, there are still many unresolved issues in 
both the areas of teaching and learning science as a way of knowing effectively for 
students in the K-12 arena.
6.4  Effective Teaching of NOS Knowledge
An examination of the efforts to create NOS-friendly curriculum for the past 50 years 
can give insight to how we understand effective teaching of NOS knowledge. The 
curricula that were developed in the 1960s and 1970s in the United States through 
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 191 ---
170
National Science Foundation funding, such as the Physical Science Study Curriculum 
(PSSC) and the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS), supported student 
learning using hands-on methods and science process skills, through which it was 
believed students could learn NOS implicitly by engaging in science activities with-
out any reference to the rationale of the choices made in an investigation (Lawson 
1982; Rudolph 2002). However, comparative studies of student outcomes demon -
strated that students who participated in the PSSC curricula had similar views of 
NOS as compared to traditional textbook orientated courses (Trent 1965). Jungwirth 
(1970) found that students participating in the BSCS Yellow curricula also did not 
have an enhanced view of NOS when compared with students in traditional biology 
programmes. More studies using a variety of measures of NOS knowledge continued 
to show the same results. Tamir ( 1972) conducted a large- scale study using BSCS 
Yellow, PSSC, and traditional science courses as treatment conditions across 44 dif-
ferent high schools with approximately 3500 students and found no significant differ-
ences in NOS views across the three treatments. In 1992, Meichtry found that students 
engaged in the BSCS curricula actually had several NOS understandings that were 
less informed as compared with students in a traditional class, with an overall result 
of no differences in NOS views. Overwhelming evidence has demonstrated that 
teaching NOS implicitly through hands-on science activities or inquiry lessons and 
expecting students to notice particular epistemic stances is not effective.
6.5  Defining Explicit and Reflective Approaches
This section reviews the literature regarding the description of explicit and reflective 
NOS approaches within science education interventions and is the first step in ana-
lyzing cognitive processes which will lead to a more systematic evaluation of effec-
tive strategies. Explicit instruction of NOS involves “cognitive instructional 
outcomes that should be intentionally targeted and planned for in the same manner 
that abstract understandings associated with high-level scientific theories are inten-
tionally targeted” (Khishfe and Abd-El-Khalick 2002, p.  555). Several NOS 
researchers describe an explicit instructional approach as one that deliberately 
focuses learners’ attention on various aspects of NOS during classroom instruction, 
discussion, and questioning. 3 Duschl and Grandy ( 2012) further distinguish two 
versions of explicit instruction of NOS. Version 1 being taught as “explicit refer -
ences to a set of heuristic principles that philosophers and historians of science use 
to characterize science as a way of knowing” (p. 3) and Version 2, which they advo-
cate, “conceptualized in terms of cognitive, epistemic, and social practices and the 
material and technological contexts that characterize doing science” (p. 3).
Reflective instructional elements have been defined in the NOS literature as “pro-
viding students with opportunities to analyze the activities in which they are engaged 
from various perspectives (e.g., a NOS framework), to map connections between 
3 Akerson and V olrich (2006), Bell et al. (2011), Khishfe (2012), McDonald (2010).
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 192 ---
171
their activities and ones undertaken by others (e.g., scientists), and to draw general-
izations about a domain of knowledge (e.g., epistemology of science)” (Khishfe and 
Abd-El-Khalick 2002, p. 555). In a more holistic description of reflective approaches 
to NOS, Abd-El-Khalick and Lederman (2000) explain that “reflective elements are 
designed to emulate the sort of activities that historians, philosophers, and sociolo-
gists engage in their efforts to understand the workings of science” (p.  691). 
Likewise, Scharmann et al. (2005) believe reflective instruction should challenge 
learners to think about how their work illustrates NOS and how their inquiries are 
similar to or different from the work of scientists. Although the terms “explicit” and 
“reflective” have been described in the science education literature and some 
descriptions of explicit and reflective approaches on specific subject matter have 
enough detail to be replicated (Rudge and Howe 2009), most descriptions are very 
general and difficult to operationalize for systematic use in classrooms.
6.6  Explicit and Reflective Approaches to NOS Instruction
Due to the lack of impact of implicit methods on student learning of NOS, science 
educators and researchers turned to an explicit means of teaching NOS, in which 
intentionally selected events in science instruction are emphasized as a feature of 
the discipline of science (Akindehin 1988). A shift from the passive, implicit meth-
ods to more explicit methods of attention focusing showed promise in changing 
student views of NOS (Billeh and Hasan 1975; Ogunnivi 1983). Since it was becom-
ing apparent that students would not be able to learn NOS understandings from the 
environment in which they engaged but could be successful when teachers directed 
their attention to particular ways the discipline of science was conducted, an empha-
sis on teacher understanding of NOS became prominent (Akerson  et al.  2000). 
These studies showed that an explicit approach in teacher professional development 
was more effective than an implicit approach in creating more sophisticated views 
of NOS with both in-service and pre-service teachers,4 building evidence for choos-
ing explicit methods as an effective instructional tool for teaching NOS. An addi -
tional component of instruction, a reflective approach to NOS instruction was added 
to the explicit approaches, which emphasized that the learner describes their under-
standing of NOS after they learn through explicit methods. 5 The focus on teaching 
through explicit and reflective methods has shown promise in shifting views of NOS 
to be more sophisticated. Note that this paper refers to these methods as explicit and 
reflective, whereas much of the prior research refers to these methods as explicit, 
reflective. The separation of the components is intentional because each approach is 
considered a different process for the purposes of this paper.
4 Abd-El-Khalick and Lederman ( 2000), Akerson and Hanuscin ( 2007), Hanuscin et al. ( 2006), 
Khishfe (2008), Scharmann et al. (2005), Schwartz et al. (2004).
5 Abd-El-Khalick (2005), Abd-El-Khalick and Akerson (2004), Abd-El-Khalick et al. (1998).
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 193 ---
172
Although explicit and reflective methods have garnered improved outcomes in 
NOS views for both teachers and students, these methods are not effective for all 
students nor are they effective in encouraging the retention views over time for all 
learners. For example, Leach et al. (2003) found that students aged 9–16 were not 
able to use a logical, comprehensive evaluation of the relationship between explana-
tion and theory in their study. Morrison  et al.  ( 2009) compared elementary and 
secondary teacher change in their NOS views after a professional development and 
found that secondary teachers with previous experience with research did not 
change their views of scientists or NOS, but elementary teachers did. Perhaps the 
most prominent limitation in changing NOS views is the difficulty that teachers who 
have even a more sophisticated NOS view after instruction have difficulty translat-
ing their own knowledge into their classroom practice.6 Explicit methods have been 
fruitful but not overwhelmingly successful. Therefore, finding ways to teach NOS 
effectively is needed. The purpose of this paper is to address parallels between sci-
ence education research on explicit and reflective approaches and processes in edu-
cational psychology research on self-regulated learning theory. Because 
self-regulated learning theory has more articulated processes of learning and moti -
vation than those currently described in explicit/reflective NOS instruction, adop -
tion of a self-regulated learning orientated framework offers more distinct methods 
of measuring processes of learners engaged in NOS instruction.
6.7  A Focus on Student Learning in NOS
A difficulty with current approaches for explicit and reflective NOS instruction in 
the literature is that they communicate a direction for the teacher, but do not indicate 
the strategies that the student should be incorporating to enhance NOS learning. 
This is problematic, because it does not give guidance to the learner about produc -
tive approaches and does not consider possibilities for learners to self-direct and 
ultimately be life-long learners about scientific developments in knowledge. 
Descriptions of lessons in NOS focus on how the teacher should design the lessons 
which are ultimately student-centered, but do not provide information about how 
the student should learn NOS. What types of strategies, cognition, metacognition, 
and behaviors should students have to take on responsibility for learning? Good 
learning theory can help to answer this question.
6 Abd-El-Khalick et al. (1998), Abd-El-Khalick and Akerson (2004), Akerson et al.  (2000).
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 194 ---
173
6.8  Useful Learning Strategies from Educational Psychology
Because the descriptions of explicit and reflective NOS instructional methods from 
the literature consist of directions for the teacher and not for the student, there is a 
need to explain how students should be interacting with the teacher and curriculum 
materials to support NOS learning. Since the purpose of this paper is to build an 
approach for how students learn NOS from the foundation of the teacher directions 
given in current explicit and reflective approaches, self-regulated learning theory 
(SRL) is a useful lens from which to examine student learning processes (Zimmerman 
2000). Self-regulated learning theory describes how learners react to their learning 
environment with their currently held beliefs, values, knowledge, motivation, and 
metacognitive strategies. According to SRL, individuals are not merely passive 
players in the learning process; rather, through development of personal perceptions 
of efficacy, they have the potential to exert personal agency and control over their 
learning goals along with their behaviors, emotions, and environments that lead to 
these goals (Bandura 2001; Zimmerman 2000). SRL has been used to improve 
achievement in diverse areas such as use of instructional media (Henderson 1986), 
volleyball skills (Zimmerman and Kitsantas 2002), and science instruction (Cleary 
and Labuhn 2013). In addition there are emerging studies that demonstrate the use 
of an SRL-based intervention can improve NOS knowledge (Peters and Kitsantas 
2010b; Peters 2012), teaching using inquiry (Peters-Burton 2013), and teaching 
using argumentation (Peters-Burton 2013).
6.9  Self-Regulated Learning Theory
Students who exhibit proactive, goal-directed and strategic behaviors, high levels of 
self-awareness, and efficient reflection and adaptation skills are typically referred to 
as sophisticated self-regulated learners (Zimmerman 2000). These students are 
driven, have many strategies from which to solve problems, seek help efficiently and 
effectively, and persist even when they face a challenge. Self-regulated students are 
able to self-direct their behaviors to overcome personal challenges presented by 
these activities, and they will often need minimal supports or feedback from teachers 
or other adults (Zimmerman 2000). Specifically in science education, researchers 
have argued that effective instruction should not only increase learning of scientific 
topics, it should help to nurture the motivation, strategic behaviors and thinking, and 
metacognitive skills of students, particularly as they progress through middle and 
high school contexts (Peters and Kitsantas 2010a; Sinatra and Taasoobshirazi 2011). 
Several studies have investigated the effects of self- regulatory interventions incorpo-
rating key SRL subprocesses on the science achievement of school-aged students 
(Cleary and Labuhn 2013; Peters 2012; Peters and Kitsantas 2010b).
Collectively, these studies show that when SRL subprocesses, such as planning, 
metacognitive monitoring and self-evaluation, are incorporated into classroom or 
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 195 ---
174
tutoring activities, they are effective in developing science content knowledge and 
scientific thinking practices. Although the processes are controlled by the student, 
the teacher can establish an environment, model behaviors, and prompt students to 
think about key characteristics of their learning. Beginning from a foundation of the 
current explicit and reflective NOS approaches explained in the literature, this paper 
demonstrates ways self-regulated learning theory can be used to describe advanta -
geous learning processes for students engaging in learning about NOS.
6.10  Subprocesses of the Phases of Self-Regulated Learning
Zimmerman (2000) defined three phases in the SRL model: forethought, perfor -
mance, and self-reflection, which occur temporally around a defined learning task. 
The forethought phase requires that students organize the content and skills they 
already know about the learning task (e.g., how scientists determine what is empiri-
cal), consider how much they value the learning task, and assess their level of com-
fort in tackling the learning task. The performance phase includes processes that 
occur during the action, such as implementation of the task and self-monitoring 
against a standard for the field (e.g., considering if the link between claims and 
evidence constitutes validity and reliability). The self-reflection phase refers to the 
processes that occur after the performance efforts which influence a learner’s 
response to the action such as the self-judgments about feedback given on the per -
formance (e.g., students compare external feedback to their internal judgment of the 
performance) and to what they attribute their successes or failures. Within the three 
phases of self-regulated learning theory, there are a total of 12 subprocesses as 
shown in Fig. 6.1 that have been empirically identified. The definitions for each 
subprocess can be found in Table 6.1. Because students continue to cycle through 
the SRL feedback loops, when students enter successive iterations of the loop that 
yield cognition and behaviors that lead to improved learning, they have more sophis-
ticated forethought, performance, and self-reflection processes.
Feedback, which is designed to reduce gaps between what student can do or 
know relative to what is expected, is recognized as a core characteristic of effective 
instructional and intervention activities from an SRL perspective. However, research 
has also shown that teachers often do not provide sufficient regulatory and process 
feedback to help students re-strategize or adjust their approaches to learning (Cleary 
and Zimmerman 2006; Hattie and Timperley 2007). Teaching of NOS using an 
explicit and reflective approach is not enough; monitoring students’ self-regulated 
learning processes while learning is an important additional piece to this puzzle.
To illustrate the nature of this feedback loop and how SRL processes are con -
nected to learning NOS in a classroom context, which further demonstrates the use-
fulness of monitoring self-regulated learning processes in students while enacting an 
explicit and reflective NOS approach, consider the following case scenario of a stu-
dent who poorly integrates SRL processes in his learning. Andrew, a student of aver-
age intellectual potential, displays very poor integrated thinking skills and regulation 
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 196 ---
175
Forethought phase
Goal setting
Strategic planning
Self-efficacy
Task interest
Goal orientation
Performance phase
Attention focusing
Self-instruction
Self-monitoring
Self-reflection phase
Self-evaluation
Attributions
Self-reactions
Adaptivity
Fig. 6.1 Subprocesses of self-regulated learning
Table 6.1 Definitions of sub-processes of self-regulated learning
Subprocess Definition
Forethought
Goal setting Decisions made about the focus of learning (Locke and Latham 1990)
Strategic 
planning
Methods chosen by learner to attain goals (Zimmerman and Martinez-Pons 
1992)
Self-efficacy Personal beliefs about one’s ability to perform a task (Bandura 1986)
Task interest Orientation to continue learning, even if there are no rewards (Deci 1975)
Goal orientation Continuum ranging from wanting to look successful, even if there is no deep 
learning, to mastery of the task, even if there are no rewards (Ames 1992)
Performance
Attention 
focusing
Ability for a learner to shift focus away from distractions and attend to the 
most profitable information (Corno 1993)
Self-instruction Ability for learner to continue to proceed through a learning task (Schunk 
1982)
Self-monitoring 
(metacognitive 
monitoring)
Ability for learners to be aware of their learning processes and check on the 
forward movement of these processes (Flavell 1979)
Self-reflection
Self-evaluation Examining the result of a performance and considering points of alignment 
and misalignment with an exemplary case (Zimmerman 2000)
Attributions Ascribing the reasons why alignment or misalignment occurred during the 
performance (Zimmerman and Martinez-Pons 1992)
Self-reactions The ways learners feel and behave in a positive or negative way once they 
self-evaluate (Zimmerman and Kitsantas 1997)
Adaptivity Ability to change a learning strategy or to seek help effectively if there is a 
failure or misalignment with exemplar (Zimmerman and Martinez-Pons 
1992)
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 197 ---
176
of his behaviors during projects. Upon hearing from his teacher that the class was 
going to conduct a design project for a model small animal habitat at the local zoo, 
Andrew became nervous because he realized that he had performed poorly on his 
last few projects. To try and motivate himself, Andrew states very broadly, “This 
time I am really going to focus.” Although many of his classmates proactively made 
a specific plan for the assignment (strategic planning), such as identifying the types 
of tasks involved and chunking them into smaller objectives, Andrew approached 
the assignment in a very general and non-strategic manner. For example, to com -
plete the assignment of researching key phenomena about the needs of the animals 
for the habitat and choosing appropriate variables to measure in the design, Andrew 
read over his notes from his STEM class and looked at a couple of old homework 
assignments from the unit on engineering design process ( learning strategy ). 
Andrew found two types of variables that he believed contributed to areas of optimi-
zation in the design, and said “this is good enough I guess.” During the project 
design, Andrew spent 30 min trying to measure these variables and believed he was 
on the right track ( metacognitive or self-monitoring) but became discouraged after 
his teacher told him that he was measuring variables that were not relevant. Instead 
of asking his teacher for further clarification (help seeking), he returned to his typi-
cal pattern of waiting to see what his classmates were doing and then copying them.
In short, Andrew did not engage in further reflective thinking and appeared to 
give up because he lacked the confidence to continue ( self-efficacy) and believed 
that he just was not good at science ( attributions). Upon receiving a 62% on the 
project report, Andrew rolled his eyes and shoved the report in his binder. He fleet-
ingly thought to himself that he just can’t do STEM and lamented about how 
“dumb” and ineffective his teacher was as an instructor (attributions).
On the other hand, a skilful learner in science, Sabrina, begins by setting a goal for 
the year that is focused on learning rather than on recognition, “I will learn the role 
of evidence in science” (goal setting) and sets benchmark goals to reach this distant 
goal, “I will find out why multiple trials are required for compelling evidence.” The 
type of goal that she sets indicates that Sabrina understands the hierarchy of her set 
of goals. This process of setting goals has worked for her in other classes, so she 
believes that this strategy will work for her in her science class this year. She feels 
ownership of this type of learning because the teacher has explicitly described how 
scientific epistemologies relate to the content knowledge and to the labs they do in 
class, so she is intrinsically interested in learning how to think scientifically ( task 
value). She feels comfortable being challenged in her scientific thinking because the 
teacher supports her synthesis of domains of knowledge by pointing out how differ-
ent fields of science discover and validate knowledge ( self-efficacy). During class, 
Sabrina often asks why particular processes in science are used, and the teacher elab-
orates on the scientific enterprise in response ( attention focusing and elaboration). 
She is aware of what she needs to do to solve problems in science because instead of 
following a prescribed set of steps, Sabrina has developed a way of knowing in sci-
ence that allows her to compare how professional scientists act and think to her own 
thinking (self-monitoring). She actively seeks out help when her ways of knowing in 
science don’t correspond to the nature of science (help seeking). She doesn’t worry 
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 198 ---
177
too much about “messing up” during science labs, because she knows that the teacher 
provides students opportunities to reflect on the logic of their own thinking. When 
Sabrina fails at a task or assignment, she knows that she needs to try some other 
learning strategy (adaptivity), and she draws from the explicit instruction the teacher 
gives her about how the teacher learns to adapt the ways that she is thinking about her 
scientific inquiry in class (self-evaluation). The compilation of successes and failures 
along with their corresponding learning strategies help Sabrina to make a library of 
academic strategies that work for her and she draws from them to create new goals, 
with the help of the teacher’s instruction (attribution).
Despite the growing level of support in the research community for combining 
SRL practices and academic instruction (Schraw et  al. 2006), there is research 
showing that teachers tend to lack sufficient knowledge and skills to provide quality 
SRL-related instruction and feedback (Cleary and Zimmerman 2006; Wehmeyer 
et  al. 2000). Although teachers perceive SRL instruction and interventions to be 
extremely valuable and important in schools, the large majority of them report being 
ill-prepared to deliver SRL interventions or to provide feedback that enhances stu -
dents’ SRL thinking and behaviors.7 Although there are several types of feedback 
that teachers provide students, such as praise and correct answers to problems, feed-
back about student processes of learning are the least used (Hattie and Timperley 
2007). This is troublesome because SRL feedback tends to help students engage in 
deeper level processing during learning and provides explicit prompts on how stu -
dents can improve their regulation of behaviors during the task.8
6.11  Parallels Between SRL and Explicit and Reflective NOS 
Instruction
Mapping the ideas about NOS instruction from the science education literature onto 
the model for self-regulated learning theory (SRL) illustrates a parallel alignment of 
processes for both science education and educational psychology. Perhaps more 
importantly, this mapping also has the potential to reveal processes of learning 
empirically supported in SRL theory that are missing from the description of explicit 
and reflective approaches. Using phases of learning in an SRL model to explain 
explicit and reflective learning processes elaborates student processes of learning 
and motivation that could occur in NOS instruction and provides devices from 
which to plan curriculum, develop models for mentoring, and monitor each factor 
of a learner’s process during NOS instruction.
7 Cleary ( 2009), Cleary and Zimmerman ( 2006), Coalition for Psychology in Schools and 
Education (2006), Grigal et al. (2003), Wehmeyer et al. (2000).
8 Earley et al. (1990), Muis (2004), Shute (2008), Wood and Bandura (1989).
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 199 ---
178
6.11.1  Parallels Between Explicit NOS Instruction and SRL 
Theory
Science teacher educators and researchers have found explicit approaches effective 
in teaching NOS, such as intentionally planning for NOS instruction within a lesson 
and creating teachable moments to point out how students are acting and thinking 
like scientists. The means to which explicit NOS instruction has been used in sci -
ence education literature have similarities to the forethought phase, specifically in 
the goal setting and strategic planning processes (Table 6.2 and Fig. 6.2).
6.11.1.1  Goal Setting and Strategic Planning
Goal setting refers to the decisions made regarding specific outcomes of learning 
and determines the point at which self-reflection occurs at the end of one cycle. 
More plainly stated, goal setting tells a learner when they have reached their chosen 
end point of learning. A productive self-regulated learner is able to set goals that are 
achievable and are steps toward long term goals (Locke and Latham 1990). Once 
advantageous goals are established, a learner then strategically plans how to achieve 
the goals. However, in science, a student may be unable to articulate goals because 
of her inexperience with the subject or lack of contact with scientists (Hogan 2000). 
Therefore, explicit teaching of NOS by a teacher helps a student set goals by having 
an expert point out instances when she engages in scientific thinking and helps stra-
tegic planning toward the goals. The recommendation of explicit instructional tech-
niques by the science education community can be seen as parallel to goal setting 
because the process of explicit NOS teaching deliberately targets instructional out-
comes involving NOS. 9 Teaching by using the current explicit NOS approaches 
9 Akerson et al.  ( 2000), Akerson and V olrich (2006), Akindehin ( 1988), Khishfe ( 2008, 2014), 
Khishfe and Abd-El-Khalick (2002).
Table 6.2 Forethought phase subprocesses aligned to current explicit NOS instruction literature
Forethought 
phase 
subprocess Explicit NOS instruction
Goal setting “Cognitive instructional outcomes that should be intentionally targeted” 
(Khishfe and Abd-El-Khalick 2002, p. 555)
“should be planned for instead of being anticipated as a side effect or 
secondary product” (Akindehin 1988, p. 73)
“Embedded in the context of learning science content” and “highlight the 
target aspects of NOS” (Akerson et al. 2000, p. 297 and p. 300)
Strategic 
planning
Learning declarative knowledge about each NOS aspect, then application of 
each NOS aspect, then integration of NOS aspects with a way of knowing in 
science through context of content (Akerson and V olrich 2006; Bell et al. 
2011; Matthews 2014; McDonald 2010)
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 200 ---
179
involves modeling goal setting for students until they can become experienced 
enough to set their own goals and plan strategically how to reach them. For students 
who may feel that passing the course is their only goal, teachers can talk to students 
about the value of understanding ways of knowing in science for the purposes of 
making rationale decision in the civic domain. Teachers can support students to be 
independent scientific thinkers by modeling forethought phase processes through 
explicit teaching of NOS. Later, when a student becomes more aware of how to set 
goals, she can do this goal setting on her own. For example, once a student learns 
that scientists are dependent on empirical evidence to develop scientific knowledge, 
she can then set goals to learn how scientists use empirical evidence in different 
contexts. This shifting responsibility for setting learning goals about NOS knowl -
edge is necessary for a student to become an independent learner. Unfortunately the 
student learning process is not articulated well in the current NOS literature. The 
theory of SRL can give guidance for the shift from teacher modeling goal setting to 
student goal setting and strategic planning. Further examination of NOS instruction 
as compared to the SRL model demonstrates that there are also non-cognitive fac -
tors of learning that the science education community has not yet considered such 
as self-efficacy, task value and goal orientation.
6.11.1.2  SRL Forethought Subprocesses Not Addressed in Explicit NOS 
Instruction
Teachers can directly influence goal setting and strategic planning processes by 
deliberately planning for and pointing out aspects of NOS in science learning for 
students, and then fading this support so that students take on responsibility for 
Forethought phase
Goal setting
Strategic planning
Self-efficacy
Task interest
Goal orientation
Performance phase
Attention focusing
Self-instruction
Self-monitoring
Self-reflection phase
Self-evaluation
Attributions
Self-reactions
Adaptivity
Explicit NOS
teaching 
Fig. 6.2 Subprocesses of self-regulated learning theory that are addressed with current explicit 
NOS instruction
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 201 ---
180
learning (Peters and Kitsantas 2010a). However, effective learning during the fore-
thought phase is influenced by more than just goal setting and strategic planning 
(Zimmerman 2000). Learning in the forethought phase involves non-cognitive fac-
tors such as self-efficacy, task interest, and goal orientation (see Fig.  6.4 for pro -
cesses not currently addressed by explicit and reflective NOS approaches). Although 
teachers have less influence on the non-cognitive factors of learning because they 
come internally from the learner, teachers can design learning environments that 
can support student’s non-cognitive processes in NOS instruction. Self-efficacy of 
learning about NOS is key because it is the driver for perseverance and changes in 
behavior and there are four sources from which people acquire their self-efficacy: 
past performance, observing others perform, verbal persuasion, and one’s own 
physiological cues such as excitement or anxiety (Bandura 1986). One’s own judge-
ment of their self-efficacy is heavily determined by their prior experiences with the 
topic. If a student does not believe she can learn about NOS, then she is unlikely to 
try to uncover the ways scientists perform in their discipline while she is learning. 
When a learner believes she can be successful, confidence in their ability to learn 
science increases and she seeks more challenging tasks in the field.
Teachers can increase self-efficacy of NOS views in students by setting up a 
learning environment where students initially feel successful at learning tasks and 
then progress to more challenging learning situations. This could be done by first 
setting up learning situations that engage students with the NOS aspects that have 
been found to be easier to learn, such as the aspect of empirical evidence. A student 
also establishes her self-efficacy when she sees another learner accomplish a task. 
Verbal persuasion, such as encouragement, is an influence, but has less effect when 
it is general and not linked to student behavior. Empty praise does little or nothing 
to enhance self-efficacy of students. Physiological cues, such as sweaty palms or a 
dry mouth, may indicate impending failure to a student embarking on a learning 
task. These cues are the weakest of the sources of self-efficacy, but nonetheless, 
having a relaxing and supportive learning environment in science class can reduce 
the ill effects of physiological cueing.
A learner who has more interest in a task tends to be more emotionally invested 
and will have more perseverance than a learner who has less interest in the learning 
task. To clarify, task interest is not judged by the level of fun the participant is hav-
ing, rather it is thought of as the learner’s perspective of the utility and importance 
of the learning (Garcia and Pintrich 1994). There is potential in improving NOS 
learning outcomes in students by addressing task interest of students in classrooms, 
according to SRL learning theory. Students’ interests in learning about NOS can be 
enhanced by providing an opportunity for students to learn why it is important to 
regard the aspects of NOS and how the scientific discipline operates. For example, 
take the case of a student learning about the ideal gas law by memorizing the for -
mula versus another student understanding historical perspectives of how ideas have 
developed and converged over time. Typically, the student experiencing the latter 
would value the task more and find it more relevant (Allchin 2011). Invested learn-
ers are committed to their goals, exert greater efforts in reaching the goals and dem-
onstrate persistence in their learning (Zimmerman 2000). In opposition, reactive 
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 202 ---
181
learners take little responsibility for their own learning and rely on outside indica -
tors or extrinsic rewards to determine success. Addressing the level of student inter-
est in the task of learning about NOS is a necessary component of effective learning 
approaches.
Goal orientation is a variable in SRL that ranges from mastery goal orientation 
to performance goal orientation. Students who possess a mastery goal orientation 
develop competencies and face their deficiencies as learning opportunities. A stu -
dent is a better learner when she seeks to improve intellectually, rather than seeks to 
gain recognition relative to others such as in a performance goal orientation. Mastery 
goal orientation is positively correlated with a preference for challenging activities 
high levels of interest, task involvement, and persistence (Ames and Archer 1988; 
Elliot and Dweck 1988). Performance goal orientation is correlated positively with 
surface level learning strategies and self-handicapping strategies such as “I’m just 
not good at science anyway” (Graham and Golan 1991). Being aware of how a stu-
dent is oriented in terms of goals and why she is oriented in that way can help a 
teacher reveal to the student why she may be reticent to learn and help her become 
better at learning how to learn, particularly learning how science works as a disci -
pline. From this point of awareness, teachers can support students to gradually move 
themselves from performance orientation to mastery orientation, eventually result -
ing in deeper learning about science and deeper learning of science.
6.11.2  Performance Phase Subprocesses
An important feature of using a learning theory perspective to analyze curriculum 
and instruction is the potential to reveal the portions of the learning activities that do 
not address the requirements in the learning theory. The analysis of current informa-
tion on NOS instruction through SRL learning theory illustrates that only one of the 
three processes involved in the performance phase of learning, attention focusing, is 
addressed by current NOS approaches (Table 6.3). Many researchers suggest that in 
explicit NOS approaches that learner attention is focused on various aspects of NOS 
throughout the lessons.10 This does address one of the processes in the performance 
phase, but does so from the teacher’s perspective, not from the learner’s perspective. 
10 Akerson and V olrich (2006), Bell et al. ( 2011), Khishfe ( 2012), Matthews ( 2014), McDonald 
(2010).
Table 6.3 Performance phase subprocesses aligned to current explicit NOS instruction literature
Performance phase 
subprocesses Explicit NOS instruction
Attention focusing Focuses learner attention on various aspects of NOS (Akerson and 
V olrich 2006; Bell et al. 2011; Khishfe 2008, 2012; Matthews 2014; 
McDonald 2010)
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 203 ---
182
The recommendation to focus learner attention on various aspects of NOS can be 
elaborated by incorporating ways for a learner to become aware of the features she 
is focusing on during learning. Since a student may initially need support, a teacher 
can follow the recommendations in the current literature, with the understanding 
that eventually a learner must take responsibility for being aware of her own atten-
tion focusing.
6.11.2.1  SRL Performance Phase Subprocesses Not Addressed in Explicit 
NOS Instruction
The subprocesses of the performance phase of SLR learning theory not addressed in 
current recommendations for explicit and reflective NOS instruction include self-  
instruction and self-monitoring (see Fig. 6.4). Self-instruction refers to the ability of 
a learner to tell herself how to proceed in a learning task (Schunk 1982). For exam-
ple, a person who is first learning how to drive a car will either verbally or mentally 
create a checklist to help her attend to all of the important steps such as adjusting 
rear view mirrors, placing the car in drive, and applying the brake appropriately. As 
the learner becomes a more experienced driver, she automatizes this list and no 
longer needs to self-instruct at such a level of detail. In science, a novice learner 
may be unaware of what steps to take to help her determine what criteria are used to 
create knowledge that is scientifically valid. Again, teachers can structure learning 
environments to include supports such as checklists for students to explicitly under-
stand NOS ideas when they are engaging in scientific endeavors (Peters and 
Kistantas 2010a; Peters-Burton 2012), with an attention towards fading the support 
when the student is ready to self-instruct on her own.
Self-monitoring or metacognitive monitoring is a very important component in 
this learning cycle because it can be the difference between active and passive learn-
ing (Cleary and Platten 2013; Peters 2012), and seems to be lacking in current NOS 
learning approaches. Self-monitoring requires one to be able to choose a standard or 
a goal to which one can realistically compare their performance. Components of the 
SRL cycle are interrelated, because the goal setting done in the forethought phase 
greatly influences the success of the metacognitive monitoring process (Peters and 
Kitsantas 2010b). Selecting a relevant and attainable goal affects the ability to com-
pare one’s performance with the goal. For example, if a learner sets a poor goal such 
as “I want to learn how scientists think,” it is difficult to monitor one’s own success 
in reaching that goal because it is too vague. Instead, if a learner sets an advanta -
geous goal such as “I will analyze the connections between the evidence and the 
claim made in an investigation,” then the learner has a clearer standard from which 
to judge the success of their performance in the learning task. Although current 
explicit NOS approaches do not address these processes, it is possible to influence 
self-instruction and self-monitoring in a positive way in the future by using a SRL 
model adapted for NOS instruction.
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 204 ---
183
6.11.3  Parallels Between Reflective NOS Instruction and SRL 
Theory
Similar to the explicit NOS approaches and their alignment to some of the subpro -
cesses in the forethought and performance phases, reflective NOS instruction seems 
to corresponds directly to the self-reflection phase of SRL theory (Fig. 6.3), as the 
names might suggest. The subprocesses in the self-reflection phase of the SRL cycle 
that have similarities to the description of NOS approaches include self-evaluation 
and adaptivity (Fig. 6.3). For a third time, the SRL theory model has a potential to 
illuminate additional factors involved in learning that are not addressed in the sci -
ence education literature recommendations, specifically self-reactions and 
attributions.
6.11.3.1  Self-Evaluation and Adaptivity
Based on all of the processes in the self-reflection phase, the current reflective NOS 
approaches from the literature are most aligned with the subprocess of self-  
evaluation (Table 6.4). Khishfe and Abd-El-Khalick (2002) recommended “provid-
ing students with opportunities to analyze the activities in which they are engaged… 
to map connections between their activities and ones undertaken by others (e.g., 
scientists) and to draw generalizations” (p. 555). The subprocess of self-evaluation 
requires one to compare the outcomes of the performance with a standard or exem-
plar performance from a well-respected source (Zimmerman 2000). In this case, the 
Forethought phase
Goal setting
Strategic planning
Self-efficacy
Task interest
Goal orientation
Performance phase
Attention focusing
Self-instruction
Self-monitoring
Self-reflection phase
Self-evaluation
Attributions
Self-reactions
Adaptivity
Reflective
NOS teaching
Fig. 6.3 Subprocesses of self-regulated learning theory that are addressed with current explicit 
and reflective NOS instruction
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 205 ---
184
recommendation is for the student to reflect on how well they acted as compared to 
how a scientist would act and then make a generalization about this work. The cur-
rent literature on NOS approaches fully aligns with the SRL theory for the subpro -
cess of self-evaluation, as long as there are ways that a student is able to evaluate her 
own performance without teacher support in future attempts.
Adaptivity refers to the ability of a learner to be able to change course in learning 
if needed. The more experience a learner has, the more adaptable her reactions to 
self-evaluations become. Abd-El-Khalick and Lederman ( 2000) suggested that 
“reflective elements are designed to emulate the sort of activities that historians, 
philosophers, and sociologists engage in their efforts to understand the workings of 
science” (p. 691). This example encourages adaptivity because it draws from three 
different disciplines from which to judge one’s own understanding of NOS. In this 
process, a learner tries a variety of learning strategies and perspectives until she find 
the ones that are most successful for her in the situation. Having many disciplines 
from which to understand NOS is beneficial to adaptivity in a learner.
Knowledge of NOS allows a student to think more flexibly about why they 
undertake the processes they do in scientific inquiry and how she can adapt her 
process if an error occurs. Reflecting on the aspects of NOS when considering find-
ings of an inquiry activity, a learner has information to draw from regarding the 
validity of scientific work. A learner’s accurate judgment of her self-evaluation 
helps her to attribute successes and failures in the performance to appropriate 
sources, causing a positive self-reaction which will help her be more productive. If 
a student attributes her successes and failures to appropriate sources, she can be an 
adaptive learner and continue to learn more material efficiently. Multiple cycles 
through the SRL model reinforce the learner to be more strategic the next time she 
is attending to a learning task (Zimmerman 2000).
Table 6.4  Self-reflection phase subprocesses aligned to current reflective NOS instruction 
literature
Self-reflection 
subprocess Reflective NOS instruction
Self-evaluation “Providing students with opportunities to analyze the activities in which they 
are engaged from various perspectives (e.g., a NOS framework), to map 
connections between their activities and ones undertaken by others (e.g., 
scientists), and to draw generalizations about a domain of knowledge (e.g., 
epistemology of science)” (Khishfe and Abd-el-Khalick 2002, p. 555).
Reflective instruction should challenge learners to think about how their work 
illustrates NOS, and how their inquiries are similar to or different from the 
work of scientists (Scharmann et al.  2005)
Adaptivity “Reflective elements are designed to emulate the sort of activities that 
historians, philosophers, and sociologists engage in their efforts to understand 
the workings of science” (Abd-El-Khalick and Lederman 2000, p. 691)
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 206 ---
185
6.11.3.2  SRL Performance Phase Subprocesses Not Addressed in Explicit 
NOS Instruction
Self-reactions and attributions appear to be lacking in recommendations for reflec-
tive NOS instruction (see Fig. 6.4). After the performance of a task, a learner often 
engages in self-evaluation first and compares self-monitored information against a 
standard or goal. Here the standard or goal is the activity of scientists, and in this 
phase of learning a teacher is in effect asking a student to self-evaluate her perfor -
mance in science against the standard of the discipline. Once a learner self-evaluates 
her performance and judges it to be aligned or misaligned with a standard, she 
ascribes attributions to her successes or failures. If a student is not aware of the 
standard which she should compare against, she will never know if she is doing well 
or not in their learning.
Attributing success or failure to a performance is key in promoting learning 
because if the learner attributes errors to their ability (she was not born with the 
skills of being a scientist) or an outside factor (the belief that the student made errors 
because the teacher just doesn’t like her) rather than effort or process, then the 
learner may give up trying to improve (Graham and Williams 2009). That is, a pro-
ductive learner attributes her successes or failures in a task to strategies, effort, and 
perseverance. Given the chance to reflect on her understanding of science, a student 
has the opportunity to see her strategies retroactively and could be encouraged to 
attribute her successes or errors to effort rather than innate ability, which results in 
a more effective learner.
Forethought phase
Goal se/g427n g
Strategic planning
Self-eﬃcacy
Task interest
Goal orienta/g415on
Performance phase
A/g425 en/g415on focusing
Self-instruc/g415on
Self-monitoring
Self-reﬂec/g415on phase
Self-evalua/g415on
A/g425 ribu/g415ons
Self-reac/g415ons
Adap/g415vity
Learning
Processes that
are currently not
addressed
Fig. 6.4 Subprocesses that are not currently addressed by explicit and reflective NOS approaches
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 207 ---
186
Additionally, a student who has an understanding of science can comprehend 
that there is a rationale for the strategies utilized in science, rather than harbor an 
understanding that a person’s ability to think like a scientist is innately granted. 
Positive attribution leads to positive self-reactions, which are the methods a person 
chooses to further their understanding of the learning situation or the way they react 
to their self-evaluation and attribution. A learner who reacts to the evaluation of 
their performance by saying “the teacher just doesn’t like me” or “I’m just not natu-
rally good at science” will do little to improve the ways she approaches learning. A 
learner who reacts by saying, “wow, I just did not study well for this test” or “I 
should have asked the teacher about the things I didn’t understand when I had the 
chance” has reacted in a positive way and will most likely learn from her mistakes. 
Consider the situation when a student conducting scientific inquiry in the classroom 
with a group and the data analysis she is carrying out does not yield a consistent 
trend. The learner could give up and resign herself to not being science-minded (a 
negative attribution and self-reaction) or the learner could reconsider her strategies 
and reflect upon what is “scientific” and realize that more trials are needed for a 
valid and reliable investigation of the scientific phenomena.
6.12  Categories of NOS That Are Supported by SRL  
Theory- Based Curriculum
Although SRL theory phases appears to align with current calls for explicit and 
reflective NOS instructional approaches, and is a tool to reveal some of the learning 
processes that should be addressed in the future, SRL theory is less helpful for some 
aspects of NOS knowledge. The aspects of NOS overlap and are not mutually exclu-
sive, but examining the types of knowledge that make up NOS can help identify the 
ones that are most fruitfully situated in SRL theory. Irzik and Nola ( 2014) present 
eight categories of science organized into two domains, science as a cognitive-  
epistemic system and science as a social system in their framework. The categories 
in the cognitive-epistemic system are processes of inquiry, aims and values, meth -
ods and methodological rules, and scientific knowledge. The categories in the social 
system of NOS in Irzik and Nola’s framework include professional actions, scien -
tific ethos, social certification, and social values. Within this framework some cate-
gories of NOS are more performance based and some are more situated in 
underpinnings of science, which are more difficult to form into a learning task for 
self-regulated learning processes. The categories of NOS that work well in the SRL 
approach include almost all of the categories: processes of inquiry, aims and values, 
methods and methodological rules, scientific knowledge, professional actions, sci -
entific ethos, and social certification. These aspects are useful in setting up and car-
rying out investigations and because they are performance based, they are easier 
content from which to set goals, monitor goals and evaluate the success of reaching 
these goals.
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 208 ---
187
For example, scientists must use creativity in developing questions, choosing 
measurement techniques, and interpreting results. Scientists also must employ hab-
its of mind such as organization and skepticism in order to obtain empirical results 
and collaborate to figure out how to be as rigorous as possible. In turn, the use of 
empirical results can lead to valid claims. Claims made by scientists are peer 
reviewed by other scientists who employ the same habits of mind to check transpar-
ency of the empirical evidence and the validity of the claims connected to the evi -
dence. Students can evaluate scientific endeavors for alignment with the aims and 
values of science. All of these activities can occur on a personal level and contribute 
to the practice of science among the community of scientists.
The one category of NOS that is difficult to fit into the SRL approach is social 
values. Irzik and Nola ( 2014) describe social values as “freedom, respect for the 
environment and social utility broadly understood to refer to improving people’s 
health and quality of life as well as to contributing to economic development” 
(p. 1008). This category of NOS seems to be a broader view of the body of knowl-
edge known as science and the ways this body of knowledge is constructed. Because 
this is difficult to demonstrate either cognitively or through performance, it is diffi-
cult to form into a learning task related to the SRL cycle. This level of NOS aspects 
describes a background of ideas about the nature of knowledge and knowing, rather 
than observable practices of science. The social values of this NOS framework may 
be more difficult to assess using the SRL phase models subprocesses because it is 
an underpinning, rather than an overt activity.
6.13  Results of Using SRL of NOS in the Classroom
Some evidence from quasi-experimental studies has shown that the use of SRL 
theory is related to improved outcomes for learning NOS. A series of studies involv-
ing almost 300 eighth- graders participating in an 8-week intervention that sup -
ported their self-regulated learning of NOS while engaged in guided inquiry on 
electricity and magnetism showed promising results. The intervention consisted of 
a four-phase coaching strategy: (a) the teacher modeled the example of NOS in the 
context of the investigation, for example explaining the key characteristics of scien-
tific observations about magnets, (b) the students used a checklist listing NOS 
aspects expected to be present in their work when performing an independent inves-
tigation, such as the need for replicability, (c) the students were encouraged to con-
tinue engaging with NOS independently while using a shorter checklist, and (d) 
students answered questions about their rationale for the NOS aspects present in 
their investigations. The experimental group was given the prompts, while the com-
parison group performed the inquiry without the checklists and studied from their 
textbooks so that there was equal time on task between the groups. The students 
who participated in the intervention outperformed the comparison group in the 
areas of NOS knowledge and in subject matter knowledge (Peters and Kitsantas 
2010b; Peters 2012). That is, even the students who engaged with the content for a 
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 209 ---
188
longer period of time learned less content than the students engaged with NOS 
using the SRL coaching technique.
In another investigation of student learning in NOS using a SRL approach, sev -
enth- and eighth-grade students who participated in a cycle of SRL-based instruc -
tion of NOS demonstrated an increased number of connections among ideas about 
empirical evidence, habits of mind, and tentativeness (Peters-Burton 2015b). In this 
investigation, SRL subprocesses were deliberately built into the curriculum of a 
NOS class for the students. Evidence from measures collected from pre- and post-  
epistemic network analysis show direct connections between the NOS aspects 
taught using SRL subprocesses and shifts in the idea nodes on the maps. Student 
learning outcomes included broader understanding of scientific endeavors beyond 
experimentation and a shift toward an understanding that knowledge is tentative.
SRL theory has also been helpful in teaching in-service teachers about NOS 
aspects and inquiry-based teaching. A temporally-based technique called SRL 
microanalysis was useful in informing instructional strategies during professional 
development experiences. (Peters-Burton 2013, 2015a). SRL microanalysis is a 
context-specific structured interview protocol that directly examines individuals’ 
cyclical-phase SRL processes as they engage in authentic learning activities and are 
designed to capture individuals’ phase-specific SRL processes (i.e., forethought, 
performance, and self-reflection) during task engagement (Cleary 2011; Cleary 
et  al. 2012). SRL microanalysis revealed that teachers’ goal setting and self-  
monitoring processes were unproductive early in the programme. Consequently, the 
professional development programme was adapted to support teachers to create pro-
cess goals to reach their objective to teach earth science through inquiry (Peters-  
Burton 2013). Similarly, SRL microanalysis was used to enhance the learning 
processes of secondary in-service teachers who were learning how to teach argu -
mentation (Peters-Burton 2015a). The adaptation of the instruction during the pro -
fessional development was facilitated by interviewing learners about SRL 
subprocesses while they were learning and adapting the learning environment to 
support the weakest subprocesses.
6.14  Conclusion
Finding ways to effectively teach NOS has been a focus for many years in science 
education. Current methods of explicit and reflective NOS instruction have been 
somewhat successful but have mainly focused on teacher behavior in the classroom, 
rather than how students learn NOS. SRL theory provides one way to examine how 
a student learns. Mapping current approaches of teaching NOS onto SRL learning 
processes shows that there are some learning processes addressed by explicit and 
reflective methods but other learning processes that are ignored. SRL theory pro -
vides two opportunities to improve NOS instruction: (a) use as a framework to 
consider processes of student learning when designing curriculum and (b) use as a 
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 210 ---
189
tool to inform teachers of learning processes that are skillfully used by a student and 
those that are not.
Adopting SRL models of learning for NOS instruction can further inform factors 
of learning and motivation, leading to more successful curriculum design than is 
currently available with explicit and reflective NOS approach recommendations. 
Further, Erduran and Dagher (2014) propose that the Family Resemblance Approach 
will spark more student interest and motivation than prior approaches, and SRL 
models have the capacity to monitor student motivation. More precision is needed 
about why explicit and reflective methods are effective and the SRL model provides 
empirically-derived variables of learning that haven’t yet been considered in science 
education. SRL theory as applied to NOS instruction helps to expand and explain 
many of the processes of learning that occur by the use of explicit and reflective 
methods and those that are not yet established in science education.
References
Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2005). Developing deeper understandings of nature of science: The impact of 
a philosophy of science course on preservice science teachers’ views and instructional plan -
ning. International Journal of Science Education, 27, 15–42.
Abd-El-Khalick, F., & Lederman, N. G. (2000). Improving science teachers’ conceptions of the 
nature of science: A critical review of the literature. International Journal of Science Education, 
22, 665–701.
Abd-El-Khalick, F. S., & Akerson, V . L. (2004). Learning about nature of science as concep -
tual change: Factors that mediate the development of preservice elementary teachers’ views of 
nature of science. Science Education, 88, 785–810.
Abd-El-Khalick, F., Bell, R. L., & Lederman, N. G. (1998). The nature of science and instructional 
practice: Making the unnatural natural. Science Education, 82, 417–436.
Akerson, V . L., & Hanuscin, D. L. (2007). Teaching nature of science through inquiry: Results 
of a 3-year professional development program. Journal of Research on Science Teaching, 44, 
653–680.
Akerson, V .  L., & V olrich, M.  L. (2006). Teaching nature of science explicitly in a first grade 
internship setting. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43, 377–394.
Akerson, V . L., Abd-El-Khalick, F., & Lederman, N. G. (2000). Influence of a reflective explicit 
activity-based approach on elementary teachers’ conceptions of nature of science. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 37, 295–317.
Akindehin, F. (1988). Effect of an instructional package on preservice science teachers’ under -
standing of the nature of science and acquisition of science-related attitudes. Science Education, 
72, 73–82.
Allchin, D. (2011). Evaluating knowledge of the nature of (whole) science. Science Education, 
95, 518–542.
Alters, B. J. (1997). Whose nature of science? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34, 39–55.
Ames, C. (1992). Achievement goals and the classroom motivational climate. In D. H. Schunk & 
J. L. Meece (Eds.), Student perceptions in the classroom (pp. 327–348). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Ames, C., & Archer, J. (1988). Achievement goals in the classroom: Students’ learning strategies 
and motivational processes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80, 260–267.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 211 ---
190
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 
52, 1–29.
Bell, R. L., Matkins, J. J., & Gansneder, B. M. (2011). Impacts of contextual and explicit instruc-
tion on preservice elementary teachers’ understandings of the nature of science. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 48, 414–436.
Billeh, V . Y ., & Hasan, O. E. (1975). Factors influencing teachers’ gain in understanding the nature 
of science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 12, 209–219.
Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically authentic inquiry in schools: A theo-
retical framework for evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86, 175–218.
Cleary, T. J. (2009). School-based motivation and self-regulation assessments: An examination of 
school psychologist beliefs and practices. Journal of Applied School Psychology, 25, 71–94.
Cleary, T. J. (2011). Shifting towards self-regulation microanalytic assessment: Historical over -
view, essential features, and implications for research and practice. In B. J. Zimmerman & 
D. H. Schunk (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation of learning and performance (pp. 329–345). 
Abingdon: Routledge.
Cleary, T.  J., & Labuhn, A.  S. (2013). Application of cyclical self-regulation interventions in 
science-based contexts. In H. Bembenutty, T. J. Cleary, & A. Kitasantas (Eds.), Applications 
of self-regulated learning across diverse disciplines: A tribute to Barry J.  Zimmerman  
(pp. 89–124). Charlotte: Information Age Publishing.
Cleary, T. J., & Platten, P. (2013). Examining the correspondence between self-regulated learn -
ing and academic achievement: A case study analysis [Special issue]. Educational Research 
International.
Cleary, T. J., & Zimmerman, B. J. (2006). Teachers’ perceived usefulness of strategy microanalyic 
assessment information. Psychology in the Schools, 43, 149–155.
Cleary, T.  J., Callan, G., & Zimmerman, B.  J. (2012). Assessing self-regulation as a cyclical, 
context- specific phenomenon: Overview and analysis of SRL microanalytic protocols [Special 
issue]. Education Research International.
Clough, M.P. (2007). Teaching the nature of science to secondary and post-secondary students: 
Questions rather than tenets, The Pantaneto forum, issue 25, January, http://www.pantaneto.
co.uk/issue25/front25.htm. Republished (2008) in California Journal of Science Education, 
8(2), 31–40.
Coalition for Psychology in Schools and Education. (2006). Report on the teacher needs survey . 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, Center for Psychology in Schools and 
Education.
Corno, L. (1993). The best-laid plans: Modern conceptions of volition and educational research. 
Educational Researcher, 22(2), 14–22.
Deci, E. L. (1975). Intrinsic motivation. New York: Plenum Press.
Driver, R., Leach, J., Millar, R., & Scott, P. (1996). Young people’s images of science. Philadelphia: 
Open University Press.
Dunbar, K. (1993). Concept discovery in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 17, 397–434.
Duschl, R. A., & Grandy, R. (2012, Online first). Two views about explicitly teaching nature of 
science. Science & Education. DOI 10.1007/s11191-012-9539-4
Earley, P. C., Northcraft, G. B., Lee, C., & Lituchy, T. R. (1990). Impact of process and outcome 
feedback on the relation of goal setting to task performance. Academy of Management Journal, 
33, 87–105.
Elliot, E., & Dweck, C. (1988). Goals: An approach to motivation and achievement. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 5–12.
Erduran, S., & Dagher, Z. R. (2014). Reconceptualizing the nature of science for science educa -
tion. Dordrecht: Springer.
Flavell, J.  H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive-  
developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34, 906–911.
Garcia, T., & Pintrich, P. R. (1994). Regulating motivation and cognition in the classroom: The 
role of self-schemas and self-regulatory strategies. In D. H. Schunk & B. J. Zimmerman (Eds.), 
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 212 ---
191
Self-regulation of learning and performance: Issues and educational application  (pp.  127–
153). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Graham, S., & Golan, S. (1991). Motivational influences on cognition: Task involvement, ego 
involvement, and depth of processing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 187–194.
Graham, S., & Williams, C. (2009). An attributional approach to motivation in school. In K. Wentzel 
& A. Wigfield (Eds.), Handbook of motivation at school (pp. 11–34). New York: Routledge.
Grigal, M., Neubart, D. A., Moon, S. M., & Graham, S. (2003). Self-determination for students 
with disabilities: Views of parents and teachers. Exceptional Children, 70, 97–112.
Hanuscin, D., Akerson, V ., & Phillipson-Mower, T. (2006). Integrating nature of science instruc-
tion into a physical science content course for preservice elementary teachers: NOS views of 
teaching assistants. Science Education, 90, 912–935.
Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, 77, 
81–112.
Henderson, R.  W. (1986). Self-regulated learning: Implications for the design of instructional 
media. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 11, 405–427.
Hodson, D. (1993). Philosophic stance of secondary school science teachers, curriculum expe -
riences, and children’s understanding of science: Some preliminary findings. Interchange, 
24(1&2), 41–52.
Hodson, D. (2014). Nature of science in the science curriculum: Origin, development and shifting 
emphases. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philosophy 
and science teaching (pp. 911–970). Dordrecht: Springer.
Hofer, B. K., & Pintrich, P. R. (Eds.). (2002). Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs 
about knowledge and knowing. Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Hogan, K. (2000). Exploring a process view of students’ knowledge about the nature of science. 
Science Education, 84, 51–70.
Irzik, G., & Nola, R. (2014). New directions in nature of science research. In M. R. Matthews 
(Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philosophy, and science teaching  
(pp. 999–1021). Dordrecht: Springer.
Jungwirth, E. (1970). An evaluation of the attained development of the intellectual skills needed for 
understanding of the nature of scientific inquiry by BSCS pupils in Israel. Journal of Research 
in Science Teaching, 7, 141–151.
Kalman, C. S. (2009). The need to emphasize epistemology in teaching and research. Science & 
Education, 18, 325–347.
Kalman, C.  S., & Aulls, M. (2003). Can an analysis of the contrast between pre-Galilean and 
Newtonian theoretical frameworks help students develop a scientific mindset? Science & 
Education, 12, 761–772.
Khishfe, R. (2008). The development of seventh graders’ views of nature of science. Journal of 
Research on Science Teaching, 45, 470–496.
Khishfe, R. (2012). Relationship between nature of science understandings and argumentation 
skills: A role for counterargument and contextual factors. Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching, 49, 489–514.
Khishfe, R., & Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2002). Influence of explicit and reflective versus implicit 
inquiry-oriented instruction on sixth graders’ views of nature of science. Journal of Research 
in Science Teaching, 39, 551–578.
King, P., & Kitchener, K. (1994). Developing reflective judgment: Understanding and promoting 
intellectual growth and critical thinking in adolescents and adults. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic cultures: How the sciences make knowledge. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Kuhn, D. (1999). A developmental model of critical thinking. Educational Researcher, 28, 16–26.
Lawson, A.  E. (1982). The nature of advanced reasoning and science instruction. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 19, 743–760.
Leach, J. T., Hind, A. J., & Ryder, J. (2003). Designing and evaluating short teaching interven -
tions about the epistemology of science in high school classrooms. Science Education, 87(6), 
831–848.
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…

--- PAGE 213 ---
192
Lederman, N. G., Bartos, S. A., & Lederman, J. (2014). The development, use, and interpretation 
of nature of science assessments. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research 
in history, philosophy and science teaching (pp. 971–997). Dordrecht: Springer.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting and task performance. Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Matthews, M. R. (2012). Changing the focus: From nature of science (NOS) to features of science 
(FOS). In M. S. Khine (Ed.), Advances in nature of science research: Concepts and methodolo-
gies (pp. 3–26). Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. (2014). Science teaching: The role of history and philosophy of science. New York: 
Routledge.
McComas, W. F. (2008). Seeking historical examples to illustrate key aspects of the nature of sci-
ence. Science & Education, 17(2/3), 249–263.
McComas, W. F., & Olson, J. K. (1998). The nature of science in international standards docu -
ments. In W. F. McComas (Ed.), The nature of science in science education: Rationales and 
strategies (pp. 41–52). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
McComas, W.  F., Lee, C.  K., & Sweeney, S. (2009). The comprehensiveness and complete -
ness of nature of science content in the U.S . state science standards.  Paper presented at the 
National Association for Research in Science Teaching International Conference, Garden 
Grove, CA.
McDonald, C. V . (2010). The influence of explicit nature of science and argumentation instruction 
on preservice primary teachers’ views of nature of science. Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching, 47, 1137–1164.
Meichtry, Y . J. (1992). Influencing student understanding of the nature of science: Data from a case 
curriculum development. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 29, 389–407.
Monk, M., & Osbourne, J. (1997). Placing the history and philosophy of science on the curricu -
lum: A model for the development of pedagogy. Science Education, 81, 405–424.
Morrison, J. A., Raab, F., & Ingram, D. (2009). Factors influencing elementary and secondary 
teachers’ views on the nature of science. Journal of Research on Science Teaching, 46, 384–403.
Muis, K. R. (2004). Personal epistemology and mathematics: A critical review and synthesis of 
research. Review of Educational Research, 74(3), 317–377.
Ogunnivi, M. B. (1983). Relative effects of a history/philosophy of science course on student teach-
ers’ performance on two models of science. Research in Science & Technological Education, 
1, 193–199.
Osborne, J., Collins, S., Ratcliffe, M., Millar, R., & Duschl, R. (2003). What “ideas-about science” 
should be taught in school? A Delphi study of the expert community. Journal of Research in 
Science Teaching, 40, 692–720.
Peters, E. E. (2012). Developing content knowledge in students through explicit teaching of the 
nature of science: Influences of goal setting and self-monitoring. Science and Education, 21(6), 
881–898.
Peters-Burton, E. E. (2012). Using metacognition to develop understanding of the role of evidence 
in science. Science Scope, 35(9), 14–19.
Peters-Burton, E.E. (2013, April). Microanalysis of self-regulatory processes of elementary teach-
ers learning to teach earth science through inquiry.  Paper presented at the annual conference 
of the American education research association, San Francisco, CA.
Peters-Burton, E.  E. (2015a, January). Incorporation of scientific argumentation into instruc -
tion: Results from a professional development for high school teachers. Paper presented at the 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Science Teacher Education, Portland, OR.
Peters-Burton, E. E. (2015b). Outcomes of a self-regulatory curriculum model: Network analysis 
of middle school students’ views of nature of science. Science & Education, 24, 855–885.
Peters, E. E., & Kitsantas, A. (2010a). Self-regulation of student epistemic thinking in science: The 
role of metacognitive prompts. Educational Psychology, 30(1), 27–52.
Peters, E. E., & Kitsantas, A. (2010b). The effect of nature of science metacognitive prompts on 
science students’ content and nature of science knowledge, metacognition, and self-regulatory 
efficacy. School Science and Mathematics, 110, 382–396.
E.E. Peters-Burton

--- PAGE 214 ---
193
Rudge, D. W., & Howe, E. M. (2009). Sickle cell disease and malaria: An explicit and reflective 
approach to the use of history to promote understanding of the nature of science. Science & 
Education, 18, 561–580.
Rudolph, J. L. (2002). Scientists in the classroom: The cold war reconstruction of American sci -
ence education. New York: Palgrave.
Sandoval, W. A. (2005). Understanding students’ practical epistemologies and their influence on 
learning through inquiry. Science Education, 89(4), 345–372.
Sandoval, W. A., & Morrison, K. (2003). High school students’ ideas about theories and theory 
change after a biological inquiry unit. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40(4), 369–392.
Scharmann, L. C., Smith, M. U., James, M. C., & Jensen, M. (2005). Explicit reflective nature 
of science instruction: Evolution, intelligent design, and umbrellaology. Journal of Science 
Teacher Education, 16, 27–41.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R. A., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Students’ understanding of 
the objectives and procedures of experimentation in the science classroom. The Journal of the 
Learning Sciences, 4(2), 131–166.
Schraw, G., Crippen, K. J., & Hartley, K. (2006). Promoting self-regulation in science education: 
Metacognition as part of a broader perspective on learning. Research in Science Education, 
36, 111–139.
Schunk, D. H. (1982). Verbal self-regulation as a facilitator of children’s achievement and self-  
efficacy. Human Learning, 1, 265–277.
Schwartz, R. S., Lederman, N. G., & Crawford, B. A. (2004). Developing views of nature of sci-
ence in an authentic context: An explicit approach to bridging the gap between nature of sci -
ence and scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88, 610–645.
Shute, V . J. (2008). Focus on formative feedback. Review of Educational Research, 78, 153–189.
Sinatra, G. M., & Taasoobshirazi, G. (2011). Intentional conceptual change: The self-regulation of 
science. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. H. Schunk (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation of learning 
and performance (pp. 203–216). New York: Routledge.
Smith, M. U., & Scharmann, L. C. (2008). A multi-year program developing an explicit reflec -
tive pedagogy for teaching pre-service teachers the nature of science by ostention. Science & 
Education, 17, 219–248.
Tamir, P. (1972). Understanding the process of science by students exposed to different science 
curricula in Israel. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 9, 239–245.
Trent, J. (1965). The attainment of the concept “understanding science” using contrasting physics 
courses. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 3, 224–229.
Tsai, C. C. (2000). Relationships between student scientific epistemological beliefs and percep -
tions of constructivist learning environments. Educational Research, 42, 193–205.
Wehmeyer, M. L., Agran, M., & Hughes, C. A. (2000). National survey of teachers’ promotion of 
self-determination and student-directed learning. The Journal of Special Education, 34, 58–68.
Wong, S. L., & Hodson, D. (2009). From the horse’s mouth: What scientists say about scientific 
investigation and scientific knowledge. Science Education, 93, 109–130.
Wood, R., & Bandura, A. (1989). Impact of conceptions of ability on self-regulatory mechanisms 
and complex decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 407–415.
Zimmerman, B.  J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: A social-cognitive perspective. In 
M. Boekaerts, P. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 13–39). San 
Diego: Academic.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kitsantas, A. (1997). Developmental phases in self-regulation: Shifting from 
process to outcome goals. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 1–10.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Kinsantas, A. (2002). Acquiring writing revision and self-regulatory skill 
through observation and emulation. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94, 660–668.
Zimmerman, B. J., & Martinez-Pons, M. (1992). Perceptions of efficacy and strategy use in the 
self-regulation of learning. In D.  H. Schunk & J.  Meece (Eds.), Student perceptions in the 
classroom: Causes and consequences (pp. 185–207). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
6 Strategies for Learning Nature of Science Knowledge: A Perspective…