Title: About the Psychological and Logical Moment in Natural Science Teaching (1890)
Pages: 215-220

--- PAGE 215 ---
195
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_7
Chapter 7
About the Psychological and Logical Moment 
in Natural Science Teaching (1890)
Ernst Mach
Historical studies convincingly demonstrate that the knowledge process 1 
[Erkenntnis] in natural science consists of the gradual adaptation of the thoughts to 
the facts. This adaptation happens through happy circumstances, which increasingly 
reveal the more general similarities and subtle differences of the facts. By this, the 
precision of the representation of the facts by the thoughts grows, so that the latter 
finally become an image of the former, which for certain intellectual purposes may 
completely substitute for them.
1  Translator’s note: In Mach’s understanding, knowledge is a non-teleological process, as  
part of Lamarck/Spencer/Wallace/Darwin’s idea of evolution. Any development, “growth”, etc. 
are local, but not general. Knowledge, like Darwinian species is thus a process generally with a 
concrete product locally (see also Beneke, 1840, System der Metaphysik und Religionsphilosophie 
aus den natürlichen Grundverhältnissen des menschlichen Geistes abgeleitet.  Mach read this 
text early in his life and applied many ideas from it). Directionality depends on observations 
relative to a “background”, which can never be absolute. The process view was used by 
Newton in his concept of “interaction” in order to replace the previous “object”/“product” view. 
The process/gestalt view was also used by Mach in his criticism of Newton’s absolute space 
and time.
Translator’s note: The article was first printed in the Zeitschrift für den physikalischen und che-
mischen Unterricht . Berlin: Springer: 1890/1891, 1–5. Über das psychologische und logische 
Moment im naturwissenschaftlichen Unterricht.
Translated by Hayo Siemsen: Translator’s note: For the following references in the footnotes, see 
Siemsen, H. (2012). Ernst Mach, George Sarton and the Empiry of Teaching Science Part I. 
Science & Education, 21/4: 447–484.
Siemsen, H. (2013). Ernst Mach, George Sarton and the Empiry of Teaching Science Part II. 
Science & Education, 22/5: 951–1000.
E. Mach (deceased)
Ernst Mach (translated and edited by Hayo Siemsen).

--- PAGE 216 ---
196
The one who admits this sober view of the meaning of natural science will assign 
to natural science teaching2 no other purpose, but to promote the aspired adaptation 
of thoughts with highest economy of work on shortcuts, by artificially bringing 
about those favorable circumstances avoiding the unfavorable historical coinci -
dences and delays. 3 If one has adopted this opinion, it can barely appear strange 
that, just as an organic being (after Darwin) in its embryonic stage replicates the 
whole step-ladder of evolutionary development in an abridged way, also in teaching 
a condensed and clarified imitation of the historical way of development of science 
has shown to be the most natural and useful; because the next higher level of knowl-
edge has actually established itself, thereby psychologically, on the former lower 
one, and can in a certain way only be ascended, i.e. fully understood through it.
On different occasions I think I have observed that this stated view is still barely 
shared in the circles of the teachers. Even those, who theoretically adhere to it, prac-
tically defect from it again and again. This mainly, and quite prominently, manifests 
itself in the overrating of the logical and disregard of the psychological moment in 
teaching. By stating my opinion on this issue here, I hope – without counting on 
immediate agreement – to contribute to the discussion and clarification of the peda-
gogical opinions.
The generally prevalent overrating of the logical moment in relation to the psy -
chological  – also when one completely disregards the abnormal outgrowth of it 
completely4 – meets us often enough. It probably derives from the time when the 
2 Translator’s note: Ernst Mach is well known for his influence in physics (spacetime), physiology 
(psychophysics, the inner ear), psychology (gestalt) or erkenntnis-psychology/ theory of knowl -
edge (Erkenntnis und Irrtum). He is less known for his works on pedagogy and didactics. He has 
many activities in this area, but he never consolidated them into a consistent theory (see Siemsen 
2014). What are these “activities”?
Most influentially, he co-authored the physics school books, which were used from the 1880’s 
to the mid 1920’s in larger parts of the German speaking countries. He also wrote a teacher instruc-
tion for the school books (see Hohenester, 1988, Ernst Mach als Didaktiker, Lehrbuch- und 
Lehrplanverfasser. In: Haller, R. & Stadler, F. (Eds.), Ernst Mach Werk und Wirkung, Vienna: 
Hölder-Pichler-Tempski; part-translation Siemsen 2012, 2013). He was also founder and co-editor 
of a teachers‘journal in science education Zeitschrift für den Physikalischen und Chemischen 
Unterricht. In this function, he wrote several articles (like the one translated here) and small 
“thought experimental “descriptions to be used for teaching. Unfortunately, nearly all this material 
has not yet been translated into English (collected in German by Koller, 1997, Kommentare zu den 
physikdidaktischen Schriften Ernst Machs, Diploma Thesis at the Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz, 
supervised by Adolf Hohenester). Furthermore, he used his pedagogy to transform the thoughts of 
his students. William James considered Mach’s lecture as “the most artistic lesson I ever heard 
“(see Thiele 1978, Wissenschaftliche Kommunikation: Die Korrespondenz Ernst Machs , 
Kastellaun: Henn; Siemsen 2014). The following article gives an account of the erkenntnis-psy-
chological implications of Mach’s pedagogy.
3 Translator’s note: Mach’s clear distinction and well-known criticism of metaphysics can be 
found in this statement. From a Machian perspective, current science teaching is full of metaphysi-
cal errors, which are not recognized as such. If students and teachers do not “understand” the 
inconsistencies taught to them, one cannot thus blame them for being confused about what is 
confusing.
4 As such an outgrowth I have to call the view, which an eminent natural scientist, who at a time 
also had been a proficient school teacher, had advanced towards me. He stated that in geometry 
E. Mach

--- PAGE 217 ---
197
elements of Euclid were seen as a model of scientific method. At the time, one 
barely considered that this method, which may have proven of excellent value as a 
means to train the reasoning power and logically educating adult men with extended 
practical and scientific geometrical knowledge, would be completely inappropriate 
for introduction into geometry.5 Criticism6 cannot already start, where secure con -
ceptualizations are still completely missing. Criticism, which does not produce, but 
only assorts what is given, is by no means the whole of science, but it is a means for 
stabilizing it.7
The goal of the teaching is without question not only psychological, but also 
logical. Not only a vivid visualization of the facts should be gained, but also an 
arrangement of the concepts achieved, which allows for the most parsimonious 
expression of them. It nevertheless seems to be clear that the order of the concepts 
can only occur when and to the extent that concepts are gained in the first place. If, 
as it often happens, it is required that teaching should already begin with full sen -
tences [Sätze] and as well continue in sentences, from which later (also at reaching 
the teaching goal) nothing is to be corrected, then one already presupposes, I think, 
the attainable goal, which one seeks, as already having been reached. One expects 
from the student an overview, a familiarity of the contents, a training of abstraction, 
which is not only non-existing, but cannot possibly be existing yet; what at best can 
be the end of the activity, one wants to begin with. This procedure – the counter 
image of the historical way of development – I can only consider as mistaken.
It will not be denied that a word has only value and meaning by the conceptions 
it awakens, by the psychological contents given to it, without which it just remains 
empty sound. This content is very different, depending on the conceptual richness 
of the speaker and of the addressed person. If now the teacher, to whom all the 
teaching contents is present, mounts a sentence adapted to his concepts to his own 
satisfaction; so therein is – if it happens unconsciously – definitely an error regard -
ing the person on whose satisfaction teaching foremost depends; if it happens 
teaching, one had to accustom the student to judge correctly from a false figure from given prem-
ises. Admittedly, such a procedure can be exceptionally quite useful in order to make the difference 
between the conceptualized perception [ Anschauung] process from the logical process, which 
basically happens in the argumentum ad absurdum; but where would one end by systematically 
leading to mistrust the conceptualized perception?! – Another time I heard in a group of teachers 
the statement that a certain topic could not be included into elementary teaching, because the defi-
nition of the basic concepts was not scientifically completed. – Also J. K. Becker seems to turn 
against such outgrowths, when he underlines that the proven truths are in no way better than the 
immediately perceived.
5 Luckily, nobody falls into the hands of a didact proceeding Euclidically without themselves hav-
ing at least some initial geometrical concepts.
6 Translator’s note: Mach is here referring to Kant’s and Herbart’s method of criticism. Criticism 
is optimizing by reducing mistakes. In another article, Mach explains that first one needs to have a 
relatively stable “world view”, before it can be “optimized”. Children are initially lacking the sta-
ble world view (a basic model).
7 This circumstance is illustrated by nothing better than the comparison of the transparency and 
fruitfulness of modern geometrical methods with the clumsiness and barrenness of the Euclidean.
7 About the Psychological and Logical Moment in Natural Science Teaching (1890)

--- PAGE 218 ---
198
 consciously, it is a didactical dishonesty. 8 For the student, a prematurely applied 
completeness and logical finesse must be useless and worthless, yes often even 
distracting.
If one sticks to this claim, it is practically impossible to start teaching or to pro -
ceed, without continuously violating against didactic usefulness. The simplest sen-
tences then become untenable, as the following examples show:
“A body, which illuminates without the mediation of another, is called self-  
luminous.” The teacher will now immediately notice that  – according to today’s 
understanding at least – every body can only illuminate through the mediation of the 
ether. Wouldn’t it be most unpractical to interrupt the simple thought of the student 
by some reservation, at this point at which the student does not think about the ether 
and does not need to do so?
“A body, which taken in-between the eye and another body, does not hinder the 
excitement of light perception through the latter, is called transparent.” According to 
this, a glass prism with a sufficiently large refraction angle would not be transpar -
ent. How quirky would a sentence have to appear to the student, if one would also 
take such a case into account?
“The pressure of a heavy body on the surface is called its weight.” One would 
actually have to say “on a surface at rest”. Strictly speaking, also that would not be 
unobjectionable, but should be “on the in a vertical sense not accelerated surface”, 
against which one could still object to on a higher level.
These examples could be proliferated at will. Who had – for example when com-
posing an elementary teaching book – not felt the conflict between the requirements 
of the didactic utility on the one hand and those of science and logical precision on 
the other? To satisfy both requirements to the same degree is simply not possible.
Such difficulties are naturally resolved by gradually proceeding from the simpler 
to the more composed, if one introduces the necessary completeness and precision 
after sufficient psychological preparation. A logical contradiction would only exist, 
if the student, after being better taught, would still see the introductory sentence as 
a complete and generally valid instruction. At the end of teaching, the introductory 
sentence has also acquired a different meaning for the student. Also he acknowl -
edges it as provisional.
The adaptation of the thoughts in the process of scientific development enables 
us to complete a partially given fact in thoughts, i.e. seeing an incoming light beam 
the we can anticipate the refracted one, to find the induced current in the neighbor-
ing conductor of a moved conductor, etc. The result of this adaptation can thereby 
linguistically be formulated: If A is, so is B. But as a fact in general is not exactly 
repeated, so such a result can only be gained by a process of abstraction, which 
8 Reading the writings of some eminent researchers (e.g. Gauss), to the same degree as one enters, 
one feels all the more, that they have not written them for the reader, but for their own satisfaction. 
By this, some such text has acquired a nearly enigmatic form. One can understand the sentences of 
them but in one specific way, if one succeeds in understanding them at all. This way of fixing a 
completed knowledge is also a masterpiece, but by no means a didactical one. A few introductory 
words about how the researcher has reached his results, in general saves the reader some major 
work.
E. Mach

--- PAGE 219 ---
199
results in a series of facts with coinciding attributes. The economy of replicating the 
facts in the thoughts already necessarily compels to this. By the thoughts also seek-
ing to sufficiently replicate the differences of the facts, also the necessity then arises 
to seek the differentiating attributes of the facts. Natural research consists of this 
gradual separation of the coinciding and differentiating attributes; a process which 
one could call classification. If the facts are so close, that the decisive [massgeben-
den] attributes of them only differ by the amount of equal parts, into which they can 
be dissected, so the further classification can take place according to this number of 
the parts. The measurement and counting or the intermediate counting, the calcula-
tion, i.e. the mathematical treatment commences. The advantage of the latter con -
sists in the immediate ability to refine the classification infinitely. Rightly, one 
considers the adaptation of the thoughts, which has advanced thus far as being 
essentially completed.
The advancement of the before mentioned classification process requires a vivid 
envisioning of the facts. Wherein the behavior of electrical, magnetic and heavy 
bodies coincides (reverse square law), and wherein it differs, can only be noticed by 
one who is familiar with the facts. Who is psychologically prepared by the demon-
stration of a continuum of cases of light refraction (i.e. air – glass) will easily notice 
the similarity of them (that both rays lie perpendicular in the same plane and larger 
arrival angles correspond to larger refraction angles) and also the difference (that 
each arrival angle corresponds to a different refraction angle). One has arrived with 
the mathematical classification, if one can attribute each special arrival angle a spe-
cial refraction angle, for example by making a chart. If one can see that the chart can 
be replaced by the formula sin α/sinβ = 3/2, so this initially seems like a practical 
simplification. But we have found a new similarity of all cases of refraction, if it 
turns out that in all of them, is manifested the same relation of the speed of light in 
air and in glass. The order established gradually in such a way will probably be bet-
ter understood and valued than if it would be presented in a completed form – for 
instance by the immediate introduction of the refraction law – which would be con-
sistent with a logical, but not with a psychological process.
It should not remain unmentioned that for the accomplishment of the aforemen-
tioned classification the psychological preparation is all the more necessary, as the 
coinciding and differentiating attributes often are not gained by immediate percep-
tion/conceptualization [Anschauung], but through an abstraction based on laborious 
activity, an activity which should be well trained.9 The abstraction “refraction expo-
nent”, “moment”, etc. will only be constructed by the one, who really calculated the 
refraction occurrences, the occurrences of equilibrium, etc. One can barely disrupt 
the abstraction process more effectively than by prematurely making use of it.10
9 I think that one can agree to what is stated in the text, even if one does not agree to the view on 
abstraction, which I have detailed elsewhere (Beiträge zur Analyse der Empfindungen. Jena 1886. 
pp. 149). Nobody doubts that for instance in mathematics, the understanding is based on the prac -
ticing of the operations.
10 In my youth I was repeatedly in the position to provide elementary teaching and could many 
times see for myself the barrenness of the pressing for premature abstraction. If, for instance, I 
7 About the Psychological and Logical Moment in Natural Science Teaching (1890)

--- PAGE 220 ---
200
The solution of a problem consists in the completion of a currently insufficient 
classification, by either finding a new more general similarity or a more detailed 
differentiation. So the discrepancy, which seems to lie in the movement of a body, 
when pushed on a horizontal path or thrown upwards it is slowed, while a falling 
body is accelerated, is resolved by the recognition [ Erkenntnis] that accelerating 
circumstances apply to all these cases. The prismatic spreading of a white ray into a 
fan of colors seems to be a contradiction of the law of refraction, but explains itself 
by the finer differentiation of the refractive index of the colors. Also the solution of 
a problem, if it is to be valued and understood, needs to be prepared psychologi -
cally. Even the obscurity, the discrepancy, which comes before the solution of the 
problem, should be felt. The solution should not appear ready, before the problem 
has appeared, but rather become gradually. Thereby it also becomes clear that not 
every produced sentence can and should be indefeasible from the point of view of 
the resolved problem. Here applies in detail what has been stated about the applica-
tion of teaching in general.
Even if the adaptation of the thoughts to the facts, i.e. the knowing of the facts is 
the actual goal of natural science, this goal cannot be accomplished without finally 
also satisfying the requirement for an economical ordering of the thoughts. From 
this economical requirement, the logical requirement, that is, the requirement of 
consistency, is a part. It would be a bad economy of a completed area of knowledge, 
if it would require continuous correction and improvement. The requirements of 
economy nevertheless go further than those of logic, which in a certain way only 
provides a negative regulative condition. One could state quite comprehensively the 
goal for natural science and natural science education as: The adaptation of the 
thoughts to the facts and the thoughts to each other.
I would now like to summarize my opinion in the following sentences:
One should in teaching first and foremost proceed psychologically; only second-
arily and as much logically, as this is enabled through the psychological preparation 
so that it becomes a need.
New concepts, theories, hypotheses, solutions of problems should only be intro-
duced, when the need for this is felt in order to be able to master the topic.
For each sentence, which appears during teaching, clarity and explicitness, but in 
general not indefeasibility from the point of view of the goal of teaching, should be 
required.
provided the question for able children, who could already count quite well: How much is 5 + 3?, 
so I got no answer. But the answer was immediately provided for the question: How many are 5 
nuts and 3 nuts? Also for my children I have often observed that the abstractions, which I had in 
vain tried to induce, occurred a few days later just on their own, sometimes in a completely unex-
pected way. I think that also in higher education, without noticing, we often commit very analo -
gous errors. – The phenomenon (mentioned in this journal, [Zeitschrift für den physikalischen und 
chemischen Unterricht III, p. 111], that so many of the most important French mathematicians of 
the eighteenth century were technicians by training, finds its explanation in this circumstance. The 
technician has to concern him/ herself with many details; his/her abstractions appear later, but 
often more powerful than at the study of pure theory.
E. Mach