Title: Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching and Learning of Science
Pages: 222-252

--- PAGE 222 ---
203
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_8
Chapter 8   
Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: 
A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching 
and Learning of Science             
Igal Galili
8.1  Introduction
Science education research in part studies the ways in which scientific knowledge is 
represented for teaching and learning purposes. Such a goal naturally seeks to be 
informed by the most representative and essential features of scientific knowledge 
as established by research in history and philosophy of science (HPS). Though edu-
cators share many views in this regard, there is controversy regarding some features 
which are of principal importance (Matthews 2012; Lederman et  al. 2014): 
objectivity- subjectivity, theory-experiment, theory dependence of observation, 
tentativeness- certainty, theory-model and theory-law relationships, etc. A recently 
published HPS&ST Handbook (Matthews 2014) represents the wide breadth of the 
pertinent discourse in this regard, and this essay touches on some of it in relation to 
the new inclusive framework of curricular contents oriented to Cultural Content 
Knowledge (CCK).
The problematic of this discourse stems from the complexity of science teaching 
and the multidisciplinary nature of research in the field. Science teachers require 
knowledge of subject matter, pedagogy, cognitive science, history and philosophy 
of science (Fig.  8.1). Commonly, the first three are addressed in pre-service pro -
grams of teacher training. Yet, even a basic knowledge of history and (especially) 
philosophy of science is very often totally lacking in such programs.1 In such a situ-
ation, teachers’ knowledge of the philosophy of science is inevitably superficial and 
this makes them an easy prey of various trends of superficial philosophical thought.
Seeing frequent confusion regarding epistemology among teachers encouraged 
us to look for a curricular framework, which could protect the practitioner providing 
1 For instance, this is the situation in Israel.
I. Galili (*) 
Science Teaching Center, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
e-mail: igal.galili@mail.huji.ac.il

--- PAGE 223 ---
204
a wider a more mature representation of scientific knowledge – metaknowledge, 
drawing on basic aspects of HPS. The core idea of the suggested change is to con -
sider scientific knowledge as a kind of cultural system, a discourse of ideas rather 
than a univocal discipline. This perspective mediates between scientific knowledge 
and the learner constructing understanding of science.
In the following, we will first depict science knowledge composed of a few fun-
damental theories as a special type of culture, so that disciplines become discipline- 
cultures (Tseitlin and Galili 2005). We will review applications of this paradigm to 
the contents of science curriculum: presenting scientific revolutions, involvement of 
HPS, conceptual change of students learning science and their interests in science. 
The essay proceeds and depicts the implementations of CCK (Cultural Content 
Knowledge) perspective in three curricular approaches: CCK based curriculum, 
conceptual excursus and summative lecture. Finally, the cultural perspective 
expands on some epistemological issues suggesting complementarity and integrated 
account in order to clarify and refine such epistemological oppositions as theory-  
model, objective-subjective in scientific knowledge.
8.2  Knowledge as a Culture
The term culture is extremely inclusive. It designates the entirety of human products 
(Tylor 1871/1920). Hofstede (1991) reduced it to a subset of material and spiritual 
products with the productive activities distinguishing one group from another. Thus, 
science is clearly distinct from history, religion, philosophy, arts, even if it is often 
interwoven with them. It employs a different methodology, possesses different goals 
and values. It is common to consider science as interacting with culture in specific 
social aspects (e.g. Bevilacqua et al. 2001). Other researchers elaborate the features 
characterizing the activities, behavior, internal relationships of scientists as a social 
group (e.g. Latour 1987). Still another popular meaning of culture considers ethni-
cal traditions, habits of different civilizations in the ways they accounted for nature, 
the kind of knowledge and knowledge production different from those adopted in 
the western science (e.g. Aikenhead, Aikenhead 1997; Ma 2012; Liu 2015).
Subject matter 
knowledge
History of 
Science
Pedagogy
Philosophy 
of Science
Cognitive 
science
Science 
Teaching
Fig. 8.1 Areas of 
proficiency required from 
science educators
I. Galili

--- PAGE 224 ---
205
Physics knowledge, as we know it, is composed of a few fundamental theories, 
each presenting an organized and internally coherent set of interrelated concepts, 
principles, laws and their derivatives all together describing and interpreting fea -
tures of world organization in a unified structure (Heisenberg 1959/1971; Weizsacker 
1985/2006; Weinberg 1992).2 Each such theory presents a “picture of the world” 
(Einstein 1918), valid not globally but in a certain area of experience and degree of 
accuracy/reliability.
There is a specific perspective in which knowledge itself is considered as a cul -
ture (Lotman 2010). Lotman distinguished two types: the culture of rules and the 
culture of texts. Within the first type, the well-defined rules regulate relationship 
among knowledge elements in certain area, making clear their correct-incorrect sta-
tus (e.g. jurisprudence). The culture of texts allows grouping knowledge elements 
around canonical exemplars (e.g. art). One may consider scientific knowledge as a 
culture of rules composed of disciplines such as mechanics, electromagnetism, ther-
modynamics, etc. Each group of knowledge elements affiliated with a discipline can 
be  represented by a fundamental theory structured in terms of nucleus-body-  
periphery – “discipline-culture” (Tseitlin and Galili 2005). Such representation is 
not only hierarchical but also reflects scientific knowledge as inherently discursive, 
yet specific in validation in terms correct-incorrect and including epistemological 
norms. Considering scientific knowledge as a culture creates an encompassing and 
adequate picture of such knowledge. It may serve as a guidance in the selection 
relevant HPS materials in the curriculum design, clarifying their role and possible 
involvement. This approach was exemplified in developing the historico-philosoph-
ical perspective on teaching optics (Galili 2014).
Discipline-culture codifies scientific theory in a tripartite structure (Fig.  8.2). Its 
first area, nucleus, includes fundamentals – the principles of ontological and episte-
mological nature, paradigmatic model and basic concepts. The second one, body 
knowledge, includes the elements subdued to the nucleus. They could be derived 
from and reduced to the fundamentals as well as being empirical and non-  
contradictive with the nucleus. Body knowledge incorporates more specific laws, 
secondary concepts, explanations of particular phenomena, experiments (actual and 
2 Though we address the fundamental theories of physics, the stated regarding theory representa -
tion holds also regarding theories in biology (e.g. theory of evolution) and chemistry (e.g. classifi-
cation of elements).
12 3
Fig. 8.2 The structure of 
discipline-culture: 
1-nucleus, 2– body 
knowledge, 3- periphery
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 225 ---
206
thought), technology, etc.3 To better represent the nature of scientific knowledge as 
a culture, one should, however, expand and include elements of a third type  – 
periphery. The elements of periphery are at odds with the pertinent nucleus. 
Periphery includes challenging problems and alternative accounts. By challenging 
certain nucleus, the periphery of  the correspondent theory determines the meaning 
of the nucleus as well as informs about the boundaries of the theory so often 
remained implicit and not known to the novice. In that, periphery touches on the 
tradition of apophatic and comparative approaches in philosophy (e.g. Libbrecht 
2009). Scientific knowledge codified and structured in terms of discipline-cultures, 
is defined as cultural content knowledge (CCK) and establishes a framework of the 
new type of science curriculum (Galili 2012).
Furthermore, since learning scientific concepts could be considered somewhat 
similar to the process of learning of a foreign language (Vygotsky 1986)  −  the 
learning “from outside” – identifying scientific knowledge as a culture cannot be 
left for students to discover; instruction should introduce the codification of knowl-
edge and its structure.
8.3  Cultural Content Knowledge Advantages
8.3.1  Scientific Revolution and History of Physics
We can apply the introduced structure to representation of conceptual change taking 
place in science during scientific revolution, replacement of the fundamental theory. 
Instead of seeing this process as a sequential exchange of theories, each dismissing 
the previous, CCK suggests an inclusive and more realistic image incorporating 
competitive ideas. This is because:
At almost any period in history, one can find a vast range of ideas existing simultaneously. The 
important question is which of the variety of ideas available at an earlier period got adopted 
and transmitted to later periods, and thus shaped later interpretations. (Giere 1999, p. 88)
Consider, for example, the theory of how the world is organised. Its first scientific 
account took the form of the geocentric theory. Its nucleus included principles of 
Aristotelian physics, the paradigmatic model of concentric spheres, fundamental con-
cepts (circular motion, spherical universe, the basic elements, etc.). The body knowl-
edge of that theory included working models of Eudoxus and Apollonius,4 auxiliary 
concepts (epicycle, equant), accounts of seasons, equinoxes, eclipses and other 
3 This definition excludes identification of a theory as either syntactic (based on axioms and theo-
rems) or semantic (based on models) type (van Fraassen 1980, p. 44; Giere 1988, p. 48), incorpo -
rating knowledge elements of both types in addition to principles, concepts, experiments, 
epistemological rules, etc. In fact, it depicts a theory as it is used and taught in physics class: clas-
sical mechanics, electromagnetism, thermodynamics and so on (Tseitlin and Galili 2005).
4 For simplicity, we may ignore here the mismatch of epicycle-based model with Aristotelian princi-
ples, which caused Lakatos to introduce protective belt around the core of the theory (Lakatos 1978).
I. Galili

--- PAGE 226 ---
207
 phenomena as depicted in Ptolemy‘s Almagest. The body knowledge included col-
lected data, instruments (quadrant, Jacob’s staff) and methods of measurement (paral-
lax, shadow patterns). Importantly, however, the rival (heliocentric and Earth spinning) 
accounts of Pythagoras, Heraclites, and Aristarchus were present from the beginning 
establishing permanent debate (Ptolemy 1952, pp. 6–14; Heath 1966). Various schol-
ars continuously introduced new elements of periphery through the period of two 
millennia. The increasing tension between the nucleus and periphery caused the revo-
lutionary change, a breakthrow and rearranging of elements: during the Copernican 
revolution, the heliocentric model moved to the nucleus, and the geocentric model – 
to the periphery. The body elements transformed to adjust the new nucleus.
Importantly, the elements of the new and old knowledge were interrelated within 
one system. One may get this spirit of conceptual unity and continuity from 
Einstein‘s perception of his contribution to physics theory. He wrote to his biogra-
pher (quoted in Miller 1986, p. xx):
With respect to the theory of relativity, it is not at all a question of a revolutionary act, but 
of a natural development of a line which can be pursued through centuries.
CCK-based description visualizes this pursuit in the space of scientific discourse, 
displaying the meaning of crisis and following revolutionary change as described by 
Kuhn (1957, 1970). Yet, in the cultural perspective, the knowledge elements of the 
old nucleus are preserved after being refuted. They remain within the horizon of the 
new theories of the world organization.
8.3.2  Theories Relationship
The controversy of fundamental physics theories is often addressed by claiming 
their incommensurability − an essential mismatch of the scientific paradigms (Kuhn 
1970). The tripartite model of discipline culture allows clarification of this relation-
ship. In particular, the nucleus of one fundamental theory ought to be located in the 
periphery of the other (Fig.  8.3). Yet, at the same time, the body areas of these theo-
ries may overlay representing the cases where the same phenomenon or problem is 
treated by the two theories producing commensurable results.
For example, in the limit of low velocities both classical and relativistic mechan-
ics provide physically equivalent results despite the essential contradiction between 
the nuclei of these two theories. The tripartite structure illustrates the meaning of the 
Body1 Body2
Periphery
Nucleus1
Nucleus2
Fig. 8.3 Representation of relationship between two fundamental physical theories that contradict 
each other with respect to their fundamentals but may consider the same subject matter
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 227 ---
208
principle of correspondence in physics knowledge. It is in this sense that continuity 
of scientific knowledge is maintained in science showing its cumulative nature as 
one of its major characteristics. Physics knowledge includes different theories, com-
plementing each other. They establish relationship known as family resemblance, 
sharing some features and different in others. It allows to more advanced theories, to 
draw on the old accomplishments, problem solutions, rather than replacing alto -
gether the previous knowledge. CCK envisions this type of relationship clarifying 
the nature of scientific holism and refining the metaphor of “patchwork” for scien-
tific knowledge (Cartwright 2005). It is inadequate to represent scientific knowledge 
as a collection of non-related different pieces. Structuring the multiplicity of knowl-
edge elements in a conceptually related web leads students to establishing metaknowl-
edge defined as the knowledge of science as an organism in terms of its global 
features (Novak and Gowin 1984). CCK does it in terms of the tripartite structure.
8.3.3  Students’ Learning
The tripartite structure of CCK suggests ways of representing individual conceptual 
change in learning science. Posner and associates (Posner et al. 1982) saw this pro-
cess as similar to conceptual change in science and stated the epistemological condi-
tions for that process to go – dissatisfaction, ineligibility, plausibility and fruitfulness. 
The individual conceptual change will be represented, then, in similar way to the 
change of the collective knowledge, as an exchange of contents between nucleus, 
initially containing naïve conceptions, and the peripheral contents created by the 
instruction. The implementations of students’ naïve conceptions create correspond-
ing body knowledge, which serves as a barrier for any change of the nuclear contents. 
The new knowledge due to instruction enters the periphery first. During the required 
conceptual change, the new concepts penetrate the nucleus and the naive ones move 
to the periphery.5 Yet, facing a novel situation, students may retrieve the old contents 
and apply them again (Galili and Bar 1992). The metaphor of a breakthrough through 
the barrier of body knowledge may explain the difficulty of conceptual change, its 
essential difference from replacement as old software in a computer.6
Furthermore, periphery knowledge stipulates meaningful learning by creation of a 
“space for learning” (Marton et al. 2004). The periphery creates conceptual variation 
with respect to the goal of instruction. For instance, the genuine understanding of 
Newton‘s First Law as the cornerstone of mechanics7 requires addressing  alternative 
5 Since 1982, the conditions for conceptual change were revised to include other factors. This, 
however, does not change the idea of using triadic structure to visualize the conceptual change as 
a breakthrough and elements transfer between nucleus and periphery.
6 The factors instigating the breakthrough are compared, thus, to the difference of potentials 
between nucleus and periphery.
7 Beyond being a special case of the Second Law, as often stated in disciplinary instruction (e.g. 
Galili and Tseitlin 2003).
I. Galili

--- PAGE 228 ---
209
accounts for motion – those by the Aristotelian and impetus theories. It is through 
identification of nucleus contents and their comparison with alternatives that concep-
tual change takes place both in the history of science and in individual learning.
In other words, by comparison of conceptual accounts, students may learn 
through considerations similar to those of scientists who changed their mind in the 
past (e.g. Galili 2015). The awareness of such changes is metalearning. CCK stimu-
lates students’ metalearning due to the created metaknowledge:
Learning about the nature and structure of knowledge helps students to understand how 
they learn… Metalearning and metaknowledge are two different but interconnected bodies 
of knowledge that characterize human understanding. (Novak and Gowin 1984, p. 9)
8.3.4  Physics Curriculum
The CCK paradigm transplants easily to physics curriculum. In common teaching, 
the theory-based superstructure of physics knowledge is often barely emphasized. 
Instead, a sequence of concepts, laws, models, instruments, experiments, problems 
to solve and phenomena to explain flood the learners with a flux of knowledge ele-
ments without clear organization in a hierarchical structure, in effect promoting the 
image of a toolbox, or even a “patchwork” (Cartwright 2005). Physics educators 
often unfold the knowledge from simpler to complex as if building a unique and 
homogeneous construction.
The learner often gets an impression of a proportional accretion: the more one 
learns, the more one knows − more models, solved problems, explained phenom -
ena, concepts and laws. Principles are often barely distinguished from laws which 
endlessly multiply themselves along the course. This perspective in which the laws 
might appear as “…neither universal nor necessary – nor even true” (Giere 1999, 
p.  90) is refined by discipline-culture organization. Indeed, physics laws are not 
universal and hold in specified areas of validity. Yet, the physics knowledge is com-
posed of a few fundamental theories, structured hierarchically. They are much more 
than “rules for model construction”.8 Although different, they are related, epistemo-
logically and ontologically. The diminished status of a theory in science curriculum 
may impede adequate appreciation of scientific knowledge as a culture.
Instead of a sequential presentation of non-interrelated contents, curricular 
designers may point to the triadic affiliation of each element of knowledge. We may 
learn of such approach from Newton. Dealing with specular reflection and  refraction 
laws, he placed them in the nucleus of his Opticks. At the same time, in his Principia, 
the same laws appeared as elements of body knowledge: they were derived from the 
general principles of mechanics. Similarly, presenting thermodynamics one may 
place the state equation (Mendeleev-Clapeyron) in the nucleus as an empirically 
8 van Fraassen (2008, p. 266) says: “A well-constructed scientific theory will tell a story, a narrative 
in which the why is as clearly explained as the what, and we come to understand not only ‘what 
happens’ but ‘what is really going on’”.
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 229 ---
210
based law, whereas in statistical physics the same law would be affiliated with the 
body knowledge backed by its microscopic underpinning.
The CCK approach emphasizes the nucleus in each theory, often missed in phys-
ics class. Thus, such contents of mechanics as space and time, relativity, interaction, 
inertia being ignored may mask the essential difference with their counterparts in 
electromagnetism.9
An important feature of the CCK based curriculum is inclusion of knowledge 
elements usually considered to be wrong or external, they are in the periphery of the 
considered theory. For instance, the curriculum of classical mechanics would incor-
porate the obsolete conceptions of Aristotelian violent and natural motion, medieval 
impetus. Moreover, such curriculum would point to how classical mechanics essen-
tially is different from relativistic and quantum. It is also emphasized that the clas -
sical account is valid in the particular span of space, time and mass magnitudes. By 
variation, these extensions provide the meaning of the classical conception of 
motion in the unified picture of physics knowledge.
The appeal to the alternative ideas specifies HPS involvement surpassing a mere 
enrichment and scientific literacy. By bringing conceptual alternatives to the fore, 
the curriculum reveals diachronic and synchronic conceptual debates thus promot -
ing meaningful learning of scientific disciplines.
8.3.5  Students’ Typology
The tripartite structure of discipline-culture suggests a new typology of students 
with regard to their potential, interests and intentions. Instead of the division 
between scientists and non-scientists (“good” and “bad” in science) as reflecting 
“two cultures” (Snow 1959), students may be distinguished in their cognitive pref-
erences towards the three facets of scientific knowledge corresponding to the three 
types of knowledge elements of discipline-culture. Some students may show inter -
est in the rules of the world order (the nucleus), but remain reluctant towards their 
applications, problem solving, and are satisfied by being informed of the science 
fundamentals. Other students may prefer solving practical problems (body) taking 
general principles as given. Such individuals are focused on certain problems that 
attract them either by challenging their ambition of mastering scientific knowledge 
or being encouraged by their needs of different nature (e.g. social or techonologi -
cal). Becoming a competent practitioner implies seeking proficiency in modeling 
and problem solving. The third type of students is interested in a different aspect of 
scientific knowledge. Facing the authoritative claims, they raise, however, a ques -
tion why these laws and not others govern reality.10
9 The contrast between nuclei of classical mechanics and classical electromagnetism is striking, 
since electromagnetism is essentially relativistic theory and employs field interaction.
10 Allegedly, this was the question Einstein mentioned as the one he would ask God if a chance 
were granted.
I. Galili

--- PAGE 230 ---
211
The students of the first type – “observers-philosophers”  − often meet teachers’ 
remarks of being superficial, not practical and not serious enough. They are advised 
to engage in more practice, problem solving, and mastering of mathematical for -
malism. They are urged not to be “childish dreamers”. Taking seriously such cri -
tique, such students often leave their science class and move over to humanities. 
This presents a real loss for our society that badly needs an enlightened population 
literate in science in order to make educated decisions in a modern democratic soci-
ety. Worth listening to is one of the leading physicists of our time who said:
What is important in science (I leave philosophy to others) is not the solution of some popu-
lar scientific problems of one’s own day, but understanding the world. (Weinberg 2015, 
p. 24)
The students who are attracted to the body knowledge – “engineers” – do not 
need to be pressured. They often please their teachers and are usually supported by 
the school administration. Such students are often shown in media as easy to present 
and appreciate. Indeed, they comprise the great reserve for the practitioners, normal 
scientists and people of technology.
The third and most controversial type of student is attracted to the periphery 
knowledge  – where there is debate over ideas. Such students  – “investiga -
tors”  − often challenge the teachers with philosophical questions. “Correct” and 
“incorrect” subject matter becomes equally interesting and deserve attention. Since 
such students may impede the flow of instruction, they might face not a favorable 
attitude. Yet, before they are called to order, one may recollect that the archaic “phil-
osophical” ideas of potentiality and actuality in Aristotelian physics inspired the 
founders of quantum mechanics, students of classical gymnasium. It was the antique 
idea of the Cartesian plenum that led physicists to the introduction of the field con-
cept to account for interactions in electromagnetism. The twentieth century intro -
duction of photons was informed by the seventeenth–nineteenth centuries debates 
about the particle-wave nature of light in. Recycling of ideas is a norm in physics 
research and virtue of intellectuality. Therefore, the students of the third type 
deserve support and encouragement, as they will nourish the new generation of 
researchers, the science pioneers producing essentially new knowledge  – the 
extremely important role.
It is important therefore that science curriculum speaks in three voices corre -
sponding to the three aspects of CCK, matching the interests important for the soci-
ety in wider perspective. Moreover, given that people are not born with clear 
self-identification of their cognitive preferences, each of us must try all three aspects 
of scientific knowledge to detect and make the correct choice of his/her preference 
for future occupation, leaving aside the special value of holistic knowledge and the 
pleasure people receive from multi-faceted intellectuality. The evidence of  relevance 
of the tripartite typology of students’ preferences emerged from a study introducing 
discipline-culture in a summative lecture (Levrini et al. 2014) that will be addressed 
in the following.
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 231 ---
212
8.4  The Ways to Provide Cultural Content Knowledge
After a certain innovation is theoretically considered, the ways to implement it 
become a subject of experimentation. Feasibility and the nature of impact of any 
innovation can be checked only through real teaching. We have explored three ways 
to facilitate construction of CCK in students. Their brief account follows.
8.4.1  CCK-Based Curriculum
The first and the most comprehensive way is a production of a CCK-based curricu-
lum in a certain area of knowledge. We produced a new curriculum for teaching 
optics – a theory of light and vision – in high school and developed a special text -
book (Galili and Hazan 2004). A yearlong teaching experiment was performed 
(Galili and Hazan 2000). The new curriculum included the unfolding discourse with 
regard to the nature of vision and light, the debate of competitive accounts through-
out the history of science (Lindberg 1976; Galili 2014).
Our experience in teaching optics and research in students’ knowledge found 
evidence of certain recapitulation. Recapitulation implies similarity of ontogeny of 
knowledge, individual development, and correspondent phylogeny, the develop -
ment of the pertinent collective knowledge. In the domain of optics and vision such 
parallelism is presented in Table  8.1.
Optics teaching involving the diachronic discourse on the nature of light and 
vision caused resonance with students’ ideas and beliefs. The teachers drew on this 
similarity in addressing the known misconceptions of students. In a way, CCK of 
Table 8.1 Conceptual parallelism in optics knowledge
Historical conceptions Students’ conceptions
Pythagorean active vision (5th c. B.C.) Active vision scheme
Euclidean dichotomy of vision and light rays 
(Ptolemy – 2nd c., Alkindi, 9th c.)
Rays of sight and rays of light
Atomists’ conception of Eidola (moving 
replica, simulacrum, from the observed 
object) (5th c. B.C.)
Conception (scheme) of Holistic Image moving 
in space
Biblical dichotomy of light as an entity and 
light as perception (lumen-lux Latin and in 
photometry)
Conception of static light located in/around light 
sources (halo, bright sky) and illuminated 
surfaces and moving light
Ibn al-Haytham’s theory of light and vision 
(11th c.)
Light comprised of rays and image projection 
scheme of account for optical image observed 
by means of light rays
Pure (white) light and colour as a pigment, 
attenuation/pigmentation
Pure (white) light and colour as a pigment, 
attenuation/pigmentation
Galili and Hazan (2000)
I. Galili

--- PAGE 232 ---
213
the subject matter vaccinated the learners through their appreciation of the evolving 
scientific views. We believe that even if the particular student did not develop a 
particular alternative conception, the learning about such was beneficial. Students’ 
naïve ideas are often less well reasoned in comparison with historical conceptions. 
Therefore, comprehension of the pertinent historical debate enriches students’ 
knowledge instigating conceptual learning. The usually vague intuitive alternative 
ideas become distinct in their meaning and that helps to analyse them, reveal their 
rationale and facilitate their refutation. This process may be compared with increas-
ing the potential difference between the nucleus and periphery leading to a break -
through – the required conceptual change. Our experiment showed that the suggested 
curriculum had strong remedial effect on students’ misconceptions (Galili and 
Hazan 2000).
8.4.2  Conceptual Excursus
The second way to provide CCK we explored does not require changes in the regu-
lar curriculum and facilitates the cultural upgrading of conceptual knowledge by 
means of complementary studies. It suggests performing a conceptual excursus11 to 
the historical consolidation of a particular concept that took place in the history of 
science, identifying the major steps in such process and thus establishing the space 
of variation of that concept in order to be truly understood. This genre is common in 
historical studies often focused on certain concept (e.g. Jammer 1957; Lindberg 
1976). It, however, is marginal in regular disciplinary teaching-learning. We have 
produced several such HPS-based excursuses to illustrate the idea in educational 
perspective (Galili 2012). Excursuses may support students’ learning in classes and 
teachers’ training, in- and pre-service. We picked up several concepts that were 
interesting and relevant to illustrate this new genre. The problematic nature of the 
chosen concepts (collision, motion, image, weight and inertial force) calls attention 
and invites changes in teaching practice. In the following, we briefly illustrate a 
couple of them.
8.4.2.1  The Concept of Weight
The concept of weight is of special interest in science education because it belongs 
to a cluster of concepts interwoven, interchangeably used and badly distinguished: 
weight, mass, heaviness, gravity, gravitation. Moreover, there is no consensus 
among physics educators regarding how this concept should be defined. In many 
countries weight of a body is defined as the gravitational force exerted on it  
11 The meaning we address in the notion of excursus is stepping aside of the major line of teaching 
for elaborating on a certain subject.
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 233 ---
214
(e.g. Young and Freedman 2004, 2012),12 while in others, weight is defined as a 
result of standard weighing. 13 Physics educators argued for the latter followed 
Reichenbach ( 1927/1958, p.  223) in his epistemological analysis in light of the 
Einstein principle of equivalence. The debate in physics education started after King 
(1962) who argued for changing the definition of weight toward the operational one. 
The concept of weight was discussed (Galili 2001), checked in students’ and teach-
ers’ knowledge (Galili and Kaplan 1996; Galili and Lehavi 2003, 2006) and experi-
mentally tested in teaching (Stein and Galili 2014; Stein et al. 2015; Galili et al. 
2017) showing numerous  advantages of the operational definition of weight. 
Textbooks slowly change in the account of weight and weightlessness towards the 
operational definition of weight.14
Importantly, however, physics textbooks avoid discussing the available choice in 
the definition of weight, and do not compare between the two options, regardless the 
way they chose to present the weight concept and related issues (weightlessness, 
weight changes, etc.). The CCK orientated excursus to the subject suggests an 
explicit comparison between the approaches. In contrast to disciplinary teaching, 
the excursus followed the evolution of the pertinent conceptual understanding 
(Fig.  8.4), displayed the debate of scientists, their discourse and in this way revealed 
to the learners the rationale underpinning concept definitions in general, the need of 
12 Such is the definition adopted in the majority of the “Western” world countries (also in Australia, 
South Korea and many others). This approach culminates in the famous definition: “The weight of 
a body is the total gravitational force exerted on the body by all other bodies in the universe” 
(Young and Freedman 2012). The latter has no sense in modern physics epistemology being 
impossible either to measure, or estimate, or use in solving any problem (Galili 2001).
13 For instance, Baruch and Vizansky (1937) in Israel, Chaikin (1947/1963) in Russia; Marion and 
Hornyack (1982) and Knight (2013) in the US.
14 Hewitt 1992, pp. 176, 179–180, versus Hewitt 2002, pp.159–160; Knight 2004, pp.131–132, 
versus Knight 2013, pp.146–147; Resnick and Halliday 1966, p. 93 versus Halliday et al. 2001, 
pp. 80–81
Newton 
1687 
Gravity, 
weight, mass 
Gravitational force, 
Weight force
Inertial Mass
Einstein 1916
Reichenbach 1927
Gravitational force
Weight force
Inertial Mass
Fig. 8.4 Flowchart of the conceptual change of meaning in the conceptual cluster of mass-weight- 
gravitation throughout the history of science (Galili 2012)
I. Galili

--- PAGE 234 ---
215
a pair of definitions for each: nominal and operational (Margenau 1950). This 
requirement presents a new epistemological framework of physics knowledge intro-
duced in the modern physics, and it is illustrated by the case of weight.
8.4.2.2  The Concept of Optical Image
This excursus lays out the genesis of physics knowledge regarding optical imagery 
and vision. The subject is usually studied at the beginning of optics course. The 
account for optical images developed in classical Greece, in parallel with the views 
about the nature of light. Several conceptions of optical image coexisted for years, 
remaining a subject of a continuous discourse 15 (Fig.  8.5). The excursus traces the 
evolution of understanding from the Hellenic conceptions (Pythagorean active 
vision, Atomists’ eidola, Plato’s hybrid understanding, and Aristotle’s medium 
through transmission), to the Euclidean rays of vision, and the medieval theory by 
Ibn Al-Haytham (11th c.).
These accounts preceded the theory of Kepler (17th c.) and thus belong to the 
periphery of the currently taught light theory of rays − Geometrical Optics. The 
concept of light rays developed in parallel, changed its status from being the effec-
tive cause of vision, in the Hellenistic and Medieval physics, to a mere descriptive 
tool, in Kepler’s ray and Huygens’ wave theories of light. The important opposition 
between the intromission and extramission theories of vision held for more than 
1500 years, until Ibn Al-Haytham refuted the extramission theory in the eleventh 
century. His own theory of image creation though was also erroneous but served as 
15 Ronchi (1970, 1991), Pedersen and Phil (1974), Lindberg (1976), Russo (2004)
O I
Holistic 
conception
Image 
projection
Mapping by light flux
Intromission 
models of vision
Extramission
model of vision
Vision by sight rays
Fig. 8.5 Historical conceptions with respect to understanding of optical image (Galili 2012)
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 235 ---
216
a vital intermediate stage before Kepler who resolved the problem within 
Geometrical optics – image creation by light flux, instead of single rays tracing the 
points of an object to its image replica (Lindberg 1976).
Similar to mechanics, it appeared that the historical conceptions are relevant for 
physics education. Several researchers reported and analyzed conceptions possess-
ing clear similarity with the historical models (Table  8.1) (Guesne 1985; Bendall 
et al. 1993; Galili and Hazan 2000).16 Thus, prior to optical instruction, students 
often show holistic understanding of optical images travelling through space, remi-
niscent of eidola of Greek Atomists, as well as the understanding by active vision, 
visual rays, similar to that by the scientists of Alexandria (Euclid, Ptolemy) and 
medieval Arabic scholars (Alkindi). Novice learners, after initial instruction, often 
show the misconception similar to Ibn al-Haytham’s account for vision. It stated 
that “relevant” light rays, one per image point, create the image. Light rays enter the 
eye, refract in multiple layers and construct an image on the surface of the eye’s-  
lens. This process often seems reasonable to learners (Galili et al. 1993; Galili and 
Hazan 2000; Kim 2011).
The excursus to imagery in optics creates a space of learning and furnishes genu-
ine understanding of geometrical optics by conceptual variation and comparison 
amidst a range of possibilities of image creation. The excursus shows the progress 
of physics theories: holistic and descriptive (Hellenic), structural and mechanistic 
(Hellenistic and medieval light rays). The account for image changed from pure 
qualitative (by means of eidola) to quantitative mathematical providing image con-
struction and a formula for its location (by means of light rays flux).
The story of the optical image touches on the nature of science with respect to its 
identification as a sub-culture of Western culture (Aikenhead 1997). In any event, 
after the first steps in Hellenic science of Greece the knowledge was promoted in 
Hellenistic mixed society of the middle East, and then by scientists of Muslim coun-
tries (Arabs, Jews, Christians) before its arrival to the medieval Europe (Al-Khalili 
2010).
The important inference here is that different scholars, regardless their ethnicity 
shared a specific trend of thought and inquiry of the same subject matter. They drew 
on the previous research, adopted its results and further developed the relevant 
knowledge. The optical excursus refines the Kuhnian claim about the incommensu-
rability of physics theories. Muslim scholars adopted Hellenic and Hellenistic sci -
ence and saw it as their own. They “were not doing Islamic science. They were 
doing science” (Weinberg 2015, p. 70). Science clearly appears here as cumulative 
and continuous, preserving and developing a universal culture with no ethnic, racial 
or religious essence.17
16 For a more inclusive list of citations, see Galili (2014).
17 This claim also touches on the important trend of science education considering Western culture 
seeking the way to present scientific knowledge in developing countries of the post-colonial world.
I. Galili

--- PAGE 236 ---
217
8.4.3  Summative Lecture
The third way to provide CCK, summative lecture, though lacking the inclusiveness 
of the novel curriculum and the depth of historical excursus, might be, however, the 
most affordable and easily implemented.
In the past, David Ausubel suggested a special tool – advance organiser – to 
facilitate and fortify learning (Ausubel 1968). Before teaching a new topic, students 
are instructed regarding the framework of the knowledge to be considered. The 
instruction may include the tools to be used, such as the required mathematical for-
malism. Yet, the major goal in such an approach is displaying the overall idea, the 
concept. For example, in a biology course, introducing at the beginning the concept 
of natural selection may serve as an advance organizer. In physics, the big picture of 
the course would require addressing fundamental theories. Providing such 
metaknowledge as an advance organiser looked problematic in physics  as there 
were too many unknown specific concepts. Therefore, we tried the reversed order. 
We designed a summative, reviewing lecture, which might be considered as an a 
posteriori or delayed organizer . The lecture addressed the students after they 
learned the contents in a traditional course.
This special type of lecture is designed to rearrange the learned materials in a 
theory-based structure, identifying the elements of knowledge as affiliated to three 
types: nucleus, body, and periphery of a certain theory. Though the lecture addresses 
the already known to students contents, to reach CCK, one should, besides the hier-
archical classification, provide, even if only qualitatively, certain elements for the 
periphery of the considered theory in order to address the pertinent historical dis -
course. Such a lecture should create a holistic view on the course, its essential con-
tent and unifying structure, rearranging the learned mosaic of knowledge 
elements.
As a teaching experiment, we provided a summative lecture to three high school 
classes at Liceo Scientifico in Rimini, Italy (Levrini et al. 2014). Optics was chosen 
as an especially convenient area for testing the discipline-cultural organization since 
the school curriculum employs three basic theories learned in different depth: ray 
theory of light (geometrical optics), wave theory of light (physical optics) and pho-
tons theory of light (modern physics). To these basic theories, we added Newton’s 
particle theory addressed at a conceptual level (Galili 2014). The four theories 
together created a panoramic image of optics development as shown in Fig.  8.6.
To depict the scientific discourse on light and vision a few fragments were added. 
Such was Newton‘s treatment of interference patterns (Newton’s rings) within the 
theory of rays and without the interference principle (not known to Newton). He 
developed the ray theory and stretched it in order to include colors and color bands 
in thin films (Shapiro 1993). Another historical fragment added was Huygens’ treat-
ment of double refraction in crystals. It showed where Huygens was stuck, unable 
to recognise the transverse nature of light waves. Newton only qualitatively resolved 
that problem by ascribing sides to a light ray.
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 237 ---
218
The elements of optics knowledge learned and new, were affiliated in according 
to the tripartite codification and filled the diagrams of the kind shown on Fig.  8.7. 
This way a competition of basic theories was visualized: the debate on color, the 
account of reflection and refraction, Snell’s law and double refraction, diffraction 
and other items populated different areas of the structure. The diagram facilitated 
explanation of the preference given in the eighteenth century to Newton’s theory of 
light particles over the theory of ether waves of Huygens.
In the following, a pertinent diagram illustrated the victory of the Fresnel-Young 
wave theory over the Newton‘s theory of light particles in the nineteenth century. 
Finally, the wave theory succumbed to the modern theory of photons in the twenti-
eth century. This review showed that each topic and feature of light the students had 
learned could find its location in the suggested structure and participate in a dynamic 
picture – recognizably human, often contentious, conditioned by context and envi -
ronment, and producing a stream of knowledge development arranged in different 
theories.
The big picture of optical knowledge emerged in its full stature. In the case of 
optics, all three learned theories of light preserved their validity and coexist in pres-
ent practice. Each of the basic models − ray, wave and photon – is valid in certain 
area of parameters (light intensity, wavelength) and level of accuracy. They serve 
for producing the simplest and efficient accounts, products and useful devices. The 
idea of knowledge progress was thus refined. Despite the confidence that the quan-
tum theory is the most general, we account for spectacles by ray optics and for 
microscope resolution by light waves.
8.4.3.1  Findings of the Experiment
We applied the lecture, pre- and post- questionnaires and following class discussion 
(Levrini et al. 2014). We found that the tripartite organization of knowledge ele -
ments within theories was appreciated by students as helpful and informing. Novel 
Ray Theory
Particle Theory 
Wave Theory Wave Theory 
Photon Theory
17thc –1 8thc1 9thc 20thc-3thc –1 7thc
Fig. 8.6 The big picture of the development of the knowledge of light. The theories dominated in 
each period are marked by a point frame (Galili 2014)
I. Galili

--- PAGE 238 ---
219
Stability of a light beam
Newton’s Rings (Fits)
Newton’s Colors
Geometrical Shadow
Newton’s hypothesis of 
polarization (in terms of 
particles poles)
Higher light speed in denser medium
for gravitational attraction
Hooke’s explanation of 
color fringes in thin films
(Pulse turn)
The mathematical account 
for diffraction (Interference)
The full mathematical 
account for double 
refraction 
Splitting light in crystals
(double refraction)
Particle
Refraction
Waves1
Reflection
Descartes’ explanation of color 
(particle rotation in pressure waves) Comparison of light with 
sound waves (higher 
speed in denser medium)
Ray
Fig. 8.7 Representation of the development of optics knowledge in the seventeenth to eighteenth centuries in the CCK perspective. It represents the competi-
tion of two theories of light stemmed from the ray theory (Levrini et al. 2014)
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 239 ---
220
for all, it matched students’ intuition. Many of them (2/3, 1/3, 1/3 in the 3 classes) 
said “it was not new for me…” indicating closeness to intuition and their naïve 
attempts to organize the multitude of laws, principles, models, concepts that they 
learned.18 Students debated the relative importance of the three types of knowledge 
elements. They were interested in the hierarchy of the theories and their possible 
unification in one inclusive theory of all.
Lacking initial understanding of theories and the related role of models, the stu-
dents asked for clarification of theory-model relationship. In responding to this 
question, different models of optical theories were affiliated to the three areas of the 
corresponding theories (Fig.  8.8). The models of ray, wave, photon were attributed 
to the nuclei as paradigmatic models. The models of thin lenses, paraxial rays, point 
sources were identified as working models located in the body of ray theory. Finally, 
the models from periphery were exemplified by photons in the wave theory used as 
a heuristic model.
Some students, who usually remained outside of discussions in physics class, 
mentioned that they were interested in the big picture of optics knowledge. 
Refutation of some conceptions and explanations, and adoption of others, as shown 
in the history and philosophy of science lessons, attracted them to physics.
The image of the subject matter as a cluster of several theories allowed consider-
ation of the relationship of physics knowledge with the real world: does physics 
knowledge mirror nature exactly? Facing several valid theories of light led students 
away from the idea of a unique reflection toward the more adequate view of physical 
theory as representing a certain perspective – useful, and valid, but not identical to 
nature leaving space to other accounts, quite in harmony with the view that the “sci-
entific knowledge is not absolute, but perspectival” (Giere 1999, p. 150).
Student interest and engagement that was apparent in the discussion indicated 
the strong appeal of the new perspective on physics knowledge applied in the 
 experiment and its beneficial impact. Students thought about whether they wanted 
18 One may interpret this reaction to the triadic organization as a sort of cognitive resonance with 
the immature ideas located in the Vygotskian Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD).
NucleusB odyP eriphery
Heuristic models
Working models
Paradigmatic models
Fig. 8.8 Models may appear in all areas of theory structure
I. Galili

--- PAGE 240 ---
221
to be physicists and if so, of what type − dealing with the nucleus, body or periphery 
of physics.
When interviewed, the teachers of the experimental classes expressed apprecia -
tion of CCK as a framework of the subject matter, unifying various knowledge ele-
ments – models, laws, experiments, etc. – in a related web. They mentioned that 
such inclusion of history and philosophy of science infused new meaning into the 
regular teaching. In particular, they pointed to the ability to display the progression 
of physical theories, the conceptual change in science and transitions from one the-
ory to another. Frequent use of representative graphical, artistic, and allegorical 
images in the short summative lecture was seen as an appealing pedagogical tool 
(Galili 2013).
8.5  Epistemology and Considering Knowledge as a Culture
The impact of a cultural knowledge approach to science curriculum with respect to 
the epistemological aspects is of different nature because philosophy itself corre -
sponds to a different type of culture. While the content knowledge of science com-
prises a culture of rules, the epistemological knowledge of science is rather a culture 
of texts, implying a more flexible perception of correct-incorrect opposition. 
Different epistemological approaches often  complement each other rather than 
exclude.
In particular, the history of science illustrates the continuous contest of rational-
ist and empiricist methods of knowledge construction. Aristotle combined them in 
an inductive-deductive circular procedure of scientific investigation drawing on 
contemplation and logical analysis (Losee 1993). Platonic-Pythagorean rational 
analysis preceded Aristotelian. It drew on the idea of transcendent order and math-
ematical logic to uncover the hidden forms projecting to the perceived reality. 
Theory was introduced to account for and represent reality. The scientific method 
developed and was modified. Initially focused on theory-based speculations it was 
reinforced by experimentation in Hellenistic and Muslim sciences.
In the following elaboration of scientific method, medieval science introduced 
“prerogatives of experimental science” on top of the further developed rationalist 
apparatus clearly prevailed. The medieval resolution-composition method as well as 
nominalist-realist opposition regarding scientific concepts prepared both Baconian 
empiricism and Cartesian rationalism. Science always kept both approaches towards 
their synthesis by Galileo and Newton who produced the integrated account 
(Fig.  8.9). This is different from the clear hierarchy of content elements in the 
discipline- culture structure. For instance, in classical mechanics, the rectilinear uni-
form motion is affiliated to the nucleus whereas its counterparts in the Aristotelian 
(state of rest) and quantum (state of definite momentum) mechanics belong to the 
periphery.
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 241 ---
222
The cultural perspective unifies the accounts of discovery in the Baconian “inter-
rogation of nature” with the constructivist creation in the scientific research pro -
gram (Lakatos 1978). The combination of both approaches more adequately 
represents scientific practice as in Fig.  8.10.
Scientists are often inconsistent in their methodology. They may employ empiri-
cism, rationalism, constructivism in different combinations while remaining com -
mitted to the standards of empirical verification, drawing on theory, objectivity, and 
open discourse. The teaching drawing on discipline-culture idea displays this plu -
rality claiming their complementarity. The epistemological plurality influences on 
science curriculum as may be represented with a semiotic triangle (e.g. Löbner 
2013, p. 24). In it, the disciplinary contents of a theory constitute the object vertex. 
The chosen philosophical dictum creates the concept vertex thus providing the 
object with conceptual meaning (Fig.  8.11). The object – disciplinary contents – is 
signified by science curriculum, the sign vertex, which features are determined by 
the chosen philosophical framework of the concept vertex (Tseitlin and Galili 2006). 
This dependence manifests itself in the emphasis and preferences given to empirical 
versus theoretical fundamentals, 19 deductive versus inductive organization of 
materials,20 etc.
19 Thus, one may compare the introductory physics textbooks of the Nuffield project in UK strongly 
emphasizing laboratory work and less the elaboration of theoretical aspects with other physics 
textbooks of the same level, for instance, Harvard Physics Project in the US.
20 Introductory courses of physics are often framed in inductive organization while the correspond-
ing advanced courses of theoretical physics are usually deductive.
Fig. 8.9 Plato and 
Aristotle in the center of 
Raphael fresco The School 
of Athens in Vatican (c. 
1511). This image became 
emblematic of the Western 
science as having two 
images in its focus. The 
gesturing of the two 
philosophers is interpreted 
as representing integration 
of rationalism (“theory 
first”) and empiricism 
(“experience first”) (Galili 
2013). (arrows added)
I. Galili

--- PAGE 242 ---
223
A discipline-cultural curriculum suggests a combined methodological perspec -
tive in exact parallel with scientists who cannot afford being restricted to one epis -
temology and combine philosophically different and even opposite approaches 
(Einstein 1949, pp. 683–684). 21
21 Einstein explained there: “He [scientist] therefore must appear to the systematic epistemologist 
as a type of unscrupulous opportunist: he appears as realist insofar as he seeks to describe a world 
independent of the acts of perception; as idealist insofar as he looks upon the concepts and theories 
as free inventions of the human spirit (not logically derivable from what is empirically given); as 
positivist insofar as he considers his concepts and theories justified only to the extent to which they 
furnish a logical representation of relations among sensory experiences. He may even appear as 
Platonist or Pythagorean insofar as he considers the viewpoint of logical simplicity as an indis -
pensable and effective tool of his research.”
Fig. 8.10 Images representing two scientific methodologies. ( a) Discovery taken as emblematic 
for physics on the Nobel Price medal (names of the figures emphasized); (b) Constructivism as the 
method of modern science might be represented using the images of Pygmalion and Galatea
Physics 
Theory
Philosophy of 
science
Science 
curriculum
Conceptually explained by
Fig. 8.11 Semiotic triangle of physics education
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 243 ---
224
Pragmatic, instrumental philosophy, such as that by Dewey ( 1938), would 
emphasise problem-based curriculum, learning by doing, drawing on personal 
experience and initial conceptions of the learner (educational constructivism) as the 
ways to mastering and understanding scientific knowledge. This perspective may 
miss the overall view, the epistemological status of knowledge elements in the 
theory- based structure of physics, identification of fundamentals, concept defini -
tions, principles, and interrelations of the constituents. Those contents would come 
to the fore in the curriculum based on the rationalistic account of science (e.g. Frank 
1957). The latter comprise metaknowledge which cannot be created in practicing 
standard problems, but should be explicitly taught, illustrated and discussed.
As an example, within the curricular perspective of modelling, one considers 
theory merely as a set of models constructed according to certain rules (semantic 
view). Addressing classical mechanics such approach pointed to the set of basic 
models (e.g. Giere 1999, pp. 110–111; Halloun 2006, pp. 140–141). However, the 
other contents of theory, its nucleus may be missed. Among them, the relativity 
principle, concepts of absolute time and space, state of motion, force definition, 
central interaction of point masses, etc. Thus, the mentioned set of useful models 
includes the uniform motion (rectilinear with constant velocity) as one of the basic 
models, next to circular and oscillatory motions. Yet, the uniform motion is much 
more than that. It presents a fundamental state different from all other types of 
motion (e.g. Galili and Tseitlin 2003, 2013). It served as one of the revolutionary 
claims of Newton’s Principia following the discourse on motion of two thousand 
years.
As already specified (Fig.  8.8), theoretical models contribute to all three areas of 
theory structure. Paradigmatic models of nuclei may reveal the analogy underpin -
ning the formalism of the whole theory (in Newton‘s mechanics: point particles in 
a void under central force interaction). Models in the body area, working models, 
mediate between the theory and reality (Morrison and Morgan 1999) as simplified 
subsets of the theory enabling precise account of chosen ideal systems (e.g. mathe-
matical pendulum). Models of the periphery may be of heuristic type for the account 
of a system without conforming to the nucleus. Such models may pave the way to a 
new theory (Bohr’s model in quantum theory or Plank’s account for blackbody radi-
ation in classical electromagnetism).
Missing fundamentals, converts teaching of physics to instruction of a craft. 
Ironically, such teaching could well serve prospective physicists who will construct 
an adequate image of physics knowledge for themselves later. Yet, the others, the 
much wider audience, will miss the holistic picture of mechanics, its ideas – the 
cultural heritage.
Similar critique could address the model-based curriculum of introductory quan-
tum mechanics often focused on Schrodinger equation and its solutions in simple 
cases. Ignoring the nucleus of quantum theory, its central principles, basic concepts 
and specific epistemology, so much different from classical mechanics, implies stu-
dents’ missing the quantum picture of the world.
I. Galili

--- PAGE 244 ---
225
Apologists for a pragmatic curriculum sometimes quote Einstein (1934/2011):
If you want to find out anything from the theoretical physicists about the methods they use, 
I advise you to stick closely to one principle: don’t listen to their words, fix your attention 
on their deeds.
One may, however, pay attention that this advice addresses the methods used by 
practitioners, not the meaning of the theory to develop the methods on the first 
place. That aspect presents a goal specific for science education. For that, one has 
no other way but address both rationalist and empiricist approaches.
Another epistemological aspect is the need of integrated concept definition. We 
have addressed above the concept of weight in that respect. Historically, Mach was 
the first who emphasized the need to draw on the operational definition of concepts. 
He introduced a new definition of inertial mass through the measurement of accel -
erations in an interaction (collision) of two bodies (Mach 1883/1989, p.  218). 
Einstein followed him with regard to simultaneity in his theory of relativity 
(Reichenbach 1927/1958).22 Yet, the initial claim of operationalism that any “con -
cept is synonymous with the corresponding set of operations” (Bridgman 1927) was 
transformed to the more recent philosophical account requiring a pair of definitions: 
nominal and operational of the same concept (Margenau 1950). This approach 
might be viewed as integration of empirical and rational approaches in physical 
method.
8.6  Objectivity of Scientific Knowledge
Lastly, we touch on the epistemological claim of science being subjective which 
presents a cardinal attack on the traditional presenting scientific knowledge as 
objective in science education.23 Normally, physicists state (Hestenes 1993)24:
What makes knowledge scientific? Scientific knowledge is distinguished from ordinary 
knowledge by its objectivity, precision and structure.  These distinctions are erratically 
maintained and sometimes missing altogether in introductory science textbooks and 
programs.
Students cannot be expected to comprehend the structure of science until they have learned 
to think objectively, in the sense that they can readily distinguish between “objective” prop-
erties of physical objects and their own subjective perceptions of them.
22 In physics education, the introduction of operational definitions was advocated by Karplus 
(1981) and Arons (1990). Essential changes might follow such change as illustrated by the case of 
weight concept.
23 Though clearly a philosophical topic, it entered educational discourse as an item of NOS (nature 
of science). As mentioned above, the implied complexity stems from the need to learn about the 
pertinent accomplishments in philosophy of science and science itself in order to avoid naïve opin-
ions regarding the nontrivial arguments of another discourse.
24 This claim presents a commonplace in physics (e.g. Weinberg 1992, 2001), philosophy of sci -
ence (e.g. Popper 1979), history of science (e.g. Holton 1985; Russo 2004; Jaroszyński 2007).
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 245 ---
226
In a sharp contrast, Lederman and colleagues assert that:
…scientific knowledge, owing to scientists’ theoretical commitments, beliefs, previous 
knowledge, training, experiences, and expectations, is unavoidably subjective. (Lederman 
et al. 2014, p.976. Emphasis added)
The subjectivity of scientific knowledge was argued for because of its dependence 
on scientific theories which were considered as subjective constructs (Lederman 
et al. 2015, p. 695):
…scientific knowledge is subjective and theory laden. Scientists’ beliefs, previous knowl-
edge, training, experiences, and expectations, in addition to theoretical commitments, influ-
ence their work. (Emphasis added)
Steven Shapin (1996, p. 165) wrote as if in answer:
…much recent history and sociology of science that seeks to portray science as the contin -
gent, diverse, and at times deeply problematic product of interested, morally concerned 
historically situated people is likely to be read as criticism of science. It may be thought that 
anyone making such claims must be motivated by a desire to expose science to say that sci-
ence is not objective, not true, not reliable or that such accounts will have the effect of 
eroding respect for science.
While Lederman talks about the personal perception of scientific knowledge and 
individual inquiry, Shapin addresses the collective scientific knowledge, the product 
of inquiry process. If taken as is, Lederman misinterprets the unifying role of theory 
in the scientific knowledge providing an inadequate image of science as activity of 
separate individuals or groups in workshops, a picture reminding more art (the cul-
ture of texts) rather than science (the culture of rules) which draws on a few funda-
mental theories shared by the whole community. In another perspective, Lederman’s 
confusion stems from missing the difference between the context of inquiry and the 
context of justification in science (e.g. Losee 1993). To avoid confusion, one needs 
to address the conceptual pair objective-subjective in science curriculum, exposing 
and refining both aspects – discipline-cultural approach.
Historically, objectivity was preserved as a norm in science. 25 It was about the 
account of regularity and features of Nature (object) independent of our (subject) 
wish. Since its foundation in Classical Greece, natural science considered objectiv-
ity as the genus of scientific knowledge and its differentia from mythology and the 
knowledge in other areas of intellectual activity, history, literature, etc. (Sarton 1948, 
p. 170). Yet, despite the long tradition, the opposite claim of science being subjective 
has been univocally appeared in the voluminous Encyclopedia of Science Education 
(Gunstone 2015). Critique came from Matthews (2012) who demonstrated that the 
claim was dubious (mixing contents) and contradicted the actual status of scientific 
knowledge. Yet, the claim of subjectivity is not new in philosophy and sociology of 
science revealing non-trivial subtleties. It is therefore cannot be ignored.
Commonly, the objectivity of knowledge presumes its essential independence 
from psychological and social factors; the latter are germane to the creation of 
knowledge (the context of inquiry), and even to its form of expression, but not to the 
25 See Elkana 1981; Hempel 1966; Polanyi 1962; Popper 1979; Weinberg 2001.
I. Galili

--- PAGE 246 ---
227
epistemological status of what is created  (the context of justification). Scientists 
explain: “the way whether and how the dropped object falls is independent of our 
attitude to that” and such should be any scientific account. In this sense scientists 
state physics theories (classical mechanics, electromagnetism, thermodynamics, 
quantum theories, general relativity) being objective and dismiss their relativism 
(Weinberg 1992, 2001). Each of the theories is valid in certain area of parameters 
and depicts a certain aspect of reality; a sort of approximation in depicting reality. 
Yet, their objectivity suggests understanding of the stated tentativeness of scientific 
knowledge: “the approximate theories are not merely approximately true” says 
Weinberg (2001, p.  208) . They adequately account for certain aspects of reality. 
Only such objective knowledge can be a subject of any critical discourse stipulating 
its reliability and “health” (Popper 1965, 1978, 1979; Elkana 1981; Holton 1985), 
providing a pledge for progress and adequate world view − much more than new 
devices, medicine, and weapon (Weinberg 2001, p. 106).
Commonly objective–subjective disputes regarding scientific knowledge are 
sometimes interwoven with true-false claims about the putative knowledge (e.g. 
Agazzi 2014). In their products, scientists might be wrong or leave explanation 
unknown, but seeking objectivity and excluding of voluntary factors in scientific 
theory present a common norm. The theory-laden analysis is intrinsic in any scien-
tific inquiry. However, stating analysis being theory-laden is not equal to volun -
tarism. It is as correct in science as stating experiment-laden theory. Both comprise 
complementary aspects of a reciprocal process of scientific inquiry essential in 
knowledge construction in science.
The subtlety of science is in the fact that in their account of nature scientists use 
associative imagination in creating a system of concepts − a “free creation of the 
human mind” (Einstein and Infeld 1938, p. 33). Yet, those enter into a continuous 
inquiry loop in which the chosen (subjectively) concepts are going through refine -
ment and correction drawing on experiments. Awareness of the circular iterative 
construction of scientific knowledge may resolve the confusion between scientific 
inquiry and scientific theory (subjective and objective aspects of science) . Indeed, 
inquiry relies on the individual and group views, hypothesis, interpretations, and 
style, and therefore, it might include subjective or intersubjective elements. However, 
the scientific theory consolidates in an iterative process of evolutionary construc -
tion, empirical corroboration in the professional discourse.26 Multiple studies inde-
pendently test theory in a variety of dimensions and in back and forth interaction 
with reality. Together with continuous versatile attempts of falsification, theoretical 
and experimental, they provide objectivity of the product. As Gerald Holton wrote:
…the metaphysical tenets of individual scientists, though often quite strong, are generally 
so varied, so vague, and technically inept that in a sense they cancel out, made ineffectual 
by the lack of a basis for general acceptance and agreement of such tenets. (Holton 1985, 
p.193)
26 The problem arises when the process of scientific inquiry is presented being listed as a sequential 
procedure (e.g. Hempel 1966, p.11). Missing circularity and iterative self-corrective nature of scien-
tific inquiry makes it vulnerable to the claims of subjectivity or intersubjectivity (e.g. Husserl 1978).
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 247 ---
228
Therefore, inclusion of the specific historical contents in education is essential 
for appreciation of objectivity as emerging from the melting pot of scientific dis -
course. This is the approach of CCK-based curriculum, in which scientific theories 
appeared not as useful opinions or dogma but as products distilled in the discipline- 
cultural discourse. Inclusion of diachronic discourse allows tracing the arguments 
on the way, compare and complement theories in contest. The mentioned excursus 
to the conceptual history of weight and optics may illustrate such process (Galili 
2014).
In our optics materials, we considered, for instance, the path of light. Heron of 
Alexandria in his Catoptrics demonstrated the rule of specular reflection: the light 
path presents the shortest trajectory between any two points including mirror reflec-
tion (Cohen and Drabkin 1966, p. 263). This was a piece of objective knowledge. 
However, the interpretation of this result by Nature seeking the most “economical” 
way to go, or by Nature that does nothing in vain (natura frustra nihil agit ) was 
mystical. Fermat in the seventeenth century used the method of Maxima and Minima 
and advocated for the extreme temporal rather than spatial path (Ross 2008, p. v) – 
the objective truth. Yet, he claimed that such path expressed the “natural inten -
tion”  – a mystical view. The actual measurement confirmed the Snell law of 
refraction as sine ratio of incident and reflection angles  – the objective truth. 
Descartes believed that this empirical law is insufficient, as it did not explain the 
phenomenon. He provided an ad hoc mechanism of analogy between light and the 
motion of a ball being hit downwards at the surface of water (Descartes 1637/1965, 
p. 79). The artificial and subjective nature of this analogy was obvious. Mach called 
it “unintelligible and unscientific” (Sabra 1981, p. 104).
The approach of Fermat was unsatisfactory too: how and why does light “decide” 
in advance (!) about the extreme path? Scientists continued to seek for an objective 
account. Only in the nineteenth century, following the account of wave interference 
by Fresnel, were the subjective speculations regarding light propagation removed. 
Raleigh by covering odd (or even) Fresnel zones demonstrated that light did not 
“decide” which way to go but goes in all ways between any two points. The interfer-
ence of all these beams produces the apparent light path and destroys all others. 
Feynman ( 1948, 1985) further expanded this account to massive particles. 
Summarizing, the subjective interpretations associated with the understanding of 
light path through the history “cancelled out” and the objective account emerged. At 
no stage, however, were scientists seize trying to reveal the objective truth about 
Nature. Individual scientists are not purely subjective; their “personal knowledge” 
incorporates both subjective and objective components (Polanyi 1962).
For Karl Popper, the objectivity of physics knowledge was framed using the idea 
of the “third world”27 – a virtual intellectual space incorporating physical theories 
(Popper 1978). Possessing its own existence (spiritual reality shared through gen -
erations), somewhat reminiscent of Plato’s transcendental world of forms and the 
realists’ view of concepts in the medieval science, it contains objective knowledge 
of science:
27 To be distinguished from the real world (the first one) and the personal world (the second one).
I. Galili

--- PAGE 248 ---
229
Without claiming to solve such ancient philosophical problems, I would argue that scien -
tific theories share those properties of rocks—stability and independence of societal set -
ting—that lead us to call rocks real (Weinberg 2001, p. 269).
Holton ( 1985) introduced ideas of science-1 and science-2 for the same pur -
pose – to distinguish between the objective core and subjective associative ideas of 
physical knowledge. We used this metaphor in addressing optics as a cluster of a 
few theories of light complementary and objective, dwelling in the “third world“. 
Valid in different areas of space-time and energy scales, they share the objective 
genus.
8.7  Conclusion
Altogether, considering scientific knowledge as a culture displays the discourse of 
science revealing its characteristic structural features − ontological and epistemo -
logical – which are often missing in strictly disciplinary teaching. For the ontologi -
cal disciplinary contents, CCK approach suggests the curriculum displaying the 
tripartite hierarchical structure of a few fundamental theories: nucleus-body-  
periphery, whereas for the epistemic contents, an integrated presentation is sug -
gested addressing a few principal accounts as complementary instead of claiming 
only one view as legitimate. Such CCK curriculum reveals a big picture and broader 
context of scientific knowledge. It provides metaknowledge of science appealing to 
the broad population of learners of different interests and preferences beyond the 
audience of disciplinary oriented students. It frames and specifies the involvement 
of HPS contents, making them a curricular necessity. In doing this, it provides a 
paradigm matching the historical tradition of dissemination of scientific knowledge 
and cultural enlightenment.
Acknowledgments I am deeply obliged to Professor Robert Carson for his essential help in pre-
paring this paper for publication. I am in great debt to Professor Michael Matthews for his never 
stopping encouraging support and intellectual inspiration. The anonymous reviewers helped me 
greatly expanding my knowledge which I sincerely appreciate and wish to acknowledge.
References
Agazzi, E. (2014). Objectivity as a replacement for truth in modern science. In Objectivity and its 
contents (pp. 1–10). London: Springer.
Aikenhead, G. S. (1997). Towards a first nations cross-cultural science and technology curriculum. 
Science Education, 81(2), 217–238.
Al-Khalili, J. (2010). Pathfinders. The golden age of Arabic science. New York: Penguin Books.
Arons, A. (1990). A guide to introductory physics teaching. New York: Wiley.
Ausubel, D. P. (1968). Educational psychology: A cognitive view . New York: Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston.
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 249 ---
230
Baruch, A., & Vizansky, A. (1937). Physics. Tel-Aviv: Dvir.
Bendall, S., Goldberg, F., & Galili, I. (1993). Prospective elementary teachers’ prior knowledge 
about light. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(9), 1169–1187.
Bevilacqua, F., Giannetto, E., & Matthews, M. (Eds.). (2001). Science education and culture. The 
contribution of history and philosophy of science. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Bridgman, P. (1927). The logic of modern physics. New York: Macmillan.
Cartwright, N. (2005). The dappled world. A study of the boundaries of science . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Chaikin, S. E. (1947/1963). Mechanics. General physics course (V ol. 1). Moscow: Gosizdaetlstvo 
Physmath Literaturi.
Cohen, R. M., & Drabkin, E. I. (1966). A source book in Greek science. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, Inc..
Descartes, R. (1637/1965). Second discourse  – Of refraction. In Discourse on method, optics, 
geometry and meteorology. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience & education. New York: Kappa Delta Pi.
Einstein, A. (1918). Principles of research. Address to physical society, Berlin, for Max Planck’s 
sixtieth birthday. http://www.site.uottawa.ca/~yymao/misc/Einstein_PlanckBirthday.html. 
Accessed 24 Sept 2015.
Einstein, A. (1934/2011). On the method of theoretical physics. In Essays in science. New York: 
Open Road.
Einstein, A. (1949/1979). Autobiographical notes. In P.  A. Schilpp (Ed.), Albert Einstein: 
Philosopher-scientist. New York: Harper.
Einstein, A., & Infeld, L. (1938). The evolution of physics . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Elkana, Y . (1981). A programmatic attempt at an anthropology of knowledge. In E. Mendelsohn & 
Y . Elkana (Eds.), Science and cultures. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Feynman, R. (1948). The space-time formulation of nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. Reviews 
of Modern Physics, 20(2), 367–387.
Feynman, R. (1985). QED – The strange theory of light and matter, Lecture 2. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Frank, M. (1957). Philosophy of science. The link between science and philosophy . Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Galili, I. (2001). Weight versus gravitational force: Historical and educational perspectives. 
International Journal of Science Education, 23(10), 1073–1093.
Galili, I. (2012). Promotion of content cultural knowledge through the use of the history and phi -
losophy of science. Science & Education, 21(9), 1283–1316.
Galili, I. (2013). On the power of fine arts pictorial imagery in science education in science educa-
tion. Science & Education, 22, 1911–1938.
Galili, I. (2014). Teaching optics: A Historico-philosophical perspective. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), 
International handbook of research in history and philosophy for science and mathematics 
education (pp. 97–128). Dordrecht: Springer.
Galili, I. (2015). From comparison between scientists to gaining cultural scientific knowledge: 
Leonardo and Galileo. Science & Education, 25(1), 115–145.
Galili, I., & Bar, V . (1992). Motion implies force. Where to expect vestiges of the misconception? 
International Journal of Science Education, 14(1), 63–81.
Galili, I., & Hazan, A. (2000). The influence of a historically oriented course on students’ con -
tent knowledge in optics evaluated by means of facets–schemes analysis. American Journal of 
Physics, 68(7), S3–S15.
Galili, I., & Kaplan, D. (1996). Students operation with the concept of weight. Science Education, 
80(4), 457–487.
Galili, I., & Lehavi, Y . (2003). The importance of weightlessness and tides in teaching gravitation. 
American Journal of Physics, 71(11), 1127–1135.
I. Galili

--- PAGE 250 ---
231
Galili, I., & Hazan, A. (2004). Optics – The theory of light and vision in the broad cultural 
approach. Jerusalem: Science Teaching Center, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. 
[ISBN-965-295-026-2]
Galili, I., & Lehavi, Y . (2006). Definitions of physical concepts: A study of physics teachers’ 
knowledge and views. International Journal of Science Education, 28(5), 521–541.
Galili, I., & Tseitlin, M. (2003). Newton’s first law: Text, translations, interpretations, and physics 
education. Science & Education, 12(1), 45–73.
Galili, I., Goldberg, F., & Bendall, S. (1993). Effects of prior knowledge and instruction on under-
standing image formation. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(3), 271–303.
Galili, I., & Tseitlin, M. (2013). Excurse to the History of Understanding of Motion – De Motu. In 
I. Galili (Ed.), The Pleasure of understanding. Collection of excurses to the history of physical 
concepts for teachers and students . Jerusalem: The Amos de-Shalit Science Teaching Center, 
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
Galili, I., Bar, V ., & Brosh, Y . (2017). Teaching weight-gravity and gravitation in middle school—
Testing a new instructional approach. Science & Education, 26(3), 977–1010.
Giere, R. N. (1988). Explaining science. A cognitive approach . Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Giere, R. N. (1999). Science without laws. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Guesne, E. (1985). Light. In R. Driver, E. Guesne, & A. Tiberghien (Eds.), Children’s ideas in sci-
ence (pp. 11–32). Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Gunstone, R. (Ed.). (2015). Encyclopedia of science education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Halliday, D., Resnick, R., & Walker, J.  (2001). Fundamentals of physics  (9th ed.). New  York: 
Wiley.
Halloun, I. A. (2006). Modeling theory in science education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Heath, T. (1966). Aristarchus of Samos. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Heisenberg, W. (1959/1971). Physics and philosophy. London: Georger Allen & Unwin.
Hempel, C. (1966). Philosophy of natural science. Upper Saddle River: Simon & Schuster.
Hestenes, D. (1993). Modelling is the name of the game. A presentation at the NSF modeling con-
ference. Temple: Arizona State University.
Hewitt, P. G. (1992). Conceptual physics. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Hewitt, P. G. (2002). Conceptual physics. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind. London: McGraw-Hill.
Holton, G. (1985). Introduction to concepts and theories in physical science.  Second edition 
revised by S. G. Brush. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Husserl, E. (1978). The crisis of European sciences and transcendental phenomenology. Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press.
Jammer, M. (1957). Concepts of force. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jaroszyński, P. (2007). Science in culture. New York: Rodomi.
Karplus, R. (1981). Educational aspects of the structure of physics. American Journal of Physics, 
49(3), 238–241.
Kim, Y . (2011). How many Korean science high-school students find the same scientific prob -
lem as Kepler found in optics and physiology? Journal of Gifted/Talented Education, 21 (2), 
575–589.
King, A. L. (1962). Weight and weightlessness. American Journal of Physics, 30(4), 387.
Knight, R. D. (2004). Physics for scientists and engineers. Reading: Pearson.
Knight, R. D. (2013). Physics for scientists and engineers (3rd ed.). Reading: Pearson.
Kuhn, T. S. (1957). The Copernican revolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakatos, I. (1978). The methodology of scientific research programs . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…

--- PAGE 251 ---
232
Lederman, N. G., Bartos, S. A., & Lederman, J. S. (2014). The development, use, and interpretation 
of nature of science assessments. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research 
in history, philosophy and science teaching (Ch. 29, pp. 971–997). Dordrecht: Springer.
Lederman, N. G., Schwartz, R., & Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2015). Conceptualizing the construct of 
NOS.  In R.  Gunstone (Ed.), Encyclopedia of science education  (pp.  694–698). Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Levrini, O., Bertozzi, E., Gagliardi, M., Grimellini-Tomasini, N., Pecori, B., Tasquier, G., & Galili, 
I. (2014). Meeting the discipline-culture framework of physics knowledge: An experiment in 
Italian secondary school. Science & Education, 23, 1701–1731.
Libbrecht, U. (2009). Comparative philosophy: A methodological approach. In N. Note, R. Fornet- 
Betancout, J. Estermann, & D. Aerts (Eds.), Worldviews and Cultures. Dordrecht: Springer.
Lindberg, D. C. (1976). Theories of vision from al-Kindi to Kepler . Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press.
Liu, Y . (2015). Overview of ancient Chinese science and technology. In Lu (Ed.), A history of 
Chinese science and technology (V ol. 1, pp. 19–40). Heidelberg: Springer.
Löbner, S. (2013). Understanding semantics. London: Routledge.
Losee, J.  (1993). A historical introduction to the philosophy of science . New  York: Oxford 
University Press.
Lotman, Y . (2010). The problem of learning culture as a typological characteristic. In What people 
learn. Collection of papers and notes (pp. 18–32). Moscow: Rudomino.
Ma, H. (2012). The images of science through cultural lenses. In A Chinese study on the nature of 
science. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Mach, E. (1883/1989). The science of mechanics, a critical and historical account of its develop -
ment. La Salle: Open Court.
Margenau, H. (1950). The role of definitions in science. In The nature of physical reality (pp. 220–
244). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Marion, J. B., & Hornyack, W. F. (1982). Physics for science and engineering (p. 129). New York: 
Saunders.
Marton, F., Runesson, U., & Tsui, A. B. M. (2004). The space of learning. In F. Marton & A. B. 
M. Tsui (Eds.), Classroom discourse and the space of learning (pp. 3–40). Mahwah: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
Matthews, M. R. (2012). Changing the focus: From nature of science to features of science. In 
M. S. Khine (Ed.), Advances in nature of science research (pp. 3–26). Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (Ed.). (2014). International handbook of research in history, philosophy and sci-
ence teaching. Dordrecht: Springer.
Miller, A. I. (1986). Frontiers of physics. Selected essays (p. xx). Boston: Birkhauser.
Morrison, M., & Morgan, M. S. (1999). Models as mediating instruments. In M. Morgan & M. S. 
Morrison (Eds.), Models as mediators: Perspectives on natural and social science (pp. 10–37). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D. B. (1984). Learning how to learn. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Pedersen, O., & Phil, M. (1974). Early physics and astronomy. London: Macdonald & Janes.
Polanyi, M. (1962). Personal knowledge. Towards a post-critical philosophy. London: Routledge.
Popper, K. R. (1965). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge. New York: 
Harper Torchbooks.
Popper, K.  R. (1978). Three worlds. The Tanner lecture on human values . The University of 
Michigan. http://www.tannerlectures.utah.edu/lectures/documents/popper80.pdf. Accessed 24 
Sept 2015.
Popper, K. R. (1979). Objective knowledge. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accommodation of a sci -
entific conception: Toward a theory of conceptual change. Science Education, 66, 211–227.
Ptolemy, C. (1952). Almagest. In Britannica great books  (V ol. 6). Chicago: Encyclopedia 
Britannica.
I. Galili

--- PAGE 252 ---
233
Reichenbach, H. (1927/1958). The philosophy of space and time. New York: Dover.
Resnick, R., & Halliday, D. (1966). Physics. NewYork: Wiley.
Ronchi, V . (1970). The nature of light: An historical survey. London: Heinemann.
Ronchi, V . (1991). Optics. The science of vision. New York: Dover.
Ross, J. (2008). Fermat’s complete correspondence on light. Dynamis. http://science.larouchepac.
com/fermat/. Accessed 24 Sept 2015.
Russo, L. (2004). The forgotten revolution: How science was born in 300 BC and why it had to be 
reborn. Berlin: Verlag/Springer.
Sabra, A.  I. (1981). Theories of light. From Descartes to Newton . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Sarton, G. (1948). The life of science − Essays in the history of civilization . New York: Henry 
Schuman.
Shapin, S. (1996). The scientific revolution. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Shapiro, A. E. (1993). Fits, passions, and paroxysms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Snow, C. P. (1959). The two cultures and scientific revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Stein, H., & Galili, I. (2014). The impact of operational definition of weight concept on Students’ 
understanding of physical situations. International Journal of Research in Science and 
Mathematical Education, 13(6), 1487–1515.
Stein, H., Galili, I., & Schur, Y . (2015). Teaching new conceptual framework of weight and gravita-
tion in the middle school. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(9), 1234–1268.
Tseitlin, M., & Galili, I. (2005). Teaching physics in looking for its self: From a physics-discipline 
to a physics-culture. Science & Education, 14(3–5), 235–261.
Tseitlin, M., & Galili, I. (2006). Science teaching: What does it mean? – A simple semiotic per -
spective. Science & Education, 15(5), 393–417.
Tylor, E. (1871/1920). Primitive culture (V ol. 1). New York: Putnam’s Sons.
van Fraassen, B. C. (1980). The scientific image. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
van Fraassen, B. C. (2008). Scientific representation: Paradoxes of perspective. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Weinberg, S. (1992). Dreams of a final theory. New York: Pantheon Books.
Weinberg, S. (2001). Facing up – Science and its cultural adversaries. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Weinberg, S. (2015). To explain the world: The discovery of modern science . New York: Harper 
Collins.
Weizsacker, C. F. (1985/2006). The structure of physics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Young, H. D. & Freedman, R. A. (2004). University physics (pp. 120, 441, 459–460). New York: 
Pearson, Addison Wesley.
Young, H.  D. & Freedman, R.  A. (2012). University physics  (pp.  406, 421–422). New  York: 
Pearson, Addison Wesley.
8 Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for Meaningful Teaching…