Title: Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science in Developing an Energy Curriculum
Pages: 253-278

--- PAGE 253 ---
235
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_9
Chapter 9
Integrating Science Education Research 
and History and Philosophy of Science 
in Developing an Energy Curriculum
Yaron Lehavi and Bat-Sheva Eylon
9.1  Introduction
Traditionally, the role of the nature of science (NOS) in curriculum development is 
manifested by asking how history and philosophy of science (HS and PS, respec -
tively) should be integrated into the curriculum (Rudolph 2000), whereas ideas 
from science itself are often regarded as the final and desired goal of students’ 
understanding. The findings from science education research (SER) are used to 
inform the curriculum designers about how students learn a certain subject, what 
difficulties they (and sometimes their teachers) have, and what methods are most 
suited for constructing the students’ desired understanding. How the four disci -
plines – HS, PS, Science, and SER - are considered in curriculum design may vary, 
reflecting the curriculum developers’ different educational perspectives. For exam-
ple, disciplines such as the history and philosophy of science (HPS) can be used to 
supplement the curriculum, aimed at adding cultural information or human interest, 
or past scientists’ views on natural phenomena could be set alongside students’ 
views as other perspectives for consideration (Monk and Osborne 1997). Class and 
lab activities can be used to emphasize methodological concerns, such as the iden -
tification and control of variables, to encourage students’ motivation and curiosity 
or, alternatively, to determine “how, with what confidence, and on what bases, sci-
entists come to know what they do” (Shapin 1992). Results from education research 
Y . Lehavi (*) 
The David Yellin College of Education, Jerusalem, Israel 
The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
e-mail: yarlehavi@gmail.com 
B.-S. Eylon 
The David Yellin College of Education, Jerusalem, Israel
e-mail: Bat-sheva.Eylon@weizmann.ac.il

--- PAGE 254 ---
236
can be used to elicit students’ prior knowledge or to put constraints on the ways by 
which new scientific ideas can be conveyed.
Thus, the strong interrelations among science, its philosophy, and its teaching 
(Elkana 2000, Matthews 2015) call for considering in conjunction all four disci -
plines when planning a curriculum design: Philosophy of Science, its History, 
Science Education Research, and Science itself (PHES). This view is in accordance 
with the suggestion of viewing didactics as a discipline that utilizes contributions 
from different scholarly fields in order to improve science education (Adúriz-Bravo 
and Izquierdo-Aymerich 2005). Although the four disciplines often overlap and 
cannot be completely distinguished from each another, each of them has its own 
unique contribution to curriculum decision making and therefore will be discussed 
here separately.
In this regard, energy serves as a very good example, since scientists, philoso -
phers of science, and science educators (e.g., Poincare 1903/1952, ch. VIII; Feynman 
1964; Bunge 2000; Wolter and Martin 2002) have all been involved in the ongoing 
long discussion regarding the meaning of energy and its special language (Bevilacqua 
2014). Evidently, the lack of consensus with regard to what is energy, its level of 
abstraction and what is meant by energy types/forms, conversion/transformation, 
transfer and conservation presents a great challenge for an energy curriculum 
designer who strives for coherence and consistency. For us, the philosophical dis -
course with regard to the experiment-theory relationship and the meaning of scien-
tific concepts, with special emphasis on their definitions, provides essential and rich 
support in making curriculum development decisions.
Thus, our approach integrates all four disciplines in developing a coherent, con-
sistent, spiral curriculum for teaching energy. We exemplify this approach by dis -
cussing how considerations based on each of the four disciplines were integrated in 
making curricular decisions in the development and implementation of a curriculum 
for teaching the concept of energy in Israel. This approach follows and extends the 
suggestion that HPS should be used in order to address the teaching of the concept 
of energy and especially with regard to teachers’ training (Bächtold and Guedj 
2012, 2014). Our approach led us to shift the focus of the curriculum and to put 
more emphasis on quantitative change in energy rather than on energy itself. The 
importance of focusing on changes in energy (as one concept) rather than viewing 
it in a static way in teaching energy has been recognized in the past (Chisholm 
1992).
Our curriculum development was based on the assumption that the difficulties 
reported by SER are strongly related to the above-mentioned lack of consensus with 
regard to the “language of energy”. We not only examined past studies—we also 
conducted our own research, with regard to teachers’ concept image of energy, to 
help us in making curricular decisions. In order to address the challenges that our 
research raised, we considered all four components of PHES in constructing a new 
curriculum for teaching energy in Israel.
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 255 ---
237
9.2  The Integrated Approach to Curriculum Design
As described above, the design of the energy curriculum was based on four pillars: 
(1) History of science; (2) Science; (3) Philosophy of science, and (4) Science edu-
cation research. We will describe how we employed each of these disciplines in 
designing our curriculum.
9.2.1  History of Science (HS): Adopting Joule’s Approach
With regard to the history of science, we followed the approach to curriculum design 
that addresses scientific ideas in their original context of discovery (Monk and 
Osborn 1997). Applying this approach to energy was manifested by adopting Joule’s 
approach.
During the nineteenth century, scientists developed the idea that the creation of a 
certain ‘power’ requires the exhaustion of another. However, to become a conserva-
tion law, this co-variation in different directions of ‘power’ required measurable 
relations to a given standard (Kuhn 1977, p. 79–82). Such relations, using change in 
temperature of a standard object, were established by several scientists at the middle 
of the nineteenth century (Kuhn 1977, p. 89) with the prominent contribution of 
Joule who wished to compare different processes:
In accordance with the pledge I gave the Royal Society some years ago, I have now the 
honour to present it with the results of the experiments I have made in order to determine 
the mechanical equivalent of heat with exactness. (James Prescott Joule 1850)
Thus, Joule’s approach1 led him to arrive at quantitative relations between differ-
ent phenomena rather than to characterize a new entity and to attribute it with quali-
ties such as being indestructible. Owing to his remarkable experimental skills, he 
discovered quantitative relations between temperature change and other phenom -
ena: electrical, chemical, gas expansion, and change in speed (Coopersmith 2015, 
p. 245–252). Although at Joule’s times many concepts were used to describe differ-
ent processes and phenomena (e.g., living force, heat, power), his experiments laid 
the groundwork for using energy as one entity that can be employed in analyzing 
different phenomena, otherwise considered to be disconnected (Kuhn 1977, p. 77). 
The heating phenomenon served Joule as a standard against which he compared the 
results of measuring chemical affinity, electromotive and electro-magnetic forces, 
and even the passage of water through narrow tubes.
Furthermore, Joule succeeded in finding equivalence between different processes 
by which a system can change by measuring the change in temperature of an object 
due to such processes:
1 We named this approach after Joule although he was one of many who contributed to the effort to 
arrive at a unified concept of energy via experiments (see especially Bevilacqua 2014 and 
Coopersmith 2015).
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 256 ---
238
A change (by various processes)  →   ∆T (of a certain object)
Thus, for each changing variable in his experiments, Joule could relate a certain 
change in temperature. This, as is well known, enabled him to relate different pro -
cesses to each other and to suggest a means to compare them. One can therefore 
interpret Joule’s approach as an endeavor to quantify different processes by the 
same operation of measurement.
Further pursuing Joule’s approach, if one measures separately how each process 
(the change in height, speed, electric charge distribution, chemical constituents in 
bio and non-bio systems,2 temperature of bodies in contact, radiation or even nuclear 
masses)3 affects the change in temperature, one can combine all such processes 
under one concept. Note that this aligns well with Joule’s own interpretation and 
enables regarding heat (the change in energy of an object that interacts with another 
object having a different temperature) and work as not distinct from each other.
Thus, HS provided us with the means to clarify in our curriculum why we can use 
energy change as one concept for different kinds of processes. It also led us to 
develop low-cost classroom experiments that can be used to demonstrate Joule’s 
approach (Lehavi et al. 2014a, b, 2016). This unitary view of energy is crucial for 
presenting it as a crosscutting curricular concept.
9.2.2  Science: Interpreting the First Law of Thermodynamics 
and Energy Conservation
Our guiding principle in employing the scientific ideas was to consider them not 
only as the goal of teaching but also for guiding curriculum design decisions.
This principle was manifested in interpreting the first law of thermodynamics 
∆E = W - Q) as representing the change in energy (left side) corresponding to dif -
ferent processes (right side) and making this change the focus of the curriculum 
(Eylon and Lehavi 2014). Thus, the 1st law was not taught at the middle school 
level, but rather, it served as a means of organizing the curriculum.
The various processes by which a system can change are characterized by a 
change in variables such as height, temperature, and speed, among others. The 
change in value (increase or decrease) of each of these variables characterizes a 
specific change (process) in the system. Such changes in the characterizing vari -
ables, each corresponding to a certain process, indicate a corresponding change 
(increase or decrease) in the value of the energy of the system. Such an interpreta -
tion of the first law of thermodynamics is in accordance with both Joule’s approach 
(although he did not use the concept of energy as such) and the scientific view of 
2 Recall Lavoisier and Laplace’s calorimetric experiment that showed how processes in animals are 
energetically (and chemically) similar to a combustion reaction.
3 Although many of these phenomena were not known to Joule, his approach is often used for 
measuring the heating/cooling they induce.
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 257 ---
239
energy as one entity (Moore 1993). It follows that energy, like any other scientific 
entity, can change only by its value. Thus, changes in kinetic energy, height energy, 
and chemical energy, among others do not represent changes in different forms of 
energy. These ‘forms’ are just labels that refer to the different processes by which 
the value of the energy of a system can increase or decrease.
Science puts emphasis on changes and processes and employs changes in the 
value of energy to describe them. Notably, science provides no definite method by 
which the energy value of a system can be determined. In fact, the energy value of 
a system is relative and can be determined up to an arbitrary constant (Fermi 1936). 
However, this ambiguity does not affect the first law of thermodynamics, since this 
law is not concerned with the energy value but instead, with the quantitative changes 
in this value. Thus, from a scientific point of view, although energy itself cannot be 
determined without ambiguity, since it has no absolute zero value, a change in the 
quantity of energy4 can be measured and thus, it is of physical importance.5 A good 
example of this view adopted by science is that the rest mass of the objects within a 
system is not often mentioned (e.g., in an electric circuit or when an apple falls), 
although it is responsible for most of the energy related to the system. This mass 
cancels out since only changes in energy matter (Quinn 2014, p. 18).
It is apparent from our discussion that the 1st law is not regarded by us as repre-
senting the energy conservation law. We adopted the view that in certain systems 
(termed isolated since any change within them is not accompanied by any change in 
their surroundings and vice versa) any increase in energy related to one or more 
processes is counterbalanced by a decrease in energy related to one or more other 
processes. Such a balance can be the subject of an empirical inquiry after we arrived 
at a good quantification of energy change in processes characterized by changes in 
different variables. In this respect, energy conservation becomes a refutable law.
9.2.3  Philosophy of Science (PS): The Meaning of Scientific 
Concepts and Theory-Experiment Relationships
Science teaching should have a have deep commitment to philosophy (Gilbert 2006, 
p. 5; Matthews 2015). Pleasingly many philosophers recognize the place of philoso-
phy in science teaching:
It is well known that there is a strong interaction between the philosophy of science and the 
science of each generation. It is less often stated clearly that there is also an interaction 
between these two and the teaching of science in so far as it is the philosophy of science 
which molds the general attitudes which form the foundations of the various theories of 
science teaching. (Elkana 2000 p.463)
4 In the literature, energy change is often used as a synonym for energy transformation. Here we use 
the term solely to describe the change in the value of energy: its increase or decrease.
5 See: Fermi 1936; Quinn 2014, p. 18; Reif 1967, p. 202; Reif 1965, p. 129.
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 258 ---
240
However, Feigl and Brodbeck (1953, p. 5) claimed that philosophy of science was 
concerned mainly with describing the structure of science itself. The structure of 
science, not surprisingly, has also been the concern of prominent science 
educators:
By linking concept clusters that have common physical variables, one can create larger 
structures that ultimately encompass all of physics. The approach to definitions, empirical 
relationships, and theoretical relationships has to be consistent among the clusters that are 
linked…. there is considerable freedom in the choice of quantities to be defined and derived. 
The exact choices that are made will determine the structure that is obtained. (Karplus 
1983, p. 240)
Elkana further supports this view:
In whatever light we see this interaction, one thing will be admitted by all; in every age it is 
the philosophy of science which forms the image of science in the eyes of the masses,... It 
is not less important that it is this philosophy which determines what is ‘good science’ and 
thus determines how it should be taught. (Elkana 2000 p.464–465).
The importance of providing meaning to data brings back Schwab‘s observation 
that the epistemology of science is not only about its procedures—it is heavily 
based on interpretation. This, as stressed by Monk and Osborne (1997), has implica-
tions for curriculum development since curriculum developers should be obliged to 
focus not merely on scientific inquiry skills but also on interpretive discussions of 
the data found. The curriculum should therefore include grounds on how “scientists 
come to know what they do” (Shapin 1992).
Karplus‘comment with regard to the freedom a curriculum planner has in choos-
ing which concepts to define and which to derive led us to also consider, in addition 
to developing inquiry skills, the meanings provided to concepts and how such mean-
ings are gained. This naturally brings to fore concepts definition and their connec -
tion to theory-experiment relationships. The context of science education also calls 
to interrelate it to PS by stressing the important role of theories and by addressing 
explicitly the nature of science in the curriculum (Duschl 1985, 1990, 2000)
Moreover, since science presents a culture, learning of science presumes encul -
turation from inside and/or outside (Tseitlin and Galili 2005). Expanding the prac-
ticing of science presents enculturation from inside. During such a process, 
conceptual knowledge is constructed by experience in many contexts. Explicit and 
concise articulation and contemplation of concept meaning might seem less impor-
tant than application of physical knowledge. This attitude is, however, natural for 
“normal science” (Kuhn 1970) rather than for revolutionary research. In the latter, 
the concept’s meaning might represent the major issue of interest (Bridgman 1952).
9.2.3.1  Addressing Scientific Concepts in Relation to Their Definitions
We adopted Elkana‘s approach that philosophy of science can assist in choosing the 
‘teaching theory’ for curriculum development design:
…We should also aim at grounding our theories of science teaching in that philosophy of 
science which at present seems to us the most advanced. (Elkana 2000)
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 259 ---
241
Traditionally, philosophy of science was largely concerned with the meaning of the 
scientific concepts, with special attention given to their definitions (Bridgman 1964; 
Copi and Cohen 1990; Hempel 1966, 1970; Margenau 1950). Schwab ( 1964) 
stressed the importance of concept definitions with regard to the structure of a sci -
entific discipline, as well as in educational scientific epistemology (comprising syn-
tactic knowledge and its relation to measurement) and in scientific content 
(substantive knowledge). He regarded concept definitions as necessary for the 
coherent presentation of a subject in science owing to their role in the organization 
of scientific knowledge.
Thus, philosophy of science was considered in our curriculum development 
approach since science education requires clarity with regard to the meaning of the 
concepts used. The scientific activity also requires the use of concept definitions in 
order to make such concepts useful for scientific endeavors:
A concept is useless if it does not appear in relation to other concepts, or if we fail to sup -
port it with clear definitions. (Holton 1985, p. 221)
Many types of definitions were found to exist (Angeles 1981). However, only 
two of them, nominal (theoretical) and operational (epistemic), are in accordance 
with the fundamental schools of scientific thinking: rationalism and empiricism 
(Margenau 1950; Matthews 2015).
A nominal definition seeks to establish the meaning of a concept by relating it to 
other concepts and by listing its characteristics. Within the nominal definitions, one 
can distinguish between several types: textual (such as “the weight of the body is the 
gravitational force acting on it”), “definitory formula” (Braithwaite 1955) (such as 
W = mg), and characteristics (such as “weight is a vector”).
Positivist philosophy recognized that the explanation of nature - unlike in math -
ematics - requires more than just theoretical definitions of the concepts involved. 
This development, which was apparent in Einstein‘s (1905) use of the concepts of 
time, simultaneity, and length, led to an appreciation of the fundamental role of the 
operational definition of physical concepts (Bridgman 1923/1964, p. 36). Thus, an 
operational definition defines the concept in terms of a particular measurement, 
indicating the apparatus and the conditions of measurement. Such a definition con-
stitutes the concept’s epistemic aspect:
Ideally, each concept used in physical sciences can be made clear in terms of some such 
definition, and that is the mechanism whereby mutual understanding among scientists is 
made possible. For it is clearly more difficult to misinterpret action than words. (Holton 
1985, p. 222)
Karplus (1981) claimed that operational definitions have a didactical advantage in 
that they are more accessible to students but warns about their weakness with regard 
to the structure of physics:
The extensive use of operational definitions relates concepts directly to the students’ experi-
ence and more-or-less familiar objects. Yet physics relationships among concepts must then 
be obtained from experiments that are carried out with the errors and uncertainties of such 
procedures, from teacher claims about such experiments that have been carried out by 
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 260 ---
242
 others (i.e., researchers in physics), or by means of theoretical derivations and “thought” 
experiments. (Karplus 1981, p. 240)
Note how in that claim Robert Karplus relates to science, science education 
research, science philosophy and, by referring to ‘researchers in physics’, also to the 
history of science. Hence, his approach was for us a way to interrelate all four 
disciplines.
However, Bunge realized that the operational definitions of physical concepts are 
not clear without any theory (Bunge 1963 pp. 60–61). Therefore, both theoretical 
(constitutional) and operational (epistemic) definitions should be employed in 
defining a given concept (Margenau 1950 pp. 220–244).
In the context of science education, the quality of definitions was regarded as an 
indicator of coherence (Bächtold & Guedj 2014; Galili and Lehavi 2006). Swartz 
(1999) drew attention to the many flaws in definitions, such as applying circular rea-
soning in connection with Newton’s Second Law, found in textbooks of which teach-
ers should be aware. Stinner ( 1992) and Hestenes ( 1998) stressed the essential 
contribution of definitions to the effectiveness of instruction. Operational definitions 
of physical concepts have been strongly advocated by several leading researchers in 
physics education (Arons 1965, 1999; McDermott 1996, 1997; Reif 1965). With 
regard to energy, providing a definition was found to be important in supporting teach-
ers and increasing their confidence (Kruger 1990, Stylianidou and Ogborn 1999).
Teachers and textbooks were found to provide additional types of definitions to 
the theoretical and the operational (Galili and Lehavi 2006). Lexical (descriptive) 
definitions (Copi and Cohen 1990) were identified as a subcategory of the nominal 
definitions. Definitions in this subcategory describe concepts informally, as in a 
general dictionary, but not in a manner sufficient for a rigid discipline. The concepts 
were usually related to common experiences, sensations, or ideas and they used 
non-formal terms. For example, energy is often defined by relating it to fuel, sun’s 
light, or electricity. The reliance on a descriptive rather than a quantitative approach 
might cause difficulties (Mclldowie 1995). Textbooks have rarely followed the 
advanced texts (e.g., Landau and Lifshits 1960) and they related energy to time 
symmetry and thus avoided its mere postulation. Such definitions were often far 
from accurate and never referred to measuring operations.
9.2.3.2  Addressing Experiment-Theory Relationships
The experiment-theory relationship is another strand of the philosophy of science 
discourse that can influence curriculum design, especially when considering 
whether to construct a concept’s understanding deductively or inductively. With 
regard to energy, such a consideration can assist when one needs to decide how 
concrete (vs. abstract) energy should be presented in a curriculum.
According to the generative view (Koponen and Mäntylä 2006), adopting the 
epistemology of experiments requires an inductive justification of knowledge that 
can foster and guide students’ own knowledge construction. It was claimed that the 
epistemological role of experiments in physics may help to reconstruct the use of 
experiments in their historical perspective. Thus, insights from history and philoso-
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 261 ---
243
phy of physics should be taken into account if one wishes to design an experimental- 
based curriculum and train teachers accordingly.
9.2.3.3  Implications for Energy Curriculum Design
Several approaches for addressing the challenge posed by the problems of defining 
energy have been suggested: (a) Avoiding a definition (Poincare 1903/1952, p. 167; 
Feynman 1964), (b) A mechanical definition as “the ability to do work”, (c) A defi-
nition as “the cause of events” (Millar 2000), (d) A definition based on an opera -
tional definition of energy change (Karplus 1981),6 and (e) Developing energy 
transfer and transformation as a theoretical framework that accounts for changes in 
very different systems (Bächtold and Guedj 2014; Papadouris et al. 2008).
It is apparent that in most cases if a definition of energy is provided, it would be 
formulated as a nominal theoretical definition rather than an operational one. The 
first two approaches seem to provide no or an incomplete answer to the question 
what is energy. The third definition, a causal definition of energy, as discussed by 
Ogborn (1986) and Millar ( 2000), is incorrect since it is entropy (or free energy), 
that can be said to ‘make things happen’. The ‘work’ definition of energy could 
hinder our goal of unifying the concept of energy because it is hardly applicable for 
non-mechanical processes such as light absorption or chemical reactions. In fact, 
any mechanical-based definition of energy (e.g., through motion) will fail to unify 
such phenomena and therefore, it will be limited in rendering the idea of energy 
conservation plausible.
Consider, for example, using a pendulum in order to convey the energy conserva-
tion idea. Any classroom observation will demonstrate that the pendulum “loses 
height” as it swings until it stops its motion. This will happen even in vacuum. 
Therefore, if one relates energy to motion, the direct interpretation of observing the 
pendulum’s motion will be that it lost its energy. In order to start looking for the 
“lost” energy, one assumes that energy is conserved and then one is also compelled 
to relate energy to phenomena other than motion. Hence energy dissipation and 
energy conservation are inseparable (Solomon 1982). However, following such an 
argumentation, students may find the unification of energy difficult and may view 
the structure of science as being based on cyclic reasoning.
Furthermore, the fact that students are very familiar with such non-mechanical 
processes stresses the didactic weakness of employing the mechanical definition.
Approaches (c) – (e) share in common the emphasis they put on processes and 
changes. The last two approaches, (d) & (e), seem to complement each other; however, 
they share an epistemic difference: (d) employs an operational definition of energy 
change, whereas (e) presents energy as an abstract, trans-phenomenological concept.
6 Karplus suggested defining operationally the energy of a system relative to a system of ice and 
water at 0 °C as: “the mass of ice melted as the system comes to equilibrium with a mixture of ice 
and water”. We consider this as a definition of the change in energy rather than the energy itself, 
since the result of such a measurement also depends on the relative motion and position of the 
measured system and the ice-water system.
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 262 ---
244
Note that although energy does not lend itself to an operational definition (or, 
perhaps to any definition), a change in the energy of a system does. Therefore, keep-
ing in mind Karplus‘educational insights with regard to the advantage of using such 
definitions from the students’ perspective, we decided to design the curriculum for 
middle school level around an operational definition of energy change.
Approaches (d) & (e) naturally directed us to follow Joule‘s approach and to 
establish a list of different processes (e.g., a change in height, a change in speed, and 
a chemical change) that share their capability to produce the same effect: changing 
the temperature of a certain object.7 Choosing the temperature change of a standard 
object as our ‘ruler’ for measuring energy change, rather than some mechanical 
device, also enables, beyond the unification of the energy concept mentioned above, 
to avoid the difficulties posed by the 2nd law of thermodynamics, i.e., that a 
mechanical process can terminate with heating as the only final result but not vice 
versa (Arons 1999).
According to the operational approach, the teachers would have a valid rationale 
to justify the unification of the concept of energy change for cases where a change 
in temperature occurs:
Changes in characterizing variables (of certain processes) →   ∆T (of a standard object) ≡  ∆E
The generalization to other processes is left for the next steps of the procedure. This 
approach enabled us to provide a definition of energy change as a quantification of 
processes:
‘Energy change’, corresponding to some process, is the maximal change in the temperature 
of a standard object that this process can induce.
Or, less formally: ‘Energy change’ is the capability of a process to induce warming or 
cooling.
‘Energy change’ thus, provides a measure of the change in a system when it goes 
from one state to another through some process. The details of the process are not 
significant - only the difference between the different states. Note that the role of a 
system is greatly emphasized according to this approach. In addition, our definition 
enables to quantify energy change when a system undergoes a process and there -
fore, it differs from defining the energy of a system as its capacity to produce a 
change (Bächtold and Guedj 2014).
It should be clarified that the operational definition does not mean that the energy 
of a system does not change if there is no (or very little) change in temperature when 
a characterizing variable of a process changes. It only means that if one wishes to 
ascribe energy change to such a process, one has to refer to a measurement in which 
the change in temperature is the only change corresponding to the changing vari -
able. Thus, if one wishes to analyze the swinging of a pendulum in terms of change 
in energy from the beginning of the swing to some intermediate position, one has 
first to ascribe independently, via measurement, energy change to the change in 
7 Karplus‘suggestion has merit in that the change in the ice mass is the only change in an ice-water 
system, whereas using a thermometer also involves volume changes. However, carrying out a 
measurement such as that suggested by Karplus is not feasible in most classrooms.
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 263 ---
245
height and the change in speed. One can then arrive empirically to the idea that the 
decrease in energy related to the decrease in height almost equals the increase in 
energy related to the increase in speed.
9.2.4  Science Education Research (SER): Studying Students’ 
and Teachers’ Pertinent Knowledge and Difficulties
Science education research provides information about students’ and teachers’ 
known pertinent knowledge and difficulties regarding various scientific concepts 
and ideas. Furthermore, analysis of textbooks can shed light on how a certain sub -
ject is planned to be presented and taught. The presentation can be categorized with 
respect to the different aspects of the concept on hand. 8 With regard to the special 
concept of energy, SER found that it presents a great challenge for teaching. The 
literature indicates that students lack a proper understanding of: (I) what energy is 
(its definition) and what is the meaning of: (II) energy forms, (III) energy transfor-
mation and transfer, and (IV) energy conservation (Duit 1984, 1985).
SER also indicates several additional challenges. Students have difficulties to 
relate quantitative and qualitative knowledge (Goldring and Osborne 1994) with 
regard to energy and difficulties related to the interrelation of work and energy and 
to the role of a system in this regard (Lindsey et al. 2009, 2012). The definition of 
energy seems to pose difficulties even to teachers (Trumper 1998, Galili and Lehavi 
2006). In the past, many doubts were raised about the use of ‘forms of energy’ in 
teaching. Millar (2000, 2014) points out that very often energy forms serve as a list 
of labels to be remembered by pupils and that such forms add little, if at all, to 
explanations and understanding of phenomena. He further argues that energy forms 
may also complicate explanations by adding unnecessary variables and can even 
lead to incorrect analyses of processes. Most important to our approach, energy 
forms may hinder the importance of processes and weaken the unifying image of 
energy (Ellse 1988; Mak and Young 1987; Summers 1983).
Commonly, graduate-level physics textbooks define energy through a gradual 
construction: First, work is defined and then, when applied to various forces (e.g., 
gravitation or elastic), different expressions are obtained by defining the 
 corresponding types of energy (Galili and Lehavi 2006). This method shows that 
many “types” of energy are based on the definition of work. However, this approach, 
as discussed above, may face difficulty in addressing heat or radiation. Hence, such 
phenomena are often postulated as additional options of energy transfer.
The concept of energy is rarely given a universal definition to which the learner 
can refer when considering something called “energy”. Thus, energy cannot be well 
distinguished from other concepts (e.g., force) and is not sufficiently inclusive to 
account for its different “types”. Therefore, the definitions of energy often lack the 
8 With regard to energy, see the comprehensive summary of Michelini and Stefanel (2010).
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 264 ---
246
requirement of the scientific method, namely that a definition of a concept will dif-
ferentiate it from other concepts and clarify its essence (Cohen and Nagel 1939, 
p. 232, 238). This, possibly, impedes a systematic exploration of the subject matter 
(e.g., the application of energy rather than force to chemical or biological systems).
Parallel to these deficiencies, there is a lack of consensus among physics educa-
tors as to the proper language by which energy should be described (Wolter and 
Martin 2002). In particular, the meaning of the above-mentioned four aspects is not 
agreed upon (Michelini and Stefanel 2014). For example, whereas energy is consid-
ered not to be a substance, the language used to describe some of its aspects (mainly 
energy transfer) may suggest a substance interpretation of energy.
Official international education standards and national curricula often leave 
much room for interpreting the meaning of the four aspects of energy. For example, 
the New Framework for K-12 Science Education uses terms like energy generation 
(e.g., pp. 9, 43), energy flow, and energy transfer (e.g., pp. 84, 89, 92, 93), energy 
storage (e.g., pp.  96, 121) without explicating their meaning (National Research 
Council 2012). Under the headline “What is energy?” the framework states: “That 
there is a single quantity called energy is due to the remarkable fact that a system’s 
total energy is conserved”. Such a statement clarifies the unitary aspect of energy 
but not the meaning of the concept (there are other conserved entities in science). 
The fact that various forms of energy still exist in the framework may also weaken 
the unitary statement. Energy as a quantitative property of a system is mentioned 
only once (p. 123) without specifying how its value can be determined. Moreover, 
scrutinizing the framework reveals that energy is predominantly mentioned with 
relation to its changes during processes due to transfer, interactions, and reactions, 
rather than its value within a system. This may provide a hint as to the importance 
of using energy changes rather than energy to describe and analyze processes and 
changes, as suggested by Hecht (2007).
The SER literature suggests that although forms of energy or its transformations 
do not have a solid scientific status, they are very useful in science teaching. Thus, 
in designing the curriculum we were challenged to develop teaching materials in 
order to address the students’ difficulties and the teachers’ need to possess a clear 
view regarding the meaning of the concepts they teach.9 In designing these  materials, 
we gave special attention to the unitary nature of energy and to the coherent mean-
ing of such terms as energy “forms”, “transfer”, “transformation/conversion”, and 
conservation.
In order to follow the goals of coherence and consistency, the curriculum design 
required us to make didactical choices with regard to which definition to choose,  
whether to focus on energy or on energy change to refer to energy forms or to avoid 
them, among other choices. We will demonstrate later possible ramifications of 
making different curricular choices with regard to the example of the energy change 
related to changes in speed (“kinetic” energy).
9 It is not surprising that the Framework (pp. 95,96) calls for the need to have “a common use of 
language about energy and matter across the disciplines in science instruction” and that “the lan -
guage of energy needs to be used with care so as not to further establish misconceptions”.
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 265 ---
247
Consequently, we had to make decisions concerning how to interweave the con-
tent and the means to support students in constructing their pertinent knowledge and 
understanding.
One can observe that many of the difficulties regarding the understanding of 
energy, as reported by SER, may be related to the “language of energy” as described 
above. These observations are summarized in the following table. We formulated 
the difficulties that were found to puzzle learners in terms of questions, and catego-
rized them according to the corresponding energy curriculum challenges:
9.3  Teachers’ Concept-Image of Energy
In parallel to our curriculum design, we conducted research on teachers’ concept 
images of energy. It revealed that their concept image may pose a great challenge 
for curriculum design (Lehavi and Eylon 2014). We found that many teachers 
declared that energy is one entity, but, at the same time, many also did not agree 
with the statement that energy only changes in its value. Moreover, regarding energy 
transformations in general, the extent of agreement among the teachers regarding 
the unity of energy was considerably less. A similar picture of teachers’ views was 
observed in their responses regarding specific cases of energy forms or types. There 
is an apparent gap between the teachers’ statements regarding the unity of energy 
and their opinion regarding energy transformations and forms. This gap may indi -
cate that the idea that energy is a unified concept is not fully accepted and is not 
clearly related to terms such as energy transformations and forms.
Most of the teachers indicated that the energy of an object is a relative quantity. 
However, their responses to questions that addressed specific cases revealed that 
many abandoned this idea in favor of the idea that energy is a property pertaining to 
a single object that is absolutely determined. This view ignores the systemic view of 
energy as is apparent in the case of an object’s height energy, which disregards the 
Earth as a part of the system. In addition, most of the teachers hold the view that 
energy is contained within an object, which further weakens the relativistic view of 
energy. Only a few teachers agreed with the statement that a single procedure of 
measurement can be used to measure energy changes, and with regard to measuring 
energy itself, most of them did not respond. This may indicate that the teachers are 
confused with regard to the idea of unifying the concept of energy via measurement 
or they may even reject it. This, together with the confusion regarding the possibility 
of measuring energy changes by a single procedure, may have implications regard-
ing the ability of many teachers to teach their students about the unification of energy.
With regard to energy conservation, our findings indicate that the energy conser-
vation law (ECL) is perceived as an irrefutable law. This is supported by teachers’ 
views of the limitations of measurement with regard to energy. Such a view of the 
conservation law assigns it a special status as a scientific law. Furthermore, the view 
that energy cannot be created or destroyed does not support the systemic view of the 
energy conservation law and might actually strengthen the material view of energy. 
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 266 ---
248
We found that the two aspects - energy conservation and energy transformations - 
nearly mirror each other in the teachers’ views. Apparently, one is the reason for the 
other and, at the same time, its result. This view may suggest that some teachers 
regard ECL not as a basic law but as being derived from energy transformation. 
Such views possibly hinder a coherent justification of both energy transformation 
and the energy conservation law.
These findings may indicate the difficulties one may face in fostering a coherent 
teaching of the energy concept in such a way that energy forms (or types) together 
with energy transformation and transfer will be consistent with the unity of energy 
and its conservation (Eylon and Lehavi 2014).
9.4  Curriculum Design Decisions
Here we will depict the framework we employed in developing an ‘energy change 
approach’. We will describe the points considered in this development and will pro-
vide specific examples from the curriculum.
It should be stressed that we focused on the teachers’ concept image of energy. 
We therefore decided to support the unitary image of energy by regarding energy 
types/forms as labels of different processes  in which the value of energy changes 
(i.e., increase or decrease) rather than perceiving the existence of different types of 
energies. The notion of energy increase/decrease assisted us in providing coherent 
meaning to confusing concepts such as energy transformations, energy transfer, and 
energy conservation. The finding that the teachers’ declarative knowledge was not 
always in accordance with their deep-rooted beliefs and knowledge led us to con -
struct ideas and activities that support their declarative knowledge. For example, the 
teachers’ doubts regarding whether it is possible to construct an energy concept on 
the basis of experiments led us to generate simple and easy-to-use Joule-like experi-
ments (Lehavi 2014; Lehavi et al. 2014a, b, 2016). Thus, we aimed at focusing the 
teachers’ attention on the following observations:
9.4.1  Central Observations
As pointed out previously (Table 9.1), we opted in the energy curriculum to provide 
meaning to energy forms, transformations, conversions, transfer, and conservation. 
This required us to draw the students’ attention throughout their learning to the fol-
lowing observations:
A. Co-variance of Changes An observation of various processes in nature revealed 
that they cannot be described by the change in one variable only. For example, when 
an object falls, its height decreases and its speed increases; when an object absorbs 
light there is less light and the object heats up.
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 267 ---
249
Table 9.1 Energy teaching challenges and their relations to energy curriculum challengesa, b
Teaching challenges Curriculum challenges
(a) Is energy a material entity? (I) How can a definition be employed 
in order to provide meaning to energy?(b) Is energy related to living things only?
(c) Is energy a force?
(d) How can we distinguish the energy scientific 
content from its everyday meaning?
(e) What makes energy one concept and not many?
(f) Is energy an absolute or relative entity?
(g) Can we measure energy or is it only an abstract 
concept?
(h) What does ‘energy of an object’ mean? (e.g., 
energy of a chocolate bar)?
(i) How can we indicate the characteristics of energy 
(e.g., its conservation or relativeness) if we don’t know 
what energy is?
(j) Why does energy, unlike other physical concepts, 
have forms?
(II) What meaning can be ascribed to 
energy forms (types)?
(k) What makes these forms manifest the same entity?
(l) How do we know that one or more forms of 
energy can be transformed into other forms?
(III) What meaning can be ascribed to 
energy transformations/conversions/
transfer?(m) Is energy transformation a consequence of energy 
conservation?
(n) How do work and heat relate to energy change?
(o) If energy is not a material entity, how can it move 
from one object to another?
(p) How do we know that energy is conserved? (IV) What meaning can be ascribed to 
energy conservation?(q) Is energy conservation an empirical law of nature?
(r) Can one, in principle, refute the energy 
conservation law?
(s) Is energy conservation a consequence of energy 
transformation?
(t) Does energy conservation mean that energy cannot 
be created or destroyed?
(u) Does energy conservation mean that energy cannot 
be created or destroyed?
(v) Why does energy conservation hold only for 
isolated systems?
(w) If energy is conserved, what is the meaning of 
energy sources?
(x) How can energy conservation be applied?
aIn some cases the difficulties from one category are closely related to those belonging to another 
category
bMost of these questions were the focus of the Discussion of Strand on Energy in Lower Secondary 
School, held at Girep 2010, Reims
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 268 ---
250
This observation enabled us to relate to energy changes in simultaneous pro -
cesses. Simultaneous changes can occur solely within a system or also in the system 
and in its surroundings. The simultaneity of changes enabled us to generalize the 
concept of energy change and to apply it to cases beyond those described by tem -
perature change.
B. Opposite Arrows of Change A further observation revealed that simultaneous 
changes always occur in such a way that some of them correspond to an increase in 
energy and others to its decrease.
C.  Simultaneous Changes in Energy Can Counterbalance Each Other  The 
previously mentioned feature of opposite arrows of changes in nature does not nec-
essarily imply that the corresponding changes in energy are mutually counterbal -
anced. This remains to be determined experimentally. One has to verify that for 
simultaneous changes to occur, the increase in energy corresponding to some 
changes equals the decrease in energy corresponding to the others.
D. Isolated Versus Non-isolated Systems The concept of simultaneous changes 
can be used to define operationally an isolated system:
An isolated system is one that any change within it is not coupled by changes in its sur -
roundings and vice versa.
Note that since the borders of a system are defined arbitrarily, one can transform a 
non-isolated system into an isolated one by expanding its borders.
E. Energy Conservation From observations A – D one can determine empirically 
that in an isolated system the energy increase corresponding to some processes of 
change is balanced by the energy decrease corresponding to other processes. 
Therefore, one can regard energy conservation as an empirical law that, in principle, 
is refutable.
9.4.2  Didactical Decisions
Considering the four disciplines as resources for guiding our curriculum design 
decisions led us to agree on the following didactical principles:
Focus on Observations To encourage students: to observe various processes and 
draw their attention to the changes involved in them without first using the concept 
of energy; to look for as many processes as they can that cause a thermometer to rise 
or fall in temperature; to look for a common feature that enables one to compare 
different processes 10; to focus on energy increase or decrease as characterizing 
changes (processes) in nature rather than focusing on energy as characterizing static 
states.
10 Some students say that time can be that common feature. A great idea!
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 269 ---
251
Unification To unify the concept of energy change (its increase or decrease) by 
providing an operational definition based on Joule-like experiments, based on the 
change in temperature of a standard object.11
Reinterpretation To keep the traditional vocabulary owing to its convenience and 
frequent use, but suggest a new meaning to it:
 – Energy transformations and transfer are presented as a convenient way to talk 
about energy increase and decrease in coupled processes and systems, 
respectively.
 – Energy conservation is presented as an empirical observation of the balance 
between energy increase and energy decrease related to processes occurring in 
isolated systems.
Table 9.2 presents how our curricular decisions employed observations from 
Science, HS, PS, and SER:
9.4.3  Example: Different Definitions Imply Different 
Approaches to Teaching Energy Related to Motion
The following is an example of how one can adopt different definitions of energy 
change in order to arrive at the well-known expression for when an object stops:
∆Ek ∝ v2–0
 A. A work-based definition:
 (a) ∆E  ≡ W ≡ F.∙∆s = (ma) ∙∆s = (m v
s s
22 0
2
- ×D D)  ∝ v2–0
 B. An operational definition:
 (a) ∆E  ≡  ∆T (of a standard object) ∝ v2–0 (as measurements show)
Note that the first alternative requires knowledge of Newton’s laws and kinemat-
ics in their mathematical formulation. Such sophistication is beyond the middle 
school level. The operational definition (alternative B), on the other hand, is based 
on knowledge of temperature measurement and the fact that a change in tempera -
ture, being a common result of different processes, can be agreed to define energy 
change. Such a view is well within the reach of our students, demonstrating rather 
well what Karplus‘claim (p. 10) with regard to operational definitions.
11 We used a simple kitchen thermometer that has a metal “sleeve” with the sensor inserted in it. 
The sleeve can be regarded as a standard object.
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 270 ---
252Table 9.2 Employing science, HPS, and SER in making curricular decisions
Alternatives Observations from science, SER, and HPS Our decisions
1. Which concept should be 
emphasized: Energy (static 
states) or energy change 
(processes)?
Scientists are mostly concerned with changes in the value of 
energy in different kinds of processes (the 1st law of 
thermodynamics) rather than in its absolute value, which is 
more ambiguous
To emphasize changes in the value of energy and hence, 
on the processes by which a system’s state can change
2. Provide the emphasized 
concept with an abstract or a 
concrete definition?
Scientists and PS scholars regard operational definitions to 
be unambiguous. SER found that students and teachers have 
difficulties in understanding the abstract meaning of energy
To relate energy changes (increase or decrease) to a 
specific measurement: Temperature change of a 
standard object
3. Many “energies” (types/forms) 
or one?
Scientists regard energy as one concept. SER found that 
students have difficulties in accepting the unitary nature of 
energy and that the community of “experts” dealing with 
energy (teachers, engineers, and scientists) find the terms of 
energy forms to be useful.
To keep the terms of energy forms or types. To unify 
these terms through energy change by referring to a 
feature common to many kinds of processes: Their 
ability to warm or cool (a calorimetric approach 
following joule and Karplus). Thus, we defined energy 
change as a measure of the maximal ability of a process 
to induce change in the temperature of a standard object
4. Energy transfer interpretation: 
a substance “flow” or a change in 
the value of energy?
Scientists regard energy transfer as a systemic feature: Its 
increase or decrease owing to a system’s interaction with 
another system (the 1st law of thermodynamics). SER found 
that students often regard energy as a kind of substance that 
can move from place to place
To relate to energy transfer in terms of a simultaneous 
decrease and increase of energy in interacting systems
5. Energy transformations: a 
change between different types/
forms of energy or a change in 
the value of energy?
Scientists did not reach a consensus regarding the scientific 
meaning of energy transformations. SER found that energy 
transformations, although useful for classroom discourse, 
strengthen the “many energies” concept
To relate to energy transformations in terms of a 
decrease and increase of energy in simultaneous 
processes
6. Energy conservation: a 
postulated character of energy or 
a systemic, empirically based 
law?
Scientists regard energy conservation either as coming from 
a general symmetry or as a systemic feature (through the 1st 
law of thermodynamics). SER found that teachers have 
difficulties in justifying energy conservation
To construct energy conservation as a systemic law 
representing the balance (supported by experiments) 
between the simultaneous increase and decrease of 
energy in certain systems
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 271 ---
253
9.5  Implementation
The subject of energy is addressed directly in the Israeli middle school curriculum 
in grades 7 and 9. In addition, energy is addressed in grade 8 as part of a unit on 
electricity, and also in grade 9 as a part of a unit focusing on biology. At the middle 
school level the national curriculum addresses topics such as energy forms, energy 
transfer, energy transformations, and energy conservation and relates them to vari-
ous phenomena. The main leap from the 7th grade level to the 9th grade level is that 
the latter requires introducing mathematical representation. Note that the Israeli 
national curriculum lets the textbook authors choose their own preferred didactics.
The curriculum resources that were designed according to the above approach 
were implemented in Israel in two phases: (a) Developing teaching materials for 7th 
and 9th grade science teachers 12; (b) Developing textbooks for 7th and 9th grade 
levels. These phases were accompanied by special workshops for teachers.
In phase (a) the teachers were provided with a rationale explaining why energy 
is the “language of changes”, followed by suggestions for classroom activities, such 
as simple experiments and demonstrations. The teaching materials also offered the 
teachers specially designed questions that emphasize changes rather than static 
states. For example, instead of asking what is the energy of a book standing on a 
shelf (given the book’s mass and height above the floor), we asked what would be 
the change in energy when the book falls from that shelf to the floor; or, instead of 
asking what is the energy of a moving car (given its mass and speed relative to the 
road), we asked what would be the change in energy when the car stops. Similar 
questions were developed for other phenomena. The teaching materials that 
appeared during the years 2011–2012 interweaved teaching, learning, and 
 assessment. The materials also offered a graphical representation that calls attention 
to processes in systems and the corresponding changes in energy (Fig.  9.1).
These materials are used by most of the science teachers in 7th to 9th grade. 
However, although mentioned in the rationale, these materials did not strictly follow 
the operational definition of energy change as mentioned above.
The materials for the 7th and 9th grades also added the operational definition of 
energy change by introducing the idea that many changes in nature can be quanti -
fied by measuring the change in the temperature of a standard object (a calorimetric 
approach).13 Thus, these materials also offered Joule-like experiments such as those 
described previously (Lehavi 2014; Lehavi et al. 2014a, 2016).
In phase (b) the textbooks developed at the Weizmann Institute followed the 
approach described previously by referring explicitly to the students’ (and teach -
ers’) attention to the following aspects of energy as a language of changes:
12 These materials were developed, in addition to the authors of the current paper, by Rami Arieli, 
Amnon Hazan, Ayelet Weizman, Yael Bamberger, Tammy Yechieli, Oren Eckstein, and Roni 
Mualem.
13 These units are not the only ones used in our system, which is in the middle of shifting from the 
old curriculum to the new one.
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 272 ---
254
 1. Processes: Different processes in nature, characterized by changeable properties 
(parameters/indicators) such as height or speed, can be quantified by energy 
change.
 2. Simultaneous (or coupled) changes: Changes in nature are always accompanied 
simultaneously by other changes.
 3. Unity: Energy is considered to be a single quantity because its increase or 
decrease in different processes can be uniquely quantified via measurement. 
Different “types” or “forms” are only labels representing different processes in 
which energy increases or decreases (and thus they are not really different).
 4. Measurability: Increases or decreases in energy can be verified experimentally. 
The results of such measurements can be generalized and used in mathematical 
expressions (for 9th grade level only).
 5. The meaning of “Energy transfer”:  Simultaneous energy increase and decrease 
in interacting systems.
 6. The meaning of “Energy transformation”: An increase and decrease in energy in 
different kinds of simultaneous processes.
 7. Conservation: The overall simultaneous changes in energy within certain systems 
(called isolated systems) are measured (or calculated, based on measurement gen-
eralizations) to mutually cancel out each other. In this respect, we wish to clarify 
that any classroom experiment can only support this idea as a plausible inference. 
We addressed it quantitatively in both grades (7th and 9th) with regard to the heat 
phenomenon by measuring the change in temperature of two identical objects 
having different temperatures. The students were able to observe that the decrease 
in energy of the hotter object equals the increase in energy of the colder one.
For the case of energy conservation during decreased height, we referred to it in 
the 9th grade as follows: First we established through Joule-like experiments that a 
linear relation between an energy change (measured by a change in temperature) 
and the height change is plausible. Then we did the same for the quadratic relations 
between the change in speed and in energy (again, measured by a change in tem -
perature). We then demonstrated that for a falling body there is a linear relation 
between the decrease in the energy corresponding to the decrease in height and the 
Changes (speed, temp...)
Energy increase related to
each change
Energy decrease related to
each change
System(s) before System(s) after
Fig. 9.1 Energy change diagram
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 273 ---
255
increase in energy corresponding to the increase in speed.14 From these two experi-
ments, together with all the qualitative examples of energy mutual increase/decrease, 
we were able to present the energy conservation as plausible inference.
We will describe here the structure of the 7th grade unit 15 developed at the 
Weizmann Institute: “A first Look at Energy”, which was intended to lay the foun-
dation for further development in the 8th and 9th grade units. The unit comprises 
five themes (Table 9.3).
9.6  Conclusion
We examined the importance of considering science, HS, PS, and SER when design-
ing a coherent science curriculum for teaching energy and discussed in detail how 
they were used. SER provided answers to the question, what is required in the 
energy language in order to address the difficulties exhibited by students and teach-
ers. Science provided us with the principles and laws that should be addressed, 
together with their interpretations. PS was examined in order to determine how to 
make scientific concepts meaningful and relate to the scientific structure regarding 
energy. HS gave us the means to justify scientific claims. In addition, the philosophi-
cal discourse regarding the experiment-theory relationship and the meaning of 
14 We analyzed a video of a falling object.
15 Written by Amnon Hazan and Yael Bamberger, The Science Teaching Department at the 
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
Table 9.3 The 7th grade unit components (14 lessons, 45 min each)
Subject Key ideas
1. Energy – Phenomena 
& changes
Energy increase or decrease can describe different types of 
processes
Each process can be characterized by some changeable property
A change in temperature can indicate a change in energy
2. Energy conservation 
(an empirical approach)
A decrease in energy is always accompanied by its increase
Observations and measurements show that in some systems energy 
increase is counterbalanced by energy decrease
3. Energy change Energy transfer means the simultaneous energy increase/decrease in 
interacting systems, and energy transformation means the 
simultaneous energy increase/decrease in processes of different 
types
4. Where is the missing 
energy?
Changes in thermal energy cannot be fully reused
5. Energy change in 
warming and cooling
Heat is the gain in energy of a system due to its interaction with a 
warmer system
Heat is related to radiation, convection, and conduction.
Heat can indicate an open system
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 274 ---
256
scientific concepts, with special attention to their definitions, provided essential and 
rich support in making curriculum and development decisions.
Note that each of the four PHES in our approach was employed not just for the 
sake of presenting them and discussing their role in understanding science, but 
rather, as a resource to be considered when designing a science curriculum. We 
regarded the PHES disciplines as important for providing guidelines for designing 
a curriculum rather than as bodies of knowledge from which the content of the cur-
riculum should be enriched. This is especially salient with regard to the history of 
science. Although in our 9th grade textbook16 we discuss the caloric theory as well 
as different alternatives to define weight, these are not considered by us as guide -
lines but rather as contents that we found important to be included in our textbook. 
In contrast, adopting operational definitions from PS (as well as from SER) and the 
Joule-Karplus thermal approach from HS, provided us with guidelines regardless of 
the important question of whether or not this choice should be presented explicitly 
to the students. Although the guidelines illustrate the approach to teaching energy, 
they can also be used for teaching other concepts such as electric charge or force. 
For example, our 8th grade unit on electricity relates the concept of electric charge 
to electroscope measurements and after discussing this topic, the different features 
of electric charge are studied.
We, as well as others (Eylon and Hofstein 2015), regard curriculum design as a 
discipline of its own that has undergone considerable changes in emphases and 
approaches. Like PS, HS the process of a curriculum design requires the examina -
tion of science in order to make it comprehensible. However, unlike those disci -
plines, the target population of the science curriculum designers is not the designers’ 
community and its goal is not a scholarly investigation. Curriculum design is mainly 
concerned with making didactical choices with students’ and teachers’ communi -
ties in mind, along with practical ramifications. Therefore, it requires knowledge 
from the SER discipline.
It should be emphasized that we do not advocate only one way of using PHES in 
curriculum design. For example, one may wish to emphasize in a specific curricu -
lum the evolution of science and hence, lean more heavily on HS or that part of PS 
that is devoted to the history of scientific discourse. In the case of energy, this would 
probably result in a curriculum much different from the one presented here – one 
that elaborates on how the concept of energy evolved in the course of scientific 
discourse. To cite another example, a curriculum that emphasizes contemporary sci-
ence may highlight, as the New Framework for K-12 Science Education does, the 
role of fields with regard to energy. Nevertheless, we believe that in making any 
such curricular choices, the role of SER in the designing process should be central.
The idea that a curriculum design process should integrate multiple perspectives 
is not new. More than 40  years ago, Schwab ( 1973) argued that such a process 
should involve five commonplaces: subject matter, learners, milieus, teachers, and 
curriculum making. Our approach addresses all of these aspects, especially if one 
16 The 9th grade textbook was developed, in addition to the authors of the current paper, by Adi 
Rosen, Uri Ganiel, and Amnon Hazan.
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 275 ---
257
accepts Null‘s (2011) interpretation of the subject matter as involving content and 
methods. However, since it is not clear in Schwab’s framework whether and how 
considerations from PS and HS should be involved, we believe that our approach 
may complement this framework in curriculum design theory.
References
Adúriz-Bravo, A., & Izquierdo-Aymerich, M. (2005). Utilising the ‘3P-model’ to characterise the 
discipline of didactics of science. Science & Education, 14(1), 29–41.
Angeles, P. A. (1981). Dictionary of philosophy. New York: Harper & Row.
Arons, A. B. (1965). Development of concepts in physics. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Arons, A. B. (1999). Development of energy concepts in introductory physics courses. American 
Journal of Physics, 67, 1063–1067.
Bächtold, M., & Guedj, M. (2012). Towards a new strategy for teaching energy based on the his -
tory and philosophy of the concept of energy. In Innovative methods for science education: 
History of science, ICT and inquiry based science teaching  (pp. 225–238). Berlin: Frank & 
Timme.
Bächtold, M., & Guedj, M. (2014). Teaching energy informed by the history and epistemology of 
the concept with implications for teacher education. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International 
handbook of research in history, philosophy and science teaching  (pp. 211–243). Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Bevilacqua, F. (2014). Energy: Learning from the past. Science & Education, 23(6), 1231–1243.
Braithwaite, R. B. (1955). Scientific explanations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bridgman, P. W. (1936). The nature of physical theory. New York: Dover Publications.
Bridgman, P. W. (1952). The nature of some of physical concepts. New York: Philosophical Library.
Bridgman, P. W. (1964). The nature of a physical theory. New York: Wiley.
Bunge, M. (1963). The myth of simplicity. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Bunge, M. (2000). Energy: Between physics and metaphysics. Science & Education, 9 (5), 
459–463.
Chisholm, D. (1992). Some energetic thoughts. Physics Education, 27, 215–220.
Cohen, M. R., & Nagel, E. (1939). An Introduction to logic and scientific method . New York: 
Harcourt.
Coopersmith, J.  (2015). Energy, the subtle concept: The discovery of Feynman’s blocks from 
Leibniz to Einstein (Revised ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Copi, I. M., & Cohen, C. (1990). Introduction to logic. New York: Macmillan.
Duit, R. (1984). Learning the energy concept in school—Empirical results from the Philippines 
and West Germany. Physics Education, 19, 59–66.
Duit, R. (1985). In search of an energy concept. In The paper was presented at the conference on: 
Teaching about energy within the secondary school science curriculum. Leeds: The University 
of Leeds.
Duschl, R. (1985). Science education and philosophy of science, twenty-five years of mutually 
exclusive development. School Science and Mathematics, 87, 541–555.
Duschl, R. (1990). Restructuring science education: The role of theories and their importance . 
New York: Teachers’ College Press.
Duschl, R. (2000). Making the nature of science explicit. In R. Millar, J. Leech, & J. Osborne 
(Eds.), Improving science education: The contribution of research (pp. 187–206). Philadelphia: 
Open University Press.
Einstein, A. (1905/1952). On the electrodynamics of moving bodies. In His: The principle of rela-
tivity. New York: Dover.
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 276 ---
258
Elkana, Y . (2000). Science, philosophy of science and science teaching. Science & Education, 9, 
463–485.
Ellse, M. (1988). Transferring, not transforming energy. School Science Review, 69, 427–437.
Eylon, B., & Hofstein, A. (2015). Curriculum development and change in the sciences. In 
R. Gunstone (Ed.), Encyclopedia of science education (pp. 258–264). Heidelberg: Springer.
Eylon, B-S., & Lehavi, Y . (2014). Position paper: Energy as the language of changes. In: Kaminski, 
W., & Michelini, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of selected papers of the GIREP-ICPE-MPTL inter-
national conference, Reims 2010, France (pp. 789–790). Università degli Studi di Udine, Italy.
Feigl, H., & Brodbeck, M. (1953). Readings in the philosophy of science . New  York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Fermi, E. (1936). Thermodynamics. New York: Dover.
Feynman, R. (1964). Feynman’s lectures on physics (V ol. I, pp. 4-1–4-8). Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Galili, I., & Lehavi, Y . (2006). Definitions of physical concepts: A study of physics teachers’ 
knowledge and views. International Journal of Science Education, 28(5), 521–541.
Gilbert, J. K. (2006). Science education: Science, education, and the formal curriculum  (V ol. 1). 
New York: Routledge.
Goldring, H., & Osborne, J.  (1994). Students’ difficulties with energy and related concepts. 
Physics Education, 29, 26–32.
Hecht, E. (2007). Energy and change. The Physics Teacher, 45(2), 88–92.
Hempel, C. G. (1966). Philosophy of natural science. Englewood: Prentice-hall.
Hempel, C. G. (1970). Aspects of scientific explanations. New York: Macmillan.
Hestenes, D. (1998). Who needs physics education research!? American Journal of Physics, 66 , 
465–467.
Holton, G. (1985). Introduction to concepts and theories in physical science. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Karplus, R. (1981). Educational aspects of the structure of physics. American Journal of Physics, 
49(3), 238–241.
Karplus, R., Pulos, S., & Stage, E. K. (1983). Early adolescents’ proportional reasoning on ‘rate’ 
problems. Educational studies in Mathematics, 14(3), 219–233.
Koponen, I. T., & Mäntylä, T. (2006). Generative role of experiments in physics and in teaching 
physics: A suggestion for epistemological reconstruction. Science & Education, 15, 31–54.
Kruger, C. (1990). Some primary Teachers’ ideas about energy. Physics Education, 25, 86–91.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962/1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Kuhn, T.  S. (1977). The essential tension: Selected studies in scientific tradition and change . 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Landau, L. D., & Lifshits, E. M. (1960). Mechanics. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Lehavi, Y . (2014). Reproducing joule’s experiment(s) in teaching the concept of energy. In 
Michelini, M. and Heron, P. (Organizers), Symposium: Teaching and learning the concept of 
energy from early childhood school through university. In Taşar, M. F. (Ed.) Proceedings of the 
world conference on physics education 2012, (pp. 491–498). Pegem Akademi, Istanbul, ISBN 
978-605-364-658-7.
Lehavi, Y ., & Eylon, B. S. (2014). Teachers’ concept image of energy. In L. Dvořák & V . Koudelková 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the international conference on physics education: Active learning – In 
a changing world of new technologies. Prague: MATFYZPRESS publisher/Charles University 
in Prague. ISBN 978-80-7378-266-5. 492-500.
Lehavi, Y ., Eylon, B. S., Hazan, A., Bamberger, Y ., & Weizman, A. (2014a). Focusing on changes 
in teaching about energy. In M. F. Taşar (Ed.), Proceedings of the world conference on physics 
education 2012. Istanbul: Pegem Akademi. ISBN 978-605-364-658-7, 491-497.
Lehavi, Y ., Eckstien, O., & Rosenzweig, G. (2014b). A simple kit for detecting quantitative 
changes in energy. In L.  Dvo řák & V .  Koudelková (Eds.), Proceedings of the international 
conference on physics education: Active learning  – In a changing world of new technolo -
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon

--- PAGE 277 ---
259
gies (pp. 1219–1225). Prague: MATFYZPRESS publisher/Charles University in Prague. ISBN 
978-80-7378-266-5.
Lehavi, Y ., Amit Yosovich, A., & Barak, S. (2016). Bringing joule back to school. School Science 
Review, 97(361), 9–14.
Lindsey, B. A., Heron, P. R. L., & Shaffer, P. S. (2009). Student ability to apply the concepts of 
work and energy to extended systems. American Journal of Physics, 77(11), 999–1009.
Lindsey, B.  A., Heron, P.  R. L., & Shaffer, P.  S. (2012). Student understanding of energy: 
Difficulties related to systems. American Journal of Physics, 80(2), 154–163.
Mak, S. Y ., & Young, K. (1987). Misconceptions in the teaching of heat. School Science Review, 
68, 464–470.
Margenau, H. (1950). The nature of physical reality (pp. 220–244). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Matthews, M. R. (2015). Science teaching: The contribution of history and philosophy of science. 
New York: Routledge.
Mclldowie, E. (1995). Energy transfer  – Where did we go wrong? Physics Education, 30 (4), 
228–230.
Michelini, M., & Stefanel, A. (2014). Approaches and learning problems in energy teaching/learn-
ing: an overview. In: Kaminski, W., & Michelini, M. (Eds .), Proceedings of selected papers 
of the GIREP-ICPE-MPTL International Conference , Reims 2010 , France, (pp.  779–788) 
Università degli Studi di Udine, Italy.
McDermott, L. C. (1997). Bridging the gap between teaching and Learning: The role of 
research. In E. F. Redish & J. S. Rigden (Eds.), The changing role of physics departments in 
modern universities: Proceedings of ICUPE  (pp. 139–165). Woodbury: American Institute 
of Physics.
McDermott, L. C., & The Physics Education Group. (1996). Physics by inquiry, Vol. I & II. New 
York: Wiley.
Millar, R. (2000). Energy. In D. Sang (Ed.), Teaching secondary physics (pp. 1–43). London: John 
Murray.
Millar, R. (2014). Teaching about energy: From everyday to scientific understandings. School 
Science Review, 96(354), 45–50.
Monk, M., & Osborne, J. (1997). Placing the history and philosophy of science on the curriculum: 
A model for the development of pedagogy. Science Education, 81, 405–424.
Moore, G. S. M. (1993). General, restricted and misleading forms of the first law of thermodynam-
ics. Physics Education, 28(4), 228–237.
National Research Council. (2012). A framework for K-12 science education: Practices, crosscut-
ting concepts, and core ideas . Committee on a conceptual framework for new K-12 science 
education standards. Board on Science Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences 
and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Null, W. (2011). Curriculum: From theory to practice. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Pub..
Ogborn, J. (1986). Energy and fuel: The meaning of the go of things. School Science Review, 68, 
30–35.
Papadouris, N., Constantinou, P., & Theodora Kyratsi, T. (2008). Students’ use of the energy 
model to account for changes in physical systems. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 
45(4), 444–469.
Poincare, H. (1905/1952). Science and hypothesis. New York: Dover.
Quinn, H. (2014). A physicist’s musings on teaching about energy. In R.  Chen, A.  Eisenkraft, 
D. Fortus, J. Krajcik, J. Nordine, & A. Scheff (Eds.), Teaching and learning of energy in K-12 
education (pp. 15–36). London: Springer.
Reif, F. (1965). Fundamentals of statistical and thermal physics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Reif, Frederick. “Berkeley physics course.” (1967).
Rudolph, J. L. (2000). Reconsidering the `nature of science’ as a curriculum component. Journal 
of Curriculum Studies, 32(3), 403–419.
9 Integrating Science Education Research and History and Philosophy of Science…

--- PAGE 278 ---
260
Schwab, J.  J. (1964). Structure of the discipline: Meaning and significance. In G.  W. Ford & 
L. Pugno (Eds.), The structure of knowledge and the curriculum  (pp. 6–30). Chicago: Rand 
and McNally.
Schwab, J.  J. (1973). The practical 3: Translation into curriculum. The School Review, 81 (4), 
501–522.
Shapin, S. (1992). Why the public ought to understand science-in-the-making. Public 
Understanding of Science, 1, 27–30.
Solomon, J. (1982). How children learn about energy—Or: Does the first law come first? School 
Science Review, 63, 415–422.
Stinner, A. (1992). Science textbooks and science teaching: From logic to evidence. Science 
Education, 76(1), 1–16.
Stylianidou, F., & Ogborn, J. (1999). Teaching about energy in secondary schools: The case of two 
innovations and Teachers’ transformations of them. In M. Komorek, H. Behrendt, H. Dahncke, 
R. Duit, W. Gröber, & A. Kross (Eds.), Proceedings of international conference . Dordrecht: 
Kluwer.
Summers, M. K. (1983). Teaching heat - an analysis of misconceptions. School Science Review, 
64, 670–676.
Swartz, C. (1999). Book report: Survey of high-school physics texts. The Physics Teacher, 37(5), 
283–308.
Trumper, R. (1998). A longitudinal study of Israeli physics students’ conceptions of energy in 
pre-service training for high school teachers. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 
7, 311–318.
Tseitlin, M., & Galili, I. (2005). Physics teaching in the search for its self: From physics as a disci-
pline to physics as a discipline-culture. Science & Education, 14(3–5), 235–261.
Wolter, H. K., & Martin, J. G. (2002). ‘Forms of Energy’, an intermediary language on the road to 
thermodynamics? Part I. International Journal of Science Education, 24(1), 81–95.
Y. Lehavi and B.-S. Eylon