Title: Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal of a More Warranted Set
Pages: 279-297

--- PAGE 279 ---
261
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_10
Chapter 10
Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common 
Justifications and the Proposal of a More 
Warranted Set
Mike U. Smith
10.1  Introduction
Along with cell theory and the DNA theory of inheritance, evolution stands as one 
the three pillars of modern biology. It helps us understand phenomena in fields as 
diverse as genetics, anatomy, ecology, and physiology. Understanding evolution is 
important not just from a scientific perspective, but from a practical one as well. 
Evolutionary theory can help us solve real-world problems that have a biological 
basis — whether figuring out how to employ antibiotics more effectively or devel -
oping new pest-resistant crop varieties. These arguments have been widely used as 
justifications for evolution instruction. But, who is the “us” in the statement above? 
Does it include students? How do these justifications apply to the daily lives of 
students?
In an earlier paper (Smith 2010), I asked, “Why do students and members of the 
public at large need to understand evolution?” This question has also been asked in 
various forms by a few other researchers (e.g., Rosengren et al. 2012), but few 
have analyzed in detail the answers educators have been giving to these 
questions.
The universal response from biologists has been that public school students 
“need” to understand evolution. A wide variety of reasons for the inclusion of evolu-
tion has been proposed, but too often these justifications make sense to teachers and 
policy makers but do not appear to be convincing to introductory students.
This chapter will discuss the types of justifications that have been used to support 
science literacy in general and evolution understanding in particular. This chapter 
will also question the likely effectiveness of those reasons as justifications for teach-
ing and learning about evolution. Recognizing the limited cogency of our student-  
centered justifications for evolution literacy, the preceding analysis also suggests 
M.U. Smith (*) 
School of Medicine, Mercer University, Macon, GA, USA
e-mail: smith_mu@mercer.edu

--- PAGE 280 ---
262
that we need a discussion about how to make our justifications more relevant and 
convincing to students. The reader will likely be surprised with how limited our 
student-centered justifications for evolution literacy are. How can we make them 
stronger? Are there better justifications? A small set of justifications is proposed that 
might be more relevant, interesting, and convincing to young people, then I close 
with some educational implications of my position. This paper is meant to initiate a 
wider conversation among evolution educators about what student-centered justifi-
cations for evolution education there might be, including expansion and criticism of 
the list presented here.
10.2  Scientific Literacy and the Utility/Relevance Argument
Scientific literacy has long been a primary goal of science education. This promi -
nence has resulted in such widely varying meanings for the term1 that it has become 
impossibly vague and perhaps nothing more than an “educational slogan” (Roberts 
1988; p. 28), a “myth,” or “little more than a romantic idea, a dream that has little 
bearing on reality” (Shamos 1995; p. 215). Several worthwhile reviews of the topic 
have appeared in recent years.2
Science educators have grouped the proffered justifications for scientific literacy 
in various ways. One of the most widely cited of these schemes is based on Roberts’ 
classification of the different “views” of science literacy: Vision I, focusing on the 
products and processes of science, (cf., the Project 2061 Atlas of Science Literacy—
AAAS 1993, 2001; NRC 1995) and Vision 2, focusing on “situations with a scien-
tific component, situations that students are likely to encounter as citizens” (Roberts 
2007, p. 730).
Another useful categorization follows Roberts’ ( 1988) earlier grouping of rec -
ommended science education curriculum “emphases”: everyday coping, structure 
of science, science technology and decisions (about practical matters), scientific 
skill development, correct explanations, self as explainer, and science as a solid 
foundation.
Another grouping focused explicitly on science literacy justifications is pre -
sented in an earlier paper of mine: (a) utility, (b) democratic/civic/social, (c) eco -
nomic, (d) cultural, (e) moral/ethical, (f) science career-related, and (g) aesthetic 3 
(Smith 2010). In Roberts’ (2007) terms, some of these justifications are more “stu-
dent–centered” than others, and it is these that I assume will be most effective with 
students. The central questions are how well each of these types of justification 
measures up as being centered on students and how we can sharpen our arguments 
for encouraging student study.
1 See DeBoer, (2000); Gormally et al. ( 2012); Millar (2005); Norris & Phillips (2003).
2 DeBoer (2000), Hodson (2009), Laugksch (2000), and Roberts (2007).
3 These categories are not meant to be non-overlapping.
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 281 ---
263
The most common justifications for teaching science found throughout most 
organizational schemes fall in Roberts’ Vision 2 (or “everyday coping”) or the first 
two Smith (2010) groupings, focusing on utility/usefulness—especially utility “in 
daily life,” or on creating “informed citizens,” solving personally meaningful prob-
lems, shaping behavior, making important practical and political decisions, framing 
questions to science professionals, evaluating scientific claims, and engaging scien-
tific information in the media.4 This has also been called “civic efficacy or good citi-
zenship” (Dewey 1916), “functional scientific literacy” (Aikenhead 2006; Jenkins 
1990; Rennie 2007; Ryder 2001; Shamos 1995), “science education for action” 
(Jenkins 1994), “science for specific social purposes” (Layton et al. 1993), and “cit-
izen science” (Irwin 1995).
Dewey (1916) characterized such aims as having “instrumental value,” i.e., top-
ics studied because of some end beyond themselves,” not intrinsic value (p. 284). 
Science instruction that favors these aims might be expected to focus on practical 
applications such as the negative effects of the use of chemical fertilizers and pesti-
cides, construction of nuclear power plants, use of ozone-destroying CFCs, climate 
change, the use of genetically modified organisms, etc. (Vilches and Gil-Pérez 
2011; Osborne and Collins 2001). According to this view, if students take antibiot-
ics in the future, they need to learn about evolution now to ensure that they do so 
properly. If students need to make sensible decisions about genetically modified 
organisms (GMOs), they will need to understand aspects of molecular genetics.
Two prominent criticisms of this “practical value” justification have been pre -
sented, even though they have mostly been ignored in the science education litera -
ture. First, Ryder (2001) has argued that the science topics we have chosen to teach 
because of their real-world utility have typically been selected on the basis of sur -
veys of expert opinion (a top-down approach) instead of surveying members of the 
public or investigating situations where science is applied in real life (more bottom-
 up approaches). A prime, and often-cited, example of such a bottom-up approach is 
an analysis of 51 case studies to identify the science knowledge and processes peo-
ple use to deal with various science related situations outside the classroom (e.g., 
options for incineration of local waste or dealing with the birth of a child with Down 
Syndrome) (Ryder 2001). Although this approach is clearly superior to top-down 
approaches, the underlying assumption in Ryder and similar studies is still that sci-
ence is useful in everyday life. But what proportion of students is likely to deal with 
each of the issues so identified in order to make it worthwhile as a learning goal for 
all students?
The second criticism is found in more ethnographic studies of how individuals 
use science content and scientific skills in their daily lives outside the classroom. 5 
These studies find that people rarely if ever use school science knowledge or 
approaches to make science-related decisions or solve science-related problems. 
4 Dempster and Hugo (2006), Feinstein (2010), Fensham (2002a, b), Gil-Pérez and Vilches (2005), 
Gordin (2015), Johnson et al. ( 2015), Kolstø (2001), and Lederman et al. ( 2012).
5 E.g., Baram-Tsabari and Segev (2011), Basu and Calabrese-Barton (2007), and Feinstein (2010).
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…

--- PAGE 282 ---
264
Thus, Ryder caricatured the utility justification as claiming that “thermodynamics is 
pressed into action to choose between one garment and another … polymer chem -
istry is used to decide what to spread on toast” (Ryder 1993; p. 148).
Another explanation of these ethnographic findings is, of course, that so much of 
the population is scientifically illiterate; they have very limited understanding of 
science upon which to base decisions about everyday science-related questions. An 
equally troubling explanation is that too many people hold the view that school sci-
ence does not apply to their everyday lives (Aikenhead 2006; Feinstein 2009). Glen 
Aikenhead’s extensive review of the relevant literature strongly suggests that:
empirical evidence … contradicts scientists’ and science teachers’ hypothetical claims that 
science is directly applicable to a citizen’s everyday life. … The fact is that this type of 
intellectual abstraction is relevant only to those who enjoy explaining everyday experiences 
this way. (Aikenhead 2006; p. 29)
Osborne maintains that today’s science education is “not appropriate for the need 
of contemporary youth” because it is based on a group of “fallacies”, one of which is:
the fallacy that scientific knowledge has personal utility—that it is essential to the mastery 
of the technology; to remedy its defects; and to live as tease in the culture of technology that 
surrounds us. Yet as machines become more intelligent they require less care and thought 
for their effective use (Osborne 2007, pp. 174–175).
The utility argument is a bit like arguing that I need to understand how my carbure-
tor works in order to drive my car – clearly this is not necessary. (See also Millar and 
Osborne 1998.)
Likewise, Jenkins (2003) has argued that “utilitarian claims for school science 
are naïve and misleading” (p. 10). Feinstein (2010) contends that, like literacy itself, 
usefulness “has largely been reduced to a rhetorical claim” (p.  168). Feinstein 
(2010) also argues that:
decades of educational psychology tell us that this is a complicated and unlikely proposi -
tion. … It is a profound misconception that individuals make everyday decisions on the 
basis of formal principles and reliable knowledge built from the foundations up [because] 
… daily action and decision making rely on heuristic devices and tailored, situation-specific 
solutions (Feinstein 2010, p. 181). 6
Dewey (1916) also argued that educators have focused too strongly on utility as 
a justification for selection of curricular content. “It is,” he says “absurd to argue 
that unless teachers or pupils can point out some definite assignable future use to 
which it is to be put, it lacks justifying value” (p. 284).
Thus, in the most general terms, it appears that utilitarian justifications for devel-
oping science literacy are weak at best, although some have argued that this prob -
lem is the result of failures of science curriculum design focused on canonical 
principles (Aikenhead 2006; Feinstein 2009). Osborne and Collins ( 2001) join 
Aikenhead and Feinstein in arguing that the focus should instead be on topics more 
directly relevant to everyday life on and helping students learn to evaluate scientific 
6 Based, for example, on the work of Lave (1988), Layton et al. (1993), and Tversky and Kahneman 
(1974).
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 283 ---
265
information—  especially the trustworthiness of that information, becoming skilled 
consumers of science.
10.3  The Practical Utility Justification for Evolution 
Education
What justifications have been applied to evolution literacy per se, and in light of the 
criticisms just reviewed, how sound are these justifications? Surprisingly, only a 
small number of justifications for teaching evolution specifically have been put for-
ward. As with justifications for scientific literacy, the majority of the reasons typi -
cally proposed for evolution education are utilitarian. Scientists and educators argue 
that knowledge of evolution is also “relevant to daily life,” that it is “useful” or 
“valuable” for making sound decisions in the “real world” (e.g., Aikenhead 2006; 
Feinstein 2010). Utility is also the cornerstone of relatively recent arguments for the 
redesign of genetics instruction (Condit 2010).
One of the few explicit cases proposed as an example of the utilitarian value of 
evolution education is that of proper antibiotic use. Presumably, this justification is 
one reason why the development of antibiotic resistance is such a common instruc-
tional activity (Lead States 2013). According to this view, understanding (and 
acceptance) of evolution informs John and Mary Q Public’s wise use of antibiotics, 
i.e., that if they understand how antibiotic resistance develops, they will be more 
likely to take the full course of antibiotics prescribed by their physicians. On the 
face of it, this claim seems logical, but two problems are apparent. First, this is an 
untested claim.
More importantly, there is an extensive research literature in health education 
that demonstrates that knowledge may be necessary but is clearly insufficient to 
determine behavior.7 This research strongly suggests that knowledge of evolution -
ary mechanisms is unlikely to account for a substantial proportion of the variability 
in antibiotic-taking (or prescribing) behavior. We think that a host of other factors 
such as simple forgetfulness, attitudes toward authority, and cultural norms are 
likely to be more important. Thus, it seems that the most widely employed justifica-
tion for evolution education has questionable merit.
The other commonly employed example used to buttress the practicality/utility 
justification for evolution education is that understanding evolution will help people 
make wise decisions about genetically modified organisms/foods (GMOs) (e.g., 
Lederman et  al. 2012). GMOs have already become a major component of the 
world’s foodstuffs—e.g., 91% of US soybeans (Anonymous 2014a), have the poten-
tial to reduce the use of pesticides and herbicides and the consequent pollution, and 
may make an important contribution to solving the persistent problem of world 
7 E.g., Atreja et al. ( 2005), Ferris et al. ( 2001), and Rogers (1983).
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…

--- PAGE 284 ---
266
hunger, but people have raised many concerns about them as well. Consumer con -
cerns are typically about food safety, risk to the environment, biodiversity and agri-
culture, and various issues of economic and governmental policy (Anonymous 
2014b; Vilches and Gil-Pérez 2011).
Recent furor has arisen over the development of a variety of apple that lacks the 
enzyme that causes apple flesh to turn brown when cut. Responding to such 
 concerns, many companies such as General Mills (maker of Cheerios ®) have 
announced that their products will be GMO-free. Education about GMO-related 
issues is needed if modern society is to take advantage of potential benefits and 
prevent potential harm. The critical question for our discussion, however, is: How 
would evolution understanding facilitate consumer decision-making about GMOs?
First, it is demonstrably clear that evolutionary issues are central to the develop-
ment and use of GMOs. For example, introducing genes into one species from 
another to produce combinations that have never existed before certainly raises 
issues about the evolutionary fitness of such hybrids - how the new cultivars would 
compete with existing varieties if the new ones were released into the environment. 
Again, these questions will be relevant to scientists, agricultural engineers, activists, 
etc. but to very few consumers.
Second, many people are concerned about the relative safety of consuming GMO 
foods. Does knowledge of evolution help consumers make decisions about consum-
ing these foods? Safety decisions can certainly be informed by scientific knowledge 
about GMOs. For example, the fact that no scientific studies have identified any 
substantial difference in safety of GMO and non-GMO foodstuff consumption 
should be important knowledge for citizens as they make decisions about consum -
ing GMO foods. If the utility argument for evolution education has merit, therefore, 
one might assume that the most knowledgeable individuals would be those most 
likely to be unconcerned about GMO foods. Again, a study testing this correlation 
has not been published to my knowledge, but anecdotal information suggests just 
the opposite conclusion. People most concerned about GMO consumption often 
seem to be very educated. In addition, the knowledge relevant to making these 
safety decisions lies primarily within genetics, digestion, and nutrition, not in evolu-
tion theory. How could understanding natural selection, genetic drift, speciation, or 
other evolutionary concepts inform GMO-related food safety decisions? No such 
informative pathways seem apparent.
Third, careful review of the GMO concerns of the public shows that the major 
concerns are about economics (“Big Pharma”) and ethics (Anonymous 2014b). As 
with the issues raised above, evolution understanding provides little or no guidance 
for addressing these concerns. Again, few of our graduates will be directly involved 
in these GMO-related discussions except through their representatives.
Second, and more generally, students can often see through our claims that evo-
lution is of practical importance to their daily lives. They haven’t needed it before, 
and most don’t plan to become scientists or activists and so don’t see any need for 
it in the future. When students see through our claims, the teacher loses credibility 
and students find either limited or no reason for investing the effort required to 
understand evolution.
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 285 ---
267
According to a largely ignored report from the United Kingdom (Millar and 
Osborne 1998), the familiar justifications for science education (and presumably for 
evolution education) “have been overused” and have “worn thin.” If these are the 
strongest available examples of the value of evolution understanding in real world 
decision making, then either we should look for better examples or perhaps we must 
look beyond the practicality/utility arguments for justifying evolution education. 
How well then do the other justifications used for supporting science literacy identi-
fied above apply to students?
10.4  The Democracy Justification
Modern societies will indeed continue to make a host of decisions beyond antibiotic 
use and GMO consumption that should be informed by evolution. It will indeed be 
crucial for our representatives to understand evolutionary principles in order to 
understand the issues involved and make appropriate decisions. The evolution-  
related scientific ignorance of many American legislators—even of presidents and 
US representatives on the federal Science, Space, and Technology Committee—has 
been apparent in recent years (Nelson 2012).
Even more important than scientific ignorance is the fact that legislative deci -
sions are often driven more by personal values than by science, whether learned at 
school or later as demonstrated by the refusal of the US Congress to fund needle 
exchange programs until 2009 even though clear data showed that such programs 
are effective in reducing HIV transmission (Office of National Drug Control Policy 
2012).
But how does the need for educated legislators impact John and Mary Student? 
Few people in the modern world live in a true republic in which they have a direct 
voice in decisions, including decisions that may specifically require evolution 
understanding. People in democracies rarely have input into such specific decisions, 
except perhaps in occasional propositions or referenda or the occasional letter to a 
congressman. If they live in a democracy, John and Mary may at most be involved 
in selecting leaders who will make decisions about funding such endeavors, but how 
well do John and Mary, themselves, need to understand the principles of evolution 
in order to choose leaders wisely? Although a candidates’ understanding of evolu-
tion may influence how some people will vote, it seems unlikely to be the deciding 
factor for many voters.
The argument is not that many of the justifications for evolution education used 
to date are incorrect or invalid or that they are not crucial at other levels and for other 
audiences such as policy makers. There is clearly great societal value in understand-
ing evolution. Most of these justifications, however, are logically unsound or simply 
irrelevant and/or likely to be unconvincing to young people in our classrooms. They 
are instead convincing to us the converted educators.
Likewise, the argument assumes that evolution instruction can be an excellent 
vehicle for teaching about the nature of science, about judging the validity of claims 
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…

--- PAGE 286 ---
268
from diverse sources, etc. But what is the value of understanding evolution itself? 
As Rosengren, Brem, Evans, and Sinatra put it,
If we’re going to ask people to expend the time and effort it requires to wrap their heads 
around a [sic] idea like biological evolution, it seems as though there ought to be a really 
big payoff for all that work (Rosengren et al. 2012, p. 1).
The analysis above suggests that the payoff may not be at the individual level. 
Should we then discard evolution instruction from all but pre-professional educa -
tion programs and perhaps instruction for legislators? The argument below explains 
why the answer is still “No,” although for reasons much less frequently cited.
10.5  Evolution Literacy Is an Essential Part of Scientific 
Literacy in Modern Society
Most of the types of scientific literacy justifications listed above can be called 
“macro” justifications, i.e., largely for the benefit of society. In contrast, “micro” 
justifications primarily affect the individual (Thomas and Durant 1987; Shortland 
1988). Macro justifications are not student-centered and thus carry little or no sway 
with young people. For example, questions about the ethical implications of the 
conduct of scientific research or the moral implications of scientific advancement 
seem mostly irrelevant to students at this age, as does the need of a society to have 
high quality scientists or good decision-making citizens. Likewise, few young peo-
ple care about how the economic health of a society depends on a scientifically-  
literate society. These criticisms are even more cogent for justifications of evolution 
literacy. What effective justifications, then, can be made for expecting students to 
develop evolution literacy?8 What justifications will be motivating and convincing 
to our students?
Science literacy requires that evolution should be taught because:
 1. it is crucial for future learning in biology—both inside and outside the 
classroom.
 2. understanding evolution is widely recognized as a basic component of being a 
scientifically literate person.
 3. it is inspiring and a thing of beauty that can enrich the lives of learners and help 
them understand living things, including themselves, and the interdependence of 
man and nature (Dewey 1916).
First are two micro utility arguments that have not been widely promoted: 
Students need to understand evolution as a foundation for understanding other parts 
8 The question of precisely what are the necessary and sufficient components of evolution literacy 
remains to be determined. A first approximation is the list of evolution-related content knowledge 
to be found in the various standards documents, but evolution literacy as described in this paper 
calls for much more—and, in terms of content, perhaps a good bit less.
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 287 ---
269
of biology. As Dobzhansky said, “Nothing in biology makes sense except in the 
light of evolution” (1973). Pre-service science teachers in a recent study shared this 
view. They argued that evolution is “a huge part of understanding the rest of biology 
… it provides a foundation for the other units …. [which] kind of build off that” 
(Dotger et al. 2009; p. 563). These student comments reflect the Next Generation 
Science Standards  (NGSS Lead States 2013) identification of the “Evidence of 
Common Ancestry and Diversity (LS4).”
Although the Dobzhansky claim has been oft-quoted and evolutionary concepts 
have long been a component of the biology curriculum, reasons for the importance 
of evolution have been claimed but rarely if ever analyzed. What specific examples 
can we propose in evidence of this claim? Certainly, we cannot understand the unity 
of all living things without understanding evolution. Without evolution we cannot 
explain why (almost) all living things have DNA as their genetic material, why the 
same histones form the chromosome scaffolding of so many diverse beings, why 
meiosis occurs in all sexually-reproducing organisms, etc. We cannot understand 
the advantages of sexual reproduction or how closely humans are related to chimps 
and apes.
Similarly, without evolution we cannot understand the diversity of living things. 
Why are there so many different species? Why is there so much variation within 
species? How does variation arise? How does each species come to be so well suited 
(adapted) to the environment of its specific niche? How do new species arise?
Likewise, at the organismal level, without understanding evolution, how can we 
explain the development over time of structures as complex as the flagellum or the 
human eye? At the cellular level, evolution helps to explain cell structure and spe -
cialization. At the sub-cellular level, evolution helps to explain the structure and 
function of organelles, proteins, and membranes and interactions between and 
among them. Moreover, given that many of our students will never take another biol-
ogy course, understanding evolution is even more important if students are to become 
effective consumers of the scientific information they will encounter in the future.
Thus it appears that the justification for evolution education coincides with that 
of science literacy and biology education. If we value understanding biology for all 
students, then of necessity biology education must embrace evolution education.
Second, closely related to the justification above, because evolution is one of the 
“explanatory stories” discussed or alluded to widely in modern society, one can 
simply not be considered a “literate” or “educated” person unless one knows some-
thing about evolution. Educated people are expected to have an opinion on the sub-
ject, and education is greatly needed to inform those opinions. The twenty-first 
Century will truly be an information-rich world. Everyone will increasingly be 
bombarded with information, which not infrequently will require an understanding 
of evolution. Throughout their lives our students are likely to encounter allusions to 
evolution in many situations, including conversations, movies, the Internet, etc. If 
they know nothing about evolution, they cannot understand these media or engage 
in “reasoned discussions” about evolution-related issues (Lewis and Leach 2006). 
They cannot fully participate in modern society. This justification is clearly part and 
parcel of the arguments our society has long made for liberal education.
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…

--- PAGE 288 ---
270
Dotger’s pre-service science teachers shared this view as well. They argued that 
evolution is “necessary for modern general knowledge or to be an informed citizen” 
(Dotger et al. 2009; p. 562). To paraphrase Laugksch (2000), evolution “is as central 
to a truly cultivated mind as literature, music, and the performing arts” (p. 86) (see 
also Ryder 2002).
Finally, we have made far too little in the classroom of aesthetic justifications for 
scientific literacy in general and of evolution literacy in particular (DeBoer 2000; 
Dewey 1916; Feinstein 2010). Dobzhansky (1973) argued that “seen in the light of 
evolution, biology is, perhaps intellectually the most satisfying and inspiring sci -
ence” (1973; p. 129). This claim has received far too little attention. Like so many 
stories in science, the story of Darwin and his journey toward the development of a 
solution for the ageless question of where we come from is fascinating. As an 
answer to a question that many students can identify with (where did we come 
from?), the modern evolutionary synthesis is a thing of beauty and elegance. Which 
one of us did not become a scientist/science educator because we were captivated 
by something we learned about science? For example, when we help students see 
the question, the conundrum to be solved, instead of only the answers as a “rhetoric 
of conclusions,” they can see the beauty in both the process and the solution. 
Evolution “cuts straight to the heart of who we are, what our strengths and limita -
tions are, and how they came to be” (Tatersall 2013). Understanding evolution is a 
way of “understanding ourselves” (Pigliucci 2005; p. 2).
For me, it was the first time I encountered Mendel and solved basic genetics 
problems. They were so beautiful! The logic was so simple! Many of my friends 
found the problems impossible, but the solutions were so transparent to me. They 
FIT! I was hooked. Yes, understanding science in general and evolution in particular 
can give pleasure, and enjoyment (Jenkins 2003; Carter 2008), “enrich” our lives 
(Anonymous 2014c), and lead to “personal self-fulfillment” (American Academy 
for the Advancement of Science 1990; Laugksch 2000). Consider:
The scientist does not study nature because it is useful; he studies it because he delights in 
it and delights in it because it is beautiful. If nature were not beautiful, it would not be worth 
knowing, and if nature were not worth knowing, life would not be worth living. (Poincaré 
1907; p. 8)
And:
Knowing some things is a “part of being ‘well-read’ in science—an excellent thing indeed, 
and one capable of giving us joy and satisfaction, but not one that all of our students will 
find useful. (Feinstein 2010; p. 183)
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 289 ---
271
10.6  Taking the Measure of the Foundational, Literacy, 
and Aesthetic Justifications
How well do these justifications fare against the criticisms lodged against those 
criticized above. How relevant are they to children’s lives and how convincing are 
the arguments likely to be to young learners?
At the outset of this part of the discussion, I should acknowledge that, even in the 
sense I am promoting, most students will not need to understand evolution. They 
will rarely if ever need such understanding to make decisions in their daily lives. 
Just as with teaching algebra, history, etc., utility justifications are weak for these 
subjects and often a hard to “sell” to students. Justifying evolution literacy to young 
students is simply a tough job.
First, how much do students care about understanding evolution allusions in dis-
cussions at home, church, synagogue, or mosque or in information they encounter 
on the web, in blogs or tweets, on television and movies (think science fiction such 
as “Jurassic Park”), etc.? This justification has perhaps the greatest potential to 
encourage the study of evolution. Most of our students have already heard about 
evolution—some a great deal. They know that it can be a controversial topic and 
that many people hold very strong opinions about it. Controversies can be very 
motivating to secondary school students. Some students may already have formed 
opinions of their own and may strongly value understanding what biology has to say 
about those opinions. Many of the opinions held by young people are merely 
adopted from their parents, but a primary developmental task of teenagers is to 
question such views and decide for themselves. For these reasons some students can 
easily see the relevance of evolution learning as important to being wise consumers 
of information.
Second, it may be difficult to convince most students that evolution is fundamen-
tal to understanding biology and thus worthy of study because young people tend to 
focus on the present not the future. Teaching techniques that demonstrate the foun-
dational nature of evolution are required if students are to be persuaded of this jus-
tification (see Implications section below).
Third, how interested are students in becoming literate/educated people? In 
becoming evolution literate? Some, though perhaps not enough, clearly are inter -
ested. They see the pitfalls and narrowed lives of the illiterate, and if learning about 
evolution is a part of literacy, they can see that such study is worthwhile—if only as 
a means to the end of getting a good job in the future. Public instruction in many 
countries has often done a poor job of convincing students of the value of such lit -
eracy, as evidenced by relatively poor performance on international exams such as 
the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) exams (U.S. Department 
of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (2015). If we value evolution 
literacy so highly, however, educators must seriously consider how we can convince 
our students of its import.
Fourth, how much do students value the aesthetics of science and evolution? Few 
students will agree that they value beauty and wonder, but their behaviors often 
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…

--- PAGE 290 ---
272
belie such protestations. Elementary education has long done the best job of tapping 
into this appreciation, e.g., watching caterpillars that spin cocoons and eventually 
become butterflies. Likewise, secondary biology education has paid at least lip ser-
vice to aesthetics with pretty pictures in textbooks and beautiful videos and other 
materials in the resources affiliated with the text. And more could be done.
But what introductory biology and evolution education has largely failed to do is 
to invite students into the experience of the beauty of discovering a solution to a 
perplexing question, the joy of the “Aha!” moment, the beauty of how well evolu -
tionary theory solves the quandary of where species come from, of mimicry, of the 
variety of breeds of dogs, of fossils and extinct species such as dinosaurs and mam-
moths. These topics are relevant to the interests of students. As many have noted, 
however, we have too often presented evolution (and biology and science) as a 
“rhetoric of conclusions” and not as a set of questions about the living world and 
how people have proposed and tested various answers to those questions. Evolution 
is a wonderful opportunity to learn about the questions people have asked and about 
how the answers to these questions have themselves evolved.
So, are these justifications for evolution literacy more relevant and interesting, 
more convincing for our students? I propose that they are—or at least they are 
potentially more relevant to students’ lives than the arguments science educators 
and policy makers have been promoting (explicitly or implicitly). That judgment is, 
of course, left to the reader and to teachers and ultimately to the students 
themselves.
10.7  Current Practice, Implications, and Further Research
What justifications do teachers actually use in the classroom? To date, no published 
study has asked this question. In mock parent-teacher conferences conducted by 
American pre-service teachers, these soon-to-be teachers justified the teaching of 
evolution as a requirement of state or national standards, as necessitated in light of 
(US) court cases, or because evolution is included in the textbook (Dotger et al. 
2009). The research design may have increased the defensiveness evident in this 
type of justification, but this study suggests that these justifications are used by 
some, perhaps many, teachers, at least in communities where evolution instruction 
is a volatile issue. Such justifications are indeed valid, and they may mollify angry 
parents. On the other hand, they are not student-centered and are not likely to 
encourage buy-in from young learners. As Dewey (1916) pointed out, these justifi-
cations likely “represent the values of adults rather than those of children and youth” 
(p. 283).
What then are the implications of adopting and promoting the positive justifica-
tions presented above for both what we teach and how we teach evolution? What 
suggestions can we make to both curriculum developers and classroom teachers?
First, a word of caution: Many of the activities for teaching evolution are “whiz- 
bang”, “fun” activities. For example, many activities for teaching natural selection 
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 291 ---
273
involve “selecting” buttons or paper dots against a colored or patterned background. 
Students often enjoy such activities greatly. Such activities present at least two prob-
lems. First, fun is not the same as relevant. We teachers see how the activity trans -
lates to an evolutionary principle, but in practice, students often get caught up in the 
activity itself and spend little time coming to understand what it means. Second, 
most students are at a concrete developmental stage in which understanding by met-
aphor is very challenging. It takes an excellent teacher to be able to help students 
translate colored dots of paper into abstract concepts such as changes in allele fre -
quency due to differences in fitness. Put simply, teachers should be explicit about 
why students are doing what they are doing. They should focus students’ attention 
on understanding the modeled process before, during, and after the activity and use 
real-world, familiar examples as well as models and metaphors whenever possible. 
For example, teachers might use the real-world studies of Peter and Rosemary Grant 
on the evolution of Darwin’s finches on the Galapagos islands (Weiner 1994).
Second, many of the things we know about effective science teaching in general 
are even more important in evolution instruction. For example, students are more 
likely to invest themselves in learning when they see a purpose for the learning—
when they need the understanding in order to answer a question or solve a problem 
that they are interested in. This approach has been called inquiry, problem-based, or 
case-based instruction, but it can also simply entail presenting questions and chal -
lenges that students, not the teacher, seek answers for. Likewise, instruction should 
be goal-driven; know specifically what you want students to achieve and aim learn-
ing activities toward that goal. If a primary goal is understanding the nature of sci -
ence (NOS), evolution is a fertile ground for helping students understand when 
science does or does not apply to a question. Teachers should be explicit about this 
goal with their students, share their goal for each activity, model such decisions, 
give students practice, and provide coaching. (See, for example, Smith and 
Scharmann (2006) and Scharmann and Butler (2015)).
Third, this discussion raises the question of what the goals of evolution education 
should be. Justifications are easily translated into goals. I have therefore argued that 
the goals of evolution education should be understanding the basic concepts and 
how they underlie the study of living things, evolution literacy, and aesthetic appre-
ciation. More generally, Feinstein ( 2010) has convincingly argued that the goal of 
science education (and I would argue of evolution education) is to help students 
become “competent outsiders” (p. 180). He argues that most people will always 
remain outsiders, rarely asking “How does science/evolution apply here?” The cur-
rent system shortchanges the student by implicitly aiming to produce “marginal 
insiders” with little or no everyday competence. “It follows that the pursuit of sci -
ence literacy is not incidentally but fundamentally about identifying relevance; 
learning to see how science is or could be significant to the things you [students] 
care about most” (Feinstein 2010; p. 180; emphasis in original).
Similarly, as with the research on NOS teaching, it seems wise to be explicit 
about the justifications for evolution education. At least some of the students sitting 
before you are likely asking themselves “Why do we need to learn this crap?” It 
behooves us as teachers to share our personal convictions about the value of this 
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…

--- PAGE 292 ---
274
instruction. We need to design instruction to help students see evolution literacy as 
valuable to them personally. Sharing our justifications is a first step toward doing 
that. Another approach is a lesson that asks students themselves to generate justifi-
cations for learning about evolution (Scharmann 2005).
Fourth, if the goal is to build a foundational understanding of evolutionary prin-
ciples, then not only is the focus on the principles, but also on the foundational 
nature of evolution (Jenkins 2003). This will require the oft-recommended use of 
evolution as the unifying theme throughout biology instruction. It means that 
 evolution becomes the basic “explanatory story” for the whole of biology, a power-
ful “explanatory tool” for solving problems (Scharmann 2005; p.  13). Again, it 
seems especially important that teachers explicitly note that they are using this uni-
fied approach and that they frequently “step outside” the lesson content to note how 
valuable their earlier learning of evolution is to understanding the biological ques -
tion being studied at the time.
Fifth, if the learning goal is evolution literacy, instruction could focus on its value 
and relevance. Teachers interested in relevance have long presented stories from 
newspapers and magazines and posted them on bulletin boards. They may also 
spend valuable class time discussing some of those stories or showing movies 
related to applications of evolution in daily life. These seem to be useful approaches 
for demonstrating the utility of evolution literacy for helping students become wise 
consumers of information. Today, of course, print newspapers and magazines have 
mostly disappeared from the homes of our students and movies have been replaced 
by videos. The primary source of information for today’s students is likely the 
Internet, but the adept teacher can make similar use of websites, blogs, and games, 
which, in fact, can provide even more opportunities than print media. Students 
might, for example, engage in finding an answer to an evolution-related problem 
that arises in a news story, movie, or blog that is of interest to them (Evolution 
Today). Students then learn for themselves how necessary it is to identify personal 
misunderstandings/misconceptions, to understand certain evolutionary principles, 
to be adept at using evolutionary terms, etc. Such an activity might, for example, be 
based on the question: “Should we use antibacterial soap?” or “Should we use hand 
sanitizers frequently?” (Scharmann 2005). As Feinstein ( 2010) notes, “learning 
about science [evolution] in a deeply personal context could make students more 
willing to plunge into unfamiliar, science-tinged waters in the future” (p. 182).
Sixth, teachers can also focus more on the beauty and wonder to be found in the 
story of evolution and in how evolutionary theory answers so many biological ques-
tions. For example, the beauty of the Watson/Crick/Franklin model of DNA and the 
excitement of developing a model that would explain both the unity and diversity of 
living things can easily be found in reading Watson’s ( 2001) account of the story, 
which might be assigned as outside reading with questions for thought and then 
discussion in class. Again, the teacher should point out how each learning experi -
ence is evidence for one of the stated justifications for understanding evolution.
Finally, recognizing that this instruction will require additional teaching, it is 
time that we reconsidered what is necessary for these future citizens to know, what 
skills they must have, and what attitudes they should hold. Perhaps, for example, it 
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 293 ---
275
might not be necessary to spend so much time on mRNA translation, having stu -
dents spend an entire lab hour using models to translate an mRNA model. Instead, 
we might present some dog skeletons and ask students: How did we get all these 
different breeds of dogs? Should they be called different species? Why/why not? 
How is what breeders do like what happens in nature? Then present a human skel -
eton and ask: What similarities and differences do you see? How does the theory of 
evolution explain these?
Adopting such an approach raises questions that call for further research. How 
do the three justifications proposed here speak to students; do they motivate learning 
of evolution? How can we best communicate these justifications to students?
Foundations:   How can we design instruction that convinces students that under-
standing all of biology requires understanding evolution?
Literacy:   What constitutes evolution literacy uniquely; what are the essen-
tial big ideas we can agree upon, etc.? What would effective 
instruction that promotes evolution literacy look like? Can we 
convince students to accept the importance of evolution literacy 
as a personal goal?
Aesthetics:   How can teachers find the instructional time to address the aes -
thetics of evolution (and science in general)?
Utility:   There is clearly a need for studies of the extent to which individu-
als can and do apply what they have learned in science class once 
they have graduated into the world outside the classroom (build -
ing on the work of people such as Basu and Calabrese-Barton 
(2007) in urban settings).
There is clearly a need for empirical studies testing the efficacy of instructional 
approaches that are built on each of these justifications.
In addition, what other justifications might be proposed that would be more pro-
ductive? If utility is a poor justification, not just for evolution learning but for most 
of science learning, what would that mean for science instruction in general? For 
example, should we adopt the goal of producing “competent outsiders” instead of 
“marginal insiders” (Feinstein 2010). How would this impact the present over -
loaded, prescribed curriculum and high stakes testing?
10.8  Conclusion
So, do students need to understand evolution? Are there sound justifications for 
evolution instruction? Yes, but, as argued above, some commonly employed argu -
ments are of questionable logical merit and others seem to be more relevant at a 
societal level. I maintain that efforts to convince students of the practical utility of 
evolution in their daily lives are often misguided. (I am not, however, arguing 
against the value of helping students see the relevance of evolution in the modern 
world in ways that impact their lives and their culture as a tool to motivate learning.) 
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…

--- PAGE 294 ---
276
I maintain that our purposes are better served by arguing that evolution is important 
(1) to becoming wise consumers of information, (2) to becoming literate individu -
als, and (3) to experiencing the beauty and wonder in the story of evolution and its 
power to explain living things.
Recognizing the limited cogency of our student-centered justifications for evolu-
tion literacy, the preceding analysis also suggests that we need a discussion about 
how to make our justifications more relevant and convincing to students. The reader 
will likely be surprised with how limited our student-centered justifications for 
 evolution literacy are. How can we make them stronger? Are there better 
justifications?
Finally, this kind of instruction calls on all the skills of a master teacher and for 
them to play a somewhat different role. Motivating students to see the value of 
learning about topics like evolution that have limited relevance to daily life is indeed 
a challenge, especially given the student effort that may be required and not to men-
tion the controversial nature of the subject itself in some settings. Also, taking the 
time to focus explicitly on justifications for evolution instruction will be a new role 
for many. Effective teachers may need to become, not just explainers, but advocates 
of evolution.
References
AAAS, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1990). Science for all Americans. 
New York: Oxford University Press. Available at http://www.project2061.org/tools/sfaaol/sfaa-
toc.htm.
AAAS, American Association for the Advancement of Science (1993). Benchmarks for science 
literacy. New  York: Oxford University Press. http://www.project2061.org/tools/benchol/bol -
frame.htm
AAAS, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (2001). Atlas of science literacy. 
Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Aikenhead, A. (2006). Science education for everyday life: Evidence-based practice . New York: 
Teachers College Press.
Anonymous. (2014a). About genetically engineered foods . Center for food safety. http://www.
centerforfoodsafety.org/issues/311/ge-foods/about-ge-foods#
Anonymous. (2014b). Genetically modified food controversies . Available at http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Genetically_modified_food_controversies. Accessed 20 Sept 2014.
Anonymous. (2014c). Scientific literacy. Available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_lit-
eracy. Accessed 22 Sept 2014.
Atreja, A., Bellam, N., & Levy, S. (2005). Strategies to enhance patient adherence: Making it 
simple. Medscape General Medicine, 7(1), 4.
Baram-Tsabari, A., & Segev, E. (2011). Exploring new web-based tools to identify public interest 
in science. Public Understanding of Science Journal, 20(1), 130–143.
Basu, S. J., & Calabrese-Barton, A. C. (2007). Developing a sustained interest in science among 
urban minority youth. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 44(3), 466–489.
Carter, L. (2008). Globalization and science education: The implications of science in the new 
economy. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 45(5), 617–633.
Condit, C. M. (2010). Public understandings of genetics and health. Clinical Genetics, 77(1), 1–9.
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 295 ---
277
DeBoer, G. B. (2000). Scientific literacy: Another look at its historical and contemporary mean -
ings and its relationship to science education reform. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 
37(6), 582–601.
Dempster, E.  R., & Hugo, W. (2006). Introducing the concept of evolution into South African 
schools. South African Journal of Science, 102(3/4), 106–113.
Dewey, J. (1916). An introduction to the philosophy of education. New York: Macmillan.
Dobzhansky, T. (1973). Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution. American 
Biology Teacher, 35(3), 125–129.
Dotger, S., Dotger, B.  H., & Tillotson, J.  (2009). Examining how preservice science teachers 
navigate simulated parent-teacher conversations on evolution and intelligent design. Science 
Education, 94(3), 552–570.
Evolution Today. http://www.amnh.org/exhibitions/darwin/evolution-today/.
Feinstein, N. (2009). Prepared for what? Why teaching “Everyday Science” makes sense. Phi 
Delta Kappan, 90(10), 762.
Feinstein, N. (2010). Salvaging science literacy. Science Education, 95(1), 168–185.
Fensham, P. J. (2002a). Time to change drivers for scientific literacy. Canadian Journal of Science, 
Mathematics and Technology Education, 2(1), 9–24.
Fensham, P. J. (2002b). De nouveaux guides pour l'alphabétisation scientifique. Canadian Journal 
of Science, Mathematics and Technology Education, 2(2), 133–149.
Ferris, F. D., von Gunten, C. F., & Emanuel, L. L. (2001). Knowledge: Insufficient for change. 
Journal of Palliative Medicine, 4(2), 145–147.
Gil-Pérez, D., & Vilches, A. (2005). Contribution of science and technological education to citi -
zens’ culture. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics and Technology Education, 5 (2), 
253–263.
Gordin, M. D. (2015). That a clear line of demarcation has separated science from pseudoscience. 
In R. L. Numbers & K. Kampourakis (Eds.), Newton’s apple and other myths about science. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gormally, C., Brickman, P., & Lutz, M. (2012). Developing a test of scientific literacy skills 
(TOSLS): Measuring undergraduates’ evaluation of scientific information and arguments. CBE 
Life Sciences Education, 11, 364–377.
Hodson, D. (2009). Toward scientific literacy: A teachers’ guide to the history, philosophy, and 
sociology of science. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Irwin, A. (1995). Citizen science: A study of people, expertise, and sustainable development . 
New York: Routledge.
Jenkins, E. W. (1990). Scientific literacy and school science education. School Science Review, 
71, 43–51.
Jenkins, E. J. (1994). Scientific literacy. In T. Husen & T. N. Postlethwait (Eds.), The international 
encyclopedia of education (V ol. 9, pp. 5345–5350). Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Jenkins, E.  J. (2003). Postscript. In E.  J. Jenkins (Ed.), Innovations in science and technology 
education (V ol. III). Madrid: UNESCO Publishing.
Johnson, K., Dempster, E., & Hugo, W. (2015). Exploring the recontextualisation of biology in the 
CAPS for life sciences. Journal of Education, 60, 101–121.
Kolstø, S. D. (2001). Scientific literacy for citizenship: Tools for dealing with the science dimen -
sion of controversial socioscientific issues. Science Education, 85(3), 291–310.
Laugksch, E. (2000). Scientific literacy: A conceptual overview. Science Education, 84(1), 71–94.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Layton, D., Jenkins, E., MacGill, S., & Davey, A. (1993). Inarticulate science? Nafferton: Studies 
in Science Education.
Lederman, N. G., Antink, A., & Bartos, S. (2012). Nature of science, scientific inquiry, and socio- 
scientific issues arising from genetics: A pathway to developing a scientifically literate citi -
zenry. Science & Education, 23(2), 285–302.
Lewis, J., & Leach, J. (2006). Discussion of socio-scientific issues: The role of science knowledge. 
International Journal of Science Education, 28(11), 1267–1287.
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…

--- PAGE 296 ---
278
Millar, R. (2005). Contextualized science courses: Where next? In D. Waddington & P. Nentwig 
(Eds.), Making it relevant: Context based learning of science. New York: Waxman Munster.
Millar, R., & Osborne, J. (1998). Beyond 2000: Science education for the future. London: King’s 
College London.
Nelson, S. (2012). Anti-Evolution Rep. Broun wants to stay on science committee. US News & 
World Report. Available at http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2012/12/03/anti-evolution- 
rep-broun-wants-to-stay-on-science-committee. Accessed 20 Sept 2014.
NGSS Lead States. (2013). Next Generation Science Standards: For States, By States. Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press. http://www.nextgenscience.org/. Accessed 13 May 2013.
Norris, S., & Phillips, L. (2003). How literacy in its fundamental sense is central to scientific lit -
eracy. Science Education, 87, 224–240.
NRC, National Research Council. (1995). National Science Education Standards . Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press.
Office of National Drug Control Policy. (2012). Federal funding ban on needle exchange pro -
grams. Available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2012/01/05/federal-funding-ban-needle-
exchange- programs. Accessed 24 Sept 2015.
Osborne, J., & Collins, S. (2001). Pupils’ view of the role and value of the science curriculum: A 
focus-group study. International Journal of Science Education, 23(5), 441–467.
Osborne, J. (2007). Science Education for the Twenty First Century, 3(3), 173–184.
Pigliucci, M. (2005). Evolution’s importance to society. Available at: http://www.actionbioscience.
org/evolution/pigliucci.html. Accessed 24 Sept 2015.
Poincare, H. (1907). The value of science. New York: The Science Press.
Rennie, L. J. (2007). What counts as science education? Studies in Science Education, 43, 135–143.
Roberts, D. A. (1988). What counts as science education? In P. J. Fensham (Ed.), Development and 
dilemmas in science education (pp. 27–54). New York: Falmer Press.
Roberts, D. A. (2007). Scientific literacy/science literacy. In S. K. Abell & N. G. Lederman (Eds.), 
Handbook of research on science teaching  (pp.  729–780). Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of innovations. New York: The Free Press.
Rosengren, K. S., Brem, S. K., Evans, E. M., & Sinatra, G. M. (2012). Understanding evolution on 
Darwin Day. http://blog.oup.com/2012/02/understanding-evolution. Accessed 18 Sept 2014.
Ryder, N. (1993). Vernacular science: Something to rely on in your actions? In P. J. Black & A. M. 
Lucas (Eds.), Children’s informal ideas about science (pp. 148–171). New York: Routledge.
Ryder, J.  (2001). Identifying science understanding for functional scientific literacy. Studies in 
Science Education, 36, 1–44.
Ryder, J. (2002). School science education for citizenship: Strategies for teaching about the epis -
temology of science. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 34, 637–658.
Scharmann, L. S. (2005). A proactive strategy for teaching evolution. American Biology Teacher, 
67(1), 12–16.
Scharmann, L.  S., & Butler, W. (2015). Two-year community: The use of journaling to assess 
student learning and acceptance of evolutionary science. Journal of College Science Teaching, 
45(1), 11–16.
Shamos, M. (1995). The myth of scientific literacy. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Shortland, M. (1988). Advocating science: Literacy and public understanding. Impact of Science 
on Society, 38(4), 305–316.
Smith, M. U. (2010). Current status of research in teaching and learning evolution: II. Pedagogical 
issues. Science & Education, 19(6–8), 539–571.
Smith, M. U., & Scharmann, L. C. (2006). A multi-year program developing an explicit reflec -
tive pedagogy for teaching pre-service teachers the nature of science by Ostention. Science & 
Education, 17(1–2), 219–248.
Tatersall, I. (2013). Why do we care about human evolution today?  Available at: https://www.
bigquestionsonline.com/print/198. Accessed 24 Sept 2015.
Thomas, G., & Durant, J. (1987). Why should we promote the public understanding of science? In 
M. Shortland (Ed.), Scientific literacy papers (pp. 1–14). Oxford: Rewley House.
M.U. Smith

--- PAGE 297 ---
279
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 
185(4157), 1124–1131.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (2015). The condition 
of education 2015  (NCES 2015–144), International Assessments. Available at https://nces.
ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=1. Accessed 15 Mar 2016.
Vilches, A., & Gil-Pérez, D. (2011). Actual experiences and actions as essential component s of 
education for sustainability. School Research, 74, 59–71.
Watson, J. D. (2001). The double helix: A personal account of the discovery of the structure of 
DNA. New York: Touchstone.
Weiner, J.  (1994). The beak of the finch: A story of evolution in our time . New  York: Alfred 
A. Knopf.
10 Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common Justifications and the Proposal…