Title: Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum
Pages: 299-322

--- PAGE 299 ---
283
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_11
Chapter 11 
Science Education, Indoctrination, 
and the Hidden Curriculum
Lena Hansson
11.1  Introduction
Are students indoctrinated in science class? What could that mean? If yes, what 
kind of views are teachers indoctrinating students into? Is it possible to avoid? Is 
indoctrination a useful concept when trying to understand what is happening in the 
science classroom? Such issues will be of focus in this chapter.
Historically there is no difference between the concept of indoctrination and the 
concept of teaching (Callan and Arena 2009; Gatchel 1972/2010; Green 1972). 
However, nowadays, indoctrination has negative connotations.  It is not known 
exactly when this pejorative way to use the word began. However, Callan and Arena 
(2009, p. 120) provide an example from 1852 where indoctrination is positioned as 
something negative. However, different usage of the concept was used at the same 
time. Gatchel (1972/2010) writes that “little over half a century ago the employment 
of ‘indoctrination’ was no more offensive in educational circles than the use of 
‘education’. Indeed, the two terms were practically synonymous” (p.  9). Green 
(1972) adds to this by referring to the Oxford English Dictionary published around 
1900 that did not distinguish indoctrination from teaching.
The definition of the concept of indoctrination, and how to distinguish it from 
teaching or from socialization, is discussed by philosophers of education.1 The risk 
of indoctrination has been frequently discussed in relation to religious and political 
education, but less frequently in science education. When used in science education, 
it has been in relation to teaching controversial value-based areas (for example in 
environmental education), as well as in relation to teaching the nature of science and 
1 See for example Bailey ( 2010); Callan and Arena ( 2009); Snook ( 1972b/2010); Wilson (1964, 
1972).
L. Hansson (*) 
School of Education, Kristianstad University, Kristianstad, Sweden
e-mail: lena.hansson@hkr.se

--- PAGE 300 ---
284
specific scientific models. It has also been used in more general discussions of 
whether teaching science should aim towards knowledge or belief.
This chapter will take as a starting point, discussions of indoctrination in 
philosophy of education. The value of philosophy of education for science educa -
tion research is highlighted by Schulz (2014). He states that debates on the aims of 
education as well as the difference between education and indoctrination are impor-
tant for science education research.
It is suggested in the literature that social and institutional structures should be 
taken into account when discussing indoctrination. In line with this Huttunen (2003) 
suggests that indoctrination can happen through the hidden curriculum (Snyder 
1971). The chapter will discuss the possibility of using the concept of indoctrination 
in this way: in relation to explicit and implicit messages in science class that are part 
of the hidden curriculum. Focus will be on the part of the hidden curriculum that 
communicates views about science itself –specific “nature of science” perspectives 
as well as specific worldviews and ideologies communicated side by side with sci-
ence content in the science classroom (without necessarily being part of the formal 
curriculum).
11.2  Indoctrination: The Concept
Indoctrination has long been a topic for analysis in the philosophy of education lit-
erature. Most teachers would feel attacked and offended if someone told them that 
they were indoctrinating students. Thus indoctrination has negative connotations for 
most people, including education scholars, teachers and the general public. The 
concept has generally come to mean the “unethical influencing in a teaching situa-
tion. Indoctrination means infiltrating (drilling, inculcating etc.) concepts, attitudes, 
beliefs and theories into a student’s mind by passing her free and critical delibera -
tion” (Huttunen 2003, p. 1). Indoctrination, in this way, is a “systematic distortion 
of some kind in the teachers’ presentation of subject matter – a distortion that elicits, 
or could reasonably be expected to elicit, a corresponding distortion in the way 
students understand the subject matter” (Callan and Arena 2009, p. 105).
In line with this, in the general use of the concept, there is a stark dichotomy 
between objectivity and indoctrination (Stolzenberg 1993).2 Thus, indoctrination 
nowadays is most often not viewed as something positive, but something that should 
be avoided. There are descriptions in the literature of how teachers navigate (and 
even exclude some aspects from their teaching) in fear of risking the indoctrination 
of students (Qablan et al. 2011).
However, even if indoctrination is most often viewed as negative and to be 
avoided, some scholars argue that avoidance is not always possible (Moore 1972). 
2 However, opposite to this there are also people for whom an “objective” teaching is part of the 
problem, e.g. not all parents want their children to rationally scrutinize everything (Stolzenberg 
1993).
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 301 ---
285
In addition, there are scholars who argue that indoctrination can sometimes be justi-
fied, for example, in the moral education of very young children, or depending on 
high values at stake. Discussions include, for example, whether it would be justifi -
able to indoctrinate students into democratic values (e.g. Kilpatrick 1972) or critical 
thinking (e.g. Cuypers and Haji 2006).
A need is identified in the literature to define the concept of indoctrination more 
stringently to be able to decide whether a teacher is correctly accused of indoctrinat-
ing. Snook (1972/2010) offers a philosophical analysis of the concept in an attempt 
to define it with the starting point of four different criteria: the methods of teaching, 
the content of the teaching, the consequences of teaching, and the intentions of the 
teacher. These criteria are widely used among philosophers of education who have 
discussed the concept of indoctrination and how to understand the difference 
between indoctrination and teaching. However, scholars do not always agree on 
which (or which combination of) criterion should be decisive.
There are scholars who argue for indoctrination being associated with specific 
teaching methods (e.g. Gatchel 1972/2010; Momanu 2012; Moore 1972/2010), for 
example, “the use of propaganda devices, including censorship” and “authoritarian 
methods” (Moore 1972/2010, pp. 93–94). Examples of authoritarian methods are 
when a teacher rewards the right answers and punishes with silence wrong answers, 
as well as not providing reasons for their claims (Bailey 2010, p. 276). Others argue 
that this criterion is not the most productive: “method is not a strong candidate as 
the criterion for indoctrination simply because it is extremely difficult to conceive 
of methods that are characteristic of indoctrination alone” (Bailey 2010, p. 276).
Also, content has been suggested as a possible decisive criterion. For example, 
there are arguments raised that only doctrines are possible to indoctrinate, or for 
defining a content based criterion in some other way (e.g. being about uncertain 
subject matters). Therefore, scholars arguing for the content criterion in different 
ways reason that there is a difference between consensus content and controversial 
content – where only controversial content could be subject for indoctrination. Flew 
(1972/2010) illustrates this by arguing for the difference between teaching contro -
versial religious or political ideologies, and something like the multiplication tables. 
However, other scholars reject the notion of ideologies being the only content open 
for the possibility of indoctrination, for example, due to the difficulties with differ-
ing “between matters of broad consensus” and “contested claims” (Bailey 2010, 
p. 275). Green on the other hand, states that the difference between teaching and 
indoctrination “has nothing to do with the contents of beliefs” and refers that “two 
persons may hold to the same belief and yet one may do so evidentially and the 
other non-evidentially” (Green 1972, p. 33).
There are also scholars who discuss the consequences as a possible criterion for 
indoctrination. For example, Bailey ( 2010) discusses “closed-mindedness” (with 
reference to Laura ( 1983)) as a consequence of indoctrination while teaching is 
characterized by “open-mindedness”. Focus, in this way to characterise indoctrina-
tion, is the care about “students’ ability to judge for themselves” (Bailey 2010, 
p. 277), and about the autonomy of the student (Bailey 2010).
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 302 ---
286
A well-discussed criterion in the literature is the intention criterion, which many 
scholars argue for as the decisive criterion (e.g. Snook 1972/2010; White 1972/2010). 
Wilson ( 1972) states that indoctrination is an “intentional activity: you cannot 
indoctrinate by accident” (p. 18). The indoctrinator must “intend his pupil to arrive 
at a certain belief” (p. 18–19). Also, when presenting the four possible criteria (see 
above), Snook concludes that the intention criterion is the most useful of them all. 
He states that “A person cannot indoctrinate if he is not doing anything intentional 
at all: one cannot indoctrinate by omission” (Snook 1972, p. 66). He further states:
‘Indoctrination’ implies a pejorative judgment on a teaching situation. It suggests that 
someone taking advantage of a privileged role to influence those under his charge in a man-
ner which is likely to distort their ability to assess the evidence on its own merit. The posi-
tive intention to bring about this state of mind is sufficient for the application of the term to 
his teaching, even if he should fail in his task. (Snook 1972, p. 66)
Thus a teacher’s intention is central for Snook and many other scholars. However 
this position has been criticised, with arguments that it is not necessary that the 
teacher intend the student to believe non-rationally. Wilson (1972) writes that even 
though indoctrination is an “intentional activity”, it is possible that the indoctrinator 
(e.g. the teacher responsible for the indoctrination) “might say, and believe, that 
they were helping people to form their own beliefs rationally and freely, but this 
might not be” (Wilson 1972, p. 18–19). Wilson argues that the teacher must “intend 
his pupil to arrive at a certain belief” for being held responsible for indoctrination, 
but it is not necessary that the indoctrinator intends this to happen non-rationally, for 
example, due to the authority of the teacher (Wilson 1972, p. 18–19). Snook ( 1972) 
widens the meaning of intention when including what is “foreseen” by the teacher: 
“Such a desire is not necessary, however, if it is foreseen that this state of mind is 
likely as a result of what is being done” (Snook 1972, p. 66).
Snook’s philosophical analysis has been a starting point for other scholars’ rea-
soning on indoctrination and education, such as Peterson ( 2007) who criticises the 
definition using the “foreseen” because it “does not allow us to accurately identify 
indoctrination. We cannot know with any degree of certainty what another person 
desires or foresees”. Due to this she suggests that we add “the foreseeable” to the 
concept of intent.3 However, she also emphasises the importance that indoctrination 
is caused by the actions of the teacher: “We ought only to hold teachers accountable 
for indoctrination if it is foreseeable that students would hold beliefs in a non-  
rational manner as a result of their teacher’s actions” (Peterson 2007, p. 303). Thus, 
if the relation between the teacher’s actions and the fact that students have come to 
hold beliefs in a non-rational manner cannot be established, then the teacher should 
not be accused. In this way “intent” has been widened to include actions that are not 
necessarily a result of the teacher’s desire to indoctrinate, but where this conse -
quence was foreseeable. Such actions can sometimes be best understood by taking 
the institutional level into account. The suggestion of taking also the institutional 
level into account will be returned to later in the chapter.
3 The foreseeable has been discussed also by Snook (1972/2010, pp. 156–157), who argued against 
it as a criterion.
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 303 ---
287
11.3  Indoctrination and Science Education
As mentioned previously, indoctrination has often been discussed in relation to 
religious or political education. Religious sects as well as totalitarian states have 
been accused of indoctrinating young people. Some scholars argue that only doc -
trines are possible to indoctrinate (see above), whilst others such as Snook ( 1972) 
argue that in principle any content can be indoctrinated, while not all content is at 
all equally probable, since doctrines “often provide motive for indoctrination” 
(p. 67). Snook even uses “physics” as an example:
Because we find it difficult to imagine a motive for indoctrinating physics we tend to 
exclude the teaching of such subjects from indoctrination. I have argued that the concept 
can include them, but a motive is needed to explain why anyone would want to indoctrinate 
them. (Snook 1972, p. 67)
However, there might be reasons as to way indoctrination could be relevant to dis -
cuss in relation to the teaching of science. There are even scholars who suggest that 
the risk of indoctrination is greater in subjects like science than in, for example, 
religious education due to epistemological assumptions often taken for granted in 
science (Leahy 1990). In this section the focus will be on how the concept of indoc-
trination has been used in relation to different practices of science education.
11.3.1  Indoctrination in Relation to the Teaching of Scientific 
Concepts and Models
Indoctrination has been discussed in relation to the teaching of scientific concepts 
and models, for example, when concepts and models are presented in the science 
classroom as “facts” without arguments. Mohanan states that in introductory text -
books one is likely to find statements such as:
A dropped coin falls to the ground because of gravity.
The Earth rotates around its axis.
All matter is made up of molecules.
There are two atoms of hydrogen and one of oxygen in a molecule of water.
Oxygen has a valency of two, and carbon has a valency of four. (Mohanan 2000, p. 1)
These types of statements are also found in many science classes, where teachers 
present “facts” to students without describing the processes that have led to consen-
sus on a specific model: “students are forced to accept a set of conclusions without 
knowledge of the reasons for believing them” (Mohanan 2000, p.  3). Using the 
content criterion, this would most probably not be viewed as an example of indoc -
trination – the content is scientific models on which there is consensus in the scien-
tific community.
However, using the method criterion provides a different result. When presenting 
science in this way, the students’ rationality is bypassed and the students are left to 
the authority of the teacher. Students who take the views described by the teacher to 
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 304 ---
288
be their own will believe on non-rational grounds (the views have not been ratio -
nally evaluated by the student). The scientific models become something that many 
students believe in due to trust in the authority (the teacher), but not because of 
rational arguments (those they have not heard about). Thus, in such a case using a 
method or consequence criterion for indoctrination would position a teacher 
presenting science in this way as guilty of indoctrination.
Yet, if instead an intention criterion is used, then this point is not so straight 
forward. The teacher’s intention is probably not to make students believe in a non- 
rational way, but this will be a consequence of teachers not problematizing this way 
to present science (a way that often is part of science teaching tradition). However, 
if we add not only what is foreseen by the teacher, but also what is foreseeable 
(Peterson 2007), then again the result will change: obviously it is foreseeable that 
some students will come to believe in a non-rational way as a result of the teaching. 
This use of the intention criterion (including the foreseeable) will position the 
teacher as an indoctrinator – the teacher could be informed of different possibilities 
for teaching the scientific model in focus and what these could result in. Being 
informed about such different possibilities includes understanding the differences 
between a teaching of “facts” without providing reasons, and a teaching that empha-
sizes reasons and describes the processes and discussions in the scientific commu -
nity that have led to consensus concerning the scientific model in focus. However, it 
is not so sure that it really is foreseeable for most teachers, due to many teachers 
having limited nature of science training, and are part of an institution (school 
science) where the power of the science teaching traditions (including teaching 
“facts”) is great. For the in-principle foreseeable to also be foreseen by the teacher, 
is often a big step.
Another related issue is the one of whether science teaching should aim at devel-
oping students’ knowledge of science concepts and models, or whether it should 
actually aim at students believing in these models. 4 Traditionally, the learning of 
scientific concepts has been viewed in line with what is described in the 1982 article 
by Posner, Strike, Hewson and Gertzog: “Often … the students’ current concepts 
are inadequate to allow him to grasp some new phenomenon successfully. Then the 
student must replace or reorganize his central concept” (Posner et al. 1982, p. 212). 
Although views concerning this have been developed further in different ways 
within the conceptual change paradigm (see Treagust and Duit 2008), these research-
ers do not discuss science learning in terms of the differences between knowledge 
and belief. Southerland and colleagues state that “often science education, espe -
cially conceptual change research, equates students’ knowledge with students’ 
beliefs” (Southerland et al. 2001, p. 342), and El-Hani and Mortimer state that with 
such an assumption of what learning science means it is “impossible to distinguish 
understanding from belief” (El-Hani and Mortimer 2007a, p. 672).
4 See, for example, Cobern ( 2000b), Cobern ( 2004), El-Hani and Mortimer ( 2007a, b), Hoffman 
(2007), Smith and Siegel (2004), and Southerland et al. ( 2001).
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 305 ---
289
However other scholars distinguish these concepts. 5 Cobern states that it is 
possible for a student to understand without taking the view to be her or his own: 
“…comprehension does not necessitate apprehension. One may well reject a con -
cept that he or she fully comprehends while someone else apprehends it as knowl -
edge” (Cobern 1996, p. 592). Science teaching that has changed beliefs as a goal for 
students is regarded by some scholars as risking indoctrination. Therefore, distin -
guishing between teaching for knowledge and for belief could be viewed as a way 
to avoid indoctrination. El-Hani and Mortimer write:
students’ understanding of scientific theories, models, and concepts is the proper goal of 
science education. We think that if science teaching adopts change of beliefs as a goal, it 
runs the risk of degenerating into nothing more than a proselytizing, indoctrinating, scien -
tistic endeavor. The decision to believe or not in scientific ideas is up to the students, but 
they are necessarily entitled to understand those ideas, if they are to be successful science 
learners. (El-Hani and Mortimer 2007a p. 683–684)
Thus, teachers should not use their authority to impose specific beliefs upon 
students, even though from a science perspective there is consensus in the scientific 
community on the model taught. Instead the only aim should be understanding. 
Ultimately, this has to do with defending the autonomy (Bailey 2010) of the student: 
students should have the right to judge reasons and evidence, and themselves decide 
what they are to believe in. Aikenhead ( 1996) emphasizes that there are ethical as 
well as empirical reasons (the traditional approach has not succeeded for large 
groups of students) for adopting a “cross-cultural” learning approach in the teaching 
of science. For example, there are students who play “Fatima’s rules” – that is they 
learn “without being intellectually engaged” (Aikenhead 2006, p. 28). Aikenhead 
describes how this is a strategy used by some students “who feel their teacher is 
attempting to assimilate them into the culture of science and who want to resist such 
indoctrination” (Aikenhead 2006, p. 28). In this way, indoctrination is discussed as 
a danger in respect of students who themselves have views and ways of reasoning 
founded in their own cultures, which differ (in different ways) from the culture of 
science.
This applies to both non-western and western countries since science also in 
western countries is a foreign culture for most students (Aikenhead 2006). For 
example, studies of students’ worldviews 6 show that students frequently have 
worldviews that are more or less at odds with the ones most often taken for granted 
in science and in science class. Scholars, in line with this, discuss different 
approaches to avoid indoctrination by replacing the aim of believing/accepting with 
the aim of understanding (e.g. Southerland and Scharmann 2013).
Would it be correct to say that a teacher indoctrinates students when teaching 
with the aim set to change students’ beliefs (not only aiming at understanding)? 
5 See, for example, Cobern ( 1991), Cobern (1996), Cobern (2004), Smith and Siegel ( 2004), and 
El-Hani and Mortimer (2007a, b).
6 See, for example, Allen and Crowley ( 1998), Hansson ( 2014), Hansson and Redfors ( 2006, 
2007a, b), Hansson and Lindahl ( 2010), Brandt (2007), Cobern (1993), Cobern (2000a), Cobern 
et al. ( 1999), and Lee et al.  ( 2012).
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 306 ---
290
Again, this depends on the criterion used. When aiming to change belief one could 
argue that most teachers do not intend this to happen non-rationally. When using the 
concept in the way suggested by Snook ( 1972), this is not a case of indoctrination 
because the intent is not there. However for Wilson it is considered enough that the 
teacher “intend[s] his pupil to arrive at a certain belief”, but it is not necessary that 
the teacher intends this to happen non-rationally (Wilson 1972, pp. 18–19). Using 
this definition, the teacher could be held guilty of indoctrination. Also, when 
arguing along the lines of Peterson’s (2007) reasoning (including the foreseeable), 
the teacher would be an indoctrinator in this case. This is due to the fact that it is 
foreseeable that a teaching for change of belief runs the risk of indoctrination – at 
least in cases when focus is not put on arguments and reasons, but instead on the 
change of belief as such.
Indoctrination is foreseeable because research shows that not all students accept-
ing a scientific model do this on rational grounds, but simply adopt a teacher’s 
beliefs. For example, Sinatra et al. (2003) show that there are students accepting the 
theory of evolution without understanding what the theory really means or its sup -
porting evidence. Here the content is not of concern, but instead that the teaching 
has by-passed students’ rational evaluation. In these types of cases it can be argued 
that the teacher takes “advantage of a privileged role to influence those under his 
charge in a manner which is likely to distort their ability to assess the evidence on 
its own merit” (Snook 1972, p. 66). Much science teaching, from the above perspec-
tive, could be viewed as guilty of indoctrination when students, as a result of teach-
ing, come to accept a specific model as true without knowing why; or when teachers 
use their power to convince students to change their beliefs.
However, it should be noted that there are also many students for whom attempts 
at indoctrination are unsuccessful. Instead, many students play “Fatima’s rules” – 
e.g. learning statements or procedures by heart without engaging intellectually, or 
find different kinds of “cross-cultural” (Aikenhead 1996, 2006) strategies where 
they separate their knowledge of the scientific view and their own views. For exam-
ple, colleagues and I have shown in previous research that students frequently asso-
ciate one view with science, but state that they themselves view the same thing in a 
different way (Hansson and Redfors 2006; Hansson and Redfors 2013). In these 
cases, students have resisted indoctrination in respect of them not adopting the 
taught views. However, it is possible to argue that students in some of these (and 
other) cases are indoctrinated into associating specific views with science. Without 
really knowing why a specific view is the view of science, this is associating science 
with these views on non-rational grounds (without any rational evaluations), which 
could be considered as a possible example of indoctrination.
We have seen that teaching models as facts, and teaching for belief (not only 
knowledge), have been discussed as indoctrination in the literature. However, the 
kind of criterion that is used for indoctrination in science education literature is 
often only implicitly communicated. Thus, whether the discussed cases should be 
judged as indoctrination depends on the criterion used: for example, according to 
the method and consequence criteria it is indoctrination, while it is most often not if 
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 307 ---
291
viewed against a content criterion. As seen above, scholars have frequently argued 
for the importance of the intentions of the teacher. In the cases described here it is 
unclear whether the indicator of indoctrination is really the intent of the teacher. The 
question then arises: can it, nevertheless, be fair to talk about indoctrination? Later 
in this chapter it will be argued that the institutional level should also be taken into 
account.
11.3.2  Indoctrination in Relation to Controversial, Value 
Based Issues
When the concept of indoctrination occurs in science education it is often invoked 
concerning controversial and value based areas such as environmental issues (Poole 
1995). Also, in general philosophy of education, the treatment of controversial 
issues in school is discussed in relation to indoctrination (Kilpatrick 1972).
Indoctrination is discussed in environmental education, and education for sus -
tainable development.7 For example, in a case study of professors in environmental 
science (Qablan et al. 2011) it is shown how these professors, due to the fear of 
indoctrinating students (“My job isn’t to tell them what to think”), emphasize the 
scientific part of curricula in Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) courses. 
They teach what they view as objective (scientific) facts. The professors feel that 
they run the risk of communicating biased ideas to students if they deal with eco -
nomic or social dimensions in combination with the scientific dimension of ESD 
(Qablan et al. 2011). Öhman (2007) describes three selective traditions in Swedish 
environmental education. One of them is the fact-based tradition (the one used by 
the professors in Qablan et al. ( 2011) described above).
Other traditions are the normative tradition and the pluralistic tradition. The criti-
cism of the normative tradition is in line with the fear of the professors in the study 
by Qablan et al. ( 2011): “there is a danger that education will lose its emancipatory 
potential and its democratic obligation will be violated; the result being that educa-
tion then resembles indoctrination” (Öhman 2007, p. 44). The third tradition (plu -
ralistic) attempts to avoid indoctrination by promoting critical thinking and 
discussing different viewpoints. On the other hand, this instead runs the risk of open 
up for relativism – students could for example be given the impression that there are 
two serious sides to the issue of global warming.8
Also concerning other controversial issues (e.g. “socio-scientific issues”, SSI) 
there could be a fear of biased presentations (Couló 2014) and of indoctrination 
(Pedretti et al. 2008). This is especially the case when teaching for change of the 
present state in society (Bobel 2006). In such cases the teaching is connected to 
7 See, for example, Jickling (2003), Qablan et al. ( 2011), Qablan et al. ( 2009), Tabone (2011), and 
Östman (2010).
8 Some, for example, Öhman ( 2007), argue against pluralistic ESD being necessarily relativistic.
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 308 ---
292
activism (Bencze and Alsop 2014) in some way, and becomes openly political and 
ideological. In such cases the teacher runs the risk of ending up being accused of 
indoctrinating students (see the examples above concerning environmental issues). 
However not mentioning societal aspects of different kinds, of relevance for the sci-
ence taught, could be seen as problematic. It could be argued that it is the responsi-
bility of the teacher to tell students about different viewpoints concerning 
controversial issues. Not doing so makes action impossible for the students and the 
teacher could instead be accused of indoctrinating students into the present domi -
nating ideological viewpoint. For example, a number of scholars state that some 
ideological perspectives (e.g. neoliberalism and modernism) are more frequently 
communicated in the science classroom than other ideological perspectives.
For example, Bencze and Carter (2011) discuss science education in relation to 
neo-liberal agendas, and Selby (2014) states that science teaching tends to commu-
nicate views such as “unending economic growth”, “ever upward progress” and 
“technological fix”, as well as the dominance of humans over nature (Selby 2014, 
p. 172). A concrete example of how these types of ideological perspectives are com-
municated in the science classroom is presented by Solli et al. ( 2014), who show 
how a professor during an introductory course in biotechnology “was engaged in 
convincing the students into being critical towards opposition to GM food” (Solli 
et al. 2014, p. 19).
Different approaches have been put forward concerning how to deal with contro-
versial issues in educational contexts (Ashton and Watson 1998; Reiss 1993). The 
problem here is the same in all education (and not specific for science education). It 
is about whether the teacher should try to be neutral (in some way) or whether the 
teacher should tell students about her or his own viewpoint. Telling students about 
their own view runs the risk of being accused of trying to indoctrinate them. On the 
other hand, it could be argued that teaching cannot be value-free, and telling stu -
dents about the teachers’ own view and having this view scrutinized with other 
views is the best thing to do (Ashton and Watson 1998). Hodson (2014) discusses 
the problems with a so called “balanced view” – “ all views embody a particular 
position, and that position needs to be rationalised and justified if indoctrination is 
to be avoided … I believe that students have a right to know their teacher’s views on 
SSI addressed in the curriculum” (Hodson 2014, p. 74).
11.3.3  Indoctrination in Relation to Teaching of the Nature 
of Science
In relation to teaching the nature of science, concern has been raised due to the risk 
of indoctrinating students. Matthews (1998) states:
there is a danger that teachers, curriculum developers, and examiners will define ‘epistemo-
logical development’ merely as ‘believing what I believe about epistemology’. When this 
happens, we confuse education with indoctrination. (Matthews 1998, p. 167)
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 309 ---
293
In such cases the purpose of teaching nature of science is to convey to students a 
“particular view about the nature of science” (Matthews 1998, p. 167). That could 
be “constructivist/positivist/realist/feminist/Marxist/multiculturalist/universalist 
views about the nature of science” (Matthews 1998, p. 167), or something else.
In the case described above the teacher explicitly teaches a specific nature of sci-
ence perspective (controversial content) with the intention that students should 
adopt the same view without necessarily scrutinizing different alternatives. If using 
the content criterion one could argue that this is a clear case of indoctrination, and 
in this case also the intention criterion is fulfilled.
There is also the problem of science teaching frequently conveying stereotypical 
and mythical images of science to students, for example that scientists always fol -
low one specific “scientific method”, that creativity is absent from the research pro-
cess and that scientific research is entirely objective and universal and produces 
objective, absolute knowledge (facts) about the world (McComas 1998). There is a 
large amount of research showing how teachers communicate such stereotypical 
images of science in their classrooms even though they do not intend to teach nature 
of science at all (Abd-El-Khalick 2012; Clough 2006). Such views are conveyed 
anyway, implicitly, through lab work that strengthens the notion of one scientific 
method/procedure, or through the way the teacher implicitly presents a model as an 
unchangeable fact. Teachers are not alone communicating these kinds of images of 
science. Medawar (1961/1996) argues that scientific research articles also do “give 
a totally misleading narrative of the processes of thought that go into the making of 
scientific discoveries” (p.38).
Related to this are examples of scholars discussing indoctrination in relation to 
worldview. Van Eijck and Roth (2011) state: “Teaching science is a double-edged 
sword, because students … may actually be indoctrinated into a particular world -
view consistent with classical metaphysics (Western science) rather than learning to 
critically reflect the value of different knowledge systems.” (van Eijck and Roth 
2011, p. 832). In line with this, Proper and colleagues ( 1988) show that only a few 
worldviews are communicated in the teaching of science, and most often implicitly. 
Taber (2013) states: “there is much potential for the image of science offered to 
pupils to be scientistic” (Taber 2013, p.  153). In line with this I and colleagues 
(Hansson and Redfors 2007a,b; Hansson and Lindahl 2010, 2015) show how 
students in fact often associate scientism with science and this is discussed as an 
indoctrination of students into associating such kinds of views with science 
(Hansson and Lindahl 2015).9
In the same way as teachers can become guilty of indoctrinating students with 
specific nature of science perspectives, there is also a communication of nature of 
9 Scientism can be defined in different ways (Stenmark 2001). Here a definition is followed sug -
gested by Poole (1998). Poole argues that scientism, but not science, “Denies that anything other 
than the natural world exists”, states that “Scientific accounts are all there are”, “Denies that there 
are first causes or final causes”, and “Denies that there could ever be behavior other than law like 
(anti-miraculous)” (Poole 1998). When such views are claimed “in the name of science” (Stenmark 
2001), this is what is meant by scientism in this chapter.
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 310 ---
294
science in science textbooks (DiGiuseppe 2014) that could contribute to 
 indoctrination. For example, in a study of science textbooks Knain ( 2001) shows 
that the image of science communicated is:
[one] where individual scientists are discovering truth, through experiment. Scientific ratio-
nality is grounded in procedures of inquiry alone and not in debate and argumentation 
within scientific communities. The communal aspects of science tend to become visible in 
historical examples where science did not function properly due to prejudices or ignorance. 
(Knain 2001, p. 319)
There is not one nature of science (Alters 1997). When teachers intentionally argue 
for a specific perspective (as discussed in the quote by Matthews above) on such a 
controversial issue then this is a self-evident case of indoctrination (e.g. using the 
content or intention criterion). Also, when teachers are not arguing for, but take 
specific perspectives for granted, this could be viewed as indoctrination, if using 
for example the content or consequence criterion. Cobern ( 2000b) states that the 
teacher who takes presuppositions for granted, which are not necessary for science, 
distorts science for the students. This is what has happened when students have 
come to associate science with for example scientism and atheism (Hansson and 
Redfors 2007a, b; Hansson and Lindahl 2010). However, it is uncertain if these 
cases could be judged as indoctrination if the latter is defined in terms of the inten-
tion criterion.
Also, the presuppositions necessary for science (which science builds upon) and 
that are taken for granted in science class, can be seen as part of the indoctrination 
of students. Leahy (1990), building upon Laura (1983), argues that any belief sys -
tem depends on assumptions (“epistemic primitives”) about the world. This is also 
in line with the worldview theory building on Kearney ( 1984) and applied in the 
science education context by Cobern (1991). Leahy argues:
If student access to truth is to be properly safeguarded … students will need to be provided 
… not only with an understanding of the content of the subject concerned, but also of the 
‘epistemic primitives’ underpinning that subject. To teach the content of any subject with-
out also providing students with an understanding of that content’s dependence on its ‘epis-
temic primitives’ would be to indoctrinate rather than to educate. (Leahy 1990, p. 142)
An example of this is students who do not know that science presupposes that the 
universe is ordered and uniform. For these students, it is not possible to in a mean -
ingful and rational way understand for example conclusions drawn about the abun-
dances of elements in stars from observed spectra (Hansson 2014). This is but one 
example of how students’ knowledge about the presuppositions of science can inter-
act with their understanding of scientific models (for a more in-depth discussion 
about this, see Hansson 2014). Leahy points to that by looking at indoctrination in 
this way there is a “danger of indoctrination in all subjects” (Leahy 1990, p. 142).
We have here encountered examples of how indoctrination can be discussed in 
relation to teaching of the nature of science. However, teachers are not always aware 
of what they are doing. Perhaps they are themselves indoctrinated, for example, into 
mythical and stereotypical images of science, which they then in turn convey to 
students. Also, they are perhaps not aware of the importance of discussing also the 
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 311 ---
295
presuppositions of science in science class – this is not something that is part of the 
science teaching tradition. Thus, teachers might not have any intention to indoctri-
nate students into biased and dubious ways to view science, but indoctrination does 
anyway seem to become the case. Was it foreseeable (Peterson 2007)? Yes, due to 
the large amount of research on students’ views of the nature of science and the 
necessity of an explicit teaching concerning this (Lederman 2007), one can argue 
that it is foreseeable that teachers communicate stereotypical and mythical images 
of science, when not explicitly focused on doing something different. Yet, is this 
foreseeable for the accused teacher? Without extensive in-service training would it 
then be reasonable to accuse the teacher of indoctrination?
Discussion in philosophy of education points to the problems of accusing teach-
ers of indoctrination when they have no such intent. We have, however, encountered 
some situations in the literature on indoctrination and science teaching where the 
intention to indoctrinate does not seem to be present, but where it anyway, some -
how, seems to be about indoctrination. Therefore, we will return to the philosophy 
of education literature and look further into the discussions concerning the intention 
criterion and possible solutions to this dilemma.
11.4  Indoctrination Without Intention
A criticism raised in relation to the use of the intention criterion is that it excludes 
the possibility that teachers are unaware of their own intentions or that of the cur -
ricula writers (Bailey 2010). If “teachers have been educated within an indoctrina-
tory system, then it is possible that they are no more aware of the actual aims of 
schooling than their students: the teacher is both a victim and a perpetrator of indoc-
trination” (Bailey 2010, p. 276). In line with this, Momanu ( 2012) points to the fact 
that indoctrination in the literature has often been coupled to “interpersonal rela -
tionships”, but that it sometimes also has been treated in relation to an “institutional 
level”. Also, Huttunen discusses the intention criterion and points to this criterion 
not accounting for a possible indoctrination caused by the social structures rather 
than intended by the teacher: “Intention criterion focus attention on the teacher-  
student relationship and excludes the aspects of social systems or ideological pro -
cesses” (Huttunen 2003, p. 10). He concludes that teachers’ intentions to indoctrinate 
should not be used as the sole criterion for indoctrination – most teachers do not 
want to indoctrinate students, but one can see teaching practices where indoctrina -
tion seems to happen:
how many teachers really want to indoctrinate students? … So, it is more meaningful to 
assume that the indoctrination happens unintentionally (by the structural causes). In this 
case, the traditional formulation of the intention criterion /…/ is useless. The intention cri -
terion does not recognise indoctrination that is caused by the institutional or social struc -
tures. I presume that in the (post)modern teaching situation indoctrination occurs at the 
level of hidden curriculum (see Snyder 1971). No teacher or no educational institution 
openly and intentionally indoctrinates students, although many unreflected attitudes and 
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 312 ---
296
beliefs (example racist and ethnocentric beliefs that would be rejected in the open and 
 critical discourse) are transferred to the next generation through education. (Huttunen 2003, 
pp. 3–4)
That is, according to Huttunen, indoctrination, instead of being intended by the 
teacher, often happens unintentionally due to social or institutional structures  – 
through the hidden curriculum (Snyder 1971).
Also, earlier writings about indoctrination and education open up for the possi -
bility that indoctrination is not always intended by the teacher. Gregory and Woods 
argue that:
The uncommitted teacher may have no intention of bringing about certain beliefs, but his 
position of authority within the institutional set-up, his role as teacher, lends powerful back-
ing to his words; the system within which he operates endows his actions with a sense of 
purpose of which he, as an individual, may be quite unaware. (Gregory and Woods 
1972/2010, p. 170)
Related to this they also speak about “the intentions of society” (Gregory and Woods 
1972/2010, p. 170). This is in line with Huttunen (2003, p. 4) who states that “many 
unreflected [unexamined] attitudes and beliefs (example racist and ethnocentric 
beliefs that would be rejected in the open and critical discourse) are transferred to 
the next generation through education”. Huttunen suggests that teaching that limits 
the possible perspectives for students instead of widening them, should be viewed 
as indoctrination:
The teaching content should provide students with opportunities to construct their own 
creative and multi-dimensional view of reality. The teaching content should also promote 
students to engage critical self-reflection. Thus, if we want the teaching content to be non- 
indoctrinative, the teaching content should contribute to students’ reflectivity towards 
those meaning perspectives that they have already adopted, and as well as toward those 
that are taught (see Mezirow 1991). … I consider content that limits students’ meaning 
perspectives and minimizes as opposed to increases students’ own power of judgement as 
indoctrinative. … The non-indoctrinative teaching content gives students both the freedom 
and faculty to determine their own differentiated identity, worldview and conduct of life. 
(Huttunen 2003, p. 13)
Huttunen’s way of treating indoctrination is useful when trying to shed light on 
some frequent practices in science teaching, and is also a way to understand the 
cases referred to above: where intention does not seem to be there, but where it 
seems to be about indoctrination. To be able to develop reasoning further in this 
direction, we will now turn to examples of images of science communicated in the 
science classroom through the hidden curriculum. Thereafter, we will return to the 
concept of indoctrination and focus on indoctrination that possibly happens through 
the hidden curriculum, as suggested by Huttunen ( 2003). We will discuss the 
possibility of using the concept of indoctrination in this way to describe what is 
happening in science classrooms.
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 313 ---
297
11.5  The Hidden Curriculum in the Teaching of Science: 
A Focus on Images of Science
The “hidden curriculum” concept was utilised by Snyder:
I have found that a hidden curriculum determines, to a significant degree, what becomes the 
basis for all participants’ sense of worth and self-esteem. It is this hidden curriculum, more 
than the formal curriculum, that influences the adaptation of students and faculty. …. 
Though each curriculum has characteristics that are special to the particular setting, the 
presence of these hidden curricula importantly affects the process of all education. The 
similarities in these hidden curricula are at least as important as the differences. (Snyder 
1971, xii–xiii)
This hidden curriculum could include how to master tasks given, how to communi-
cate in science class, how to engage in laboratory work or problem solving, or how 
to attain high grades. Messages about these kinds of things, given by the teacher, are 
not always in line with the formal curriculum. Instead, there could be important dif-
ferences between the formal curriculum and these other messages (the hidden cur -
riculum) that influence life in the classroom.
In science teaching, there are messages about science itself, which are communi-
cated in the classroom, in textbooks or elsewhere, but are not necessarily in line 
with how the formal curriculum describes the subject – these messages could be 
viewed as part of the hidden curriculum. It could be specific worldviews and ideolo-
gies communicated in the science class and therefore, associated with science by the 
students, as well as specific nature of science perspectives. Stereotypic and mythical 
images of science could very well be communicated in the teaching of science, even 
though the formal curriculum perhaps puts forward other nature of science perspec-
tives. These types of views about science are sometimes communicated explicitly, 
but often also implicitly in science class.10
Schools can communicate a worldview through teaching in different ways, and 
two extreme cases can be seen (Proper et al. 1988). In one extreme, school explicitly 
presents and discusses a large variety of worldviews, while in the other extreme 
only a narrow span of worldviews is presented, and implicitly. The same could be 
said about possibilities for the communication of ideology as well as “nature of sci-
ence” perspectives. In the second case (narrow span and implicit) it is relevant to 
discuss worldview (or ideology, or general nature of science perspectives) as part of 
the hidden curriculum (Kilbourn 1980). Often these worldviews, ideological 
perspectives, and nature of science perspectives are communicated implicitly as 
“companion meanings” (Roberts 1998). These companion meanings “can be either 
deliberately planned and incorporated in policy … or ‘unintentional’ (as with gen -
der bias, world view bias, cultural bias, and many others)” (Roberts 1998, p. 11). In 
line with this, Östman states that the teaching, through these kinds of companion 
meanings, is communicating a view about science, nature and the relation between 
10 See, for example, Fourez ( 1988), Kilbourn (1980), Kilbourn (1980–1981), Roberts (1998) and 
Östman (1998).
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 314 ---
298
humans and nature. To be able to see these companion meanings and be aware of 
their role, it is necessary to look for differences between the messages communi -
cated and other possible alternative messages. This is done by noting what is not 
said, but could have been said (Östman 1998).
The examples given by Östman constitute examples of how views about science 
and specific worldviews are communicated in the teaching of science and become 
part of the hidden curriculum (see also Kilbourn 1980). Also, Fysh and Lucas (1998) 
discuss the problem with messages implicitly communicated about things not 
explicitly discussed in the teaching (in their case the relation between science and 
religion). Those implicit messages are important and students’ views about the val-
ues and presuppositions of science are formed by them. In the extreme cases articu-
lated by Proper and colleagues ( 1988) of how school science communicate 
worldviews, most such teaching is implicit rather than explicit. This means that 
even though science could be understood from the starting point of very different 
worldviews, ideologies and nature of science perspectives, this is most often not 
communicated in the science classroom. Here follow some examples.
11.5.1  Messages About the Nature of Science as Part 
of the Hidden Curriculum
Though often misunderstood in a way that makes a travesty of the pedagogical 
theory and practice of the founding positivists (Matthews 2004), logical positivism 
strongly influences much teaching of science (Aikenhead 2006). The above men -
tioned myths about science (McComas 1998) are reproduced in science classes 
through science concepts and models being presented as unchangeable, objective 
facts, and through traditional lab-work practices conveying images of a strict scien-
tific method always being applicable. A large amount of research (see e.g. Lederman 
2007) shows that students frequently express such views about the “nature of sci -
ence” including, for example, that scientific research is an entirely rational, objec -
tive and universal enterprise, following the “scientific method” leading to absolute, 
objective facts about nature (Lederman 2007; McComas 1998).
Communicating such a small span of nature of science perspectives in the class-
room leaves no room for students to scrutinize different possibilities and positions. 
Of course, a positivistic view is possible to combine with science, but so are many 
other views. Despite that many different perspectives are possible – Alters (1998, 
p. 48) argues that “no one agreed-on NOS exists” – uniform images of science are 
communicated in most science classrooms. This uniform image most often leaves 
no room for discussing or problematizing different possible perspectives on the 
nature of science. Instead, it could be argued that such images of science are part of 
the hidden curriculum in many science classes.
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 315 ---
299
11.5.2  Messages About Worldview and Ideology as Part 
of the Hidden Curriculum
The image of science communicated in science class could also include science 
being associated with specific worldviews, such as scientistic (Stenmark 2004) and 
atheistic worldviews. Taber (2013, p. 153) states that “there is much potential for the 
image of science offered to pupils to be scientistic”; while Hansson and Redfors 
(2007a, b) and Hansson and Lindahl (2010, 2015) show that students often associate 
scientistic and atheistic views about the world with science. The question of how 
science is related to worldview has been discussed by scholars with different disci-
plinary backgrounds (see Matthews 2014, 2015, chap.10) and contributions to 
Matthews 2009). That there are different views concerning science and worldview 
is consistent with scholars having different views on other nature-of-science related 
issues.11 Cobern ( 1991, 2000a) describes how scientists could be viewed to have 
some presuppositions about the world in common, but these presuppositions do not 
in themselves constitute a worldview. Instead these presuppositions are combined 
with others that differ between different scientists. Taber (2013) exemplifies how in 
this way it is possible to understand science with the starting point in different 
worldviews. This is, however, most often not communicated in the science class. 
Instead, frequently, a narrow span of worldviews is communicated, and taken for 
granted, in science class.
In addition, school science also communicates ideological perspectives. Fourez 
(1988) discussed ideology in relation to the teaching of science, stating that all sci-
ence teaching is marked by ideology, but that there is often a large unawareness of 
this. Fourez gives an example of a teacher who argues that in his text book there is 
no ideology, only science. However, independent of the teacher’s unawareness of 
the communication of ideology in the teaching of science, such messages are always 
there implicitly, in the teaching and in the text book (Fourez 1988). These messages 
will influence students’ images of science. For example, there are scholars who 
argue that school science most often communicates modernistic and technology 
optimistic agendas (see above). However, these are not the only possible ideological 
starting points for engagement in science, and again the images communicated of 
science are narrow.
In the science class, often only a narrow span of worldviews, ideology, and 
nature of science perspectives are communicated and therefore tend to be associated 
with science by the students. Due to this students are not given access to different 
perspectives from which science can be understood. This specific narrow span is 
often not part of the formal curriculum, but something that influences what is hap -
pening in the science classrooms and how science is understood by students. These 
11 An individual’s view about science and religion depends on her/his view about different nature 
of science issues), but also on the individual’s view about religion, see Stenmark (2004) for an in-
depth discussion on the relationship between science and religion.
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 316 ---
300
messages could be viewed as part of the hidden curriculum in many science classes 
around the world.
11.6  Indoctrination in Science Class Through the Hidden 
Curriculum
Huttunen (2003) suggests that indoctrination is not always the intent of the teacher, 
but that it could be fruitful to think of indoctrination as something that also happens 
due to institutional structures, through the hidden curriculum. The hidden curricu -
lum includes a lot of different aspects, and the ones focused on here are messages 
communicated about science itself – messages that most often are not part of the 
formal curriculum but nevertheless have great impact on students’ images of sci -
ence. For example, there are plenty of examples in the literature showing how sci -
ence teaching communicates messages about science being a body of unchangeable, 
objective, universal facts; science being the same thing as scientism and science 
being associated with modernism (see above). These views are so frequent among 
teachers and students that they could be viewed as part of a hidden curriculum 
shared by many science classes around the world. Teachers and students are part of 
the social structures reproducing these images of science. While it would have been 
possible to communicate a wide span of perspectives in respect of worldviews, ide-
ologies and nature of science perspectives, this is most often not what is happening. 
Instead, only a narrow span of perspectives are presented to the students, and fre -
quently this is also done implicitly (Proper et al. 1988). It could be argued that these 
taken-for-granted and unproblematised messages constitute an attempt to indoctri -
nate students. In such a classroom where only a narrow span of perspectives is com-
municated, science is distorted for the students.
In these cases, it is not necessarily about teachers wanting to indoctrinate stu -
dents (most teachers have good intentions), but something that happens unintention-
ally through the hidden curriculum (Huttunen 2003). Due to this, the traditional 
intention criterion is not fulfilled. However, it could be argued, in line with what 
Huttunen suggests, that teachers – as part of the school science institution – have 
used their “privileged role to influence those under his charge in a manner which is 
likely to distort their ability to assess the evidence on its own merit” (Snook 1972, 
p. 66). However, this may not always be the intention of the teacher. Also the teacher 
could have been indoctrinated into associating science with for example positivistic, 
scientistic and modernistic views. Not knowing what they are doing, the teachers 
contribute to a reproduction of the association between science and these specific 
perspectives on science. This distorts science for these indoctrinated students, who 
lose their possibility to engage in science with the starting point in their own 
ideological and worldview perspectives. Hansson and Lindahl ( 2010) shows how 
students’ relations to science (good or bad) could partly be understood from such 
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 317 ---
301
differences between students’ own worldviews and the type of worldview they asso-
ciate with science. Huttunen considers:
content that limits students’ meaning perspectives and minimizes as opposed to increases 
students’ own power of judgement as indoctrinative. … The non-indoctrinative teaching 
content gives students both the freedom and faculty to determine their own differentiated 
identity, worldview and conduct of life. (Huttunen 2003, p. 13)
Thus, not problematizing and discussing different nature of science perspectives 
as well as science in relation to worldview and ideology, but instead only implicitly 
communicating a narrow span of views, indeed, according to this definition of the 
concept, is indoctrination. Thus, it is indoctrination both with the starting point in 
the content criterion (controversial content being communicated as non-  
controversial), and the consequence criterion (the teaching limits, rather than broad-
ens, students’ meaning perspectives). Taking the hidden curricula into account, 
much science teaching could be viewed as an attempt to indoctrinate students into 
specific views about science, even though most teachers have no such intent.
That the result of such teaching would be indoctrination is foreseeable, due to the 
large body of literature on students’ views upon science. However, the one respon-
sible for this indoctrination through the hidden curriculum is not only the teacher 
(who might have no intention of indoctrinating students), but the whole system (for 
which it is foreseeable that much teaching today is guilty of indoctrinating students 
into very specific views about science). Thus, it is the system as a whole that should 
be held guilty of indoctrinating students in science classes. This includes teachers, 
but also textbook authors, curriculum developers, teacher education and science 
education researchers – who all are part of this indoctrination. All should do their 
part to counteract this pattern.
11.7  Conclusion
The concept of indoctrination has not been given much attention in science educa -
tion. Instead, most texts about indoctrination are about political and religious educa-
tion. However, we have also seen that there are a number of different situations in 
which scholars have found indoctrination to be a fruitful concept in respect of 
science education. As we have seen here, with different definitions of the concept, 
these cases become more or less relevant to speak about as indoctrination.
This chapter outlined what it would mean to follow the line of reasoning sug -
gested by Huttunen ( 2003) – which includes the institutional level and the hidden 
curriculum, in the concept of indoctrination. With this use of the concept much sci-
ence teaching will be guilty of indoctrinating students, due to unproblematized and 
taken for granted views about the nature of science, worldview and ideology. As 
well as sticking to teaching traditions where science is mainly taught as “facts and 
lab-work” (Leden et al. 2015), where the aim is to change the belief (rather than 
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 318 ---
302
understanding), and where reasons for “facts” are not given. Such a teaching could 
result in students’ rationality being by-passed and their autonomy threatened.
Scholars have identified this situation in the teaching of science, and also pointed 
to these practices as a hindrance for a meaningful and pluralistic science education, 
as well as for a pluralistic science. Empirical studies has pointed to the risk that 
students associating science with specific worldviews and values, but who them -
selves not share these views, tend to choose not to study science when having the 
choice (Hansson and Lindahl 2010; Krogh and Thomsen 2005; Worthley 1992). For 
example, a Swedish case study indicate that students with worldviews very different 
from the ones they associate with science tend to exclude themselves from science 
intense programmes (Hansson and Lindahl 2010). Indoctrination of students into 
specific ways of viewing science could therefore have consequences for students’ 
possibilities to engage in science, and could also have consequences in respect of 
choice of study profiles.
Stenmark argues that it is important that “the scientific community consists of 
people with different ideological or religious backgrounds so that the research top-
ics undertaken and the questions asked reflect the interests of different groups of 
people” (Stenmark 2004, p. 220–221). To accomplish such a pluralistic science, it is 
important that students are provided with examples of how science could be engaged 
in from very different starting points. In this way, students with different world -
views, ideologies and perspectives on the nature of science get the possibility to 
engage in science in ways that they find meaningful. However, the present state is 
far from that. Instead, specific images of science are part of the hidden curriculum 
in most science classes around the world.
To label this “indoctrination” perhaps sounds harsh, but it is, as argued here, fair. 
To call things by their right name can shed light on the state of affair, and perhaps 
function as a starting shot for breaking the traditions of science teaching that result 
in indoctrination processes taking place in science classes all over the world.
References
Abd-El-Khalick, F. (2012). Nature of science in science education: Toward a coherent framework 
for synergistic Research and Development. In B. J. Fraser, K. Tobin, & C. McRobbie (Eds.), 
Second international handbook of science education (V ol. 2, pp. 1041–1060). Berlin: Springer.
Aikenhead, G.  S. (1996). Science education: Border crossing into the subculture of science. 
Studies in Science Education, 27, 1–52.
Aikenhead, G. S. (2006). Science education for everyday life: Evidence-based practice. New York: 
Teachers College Press.
Allen, N. J., & Crawley, F. E. (1998). V oices from the bridge: Worldview conflicts of Kickapoo 
students of science. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(2), 111–132.
Alters, B. J. (1997). Whose nature of science? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 34 (1), 
39–55.
Ashton, E., & Watson, B. (1998). Values education: A fresh look at procedural neutrality. 
Educational Studies, 24(2), 183–193.
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 319 ---
303
Bailey, R. (2010). Indoctrination. In R. Bailey, R. Barrow, & D. Carr (Eds.), SAGE handbook of 
philosophy of education. London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Bencze, L., & Carter, L. (2011). Globalizing students acting for the common good. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 48(6), 648–669.
Bencze, L., & Alsop, S. (Eds.). (2014). Activist science and technology education, Cultural studies 
of science education (V ol. 9). Dordrecht: Springer.
Bobel, C. (2006). “take this class if you like to be brainwashed”: Walking the Knife’s edge between 
education and indoctrination. Human Architecture, 4, 359.
Brandt, C. (2007). Scientific discourse in the academy: A case study of an American Indian under-
graduate. Science Education, 92, 825–847.
Callan, E., & Arena, D. (2009). Indoctrination. In H. Siegel (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of phi -
losophy of education. New York: Oxford University Press.
Clough, M. P. (2006). Learners’ responses to the demands of conceptual change: Considerations 
for effective nature of science instruction. Science & Education, 15(5), 463–494.
Cobern, W. W. (1991). World view theory and science education research, NARST monograph no. 
3. Manhattan: National Association for Research in Science Teaching.
Cobern, W. W. (1993). College students’ conceptualizations of nature: An interpretive world view 
analysis. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30(8), 935–951.
Cobern, W. W. (1996). Worldview theory and conceptual change in science education. Science 
Education, 80(5), 579–610.
Cobern, W. W. (2000a). Everyday thoughts about nature. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Cobern, W. W. (2000b). The nature of science and the role of knowledge and belief. Science & 
Education, 9, 219–246.
Cobern, W. W. (2004). Apples and oranges: A rejoinder to Smith and Siegel. Science & Education, 
13, 583–589.
Cobern, W. W., Gibson, A. T., & Underwood, S. A. (1999). Conceptualizations of nature: An inter-
pretive study of 16 ninth graders’ everyday thinking. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 
36(5), 541–564.
Couló, A. C. (2014). Philosophical dimensions of social and ethical issues in school science educa-
tion: Values in science and in science classrooms. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International hand-
book of research in history, philosophy and science teaching (V ol. II). Dordrecht: Springer.
Cuypers, S. E., & Haji, I. (2006). Education for critical thinking: Can it be non-indoctrinative? 
Educational Philosophy and Theory, 38(6), 723–743.
DiGiuseppe, M. (2014). Representing nature of science in a science textbook: Exploring author-  
editor- publisher interactions. International Journal of Science Education, 36(7), 1061–1082.
El-Hani, C. N., & Mortimer, E. F. (2007a). Multicultural education, pragmatism, and the goals of 
science education. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 2, 657–702.
El-Hani, C.  N., & Mortimer, E.  F. (2007b). Understanding typically yields belief: A neglected 
point in Hoffmann’s reaction to our idea of “culturally sensitive science education”. Cultural 
Studies of Science Education, 2(3). doi:10.1007/s11422-007-9064-y.
Flew, A. (1972/2010). Indoctrination and doctrines. In I. A. Snook (Ed.), Concepts of indoctrina-
tion. Philosophical essays. Abingdon: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Fourez, G. (1988). Ideologies and science teaching. Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society, 8, 
269–277.
Fysh, R., & Lucas, K. B. (1998). Religious beliefs in science classrooms. Research in Science 
Education, 28(4), 399–427.
Gatchel, R. H. (1972/2010). The evolution of the concept. In I. A. Snook (Ed.), Concepts of indoc-
trination. Philosophical essays. Abingdon: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Green, T. F. (1972). Indoctrination and beliefs. In I. A. Snook (Ed.), Concepts of indoctrination. 
Philosophical essays. Abingdon: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Gregory, I. M. M., & Woods, R. G. (1972/2010). In I. A. Snook (Ed.), Concepts of indoctrination. 
Philosophical essays. Abingdon: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 320 ---
304
Hansson, L. (2014). Students’ views concerning worldview presuppositions underpinning science: 
Is the world really ordered, uniform, and comprehensible? Science Education, 98(5), 743–765.
Hansson, L., & Lindahl, B. (2010). “I have chosen another way of thinking” Students’ relations to 
science with a focus on worldview. Science & Education, 19, 895–918.
Hansson, L., & Lindahl, B. (2015). Students, science and scientism: A story about resistance. Proceedings 
from the IHPST Thirteenth Biennial International Conference, Rio de Janeiro. Retrieved from 
http://ihpst.net/content.aspx?page_id=22&club_id=360747&module_id=187166
Hansson, L., & Redfors, A. (2006). Swedish upper secondary students’ views of the origin and 
development of the universe. Research in Science Education, 36, 355–379.
Hansson, L., & Redfors, A. (2007a). Physics and the possibility of a religious view of the universe: 
Swedish upper secondary students’ views. Science & Education, 16, 461–478.
Hansson, L., & Redfors, A. (2007b). Upper secondary students in group discussions about physics 
and our presuppositions of the world. Science & Education, 16, 1007–1025.
Hansson, L., & Redfors, A. (2013). Lower secondary students’ views in astrobiology. Research in 
Science Education, 43(5), 1957–1978.
Hodson, D. (2014). Becoming part of the solution: Learning about activism, learning through 
activism, learning from activism. In L. Bencze & S. Alsop (Eds.), Activist science and technol-
ogy education, Cultural studies of science 9. Dordrecht: Springer.
Hoffman, M. H. G. (2007). Learning without belief change? Cultural Studies of Science Education, 
2(3). doi:10.1007/s11422-007-9064-y.
Huttunen, R. (2003). Habermas and the Problem of Indoctrination. In M.  Peters, T.  Besley, A.  Gibbons, 
B. Žarnić, & P. Ghiraldelli (Eds.), The Encyclopaedia of Educational Philosophy and Theory. 
Retrieved from http://eepat.net/doku.php?id=habermas_and_the_problem_of_indoctrination
Jickling, B. (2003). Environmental education and environmental advocacy: Revisited. The Journal 
of Environmental Education, 34(2), 20–27.
Kearney, M. (1984). World view. Novato: Chandler & Sharp.
Kilbourn, B. (1980). World views and science teaching. In H. Munby, G. Orpwood, & T. Russell 
(Eds.), Seeing curriculum in a new light. Essays from science education  (pp. 34–43). OISE 
Press/The Ontario Institute for Studies in Education.
Kilbourn, B. (1980–1981). World views and curriculum. Interchange, 11(2), 1–10.
Kilpatrick, W. H. (1972). Indoctrination and respect for persons. In I. A. Snook (Ed.), Concepts of 
indoctrination. Philosophical essays. Abingdon: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Knain, E. (2001). Ideologies in school science textbooks. International Journal of Science 
Education, 23(3), 319–329.
Krogh, L. B., & Thomsen, P. V . (2005). Studying students’ attitudes towards science from a cul -
tural perspective but with a quantitative methodology: Border crossing into the physics class -
room. International Journal of Science Education, 27(3), 281–302.
Laura, R. S. (1983). To educate or to indoctrinate: That is still the question. Educational Philosophy 
and Theory, 15(1), 43–55.
Leahy, M. (1990). Indoctrination, evangelization, catechesis and religious education. British 
Journal of Religious Education, 12(3), 137–144.
Leden, L., Hansson, L., Redfors, A., & Ideland, M. (2015). Teachers’ ways of talking about nature 
of science and its teaching. Science & Education, 24(9–10), 1141–1172.
Lederman, N.  G. (2007). Nature of science: Past, present, and future. In S.  K. Abell & N.  G. 
Lederman (Eds.), Handbook of research on science education  (pp.  831–879). Mahwah: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lee, H., Yen, C.-F., & Aikenhead, G. S. (2012). Indigenous elementary students’ science instruc-
tion in Taiwan: Indigenous knowledge and western science. Research in Science Education, 
42(6), 1183–1199.
Matthews, M. R. (1998). In defense of modest goals when teaching about the nature of science. 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 35(2), 161–174.
Matthews, M. R. (2004). Reappraising positivism and education: The arguments of Philipp Frank 
and Herbert Feigl. Science & Education, 13(1–2), 7–39.
L. Hansson

--- PAGE 321 ---
305
Matthews, M. R. (Ed.). (2009). Science, worldviews and education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (2014). Science, worldviews and education. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International 
handbook of research in history, philosophy and science teaching (pp. 1585–1635). Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (2015). Science teaching: The contribution of history and philosophy of science. 
New York: Routledge.
McComas, W. F. (1998). The principal elements of the nature of science: Dispelling the myths. In 
W. F. McComas (Ed.), The nature of science in science education: Rationales and strategies  
(pp. 53–70). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Medawar, P. (1961/1996). Is the scientific paper a fraud? In P. Medawar (Ed.), The strange case of 
the spotted Mice and other classic essays on science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mohanan, K. P. (2000). Indoctrination in linguistics education. Retrieved from http://www.iiser-
pune.ac.in/~mohanan/educ/ling-ed.pdf.
Momanu, M. (2012). The pedagogical dimension of indoctrination: Criticism of indoctrination 
and the constructivism in education. Meta: Research in Hermeneutics, Phenomenology, and 
Practical Philosophy, IV(1), 88–105.
Moore, W. (1972/2010). Indoctrination and democratic method. In I. A. Snook (Ed.), Concepts of 
indoctrination. Philosophical essays. Abingdon:Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Öhman, J. (2007). The ethical dimension of ESD–Navigating between the pitfalls of indoctrina -
tion and relativism. In I. Björneloo & E. Nyberg (Eds.), Drivers and barriers for implementing 
learning for sustainable development in pre-school through upper secondary and teacher edu-
cation, 43. UNESCO, Education for Sustainable Development in Action Technical Paper N°4.
Östman, L. (1998). How companion meanings are expressed by science education discourse. In 
I. D. A. Roberts & L. Östman (Eds.), Problems of meaning in science curriculum (pp. 54–70). 
New York: Teacher College Press.
Östman, L. (2010). Education for sustainable development and normativity: A transactional 
analysis of moral meaning-making and companion meanings in classroom communication. 
Environmental Education Research, 16(1), 75–93.
Pedretti, E. G., Bencze, L., Hewitt, J., Romkey, L., & Jivraj, A. (2008). Promoting issues-based 
STSE perspectives in science teacher education: Problems of identity and ideology. Science & 
Education, 17(8–9), 941–960.
Peterson, B. A. (2007). Holding teachers accountable for indoctrination: A reexamination of I. A. 
Snook’s Notion of “Intent”. Philosophy of Education.
Poole, M. W. (1995). Beliefs and values in science education. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Poole, M.  W. (1998). Science and science education: A Judeo-Christian perspective. In W.  W. 
Cobern (Ed.), Socio-cultural perspectives on science education. An international dialogue  
(pp. 181–201). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W. A. (1982). Accommodation of a scien -
tific conception toward conceptual change. Science Education, 66(2), 211–227.
Proper, H., Wideen, M. F., & Ivany, G. (1988). World view projected by science teachers: A study 
of classroom dialogue. Science Education, 72(5), 547–560.
Qablan, A., AL-Ruz, J. S., Khasawneh, S., & Al-Omari, A. (2009). Education for sustainable devel-
opment: Liberation or indoctrination? An assessment of faculty members’ attitudes and class-
room practices. International Journal of Environmental & Science Education, 4(4), 401–417.
Qablan, A., Southerland, S. A., & Saka, Y . (2011). “my job isn’t to tell them what to think”: The 
fear of indoctrination and how it shapes education for sustainable development. Electronic 
Journal of Science Education, 15(2).
Reiss, M. (1993). Science education for a pluralist society. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Roberts, D. A. (1998). Analysing school science courses: The concept of companion meaning. 
In D. A. Roberts & L. Östman (Eds.), Problems of meaning in science curriculum (pp. 5–12). 
New York: Teacher College Press.
Schulz, R. M. (2014). Philosophy of education and science education: A vital but underdeveloped 
relationship. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philoso-
phy and science teaching (V ol. II). Dordrecht: Springer.
11 Science Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum

--- PAGE 322 ---
306
Selby, D. E. (2014). Education for sustainable contraction as appropriate response to global heat -
ing. In L. Bencze & S. Alsop (Eds.), Activist science and technology education, Cultural stud-
ies of science 9. Dordrecht: Springer.
Sinatra, G. M., Southerland, S. A., McConaughy, F., & Demastes, J. W. (2003). Intentions and 
beliefs in students’ understanding and acceptance of biological evolution. Journal of Research 
in Science Teaching, 40(5), 510–528.
Smith, M. U., & Siegel, H. (2004). Knowing, believing, and understanding: What goals for science 
education? Science & Education, 13, 553–582.
Snook, I. A. (1972). Indoctrination and education. Abingdon: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Snook, I. A. (1972/2010). Concepts of indoctrination. Philosophical essays . Abingdon: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul.
Snyder, B. R. (1971). The hidden curriculum. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Solli, A., Bach, F., & Åkerman, B. (2014). Learning to argue as a biotechnologist: Disprivileging 
opposition to genetically modified food. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 9(1), 1–23.
Southerland, S.  A., & Scharmann, L.  C. (2013). Acknowledging the religious beliefs students 
bring into the science classroom: Using the bounded nature of science. Theory Into Practice, 
52(1), 59–65.
Southerland, S. A., Sinatra, G. M., & Matthews, M. R. (2001). Belief, knowledge, and science 
education. Educational Psychology Review, 13(4), 325–351.
Stenmark, M. (2001). Scientism: Science, ethics and religion . Aldershot: Ashgate Science and 
Religion Series.
Stenmark, M. (2004). How to relate science and religion: A multidimensional model . Michigan: 
W. B. Eerdmans Publishing.
Stolzenberg, N. M. (1993). "he drew a circle that shut me out": Assimilation, indoctrination, and 
the paradox of a liberal education. Harvard Law Review, 106, 581–667.
Taber, K.  S. (2013). Conceptual frameworks, metaphysical commitments and worldviews: The 
challenge of reflecting the relationships between science and religion in science education. 
In N.  R. Mansour & Wegerif (Eds.), Science education for diversity. Theory and Practice . 
Springer. Dordrecht
Tabone, C. P. (2011). Environmental education under assault: Can instructors teach environmental 
science without fear? Interdisciplinary Environmental Review, 12(2), 146–153.
Treagust, D. F., & Duit, R. (2008). Conceptual change: A discussion of theoretical, methodologi -
cal and practical challenges for science education. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 3 , 
297–328.
van Eijck, M., & Roth, W.-M. (2011). Cultural diversity in science education through Novelization: 
Against the Epicization of science and cultural centralization. Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching, 48(7), 824–847.
White. (1972/2010). Indoctrination and intentions. In I. A. Snook (Ed.), Concepts of indoctrina-
tion. Philosophical essays. Abingdon: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Wilson, J. (1964). Education and indoctrination. In T. H. B. Hollins (Ed.), Aims in education: The 
philosophic approach (pp. 23–46). Manchester: University of Manchester Press.
Wilson. (1972). Indoctrination and rationality. In I. A. Snook (Ed.), Concepts of indoctrination. 
Philosophical essays. Abingdon: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Worthley, J. S. (1992). Is science persistence a matter of values? Psychology of Women Quarterly, 
16, 57–68.
L. Hansson