Title: Warranted Indoctrination in Science Education
Pages: 323-331

--- PAGE 323 ---
307
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018 
M.R. Matthews (ed.), History, Philosophy and Science Teaching, Science: 
Philosophy, History and Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-62616-1_12
Chapter 12   
Warranted Indoctrination in Science 
Education             
Paul A. Wagner
A much-debated educational question has been: What is the legitimate role of 
indoctrination in education, and more specifically in science education? Contrary to 
many opinions, the noun indoctrination does not name a process or a set of pro -
cesses; it does not denote any malevolent intent on the part of an indoctrinator; nor 
does it denote the value or epistemic soundness of any content resulting from one or 
more processes employed by an indoctrinator. Each of these claims will be made 
clear in the explanations which follow as will the conclusion that the noun indoctri-
nation is best understood as a “benchmark” term and nothing more. It is a valuable 
benchmark term and provides generic license for pedagogical practices that lead to 
firmly held beliefs without the benefit of epistemic grounding.
12.1  Some History
The concept of indoctrination suffered a turbulent past during much of the last cen-
tury (Wagner 1981, 1990). Appreciation of the Progressive Education movement 
and fear of practices such as the indoctrination of those in Nazi youth programs 
caused the concept of indoctrination to fall into disrepute. Western ideological fears 
prompted by the rise of the Cold War turned the connotation of the concept from a 
perceived good to a perceived evil. Many troubling practices were increasingly 
affiliated with the concept by politically sensitive scholars.
At the extreme, British philosopher Anthony Flew declared, albeit free from any 
definitional source, that indoctrination is a matter of implanting firm conviction in 
the truth of doctrines that are “…known to be false or at least not known to be true 
(Flew 1966, p. 282).” A few years later another British scholar John Wilson  similarly 
P.A. Wagner (*) 
Institute for Logic and Cognitive Studies, University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA
e-mail: wagner@uhcl.edu

--- PAGE 324 ---
308
dictated that indoctrination is “…to take over [the child’s} consciousness” (Wilson 
1972, p. 22 and Wilson 1964). A variety of similar ideological definitions of indoc-
trination were entertained moving from the 1960s into the 1980s as evidenced in 
Ivan Snook’s anthology titled, Concepts of Indoctrination (Snook 1972b). Snook’s 
own position, developed in his monograph, Education and Indoctrination  (Snook 
1972a), echoed much the same alarm as the authors in his edited volume.
The alarm of these post-war and Cold War scholars was misdirected. They took 
recent connotations of the term indoctrination and assigned malignant teaching 
practices to the meaning of the term itself. This was unnecessary. Drill and grill 
teaching practices had been denounced by progressive educators for years. Practices 
that stunted intellectual growth and substituted predictable behaviors in their stead 
had been denounced for years and continue to be denounced to this day. All that is 
well and good. But to bundle objection to malignant teaching practices with analy-
sis of a common and well entrenched term such as indoctrination was likely to 
generate jargon and linguistic hair-splitting among scholars while practical advice 
to teachers lingered by the wayside.
The philosopher Thomas Green was among the first to recognize that something 
about recent attitudes toward indoctrination may cause more distraction than clarity 
in managing classroom instruction. Green’s recognition, as articulated in Ivan 
Snook’s edited volume Indoctrination and Education,  set his position distinctly 
apart from the other contributors (Green 1972).
Green acknowledged that some beliefs must be inculcated in students. This 
seems a straight-forward matter of entering into any new study or the learning of a 
new game. These inculcated beliefs however should never be such as to make reflec-
tion, repair, or the discarding of ineffectual beliefs impossible. Certainly all this 
seems true enough and had Green stopped there then there would be no need to re- 
visit his position. Unfortunately Green did not stop there but rather went on to elab-
orate the concept of indoctrination to distinguish between teaching strategies that 
precluded or greatly inhibited any further questioning on the part of students, from 
evidentially-responsive teaching that allowed for later belief revision when 
appropriate.
This bit of well-intended analysis did not advance pedagogical theorizing as 
Green hoped. Refining the meaning of the term ‘indoctrination’ does little to repair 
misguided classroom practices. In the mid-1980s Harvey Siegel picked up Green’s 
ambition in a book titled, Educating Reason (1988). Siegel recognized the practical 
importance of the distinction that animated Green’s thinking.
Siegel uses an example of two children Janie and Johnny. If each child is incul -
cated in some belief, but say Johnny’s belief cannot be rationally redeemed while 
Janie’s can, then there is indoctrination in the first case but not in the second. The 
turning point for Siegel, as for Green, turns on two evaluations. First, if the initial 
inculcation of belief leads to irredeemable grasping of some belief that is the distin-
guishing feature of their technical notion of indoctrination. Second, the holding of 
irredeemable beliefs on the part of a student is de facto evidence of culpable fault on 
the part of the teacher or some prescribed instructional strategy (Siegel 1988, 
pp. 79–83). All of this is a lot of machinery to make distinctions that in the end are 
P.A. Wagner

--- PAGE 325 ---
309
pragmatically unmanageable. Holding irredeemable beliefs is difficult to make 
sense of for any prescriptive purpose. How long must one wait before evaluating 
whether or not a student’s inculcated belief is irredeemable by reason?
In addition, there are many causes for why a student may not redeem an incul -
cated belief with reason and many of those may have nothing to do with how the 
student was taught! For example, the student may simply be negligent in attending 
to a particular belief set as she passes through life! And there may be no reason for 
her to attend to certain acquired belief sets in her life as she lives it.
12.2  Clearing a Path
In what follows, the term will reduced to its simplest and most deeply entrenched 
historical meaning. The purpose of this reduction is to secure ease of application of 
the concept when and where it matters most namely, the time and place of 
instruction.
The social and biological sciences make clear that the inculcation of belief is 
necessary for humans to grow intellectually. Standard dictionaries make clear that a 
simple and modest definition of the term indoctrination offers greatest utility for 
purposes of bench-marking effective pedagogical practices.
The utility of any term is best grounded by simplifying the concept to its most 
basic denotative meaning (Sober 2015, p. 10–12). Determining whether objection-
able practices are indoctrinative or not is not the same as analyzing whether or not 
such practices corrupt student education. And declaring such practices to be indoc-
trination is not the same as explaining why named practices are offensive by refer -
ence to some clear and unambiguous criteria for identifying offensive practices.
Pejorative reference to practices associated with indoctrination and decrying that 
they involve some misguided intent is not uncommon (Smith and Siegel 2004). Of 
course, misguided or worse, evil intent towards others is always a bad thing as is 
deliberately inculcating falsehoods in others. And certainly the destruction of criti-
cal thinking and diminishing personal autonomy is similarly objectionable. Each of 
these intents and practices thwarts the invitation for every learner to come together 
in a Great Conversation of Humankind (Wagner 2011, p. 394). Yet none of these is 
an element in any standard dictionary’s primary definition of indoctrination.
Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions  (Kuhn 1962/1970) 
attracted so much attention because the idea is that entry into a paradigm entails 
adopting organizing principles common to the science at the time. That much Kuhn 
continues to stand by (Kuhn 1987, p.11). Whatever challenges continue regarding 
the coherence of Kuhn’s arguments, one thing remains settled: namely that, entering 
a new discipline involves learning context-dependent fundamentals.
Following Sosa, the term ‘context–dependent fundamentals’ will henceforth 
refer to principles, doctrine and performative practices that must be learned in order 
to engage those who already exhibit substantial expertise in a given discipline (Sosa 
2011, p.  238–239). There is no suggestion here that in each and every case a 
12 Warranted Indoctrination in Science Education

--- PAGE 326 ---
310
 discipline specific set of context-dependent fundamentals creates a closed system. 
In some sciences, such as classical mechanics, this may be true but in many other 
sciences, such as population genetics and plate tectonics, there is a relatively narrow 
but open set of such fundamentals operative at any point in time.
12.3  Preliminary Definition
Indoctrination is neither a good nor an evil in itself. Judging the effects of indoctri-
nation and in context may prompt a host of legitimate and timely concerns. However, 
the effects and context do not constitute the literal meaning of the term, either tradi-
tionally or in this exegesis.
Indoctrination is best described (as opposed to defined) as a dangerous good. 
Indoctrination in science is good to the extent it instills in students a useful concep-
tual foundation for doing science. This is to say, indoctrination is good to the extent 
that it makes possible greater student engagement with those more expert in a disci-
pline or field of study. In contrast, indoctrination is dangerous to the extent it causes 
students to lose a sense of wonder, a passion for confirmation and a propensity to 
seek ever better understanding of the world. Furthermore, indoctrination is danger-
ous to the extent it causes students to disengage with experts and other specialists in 
a field or discipline, or causes students to lose interest in independently seeking 
further insight into the world through a never ending process of systematic trial and 
error.
In practice, fitting students with a set of beliefs and dispositions for which they 
are unable to provide justification is not always a bad thing—at least initially. In 
fact, practices culminating in indoctrination are often unavoidable as in situations 
where novice learners must be led to the threshold of creative inquiry in a discipline 
wholly novel to them. For example, take the common and rudimentary case of stu-
dents learning the context-dependent fundamentals of written communication. No 
alphabet is particularly superior to any other. But given the context, the twists and 
turns of symbols acquire an evolutionary resiliency that make for a useful tool 
advancing communal access to common understanding.
In the United States, students are typically taught a song, the Alphabet Song. 
Once familiar with the alphabet, students begin reading, writing and moving for -
ward towards participation in The Great Conversation in ways they never previously 
imagined. Being drilled on the alphabet or how to count with no grounds for justifi-
cation (indoctrination) never prevented anyone from later engaging in science, phi-
losophy, linguistics, critical theory and all contemporary disciplines which require 
written transactions of one kind or another.
When students first learn the elements of the periodic table, they have little grasp 
of why it is worth learning (Weinstein 2013, p.46). Teachers make a point of explain-
ing atomic weights and the sterile nature of elements, but to the novice this is typi-
cally little more than information to be grasped and responded to on recognition 
tests. Little more can be expected early on. Without such directed (indoctrinative) 
P.A. Wagner

--- PAGE 327 ---
311
learning, again to use Wiley’s term, ritualized signaling, students have little chance 
to gain an independent grasp on the various disciplines, fields and other ways of 
looking at the world.
12.4  Indoctrination in the Sciences
Beginning students in every science are required to grasp basic semantics, inferen-
tial principles and, perhaps, dispositions and habits of observation (Wagner and 
Lucas 1977). As these context-driven fundamentals are acquired, students should 
then be invited to doubt, criticize hypothesize and consider systematic trial and error 
approaches to extort further information from nature. In general, this is how humans 
advanced individual and collective understanding across every generation. The pro-
cess leads from early indoctrinative/ritualized signaling practices to greater theo -
retical strategies and the ability to notice anomalies in experimental observations 
(Wiley 2015, p. 124–5). As student understanding and management of autonomous 
reflection increase, directed instruction leading to indoctrination should decrease 
proportionately (Driver et al. 1996).
12.4.1  The Teaching of Genetics
As an example, consider the teaching of genetics. The context-driven fundamentals 
in biology at the time of Watson and Crick’s childhood were as follows: Mendel and 
Ronald Fisher’s theory of proportional probabilities of inheritance, Thomas 
Morgan’s work with fruit flies exhibiting the potency of mutations, cells had non-  
porous membranes, eukaryotic cells had nucleus and were filled with cytoplasm 
protecting the nucleus. Watson and Crick and others of their generation would have 
been required to memorize these context-driven fundamentals in their early biologi-
cal education (Wesson 1991, p. 289–90). There was no gene theory of information 
processing as of yet. There was no knowledge of ribosomes (a term Crick coined), 
the transmission of biological information for coding proteins within cytoplasm (a 
hunch Crick explored the year after discovering the structure of DNA) (Lane 2015, 
p. 7). There was no theory of mitochondria oxygen-releasing, energy engines, and 
no speculation regarding messenger RNA (Lane 2005, p. 16). Yet Watson and Crick, 
schooled in the context-driven fundamentals of biology at their time were able to 
use the knowledge they had to construct disciplined speculation about something as 
extraordinary as DNA and add to the set of context-driven fundamentals of the neo- 
Darwinian evolutionary science that they and folks like Carl Woese were revising 
and extending (Lane 2015, p. 7–9).
Forty years later students in high school were taught that every cell is an indus -
trial center of activity with at least forty-three factories operating inside nearly every 
cell. Students are told that DNA contains chemical bases of four amino acids 
12 Warranted Indoctrination in Science Education

--- PAGE 328 ---
312
(ACGT). They are also told that combinations of these amino acids code for pro -
teins, and generate ribosome activity and genetic differentiation (Stolz et al. 2004). 
Students learn Lynn Margulis’ startling discovery of a process called symbiosis 
inside the cell whereas previous generations had been taught there is only the dor -
mant cytoplasm (Lane 2015, p. 30–37). High school curricula are making genetic 
coding a threshold concept in biological education (Smith and Good 1984).
Approaching 2020, the scientific context determining relevant fundaments con -
tinues to evolve. Students are still directly taught about cell membranes, meiosis, 
mietosis, nucleus, inheritance and mutation just as were Watson, Crick, Woese and 
others decades before. The additional context-driven fundamentals of the twenty-  
first century now incorporate ribosomes, genes as hybrid units of shape, amino acid 
proximity and information (Field and Davies 2015), as well as suspicions about the 
creative potential of something called epigenetics and environmental change (Carey 
2015, p. 101). The size of the human genome, students are now taught, is approxi-
mately twenty to thirty thousand genes and not the one hundred thousand believed 
in the year 2000 (Lane 2015, p. 22–23). Students are told that humans and chimpan-
zees share as much as 98.3% of the same genomic make up but as data from the 
ENCODE Project flows in, it may turn out that non-coding “junk DNA” is critical 
to managing genetic information and differentiating humans from other primates as 
well as re-framing the problem of speciation generally (Carey 2015, p. 178–179).
No entry level biology student can understand what such a deluge of information 
means in any significant way (Lombroso et al. 2008). Even the public at large seems 
overwhelmed by all the evidence revealing genetic foundations of evolution (Miller 
et al. 2006). Nonetheless, through ritualized signaling/indoctrination, students are 
expected to buy into these facts. This information must stick if one day students are 
to speculate, doubt and otherwise meaningfully grapple with the complexities of 
genetics and evolution (Lawson and Weser 1990).
There is no way of entering into the deep and demanding study of genetics with-
out first grasping some basic linguistic and conceptual tools, inferential practices 
and investigatory procedures that constitute the context-driven fundamentals (Smith 
and Adkinson 2010; Thompson and Stewart 2003). These basic tools and practices 
are no more simply discovered by students than do students simply discover a 
usable alphabet and theorize about its utility. Instead, students are introduced to 
adopt conceptual tools intended to transport them through the threshold of ritualized 
signaling and then into a new dimension of the Great Conversation. The same 
instructional pattern is repeated in the teaching of all science disciplines.
Instructional practices that exceed the required amount of indoctrination, work 
against students developing autonomy in science and beyond. Science educators 
must be careful not to treat all subject matter as if it is fundamental (El Hani and 
Mortimer 2007). If everything is taught as so much “mud thrown against a brick 
wall,” in the hope that some will stick, then students are unlikely to recognize some 
ideas as “context-driven” and others as more promisingly resilient (Nisbett 2015, 
P.A. Wagner

--- PAGE 329 ---
313
p. 230–2). If all is determined as settled once and for all, learners may dismiss the 
need for critical review and inventive investigation.
The fact that creationism must rely wholly on indoctrinative practices discredits 
creationism in science education. But discrediting creationism doesn’t make indoc-
trination a bad idea. It is only the exhaustive exploitation of indoctrinative practices 
that is pedagogically (and perhaps morally) objectionable. This is true of genetics 
and evolutionary science as much as it is for creationism. Any time instruction dis-
courages apt questions, the curriculum becomes fossilized. In the teaching of every 
science, there must be a threshold demarcating the staged ending of indoctrinative 
instructional strategies (practices that aim for acquisition of facts, protocols and 
dispositions that students cannot remotely justify) and leading towards participation 
in a technical aspect of the Great Conversation.
12.5  Conclusion
In the end, two things matter when it comes to understanding the pedagogical sig -
nificance of the concept of indoctrination. First, educators need to benchmark when 
indoctrinative practices are necessary given learner innocence of the fundamentals. 
Second, educators need to recognize when practices leading to indoctrination 
become excessive. This excessiveness alerts educators that current practices need to 
be curtailed and replaced with more dialogic exercises. Understanding indoctrina -
tion benchmarks for educators both when indoctrinative practices are necessary and 
when ritualistic signaling practices exceed their utility.
Students need indoctrination as herein defined, in order to approach the threshold 
of study in any new discipline. However, once learners are over the threshold, sci -
ence educators need to identify the transition points wherein the focus of instruction 
steers away from constraining practices that are counter-productive to bringing stu-
dents into the Great Conversation of Humankind.
When indoctrination continues unabated beyond the threshold required for novel 
speculation and criticism, new paths for student understanding are thwarted. Teacher 
respect for the moral agency of the student as an independent thinker and contribu-
tor to the science is threatened. In short, the student’s eventual residence in The 
Great Conversation of Humankind is at risk. Such consequences are grave moral 
misdeeds.
Students must simply appropriate fundamentals of a discipline or field of study 
in order to begin developing any skills of independent investigation. This recogni -
tion of the limited but core value of indoctrinative practices leads to the following 
principles:
 I. Indoctrinative practices are necessary in the initial stages of any new quest for 
disciplinary understanding.
12 Warranted Indoctrination in Science Education

--- PAGE 330 ---
314
 II. The justification of such practices is limited to facts, principles, current investi-
gatory strategies and semantics fundamental for understanding the discipline in 
its current scientific context.
 A. What is fundamental to a discipline or field of study is context dependent 
and made evident by the practices of currently engaged experts in the field 
(Sarkar 2007).
 B. Indoctrination should never exceed the minimum required for disciplined 
inquiry into a field of study in its current state.
 III. Indoctrinative practices that prove excessive should be avoided.
 A. Such practices prove excessive when they discourage desire for indepen -
dent investigation.
 B. Excessive use of practices which indoctrinate is morally offensive. It should 
be avoided when it limits rather than extends prospects for learner autono -
mous agency.
References
Carey, N. (2015). Junk DNA: A journey through the dark matter of the genome . New  York: 
Columbia University Press.
Driver, R., Leach, J., Millar, R., & Scott, P. (1996). Young people’s images of science. Buckingham: 
Open University Press.
El Hani, C. N., & Mortimer, E. F. (2007). Multicultural education, pragmatism, and the goals of 
science teaching. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 2, 657–702.
Field, D., & Davies, N. (2015). Biocode: The new age of genomics . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Flew, A. (1966). What is indoctrination? Studies in Philosophy and Education, 4(3), 281–306.
Green, T.  F. (1972). Indoctrination and beliefs. In I.  Snook (Ed.), Concepts of indoctrination  
(pp. 25–46). New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962/1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1987). Black body theory and the quantum discontintuity . Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Lane, N. (2005). Power, sex and suicide: Mitochondria and the meaning of life . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Lane, N. (2015). The vital question: Energy, evolution and the origins of complex life. New York: 
W. W. Norton.
Lawson, A. E., & Weser, J. (1990). The rejection of non-scientific beliefs about life: Effects of 
instruction and reasoning skills. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 27(6), 589–606.
Lombroso, T., Thanukos, A., & Weisberg, M. (2008). The importance of understanding the nature 
of science for accepting evolution. Evolution Education and Outreach, 1, 290–298.
Miller, J. D., Scott, E. C., & Okamoto, S. (2006). Public acceptance of evolution. Science, 313, 
765–766.
Nisbett, R. (2015). Mindware: Tools for smart thinking. New York: Strauss, Giroux & Farrar.
Sarkar, H. (2007). Group rationality in scientific research . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
P.A. Wagner

--- PAGE 331 ---
315
Siegel, H. (1988). Educating reason: Rationality, critical thinking, and education . New  York: 
Routledge.
Smith, M. U., & Good, R. (1984). Problem-solving and classical genetics: Successful v. unsuc -
cessful performance. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 21, 895–812.
Smith, M. U., & Siegel, H. (2004). Knowing, believing and understanding: What goals for science 
education? Science and Education, 13, 553–562.
Smith, M. U., & Adkinson, L. R. (2010). Updating the model definition of the gene in the modern 
genomic era with implications for instruction. Science & Education, 19(1), 1–20.
Snook, I. (1972a). Indoctrination and education. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Snook, I. A. (Ed.). (1972b). Concepts of indoctrination. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sober, E. (2015). Ockham’s razors: A user’s manual. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sosa, E. (2011). Reflective knowledge: Apt belief and rational knowledge . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Stolz, K., Griffith, P. E., & Knight, R. (2004). How biologists conceptualize genes: An empirical 
study. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Biological and Medical Sciences, 35, 647–673.
Thompson, N., & Stewart, J. (2003). Genetics inquiry: Strategies and knowledge geneticists use in 
solving transmission genetics problems. Science Education, 87(2), 161–180.
Wagner, P. (1981). Indoctrination, Simon and ethical relativism. Journal of Educational Thought, 
15(3), 187–194.
Wagner, P. (1990). Will education contain fewer surprises for students in the future? In V . Howard 
(Ed.), Varieties of thinking: Recent research from the Harvard Philosophy of Education 
Research Center (pp. 176–211). New York: Routledge.
Wagner, P. (2011). Isolationism and the possibility of truth. Interchange, 42(4), 389–408.
Wagner, P., & Lucas, C. (1977). Philosophic inquiry and the logic of elementary school science 
education. Science Education, 61(4), 549–558.
Weinstein, M. (2013). Logic, truth and inquiry. London: College Publications.
Wesson, R. (1991). Beyond natural selection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wiley, R. (2015). Noise matters: The evolution of communication . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Wilson, J. (1964). Education and indoctrination. In T. H. B. Hollins (Ed.), Aims in education: The 
philosophic approach (pp. 23–46). Manchester: University of Manchester Press.
Wilson, J.  (1972). Indoctrination and rationality. In I.  Snook (Ed.), Concept of indoctrination  
(pp. 17–24). New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
12 Warranted Indoctrination in Science Education