Title: New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction
Author: Michael R. Matthews
Pages: 10-26 (pp. ix-xxv)

--- PAGE 10 ---
ix
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and 
Science Teaching: An Introduction
 Introduction
Research relating the history and philosophy of science to theoretical, curricular and 
pedagogical issues in science teaching (HPS&ST research) has been conducted for 
over a century. Its institutionalised or disciplinary beginnings can be dated from 
1887 when Ernst Mach, the German physicist, philosopher, historian and educator, 
founded the world’s first science education journal  – Zeitschrift für den 
Physikalischen und Chemischen Unterricht .1 In the USA, John Dewey and Lloyd 
Taylor explicitly addressed HPS&ST issues in the 1920s and 1930s. James Conant, 
Gerald Holton, Stephen G. Brush, Leo Klopfer, Robert S. Cohen, Joseph Schwab, 
Otto Blüh and Arnold Arons made significant contributions to the tradition through 
the 1950s and 1960s. In the UK, HPS&ST issues were addressed by Thomas Henry 
Huxley in the nineteenth century; from the 1920s in books and articles by Frederick 
Westaway, Eric Holmyard and James Partington; and in the 1960s and subsequently 
by John Bradley, Joan Solomon and others. HPS&ST investigations are also found 
in Spanish, Portuguese, French, German, Italian, Finnish and Asian educational 
research traditions.2 All of this work was published in various philosophy, history 
and education journals and book series.
That there should be such a tradition of HPS&ST scholarship is not surprising: 
Any intelligent and informed teaching of a subject inevitably leads teachers and 
curriculum writers towards an appreciation and understanding of the history, episte-
mology and ontology of the subject they teach, organise and frame for students. The 
same holds for mathematics, economics, psychology, theology and all disciplines.
A landmark in the history of HPS&ST research was the launching in 1992 of the 
Springer-published journal, Science & Education: Contributions from History and 
Philosophy of Science. This was, and is, the first scholarly journal devoted entirely 
to HPS&ST research. It began modestly with four numbers per year and has grown 
1 Pleasingly Mach’s journal is archived on the web.
2 An outline of the tradition of HPS&ST can be found in Matthews (2015a, Chaps.1–3).

--- PAGE 11 ---
x
both in size and in scholarly recognition. In 1997 it moved to six numbers, in 2003 
to eight numbers and in 2007 to ten numbers per volume. In 2011 there were 108,650 
article downloads from its Springer site.3
Much of the last 30 years of HPS&ST research was detailed and appraised in the 
3-volume, 76-chapter, 125-author, 2544-page Springer International Handbook of 
Research in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching  (Matthews 2014a). The 
Handbook’s subject index contained 2,000 entries and its name index had 3,600 
entries. The chapters were grouped into four sections, Pedagogical Studies, 
Theoretical Studies, Regional Studies and Biographical Studies, with each section 
being further subdivided. Indicative of the vitality of the HPS&ST research, there 
have been 100,000 chapter downloads from its Springer site in the two years it has 
been available.
In the past three decades, there have been hundreds of papers published on nature 
of science and its implications for teaching, learning, science curriculum and teacher 
education programmes. This is commonly cited as ‘NOS research’ and it has had 
enormous international impact in research, teacher education and curriculum writ -
ing.4 Although often not seen as such, it is another segment of the broader HPS&ST 
research tradition.5
Although extensive, the Handbook did not exhaust the spectrum of HPS&ST 
studies. This anthology of New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science 
Teaching Research takes up some fields that were not included in the Handbook (the 
Enlightenment tradition, cultural studies and indoctrination) and develops some that 
were.
 Structure and Contents
This anthology of 12 reviewed articles grouped in four sections deals either with 
aspects of HPS&ST research not covered in the Handbook (the chapters on the 
Enlightenment tradition and on indoctrination) or with research that has risen in 
importance over the past few years. The first section of four chapters deals with the 
pressing issue of understanding the interrelation between science, science education 
and the cultural tradition of the Enlightenment.
The first chapter, ‘Feng Shui: Educational Responsibilities and Opportunities’, is 
a new contribution to the perennial and important topic of ‘science education and 
3 Something of the origins, history, content and impact of the journal can be read in Matthews 
(2015b).
4 For reviews of NOS research, see Erduran and Dagher (2014), Hodson (2014) and Lederman 
et al. (2014).
5 Three papers connecting NOS research to the wider spectrum of HPS&ST studies are Matthews 
(1997, 2004a,b). Some of the philosophical issues raised, but not adequately addressed, by con -
temporary NOS research have been canvassed in Matthews (2012, 2015a, Chap.11).
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 12 ---
xi
worldviews’.6 The chapter describes how feng shui belief and practice is an ancient 
and still significant worldview in Chinese and Southeast Asian cultures and how it 
has an increasing commercial and personal presence in other cultures. It documents 
the unexpected, almost total neglect of feng shui in educational and philosophical 
literature, especially in accounts of pseudoscience and of ‘alternative sciences’. A 
brief account of the history of feng shui is given, with special attention paid to two 
early encounters between feng shui and Western science and worldviews: first, the 
Jesuit priest Matteo Ricci (1552–1610) and, second, the Protestant missionary Ernst 
Johann Eitel (1838–1908). These are chosen in part for their own historical impor -
tance but also because the philosophical, cultural and educational dimensions of the 
two ‘encounters’ still resonate whenever and wherever issues of modernisation and 
multicultural science arise. The chapter elaborates efforts at cultural modernisation 
in twentieth-century China, including the Communist Party’s efforts in this regard, 
and how these sought to excise feng shui from personal and cultural life in China.
Debate over the possibility of demarcating science from pseudoscience is exam-
ined, and arguments are given for maintaining the distinction against those wanting 
to dissolve it and, more strongly, for regarding feng shui as a pseudoscience. The 
claim is made that it is a responsibility of education, specifically science education, 
to engage with and promote the refinement of students’ worldviews, the more so 
when those views encompass events, processes and mechanisms in the natural 
world, the world about which science provides unrivalled knowledge. Science edu-
cation can provide practice in requiring beliefs to be linked to evidence and practice 
in the more sophisticated appraisal of competing beliefs. Such training can flow 
over to beliefs and commitments in politics, history, religion, economics and gov -
ernment policy. Such engagement and flow-over are a contribution of science edu-
cation to the cultural health of societies. This was the hope of the Enlightenment 
philosophers who thought widespread science education could counteract the preju-
dice, superstition, illusion, fantasy and unchecked harmful social and political pro-
grammes so rife in their age; it remains the hope of most contemporary science 
educators.
Robert Nola’s second chapter, ‘The Enlightenment: Truths Behind a Misleading 
Abstraction’, brings philosophical and historical refinement to a core issue in sci -
ence education, namely, the connection between modern science education and the 
eighteenth-century sociocultural-historical movement known as the ‘European 
Enlightenment’ (le Siècle des Lumières or Aufklärung). One unfortunate omission 
from the Handbook, and more generally from contemporary science education dis-
cussion, is the ‘The Enlightenment Tradition in Science Education’. The eighteenth-
century Enlightenment philosophers – John Locke (1632–1704), Baruch Spinoza 
(1632–1677), V oltaire (1694–1778), Jean D’Alembert (1717–1783), Denis Diderot 
(1713–1784), Nicolas de Condorcet (1743–1794), Julien de la Mettrie (1709–1751), 
David Hume (1711–1776) and a little later Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790), Joseph 
Priestley (1733–1804), Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) and Immanuel Kant (1724–
6 On this subject, see Matthews (2009b, 2014b) and contributions to Matthews (2009a).
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 13 ---
xii
1804) – were inspired by the dramatic achievements of the new science of the sev -
enteenth century. Of this founding group, Isaiah Berlin well said:
The intellectual power, honesty, lucidity, courage and disinterested love of the truth of the 
most gifted thinkers of the eighteenth century remain to this day without parallel. Their age 
is one of the best and most hopeful episodes in the life of mankind. (Berlin 1956, p.29)
The eighteenth-century Enlightenment was the fruit of the seventeenth-century 
scientific revolution. It was not a monolithic grouping holding to a ‘party line’; they 
held a diverse set of philosophical, religious and political views, but nevertheless 
certain core commitments can be identified, and the holding of which warrants an 
individual’s inclusion in the Enlightenment movement (Matthews 2015a, pp.23–26, 
Shimony 1997).7
The Enlightenment put large-scale, society-wide education on the cultural and 
political map. It was distinguished, among other things, by its commitment to social 
and cultural improvement, to progress, and this was to be achieved through educa -
tion broadly understood to include periodicals, newspapers, books, colleges and 
embryonic schools (Shimony 1997). The hallmark of Enlightenment education was 
to be the spread of scientific (natural philosophy) knowledge and outlooks. 
Enlightenment figures believed in ‘science for all’ some three centuries before it 
became a popular educational slogan (Brock 1996). This commitment to expansive 
science education has marked all educators explicitly aligned to the Enlightenment 
tradition – Ernst Mach, Thomas Huxley, John Dewey and Gerald Holton, to name 
just some.8
The Enlightenment tradition deserves to be a core topic in science education. Its 
educational, cultural, religious, political, historical and philosophical dimensions 
are deep, rich and demanding; the topic is, one might say, very illuminating. There 
can be productive cooperation between school science, history, religion, economics, 
politics and literature teachers if more were known of the scientific roots of the 
Enlightenment. The intimate connection of science, politics and the Enlightenment 
in the foundation of the USA (Cohen 1995, Koch 1965, Stewart 2014) is an obvious 
illuminating cross-disciplinary case study that can be, with benefit, repeated for just 
about all countries. Such cross-faculty collaboration can bring some cohesion to the 
fragmented, unconnected subject divisions that school students’ experience.
The Enlightenment tradition has many detractors, both within and outside mod-
ernism. Contemporary postmodernism is basically defined in terms of its rejection 
of the historic Enlightenment project; wherever postmodernism holds sway, all, or 
most, of the Enlightenment’s commitments are abandoned. Assuredly the 
Enlightenment is out of favour in education; it is seen to be intimately connected to 
ills, real and imagined, of universalism, imperialism, rationalism and patriarchy. 
The Enlightenment’s connection to embryonic democratic movements, opposition 
7 There are numerous scholarly studies of the Enlightenment (see, for instance, Himmelfarb 2004, 
Israel 2001, Outram 2005, Porter 2000), while three recent ‘popular’ expositions and defences are 
Grayling (2007), Pagden (2013) and Postman (1999).
8 For an outline of this research tradition, see Matthews (2015a Chap.2), and for different national 
HPS&ST traditions, see individual chapters in Matthews (2014a, Section 3).
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 14 ---
xiii
to political and religious absolutism, support for universal human rights, secularism 
(as in the separation of church and state, the separation of sin from crime), freedom 
of the press, open debate, freedom of association, an open and civil society and 
promotion of the critical, including self-critical, spirit or habit of mind is less often 
recognised. What is living and what is dead in the historic European Enlightenment 
movement need to be disentangled, and a good education would endeavour to do so. 
HPS-informed science teachers can contribute wonderfully to this project.
Overwhelmingly modern science education appeals to and extols Enlightenment-
grounded commitments: the importance of evidence; rejection of simple authority 
as the arbiter of epistemic matters; a preparedness to change opinions and theories; 
recognising the interdependence of disciplines; pursuing knowledge for advance -
ment of personal and social welfare; resisting the imposition of political, religious 
and ideological pressures on curriculum development and classroom teaching; and 
so on. These commitments are mostly made without awareness of their Enlightenment 
roots. It is important for educators to connect these contemporary commitments 
with their historical scientific-philosophical base and to be aware of the trajectories 
and philosophical-political-religious buffeting that the commitments have experi -
enced over time. If the past is known, it can be learnt from, and teachers can develop 
a sense of belonging to an open-minded, critical, scholarly tradition and hopefully 
defend it.9
Nola’s chapter asks: What does the name ‘The Enlightenment’ refer to? 
Sometimes it is used merely to name a period of time in European history. Sometimes 
it is used to refer to some body of doctrine (though often what doctrine is unclear). 
On other occasions, it is used to refer to people who advanced such bodies of doc -
trine. Such a nominalisation obscures the use of the adjective ‘enlightened’ to name 
some property of a person. The chapter attempts to say what this property is and 
shows how it underpins an epidemiology of being enlightened, that is, an account of 
the distribution of enlightened as opposed to unenlightened people, in a given soci-
ety at a given time. This gives the kernel of truth that the nominalisation ‘The 
Enlightenment’ obscures. It also helps show that some recent criticisms of ‘The 
Enlightenment’ fall quite short of their mark.
The chapter argues that, introducing the idea of the epidemiology of 
Enlightenment, one can begin to see how excessive focus on a nominalisation of 
what is more properly adjectival can lead one astray. Talk of ‘The Enlightenment’ 
can be a convenient shorthand, but it comes at the cost of taking the nominalisation 
at face value and assuming that there is a definite ‘object’ to be spoken about. The 
epidemiology of being enlightened tells us what are the real facts hidden behind the 
veil of a nominalising abstraction.
Deniz Peker and Özgür Taskin’s third chapter, ‘The Enlightenment Tradition and 
Science Education in Turkey’, provides a case study of the subject introduced by 
Nola. The chapter argues that the Enlightenment tradition in modern Turkey cannot 
be understood without first examining the Enlightenment tradition in the late 
Ottoman Empire. The original Enlightenment tradition in Europe emerged as a 
9 Neil Postman (1999) provides a clear and informed elaboration of this argument.
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv
reaction to the church and state’s dogmatism and oppression in quest for a more 
rational and sceptical worldview and a freer more open society. The Ottoman 
Empire had different societal dynamics than Western Europe, so to understand the 
Enlightenment tradition in Ottoman times, one needs to pay attention to these 
differences.
The Ottoman Empire occupied a massive land area spread over three continents. 
Within this big diversity of geography and population, it is hard to imagine a unified 
view of an Enlightenment phenomenon for Ottoman societies. Nonetheless, the 
Ottoman Empire was a very bureaucratic, centralised state, somehow distant from 
the societies it includes. Thus, focusing on the changes and transformations on 
Ottoman state and Turkey, their structures and policies on education since the con-
ception of European Enlightenment provide good reference points for understand -
ing the Enlightenment movement in the Ottoman Empire and its successor, the 
Republic of Turkey.
However, a chronological order of events alone is not sufficient to capture the 
complexity of the Enlightenment tradition in Turkey. One needs to look at the social, 
cultural, philosophical and political backdrop of these events, with particular atten-
tion to the tension between secularism and religious conservatism. The chapter 
presents the Enlightenment tradition by examining some of the key events in several 
distinct historical periods from late Ottoman through today’s Turkey while provid-
ing cultural, social and political contexts for these events.
Clearly more such national studies of ‘science education and the Enlightenment 
tradition’ need to be undertaken, and hopefully they will be. There is a clear case for 
such studies of Enlightenment-engaged science education in the USA, England, 
Brazil, Argentina, France, Spain, Portugal, China, Japan and Finland – to identify 
just the most obvious candidates for further research.
India is a noteworthy case where the introduction of Enlightenment-informed 
science education in a country, and its subsequent contested history, provides mate-
rial for philosophical, political and educational analysis and hence lessons. The 
Constitution of the newly independent India had many claims to international atten-
tion, but one is unique. Article 51A(h) of the Constitution of India, co-written by 
Jawaharlal Nehru and Bhimrao Ambedkar, states that a fundamental duty of the 
state is To develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and 
reform. How did this explicitly Enlightenment provision get there, what has it 
achieved, and what intellectual, educational and political controversy has it occa -
sioned? These are all engaging questions that repay serious research and that illumi-
nate current curriculum and pedagogy debates in India. 10 Comparable research on 
Pakistan, which was co-created with modern India but whose founding educational 
power brokers rejected the Enlightenment tradition, would be rewarding.11
10 An outline of the India case, and consequent debate about cultivation of scientific temper (‘Habits 
of Mind’, as more generally known, as a goal of science education, can be read in Matthews 
(2015a, pp.48–50).
11 In a 2016 HPS&ST conference address in Pusan, the dean of education at a major Pakistan uni-
versity laid out the depressing litany of problems bedevilling the country’s education and laid 
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 16 ---
xv
Christine McCarthy’s fourth chapter, ‘Cultural Studies of Science Education: A 
Philosophical Appraisal’, documents how the newly emergent research field of cul-
tural studies of science education (CSSE) came to prominence with the launching in 
2006 of the Springer journal of the same name and a little later a Springer book 
series of the same name. The founding editors of the journal and book series, 
Kenneth Tobin and Wolff-Michael Roth, were also two of the most prominent driv-
ers of, and prolific writers in, the constructivist research programme in science edu-
cation and protagonists in the ‘constructivist controversies’ that were ignited by 
early philosophical criticisms of the doctrine. The CSSE programme rejects the 
Enlightenment project; such rejection is an identifier of the CSSE tradition.
The conceptual contradictions and simple confusions of constructivism were 
detailed by Wallis Suchting (1992) and in Matthews (1992, 1993). The former pro-
vided a detailed, philosophically informed, line-by-line critique of von Glasersfeld’s 
hugely popular version of constructivism that was championed by both Tobin and 
Roth. Suchting concluded that:
First, much of the doctrine known as ‘constructivism’ ... is simply unintelligible. Second, to 
the extent that it is intelligible ... it is simply confused. Third, there is a complete absence 
of any argument for whatever positions can be made out. ... In general, far from being what 
it is claimed to be, namely, the New Age in philosophy of science, an even slightly percep-
tive ear can detect the familiar voice of a really quite primitive, traditional subjectivistic 
empiricism with some overtones of diverse provenance like Piaget and Kuhn. (Suchting, 
1992, p.247)
The critique was ignored, and the constructivist caravan moved on over the edu-
cational landscape with unfortunate consequences for student learning of mathe -
matics, literacy and science and harming graduate education and teacher-education 
programmes where belief in the doctrine verged on being compulsory. Symptomatic 
of the times is that in the mid-1990s I gave a talk critical of constructivism at the 
Harvard Graduate School of Education and students told me that it was the first time 
they had heard any criticism of the doctrine since enrolling in the programme. And 
that was at Harvard, the supposed jewel in the education crown.
After the early critiques published in Science & Education  and elsewhere 
(Solomon 1994, Osborne 1996), the range of philosophical problems occasioned by 
constructivism were laid out by contributors to Matthews (1998). Later research 
focussed, to put it gently, on the pedagogical deficiencies of the doctrine. That these 
are substantial and warranted is confirmed by the fact that the word ‘constructivism’ 
has now entirely disappeared from the annual NARST conference programme.12
As Ken Tobin has now ‘moved on’ from constructivism (Tobin 2000) and Wolff-
Michael Roth has now ‘abandoned the constructivist paradigm as a useful theory … 
because [it is] plagued with considerable contradictions’ (Roth 2006), the emergent 
field of CSSE research needs to be examined to see if the well-known philosophical 
problems of constructivism have been carried over into its replacement programme. 
responsibility for most of them on the founding fathers’ rejection of the ‘Enlightenment’ education 
policies adopted in India 70 years ago.
12 The critical studies are outlined in Matthews (2015b, pp.782–789).
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi
An issue now is whether CSSE is a case of old and discredited philosophical wine 
in new bottles. McCarthy takes up this question.
A great deal of patient, useful work has been done in examination of the inter -
relations of science, philosophy and culture. Ernst Mach, so often decried by educa-
tors as a narrow-minded, scientistic positivist, wrote:
The historical investigation of the development of a science is most needful, lest the prin -
ciples treasured up in it become a system of half-understood prescripts, or worse, a system 
of prejudices. Historical investigation not only promotes the understanding of that which 
now is, but also brings new possibilities before us, by showing that which exists to be in 
great measure conventional and accidental. (Mach 1893/1974, p.316)
George Sarton, arguably the founder of the discipline of history of science, wrote in 
his foundational work:
In this book pains have been taken to evoke the social background of living science …
Science never developed in a social vacuum, and in the case of each individual it never 
developed in a psychologic vacuum. (Sarton 1952, p.xiii)
In 1994, William Cobern, in introducing a new section in the long-established jour-
nal Science Education, wrote:
This section serves as a forum for the critical discussion of cultural, sociological, and politi-
cal influences on all aspects of science education. Its purpose is to bring a cross-cultural and 
international perspective to science education that will broaden awareness within the com-
munity of science educators, wherever they may be, that science education is a global activ-
ity. (Cobern 1994, p.217)
The study of ethno-science is a well-established anthropological research tradi -
tion from which science educators can learn. There are serious pedagogical and 
utilitarian issues about how science can best and most effectively and respectively 
be taught in diverse different cultures each with diverse worldviews. Such ‘critical 
discussion’ has been reported in different journals, including CSSE. But the basic 
issue is not pedagogical but philosophical: what is the aim and what should ulti -
mately be taught in the ‘global activity’ of science education? Is it ‘global’ in the 
sense of everywhere having the same goals? Is it universal science or local (ethno)
science that is to be taught? In the most recent iteration of CSSE, what needs to be 
identified is the degree to which the constructivist origins of the field have influ -
enced its methodological, epistemological and even political research 
commitments.
A central issue is whether the CSSE subject matter, namely, the interdependence 
of science, culture and education, can be studied in a scientific or social-scientific 
way as Mach or Sarton did or whether the ‘new’ discipline has its own distinctive 
methodology and truth tests. The latter is suggested by the opening editorial of 
CSSE where it is stated that ‘A requisite for all published articles is, however, an 
explicit and appropriate connection with and immersion in cultural studies’ (Roth 
2006; Tobin 2000, p.1). And a few pages later, that research will be published pro-
vided it ‘is consistent with the forms of inquiry that characterize the research’ (p.7). 
This is very close to a ‘only insiders need apply’ policy and gives rise to important 
methodological and political questions about scholarly publishing.
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 18 ---
xvii
Not surprisingly there is carry-over from CSSE’s constructivist birthing to its 
current decade-old form. McCarthy’s chapter documents how the CSSE field has 
developed a suite of interrelated theses about the nature of modern science that cast 
doubt on the claims of scientific inquiry to provide the best possible and needed 
knowledge of the natural and social worlds. The prevalence in CSSE of postmodern 
interpretations of the nature of science, the nature of knowledge and the nature of 
truth fuels public doubt about modern science, its practices and its findings.13 There 
is a pervasive intercultural and intracultural relativism in the CSSE literature; 
indeed, commitment to such functions as a shibboleth for the tradition. This is intel-
lectually, politically and culturally both unsound and dangerous. Harry Collins, one 
of the foremost proponents of the Edinburgh/Bath strong programme in sociology 
of science, has written:
The attitude that anyone’s opinion on any topic is equally valuable could spread, and there 
are some indications, such as widespread vaccine scares, that suggest it is happening. A 
world in which there is said to be no difference between those who know what they are 
talking about and those who don't is not one that anyone who thinks about it wants. Such a 
society would be like one's worst nightmare, exhibiting many of the characteristics of the 
most vile epochs of human history. (Collins 2008)
In contrast to most CSSE advocates, McCarthy argues for a set of philosophical 
positions she regards as essential for the conduct of modern science: methodologi -
cal naturalism, pragmatic realism, a correspondence conception of truth and a natu-
ralistic conception of knowledge. There is, of course, serious dispute about each of 
these positions, but McCarthy lays them out in detail and invites engagement with 
the arguments. She rejects the common CSSE argument that, because science is not 
infallible (something on which everyone agrees), then anything or any system of 
beliefs is equally warranted. McCarthy rightly points out that between epistemo -
logical infallibilism and relativism falls fallibilism. And in the latter domain, mod -
ern science has no equal in terms of understanding natural mechanisms in the world.
The second section on ‘Teaching and Learning Science’ begins with Gregory 
Kelly and Peter Licona’s fifth chapter, ‘Epistemic Practices and Science Education’, 
which continues this bridge-building between epistemology and the psychology of 
learning. The chapter draws from the empirical studies of scientific practice to 
derive implications for science teaching and learning. There has been considerable 
empirical work from multiple disciplinary perspectives (cognitive science, sociol -
ogy, anthropology, rhetoric) informing perspectives about science and the inner 
workings of scientific communities. These studies examine the practices, discourses 
and cultures of scientists and scientific communities. While the empirical study of 
science has a considerable history, it is an area often less emphasised in education 
as compared to the roles of philosophy and history of science for informing educa-
tion. The chapter details how such empirical studies of science offer insights about 
science, provide implications for science learning and model ways of investigating 
knowledge in action.
13 Further elaboration of this claim can be found in Mackenzie, Good and Brown (2014).
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 19 ---
xviii
A key contribution of this empirical work on the practice of knowledge construc-
tion is the shift in the identification of the epistemic subject from the individual 
knower to that of a relevant social group. The chapter adds to the work in philoso -
phy identifying limitations to epistemologies based in, or assuming, a Cartesian 
knowing subject. This shift suggests the need to examine the social processes deter-
mining what counts as knowledge, to consider a communal understanding of mean-
ing, to evaluate ideas set in historical and public contexts and to recognise the 
importance of the assessment of knowledge claims by relevant groups. The chapter 
might be seen as repeating the point made long ago by Hegel and popularised by 
Paulo Freire that ‘The “we think” determines the “I think”’.
Through a review of science studies, the argument of the chapter for the rele -
vance of a study of epistemic practices is developed. From this point of view, a 
number of implications for developing conceptual understanding, for learning and 
for research methodology in science education are derived. The chapter shows how 
the use of empirical studies of scientific knowledge and knowledge construction 
processes in schools offers contributions to thinking about science education. This 
perspective complements the important normative work in epistemology to provide 
a balanced view of history, philosophy and sociology of science in science 
education.
Erin Peters-Burton’s sixth chapter, ‘Strategies for Learning Nature of Science 
Knowledge: A Perspective from Educational Psychology’, begins with the common 
recognition that learning how to think scientifically is an important, if not vital, skill 
for an informed citizenry. In order to have a democratic community who can make 
knowledgeable decisions, citizens need to be able to evaluate the reliability of evi -
dence and to be able to use logic and reason to make choices that result in favour -
able consequences both for themselves and their society.
The chapter examines the parallels between the ways that nature of science 
(NOS) knowledge has been taught and the learning processes established by self-
regulated learning theory. The chapter bridges the two often separate research fields 
of the epistemology of subject matters and the psychology of learning those subject 
matters. The chapter recognises that one mechanism from which to develop student 
scientific thinking is through the exploration of epistemic cognition in science. The 
chapter shows that an examination of the history of efforts to create NOS-conscious 
curriculum over the past 50 years can give insight into how we identify and under -
stand the effective teaching of NOS.
Hayo Siemsen provides the seventh chapter, it being the first published English 
translation of Ernst Mach’s influential 1890 essay ‘About the Psychological and 
Logical Moment in Natural Science Teaching’. The article was published in the 
world’s first science education journal that had been established by Ernst Mach 
in 1887  – Zeitschrift für den Physikalischen und Chemischen Unterricht .14 
The article was titled ‘Über das Psychologische und Logische Moment im 
Naturwissenschaftlichen Unterricht’ (1890/91, vol.4 pp.1–5). It was the distillation 
14 Pleasingly the journal is archived on the web.
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 20 ---
xix
of Mach’s numerous works on pedagogy and educational theory.15 Mach took as a 
given that science pedagogy involves both logical (epistemological) and psycho -
logical considerations. Mach states his position in the conclusion of the essay:
One should in teaching first and foremost proceed psychologically; only secondarily and as 
much logically, as this is enabled through the psychological preparation so that it becomes 
a need. New concepts, theories, hypotheses, solutions of problems should only be intro -
duced, when the need for this is felt in order to be able to master the topic. For each sen -
tence, which appears during teaching, clarity and explicitness, but in general not 
indefeasibility from the point of view of the goal of teaching, should be required.
Mach’s writings initiated a long ‘Machian tradition’ of education. The tradition 
is characterised by having a historically informed or ‘heuristic’ method; valuing 
experiential and manipulative (‘hands-on’) learning; promoting thought experimen-
tation; championing a liberal, coherent and limited curriculum so that understand-
ing of subject matter can be achieved; stressing the elaboration of the philosophical 
content of curriculum material; and directly or indirectly teaching the nature of 
science.16
It is a great pity that there is so little opportunity in any country’s science teacher 
education programmes, or even graduate education programmes, to learn from the 
life, work and writings of Mach. The same is true of the other significant contribu-
tors to the HPS&ST tradition  – Thomas Henry Huxley, Frederick Westaway, 
E.J. Holmyard, John Dewey, Joseph Schwab and numerous others. 17 The history 
and philosophy of science is not a part of these programmes, and neither is the his-
tory of science education. With both HPS and history of education missing, Mach 
does not appear in pre-service or graduate education programmes that are domi -
nated by other supposedly more practical concerns. But in education, as in science, 
there is nothing so practical as a good theory, and Mach provides one.
Mach’s educational (and philosophical) theory can be elaborated, revised and 
criticised. It is an orientation and guide to education and pedagogy that rewards 
engagement. Hopefully this first-ever English translation of his brief piece might 
lead educators and researchers to give more attention to Mach’s life and writings. 
The notoriously monolingual Anglo-American science education community has a 
debt to Hayo Siemsen’s painstaking translation efforts.
The third section on curriculum development and justification begins with Igal 
Galili’s eighth chapter, ‘Scientific Knowledge as a Culture: A Paradigm for 
Meaningful Teaching and Learning of Science’, which starts with recognition that 
considerable research in science education has focussed on how scientific knowl -
edge is best represented in classrooms so as to facilitate its teaching and learning. 
Such a goal naturally seeks for the most representative and essential features of 
scientific knowledge as established in history and philosophy of science (HPS). It 
15 For discussion of Mach’s extensive educational writings, research and involvements, see 
Matthews (2015a, Chap.2, 2017) and Siemsen (2014).
16 The characteristics of the tradition, and its contributors, are elaborated in Matthews (2017).
17 There are chapters on five of these individuals in the biographical section of Matthews (2014a). 
More such research needs to be written on others in the tradition.
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 21 ---
xx
acknowledges that science teachers require the rudiments of multidisciplinary 
knowledge: subject matter, pedagogy, cognitive science, history and philosophy of 
science. Commonly, the first three are addressed in pre-service programmes of 
teacher training. Yet, even a basic knowledge of history and philosophy of science 
is often totally lacking in such programmes.
An appropriate way to make up this deficiency is to consider scientific knowledge 
as a cultural system. Doing so opens up opportunities to explore how scientific 
knowledge mediates human understanding of natural phenomena and how that 
knowledge is developed through carefully managed processes of investigation and 
validation. Such a pedagogical approach sees science as an instance of cultural con-
tent knowledge (CCK).
A CCK-based curriculum looks to the discourse in the scientific pursuit for 
knowledge, revealing its characteristic structural features − ontological and episte-
mological – which otherwise languish in obscurity in the strictly disciplinary teach-
ing of science. CCK reveals the big picture and broader context of scientific 
knowledge as well as frames and specifies the necessary involvement of HPS in 
science curriculum construction. Evidence is provided that such a curriculum 
appeals to a broad population of learners beyond the traditional disciplinary-  
oriented students and that it keeps with the Enlightenment tradition of dissemina -
tion of scientific literacy.
Yaron Lehavi and Bat-Sheva Eylon’s ninth chapter, ‘Integrating Science 
Education Research, Science and History and Philosophy of Science in Developing 
an Energy Curriculum’, contributes to applied or pedagogical aspects of the 
HPS&ST tradition. One of the universally agreed goals of science education is to 
foster students’ understanding of science: the community-generated web of con -
cepts and ideas that aims to explain natural phenomena according to accepted tools 
and methodology. In addition, students are expected to develop their competency in 
applying scientific ideas and justifying their application. Hence, a curriculum in sci-
ence education involves addressing the interpretation of evidence and the reasons 
for preferring one view over another. Since these considerations are also the focus 
of the history of science and its philosophy, their utilisation can assist the develop-
ment of a genuine scientific curriculum.
Curriculum serves both students and teachers so science education research pro-
vides another context for curriculum theorising and design. Hence, a curriculum 
that aims at supplying students with the requisite tools to learn from the evolution 
of scientific ideas and their foundations, and by those means, foster students’ scien-
tific understanding, rests on four pillars: science itself, its history and philosophy 
and results from science education research. The chapter discusses how each of 
these four pillars can assist in designing a curriculum for teaching energy at middle 
school (7th and 9th grade levels) in Israel. Given international concern about the 
energy crisis and commitments to clean energy, it is valuable to see how HPS plays 
out in a practical, national curricular context.18
18 On contemporary approaches to energy teaching and curricula, see Chen et al. (2014) and the US 
Department of Energy (2012).
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 22 ---
xxi
Mike Smith’s tenth chapter, ‘Teaching Evolution: Criticism of Common 
Justifications and the Proposal of a More Warranted One’, shows that, with cell 
theory and the DNA theory of inheritance, evolution stands as one of the three pil -
lars of modern biology. Evolution helps us understand phenomena in fields as 
diverse as genetics, anatomy, ecology and physiology. Understanding evolution is 
important not just from a scientific perspective but from a practical one as well. 
Evolutionary theory can help us solve real-world problems that have a biological 
basis. The chapter shows that while a wide variety of reasons for the inclusion of 
evolution in the science curriculum have been proposed, too often these justifica -
tions make sense to teachers and policy makers but do not appear to be convincing 
to students; despite all justifications, many students hold out against learning evolu-
tionary theory, and many of those that do learn resist belief in it.
The chapter discusses the types of justifications that have been used to support 
science literacy in general and evolution understanding in particular. It demonstrates 
how limited student-centred justifications for evolution literacy are and asks how 
they can be made stronger. A small set of justifications are proposed that are more 
relevant, interesting and convincing to students. The chapter concludes by drawing 
out educational implications of the argument.
The fourth section on indoctrination introduces the important but largely 
neglected task of the informing science education debates by the discipline of phi -
losophy of education. It begins with Lena Hansson’s eleventh chapter, ‘Science 
Education, Indoctrination, and the Hidden Curriculum’. On connections between 
the two research fields, see Schulz (2014). In Hansson’s chapter, the topic of indoc-
trination is discussed; with the chapter taking as its starting point analyses of the 
concept of indoctrination in philosophy of education, it provides an overview of the 
use of the concept in science education. The chapter then focuses on indoctrination 
through the hidden curriculum, claiming that messages about the image of science 
communicated in the classroom, which are not in line with the formal curriculum, 
are part of this hidden curriculum.
It is suggested that widespread views about science (e.g. associating science with 
positivistic, scientistic, atheistic and modernistic views) could be viewed as the 
indoctrination of students. It is claimed that since these views are not necessary for 
science, the image of science becomes distorted for students. Thus, such indoctrina-
tion could have unfortunate consequences for the possibility of students embracing 
science or identifying with it. The issues raised in the chapter return to those in the 
opening chapter about whether the practice of science is committed to any particular 
worldview, or more usefully, what characteristics of the world are required to 
explain the conduct and success of science.
Paul Wagner’s twelfth chapter, ‘Warranted Indoctrination in Science Education’, 
continues the discussion of indoctrination by asking the following question: Is there 
a place for indoctrination in science education? The issue surfaces with some regu-
larity, but usually without the necessary historical and philosophical refinement, in 
education debate. The question arises whenever science education removes itself 
from student experience and depends overly on authority, the scientific tradition or 
the testimony of experts.
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 23 ---
xxii
The problem might appear intractable as a hallmark of modern science is its 
remove from immediate, unmediated experience and its dependence upon the 
experimental and confirmed findings of others as reported in journals and books. 
Everywhere students learn about things they rarely can see or experience – atomic 
structure, chemical bonding, paleo-climates, arrangement of the solar system, 
galactic events and so on. Nearly all school science content needs to be learnt  
second-hand and taken on testimony, hence the need to see how, and indeed if, rou-
tine science learning and instruction can be distinguished from indoctrination. The 
chapter shows that, through to the early part of the twentieth century, the concept of 
indoctrination was straightforward and generally free of controversy. Ideological 
agitations likely fermented by several factors such as a misunderstanding of the 
progressive education movement, reaction to the growth of fascism and commu -
nism in Europe especially and student revolts of the 1960s and 1970s brought with 
them a host of disturbing connotations surrounding the idea of indoctrination.
The chapter notes that the noun indoctrination does not name a process or a set 
of processes. Indoctrination does not denote any malevolent intent on the part of an 
indoctrinator. Indoctrination does not denote the value or epistemic soundness of 
any content resulting from one or more processes employed by an indoctrinator; it 
is claimed that the noun indoctrination is best understood as a ‘benchmark’ term 
and nothing more. It is a valuable benchmark term and provides generic licence for 
pedagogical practices that lead to firmly held beliefs without the benefit of personal 
epistemic grounding.
The chapter’s claim is that indoctrination functions as a benchmark when entry 
levels of disciplinary material have sufficiently ‘stuck’ in order that learners might 
pass over the threshold of a new discipline and into independent engagement with 
those who are more expert in the discipline. The benchmark establishing that the 
threshold has been successfully secured is manifest when learners are able and 
inclined to carefully express doubt about knowledge claims within the discipline.
 Conclusion
As a guiding curricular principle, Matthew Arnold’s claim of nearly 150 years ago 
(Arnold 1868/1966) that education systems have a responsibility to identify and 
transmit the best of their culture’s heritage is hard to dispute: surely no one would 
want to advocate its opposite. Modern science is one of the most important parts of 
the patrimony of humanity; it has long ceased to be a European or Western cultural 
artefact. The history and philosophy of science allows science teachers and science 
education researchers to better understand the achievements, the strengths and the 
weaknesses of science and so their own social and professional responsibilities as 
part of an important tradition. Consequently, interest and competence in HPS need 
to be cultivated in teacher education and graduate education courses. Minimally, as 
Israel Scheffler so succinctly maintained, to teach a discipline, you need to know 
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 24 ---
xxiii
something of its history and epistemology, and the more of the latter you know, the 
more valuable for students can be your teaching of the discipline (Scheffler 1973).
Hopefully each of the contributions in this anthology can do something towards 
broadening the professional vision of science teachers and thus assist in having their 
students not only arrive at ‘mandated’ destinations – scientific competence, literacy 
and appreciation  - but arrive with broader horizons. Such positive learning out -
comes enable science education to contribute to the cultural health of all societies 
and cultures.
 References
Arnold, M. (1868/1966). In J. Dover Wilson (Ed.), Culture and anarchy: Landmarks in the history 
of education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berlin, I. (Ed.). (1956). The Age of enlightenment: The eighteenth century philosophers. New York: 
Mentor Books.
Brock, W. H. (1996). Science for All: Studies in the history of Victorian science and education . 
Aldershot: Variorum Press.
Chen, R. F., Eisenkraft, A., Fortus, D., Krajcik, J., Neumann, K., Nordine, J., & Scheff, A. (2014). 
Teaching and learning of energy in K-12 education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Cobern, W. W. (1994). International science education section: Editorial policy statement. Science 
Education, 78(3), 217–220.
Cohen, I. B. (1995). Science and the founding fathers: Science in the political thought of Jefferson, 
Franklin, Adams, and Madison. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Collins, H.M. ( 2008). An Interview. American Scientist. http://www.americanscientist.org/search/
home_result.aspx?q=harry%20collins
Department of Energy (DoE) USA. (2012). Energy literacy: Essential principles an fundamental 
concepts for energy education. Washington, DC: US Department of Energy.
Erduran, S., & Dagher, Z. R. (2014). Reconceptualizing the nature of science for science educa -
tion. Dordrecht: Springer.
Grayling, A. C. (2007). Towards the light: The story of the struggles for liberty & rights that made 
the modern west. London: Bloomsbury.
Himmelfarb, G. (2004). The roads to modernity. The British, French, and American enlighten -
ments. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Hodson, D. (2014). Nature of science in the science curriculum: Origin, development and shifting 
emphases. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philosophy 
and science teaching (pp. 911–970). Dordrecht: Springer.
Israel, J. I. (2001). Radical enlightenment: Philosophy and the making of modernity 1650–1750 . 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koch, A. (Ed.). (1965). The American enlightenment: The shaping of the American experiment and 
a free society. New York: George Braziller.
Lederman, N. G., Bartos, S. A., & Lederman, J. (2014). The development, use, and interpretation 
of nature of science assessments. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research 
in history, philosophy and science teaching (pp. 971–997). Dordrecht: Springer.
School of Education
University of New South Wales
Kensington, NSW, Australia
Michael R. Matthews
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 25 ---
xxiv
Mach, E. (1893/1974). The science of mechanics . (6th edn). La Salle: Open Court Publishing 
Company.
Mackenzie, J., Good, R., & Brown, J.  R. (2014). Postmodernism and science education: An 
appraisal. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philosophy 
and science teaching (pp. 1057–1086). Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (1992). Old wine in new bottles: A problem with constructivist epistemology. In 
H.  Alexander (Ed.), Philosophy of education 1992 , Proceedings of the forty-eighth annual 
meeting of the Philosophy of Education Society. Philosophy of Education Society, Urbana, IL, 
pp. 303–311.
Matthews, M. R. (1993). Constructivism and science education: Some epistemological problems. 
Journal of Science Education and Technology, 2(1), 359–370.
Matthews, M. R. (1997). James T. Robinson’s account of philosophy of science and science teach-
ing: Some lessons for today from the 1960s. Science Education, 81(3), 295–315.
Matthews, M. R. (Ed.). (1998). Constructivism in science education: A philosophical examination. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Matthews, M.  R. (2004a). Thomas Kuhn and science education: What lessons can be learnt? 
Science Education, 88(1), 90–118.
Matthews, M. R. (2004b). Reappraising positivism and education: The arguments of Philipp Frank 
and Herbert Feigl. Science & Education, 13(1-2), 7–39.
Matthews, M. R. (Ed.). (2009a). Science, worldviews and education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (2009b). Teaching the philosophical and worldview components of science. In 
M. R. Matthews (Ed.), Science, worldviews and education (pp. 49–80). Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (2012). Changing the focus: from nature of science (NOS) to features of science 
(FOS). In M. S. Khine (Ed.), Advances in nature of science research  (pp. 3–26). Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (Ed.). (2014a). International handbook of research in history, philosophy and 
science teaching (3 vols.). Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M.  R. (2014b). Science, worldviews and education. In M.  R. Matthews (Ed.), 
International handbook of research in history, philosophy and science teaching  (pp.  1585–
1636). Dordrecht: Springer.
Matthews, M. R. (2015a). Science teaching: The contribution of history and philosophy of science: 
20th Anniversary revised and enlarged edition. New York: Routledge.
Matthews, M. R. (2015b). Reflections on 25-Years of Journal Editorship. Science & Education, 
24(5–6), 749–805.
Matthews, M. R. (2017). Mach’s educational theory and practice. In F. Stadler (Ed.), Vienna circle 
institute yearbook. Berlin: Springer.
Osborne, J. (1996). Beyond constructivism. Science Education, 80(1), 53–82.
Outram, D. (2005). The Enlightenment (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pagden, A. (2013). The Enlightenment and why it still matters. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Porter, R. (2000). The Enlightenment: Britain and the creation of the modern world . London: 
Penguin Books.
Postman, N. (1999). Building a bridge to the 18th century: How the past can improve our future . 
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Roth, W.-M. (2006). Learning science: A singular plural perspective. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Sarton, G. (1952). A history of science, volume one: Ancient science through the golden age of 
greece. New York: W.W. Norton.
Scheffler, I. (1973). Philosophy and the curriculum. In his reason and teaching  (pp.  31–41). 
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Schulz, R. M. (2014). Philosophy of education and science education: A vital but underdeveloped 
relationship. In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philoso-
phy and science teaching (pp. 1259–1315). Dordrecht: Springer.
Shimony, A. (1997). Presidential address: Some historical and philosophical reflections on science 
and enlightenment. In L. Darden (Ed.) Proceedings of the 1996 PSA Meeting, S1–14.
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction

--- PAGE 26 ---
xxv
Siemsen, H. (2014). Ernst Mach: A genetic introduction to his educational theory and pedagogy. 
In M. R. Matthews (Ed.), International handbook of research in history, philosophy and sci -
ence teaching (pp. 2329–2357). Dordrecht: Springer.
Solomon, J. (1994). The rise and fall of constructivism. Studies in Science Education, 23, 1–19.
Stewart, M. (2014). Nature’s god: The heretical origins of the American republic . New  York: 
W.W. Norton & Co.
Suchting, W. A. (1992). Constructivism deconstructed. Science & Education, 1(3), 223–254.
Tobin, K. (2000). Constructivism in science education: Moving on. In D.  C. Phillips (Ed.), 
Constructivism in education  (pp.  227–253). Chicago: National Society for the Study of 
Education.
New Perspectives in History, Philosophy and Science Teaching: An Introduction