

<<< PAGE 1 >>>

Educational Psychologist
ISSN: 0046-1520 (Print) 1532-6985 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/hedp20
Supporting the integration of evidence into
federal educational policy and reform eﬀorts:
A navigational framework for educational
researchers
Zewelanji N. Serpell
To cite this article: Zewelanji N. Serpell (2020) Supporting the integration of evidence into
federal educational policy and reform eﬀorts: A navigational framework for educational
researchers, Educational Psychologist, 55:1, 40-48, DOI: 10.1080/00461520.2019.1700798
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2019.1700798
Published online: 30 Jan 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 598
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hedp20

<<< PAGE 2 >>>

Supporting the integration of evidence into federal educational policy and
reform efforts: A navigational framework for educational researchers
Zewelanji N. Serpell
Department of Psychology, Virginia Commonwealth University
ABSTRACT
There is an ongoing debate about how best to infuse “evidence” into school evaluation and
reform efforts, and what role education researchers can play in this effort. A lot of support has
been garnered for evidence-based reform or policies that place a premium on practices that have
been proven effective using rigorous research methods; most often randomized controlled trials
(RCTs). This article discusses challenges with these approaches in the policy space, and presents
an alternative framework for educational researchers; one that requires a deeper and more stra-
tegic engagement in the policymaking process. It highlights that inherent in the federal process
are important windows of opportunity for educational researchers to make their work count. The
article considers the unique way in which time, intermediary partners, and communication influ-
ence the development of federal educational policy, and what the implications are for educa-
tional research.
There is enormous potential for policy decisions to be better
informed by evidence, but the research-to-policy divide in
American education is a vast chasm. This was the impres-
sion I had as an academic doing school-based research with
little to no knowledge about policymaking; and this was
what I came to know again, after a year of working in the
political sphere as a congressional fellow. When I started
outlining this article, it was my intention to articulate my
insights about the root of this chasm based on my education
policymaking experiences as a congressional fellow serving
on the House Committee on Education and the Workforce.
However, as I read more about this divide, I was astounded
to discover that my specific “lessons learned ” had already
been articulated in papers as early as the 1970s (see for
example Weiss, 1977). This fact, led me to a simple conclu-
sion: this was a problem of translation. Educational
researchers can concentrate their efforts on improving the
evidence base for policy and practice decisions. However,
these efforts may be rendered void because uptake is threat-
ened by constraints embedded in the standards we set for
our research to be considered valid, and by our inadequate
engagement in the policymaking process.
In this article, I argue that in many ways the federal
policymaking process can and does accommodate evidence,
but how we define evidence matters. Adopting the gold-
standard definition of “evidence” requires randomized
controlled trial studies (RCTs; Slavin, 2017). However, the
bottom line is that in politics, an RCT-based approach is
not nimble enough to accommodate the complexity of the
education field, nor the policymaking process as it is
currently structured in the United States (Finnigan & Daly,
2014). Further, educational policy is on the whole value-
based (K. Wentzel, personal communication, April 2018),
and is frequently driven by personal accounts of issues that
emerge and inspire action in real-time. As such, successful
contributions to policymaking are contingent on educational
researchers being ready to engage with the right people,
with the right information, at the right time (Weiss, 1991).
The analysis presented here is in large part premised on the
notion that to effectively put forward evidence you have to
understand—and maybe even live in —the world of your
intended recipients (Finnigan & Daly, 2014). The sections
that follow describe this policymaking context, including its
narrow domain of influence, and the structures in place
therein, that define in what ways and when researchers can
bring their evidence to bear.
The federal policymaking landscape then and now
The federal policymaking landscape can be viewed in terms
of opportunities and constraints for educational researchers
to indirectly and directly impact school improvement efforts.
Historically in the United States, the federal government ’s
role in education has been limited. This is due to the tenth
amendment, which defines federalism as a two-tiered system
whereby a territory is controlled by two levels of govern-
ance—the federal government and the state (Nolan et al.,
2018). Within the education arena, the tenth amendment
also relegates most policy decisions to the states. As such,
much of education policy pertinent to school evaluation and
CONTACT Zewelanji N. Serpell znserpell@vcu.edu Department of Psychology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Box 842018, Richmond, VA 23284-2018.
/C2232020 Division 15, American Psychological Association
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST
2020, VOL. 55, NO. 1, 40 –48
https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2019.1700798

<<< PAGE 3 >>>

reform is decided and implemented at state and local levels.
For example, the federal government does not oversee deci-
sions about curricula, teaching methods, instructional mate-
rials, nor even establish requirements or benchmarks for
achievement.
Two key pieces of education legislation were signed into
law in 1965: the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
(ESEA) and the Higher Education Act (HEA). Since the
1960s, federal involvement has progressively grown, as
indexed by the establishment of the Department of
Education as an independent cabinet-level department in
1980 (U.S. Department of Education, 2015). Although, this
department’s role in policy remains relatively small. The pri-
mary mechanism through which the federal government
plays a role in education is through its relations with the
states, and more specifically through stipulations for funding
allocations. “Evidence” entered federal education policy with
ESEA, which laid the foundation for an emphasis on high
standards and accountability, with funds authorized to sup-
port professional development and parental involvement,
but also for instructional materials and educational pro-
gram resources.
The first truly reform-minded federal policy approach
emerged under president George Bush with the passing in
2001 of the No Child Left Behind Act (NBCL), and with
this, “scientifically based research ” was written into law
(Peterson, 2016). It is important to note that while the infu-
sion of an “evidence” mandate was certainly a positive shift
in the policy world, things can go shockingly awry. A case
in point with NBCL: student performance as assessed by
standardized test scores were yoked to teacher evaluations,
which had the tragic effect in some states of teachers
“teaching to the test ” or outright cheating (Croft, Roberts, &
Stenhouse, 2015). A little over a decade later, ESEA was
reauthorized under president Barack Obama as The Every
Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) in 2015 and —in part in
response to problems like the above —made dramatic
changes to how school performance is measured, including
requiring a comprehensive approach with multiple measures;
defining and rewarding the use of evidence in policy and
practice; and shifting many of the nuanced decisions around
these back to the states (Skinner, 2019). Of note, both
NBCL and ESSA are mostly regulatory policy approaches.
The distinction between a regulatory and other policy
approaches is an important one as each approach yields a
different policy structure. For example, I paraphrase below —
in education terms —the difference between a regulatory
approach and a developmental approach articulated in a
chapter by Russel et al. ( 2018) regarding policy to support
adapting to climate change. A regulatory approach aims at
establishing a framework for action that is mandated, such
that the goal is to create a stable regulatory environment in
which actions can be monitored and corrected. This
approach should result in a system that reduces cost and
waste of taxpayers ’ money. Theoretically, it should also pro-
mote investment by inspiring confidence in efforts sup-
ported by and reflecting the federal policy mandate. For
example, in educational reform efforts increased state
investment in education may be motivated or inspired by
allocations from federal government that supports a particu-
lar type of school reform effort.
A developmental approach works to integrate policies
within a dynamic context of ongoing change. Policies are
therefore designed to facilitate rather than regulate, and to
foster the creation and deployment of novel practices that
support positive change. This policy approach is set up to
stimulate work that can be adapted to push specific solu-
tions that emerge out of local concerns. For example, lan-
guage is included in policy that “encourages” some action,
such as the evaluation of programs, but does not specify
how this is done. Evidence plays a role in both regulatory
and developmental policy approaches, but in the latter, evi-
dence is not considered the only or most important factor
and attention to the context of policymaking, including
human factors is critical (Sutcliffe & Court, 2005). In the
following sections, I focus on the role of evidence in the pol-
icymaking process.
Evidence in policymaking
In policymaking, there is preexisting evidence that can help
inform policy decisions, and post-policy enactment evidence,
which is evaluative and speaks to the impact of an existing
policy. The key questions here are: what counts as evidence?
When and why does evidence influence policy or not? For
educational researchers, the question of evidence is really
about data: what kind we pursue and how we go about col-
lecting it (research methods). In the policy world, very care-
ful attention is paid to how federally-owned data is made
available, to who and for how long. In fact, data collection
can itself be a policy issue. In 2017, for example, an effort
was launched in congress to end a policy that mandated the
collection of student achievement data disaggregated by
race. The argument was that it served no purpose, even
though its inclusion in policy was specifically to ensure
schools recognized and could take steps to address achieve-
ment gaps.
Legislators also vary in their embrace of evidence arising
from science-based research despite the fact that it is the
defining feature of the two most significant policy shifts in
education: the No Child Left Behind Act (2011) and the
Every Student Succeeds Act (2015). Ambiguity about how to
define “evidence” is related in part to ambivalence about
what constitutes a fact (Schultz, 2017). This is important
because “fact gathering ” is the cornerstone of policymaking.
How politicians and researchers view the world and how
they gather facts to build evidence is very different. For poli-
ticians the gathering of facts is based on what will be most
persuasive with the general public or with those whom they
are trying to convince. In other words what will “sell” or be
compelling to sway a majority of people and do so quickly.
As such, the methods educational researchers adopt and
tout as the gold standard, often fall short in policymaking
contexts. Empirical studies take time, they rarely yield clear-
cut answers, and evidence is mixed at best, contradictory at
worst, and the educational researcher ’s solution to these
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST 41

<<< PAGE 4 >>>

problems is to gather more data/conduct more studies
(Horton & Brown, 2018). Yet, time is perhaps the one thing
that politicians do not have more to waste.
Even so, this past decade has seen a growing push toward
adopting an evidence-based approach to educational policy
and practice. This approach posits that for policy to count
as evidence-based it must have as its root data derived from
studies that adopt a scientific methodological approach, and
ideally, randomized controlled trials (RCTs). This has com-
mandeered a massive increase in the use of RCTs in educa-
tion research (Connolly, Keenan, & Urbanska, 2018). The
RCT approach is not, however, universally embraced in the
context of educational policymaking and very specific con-
cerns have been raised (Morrison, 2001; Styles & Torgerson,
2018). However, a couple of key points are worth mention-
ing about the drawbacks of an RCT-based approach to
infusing evidence into policymaking.
First, RCT research cannot actually provide definitive
answers to the complex education problems we are trying to
solve through policy (Lortie-Forgues & Inglis, 2019).
Raudenbush ( 2015) articulates this challenge well: “Does the
answer to a precisely focused research question, by itself,
have implications for practical action? What happens when
‘other things ’ are not held constant? For example, if we give
school district leaders the authority to base personnel deci-
sions on value added or other measures of teacher effective-
ness, will we undermine the authority of the school
principal?” Hence, even perfectly executed RCTs may not
translate into policies that make sense (Hess, 2008).
Furthermore, often what works is context-specific, such that
rarely are we able to replicate proven effects (Nutley, Davies,
& Walter, 2002). A study by Dynarski et al. ( 2007) is a case
in point. Their RCT testing the impact of instructional soft-
ware showed positive effects in some schools and negative
effects in others, and effects were correlated with some class-
room and school characteristics (e.g., student-teacher ratio).
In addition, what is particularly challenging for bridging
the research to policy divide is that our science-based dis-
covery process simply takes too long. Confidence that a
given educational intervention works is built over the course
of several years —sometimes almost a decade, and often long
after the evidence is needed to inform policy decisions. One
might consider, for example, if the RCT approach will also
inevitably fail to keep up with technological advances
because by the time one technology has been sufficiently
tested, the technology in question may be obsolete. The pol-
icy world is decidedly more urgent, partly because it is
prompted by an event or set of circumstances that is per-
sonal and critical.
The aforementioned limitations notwithstanding, policy-
makers have become much more amenable to and in fact
demand evidence. As such, research increasingly matters
and holds particular sway with policymakers. A clear index
of this is the recent passing of the Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2019, which prompts
significant government-wide reforms to make data more
accessible and sets the stage for data to be more useful in
policy-related decision-making. Prioritized within this piece
of legislation is open data —making non-sensitive govern-
ment data electronically accessible to the public, and ensur-
ing user-friendly formats and confidentiality. As such, while
educational researchers might not agree on the “best
evidence,” we can all agree that evidence should most cer-
tainly play a role in policymaking. Further, we will now
have access to federally-owned data that can be securely
analyzed to answer important questions and can inform
educational policymaking. We also get closer to being able
to make our science count in policymaking if we do not
expect for the policymaking process to mimic the scientific
discovery process (Horton & Brown, 2018). We can be bet-
ter contributors if we focus squarely on employing system-
atic approaches, but recognize the limitations of any
particular method (Haskins & Baron, 2011). Policy should
be informed by a wide breadth of evidence and methodolo-
gies, not just RCTs. RCTs may be the gold standard for our
judgement about what constitutes good evidence in our field
of research, but in the broader field of educational policy,
being relevant and timely may outweigh the need to select
this particular methodological approach. This does not
obfuscate the importance or need for RCTs, it just avoids
making them the most important thing.
The policymaking chronosystem: Timeframes,
timeliness, and timing
There are arguably few real incentives for the use of educa-
tional research in politics (Wong, 2008), primarily because
the timeframe for research to generate evidence and that of
political decision-making are misaligned. Borrowing from
Bronfenbrenner’s and Ceci ( 1994) theory about human
development, policy development does not happen in a vac-
uum and has a particular chronosystem or a set of changing
conditions determined by sociohistorical circumstance and
environmental events that emerge over the life course and
prompt change. Applying this notion of a chronosystem to
think about policymaking highlights that there is both stabil-
ity and change in policy, and that many factors across both
historical time and cultural space interact to influence its
development.
The federal education policymaking process is often acti-
vated by a salient event that occurs in a particular cultural
context at a particular point in time, like a school shooting
(Sandy Hook) or a catastrophic weather event (Hurricane
Katrina). There is a lot of pressure to act and do so quickly
(Oakley, Pesta, Ciftci, & Blomberg, 2013) and it is not infre-
quent that within hours a legislator will decide their position
on an issue and announce it. The public statement renders
the position something to which the legislator will forever
be held. Delaying a response or back-tracking can come at a
high political cost. Hence, it is at the public announcement
juncture that evidence is sought to validate the policy stance
taken. As such, in policymaking, research will rarely be the
driving force, but it is often the fuel (Haskins & Baron,
2011; Weiss, 1991).
Politicians know that evidence lends legitimacy to their
public action and potentially engenders trust and confidence
42 Z. N. SERPELL

<<< PAGE 5 >>>

from the public. Policymakers primarily use research evi-
dence to support their preexisting beliefs and bolster their
messaging or “political mantra ” (Horton & Brown, 2018).
As such, even when the evidence for their position is
weak—politicians will often stick to their position until the
tide shifts and they can safely move to the other side of an
issue. As a result of this accelerated timeframe, only occa-
sionally can legislators be convinced to make an ideological
change/shift as a result of a new insight they gain from the
evidence with which they are presented (Weiss, Murphy-
Grahan, Petrosino, & Gandhi, 2008).
This targeted use of evidence to support political stances
underscores that politics are largely about values (Weiss,
1977); policymaking is not neutral —it requires a political
position. As researchers, we can tap into this by identifying
the value framework a politician embraces and assessing the
extent to which our research fits within it. When we enter
the policymaking world in this way, we do face an ethical
dilemma: are we willing to eschew the cloak of impartiality
that comes with underlying philosophy of science-based
research? Is it problematic that many of the decisions to use
evidence are driven by efforts to garner support for preexist-
ing ideas that fit a particular political point of view
(Finnigan & Daly, 2014; Manna & Petrili, 2008)? We as
“experts” and our work as “evidence” will indeed be cherry-
picked (Horton & Brown, 2018), but I am not sure this is
much different from the fact that when we present our work
we mostly highlight other work that supports our findings
and minimize work that does not.
Despite challenges associated with timing and the value-
laden nature of policymaking, it is hard to think of an edu-
cational researcher who does not want their work to be used
to solve a pressing or seemingly intractable problem in edu-
cation. Our failure to make meaningful contributions to pol-
icymaking is not for lack of knowledge or expertise on a
topic. It may be instead the prospect of navigating an
unfamiliar political terrain or discomfort with engaging in
advocacy work. The next section of this article provides a
navigational framework for educational researchers thinking
about ways to infuse their research findings into the federal
education policymaking process.
Processes and entry points into the policy world for
educational researchers
The view of the American policymaking process from the
outside—through public and social media —is disconcerting
and, the policy world as a whole can appear alarmingly cha-
otic. From an “outsider-inside” vantage point, the environ-
ment appears as it actually is —dynamic and fast-paced and
sometimes unpredictable, but also orderly. The federal policy
process has several stages that may recycle back from identi-
fying and defining a problem, to generating, implementing
and evaluating a policy to address the problem, and many,
many meetings in between. Evidence can potentially influ-
ence the policymaking process at each stage, but different
types of evidence and different approaches to conveying that
evidence may be required. Thus, infusing research into the
policy process is decidedly recursive —it is not a straight line
and there is no guarantee that the provision of that evidence
will yield a particular policy outcome (Malakoff, 2017).
Further, policy work is never an individual endeavor —it
involves several stakeholders including members of congress
and their staff, committee staff, department officials, leaders
from regulatory agencies, but also lobbyists, advocacy
groups, scholars from the academy, experts from think-tanks
and policy institutes. As such, part of effective engagement
in policymaking is getting to know and working strategically
with other stakeholders.
A common way of conceptualizing the policymaking pro-
cess is as a set of six linked stages (see Figure 1 ) that entail
specific activities and stakeholders. The steps are sequentially
ordered as follows: (1) identifying and defining the problem,
(2) setting an agenda, (3) formulating a policy, (4) legitimiz-
ing the policy, (5) implementing the policy, (6) evaluating
the policy. This last stage might cycle back to stage one and
prompt the elimination or update of an existing policy. My
experience suggests that opportunities to infuse evidence
into the policymaking process are evident at every stage, but
focuses on the first four stages; problem identification,
agenda setting and policymaking.
Stage 1: Problem identification and definition
Often precipitated by discontent with the current state of
affairs or by an event, this stage is often marked by a sense
of urgency. Also, a remarkable feature of the American pol-
itical process; this as entry point into policymaking is rela-
tively easy. Legislators ’ offices are set up to allow ordinary
people or “the public ” to initiate a conversation with the
legislator—often through their staffers —about something
important to them. Policymakers are largely motivated by
their constituents, who are oftentimes the people to identify
a problem that requires policy intervention. Constituents are
ordinary citizens, but are also “groups” who represent a part
of the congressperson ’s constituency, such as representatives
from the local community college or the fire-fighters ’ league.
Educational researchers can enter this phase of the pro-
cess as “ordinary” albeit more informed constituents. Key to
the whole endeavor at this stage is to capture interest in
your research. This first step often occurs at the level of per-
sonal-office engagement. Educational researchers should visit
and meet with staff in legislative offices, especially legislators
in their constituency, those whose priorities are aligned with
their research or who serve on key committees. For educa-
tion issues, these committees would be the House
Committee on Education and the Workforce, and the Senate
Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions.
Educational researchers can also serve a role as knowledge
brokers and empower ordinary citizens with evidence-based
knowledge to bolster their efforts to engage the
political system. For example, a fellow faculty member/
researcher supplied a group of parents in her district with
evidence-based knowledge to take to their legislator to help
support their case for shifting school times for middle and
high school students to later in the day. Also, if you are doing
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST 43

<<< PAGE 6 >>>

education research in local schools, you can invite the legisla-
tor or their staff to that school to see your research in action.
Media will invariably get involved, and this will raise general
awareness about your work and could prompt a deeper inter-
est in how the work could be harnessed to highlight or
address a policy-related issue. You can also engage your legis-
lator by inviting them to give the keynote address at a
research conference/event or meeting organized at your
institution.
Stage 2: Agenda setting
Before uptake of an idea for policy development or change, it
must make it to the agenda —move to a place of active con-
sideration. This is the stage at which researchers can get a
clear picture of whether their work resonates or can fit within
the legislator’s overarching political framework. At this stage,
the policy proposal has to be aligned with the broader polit-
ical agenda: who is in power, what the main issues are, and
what is clearly on the docket for consideration matters a great
deal. This is the stage at which it becomes clear how much of
policymaking has to do with a stance or a particular set of
values. At this juncture, policymakers primarily use research
or evidence to support or bolster a preexisting set of beliefs.
Values can and do change over time but only occasionally
are policymakers convinced to make a change or shift as a
result of a new insight they gain from evidence brought
before them. If it happens, it is usually in the context of a
major societal event, for example 911.
An important engagement goal for educational research-
ers at this stage is awareness of the political landscape.
Keeping abreast of education issues covered in the daily
news (especially through outlets staffers monitor, such as
The Hill, Politico, Huff Post, Wallstreet Journal) and staying
informed about activity at the Department of Education is
critically important. Lastly, it helps to pay attention to what
the education policy think tanks, groups, and associations
are writing about. When and what type of evidence matters
a great deal for evidence uptake (Haskins & Margolis, 2014),
as such, pay close attention to how these stakeholders frame
and discuss relevant research.
Another important goal at this stage is to nurture a rela-
tionship with staffers in a legislator ’s office, so that you
come to mind when staffers need to call on someone when
your “issue area ” arises. The office one targets to engage can
be based on a relationship —“I am a constituent in your dis-
trict,” or it can be based on value-alignment “I also care and
Figure 1. Stage model of the policymaking process and key process-drivers in stages 1 –4.
44 Z. N. SERPELL

<<< PAGE 7 >>>

have expertise to help you move your agenda forward. ”
Selecting the right venue for engagement should be based
on how much attention you can garner on your issue area.
Stage 3: Formulating a policy
At this stage, the problem has been defined and the main
task is formulating the policy solution. The process here
involves a substantial amount of planning and plotting, as
sometimes the goal is to topple an alternative policy idea
using evidence. This is often the case when the legislator ’s
party is not in the majority. Political offices spend a great
deal of time determining a strategy —both a legislative one,
as well as other strategies to help move the policy solution
forward, including messaging strategies, and engagement
strategies with outside groups, and importantly —a press and
communication strategy.
This is an intense time of data gathering and vetting of
evidence, and many people aggressively enter the landscape.
While all of these people have in common a specific policy
interest, their views may be vastly different and the collating
of evidence and achieving buy-in across them is a critical
part of the process. As such, the role of researchers in devel-
oping policy should not be underestimated, even if they are
not at the writing table. It is not uncommon for a congres-
sional committee to holding hearings on a particular bill to
hear testimony from academics who have important insights
on an issue based on their programmatic line of research.
For example, during my time on the Hill, Russell Skiba was
invited to give testimony about the disproportionate use of
exclusionary discipline practices with African American stu-
dents. If possible, when issues arise within the scope of their
research expertise, educational researchers should attend
hearings and consider testifying or writing reaction state-
ments for public consumption.
Capitalizing on current circumstances cannot be under-
estimated—the window of opportunity to be fully engaged
and serve as a resource for research-based evidence is often
very narrow. Part of the educational researcher ’s goal must
entail recognizing political opportunities. One of the most
important things is to be aware of major legislation coming
up for reauthorization and try to stay ahead of it. Lastly,
when researchers get requests, they should respond immedi-
ately as the urgency on Capitol Hill is double speed.
Stage 4: Policy legitimization
This stage marks the passage of the law by congress. This is
the stage at which “official” law-making begins, defined by a
formal set of procedures outlining how the process proceeds
from the introduction of a bill to the signing of the bill into
law. There are two parallel processes in each of the two
chambers of the government: the house and senate. Timing
is a critical issue —when a bill is introduced is carefully
planned but myriad things might delay or accelerate its
introduction. Staffers ’ schedules sometimes drastically shift
due to breaking news at the national level or within the
state/district such that an immediate response is needed,
and everything will shift to accommodate this. All planned
activities for the day may come to a halting stop —and “all
hands-on-deck” for the issue at hand such that the careful
planning for a bill introduction is undone. Also noteworthy
on the time front, is that the time it takes for a bill to move
through this process will vary greatly. Major legislation,
such as the reauthorization of ESSA and HEA may take a
full two-year congressional session (or longer), whereas
smaller bills may move from start to finish in a single week
or just a few weeks.
Your introduction of evidence is more likely to shape
policy if it is useful to inform a bill that is actually “moving”
or on the docket for consideration. However, your research
can also inform “messaging bills ”—bills that are not on the
docket and not going anywhere —but may at some more
opportune time in the future. This might raise the profile of
your research and enable you over the course of an atypic-
ally long period of time, to fine tune how you share your
evidence. Messaging bills will shape policy down the line
when the composition of congress changes and the bill has
better chances of moving forward through the legislative
process. A substantial amount of press coverage occurs
around bill introduction so there is also an opportunity for
researchers to infuse evidence into the policymaking process
by commenting on legislation based on their
research findings.
Stage 4 is marked by a lot of negotiation. The role of
committees becomes central, and committee staff are actu-
ally very amenable to using research findings. Committee
staff actively engage experts and at particular junctures, may
reach out to gather more information (Weiss, 1989). At
both the legislative office and committee levels, a critical
role is also played by intermediary organizations or groups,
such as New America, American Council on Education
(ACE), The Education Trust (EdTrust), American Association
for Colleges of Teacher Education (AACTE). Above are a few
examples, but there are many of these intermediary organi-
zations and they play two primary roles: translation and dis-
semination. Their work is remarkably tailored and timely.
Committee staff engage them in collective action to garner
support for particular bills and it is frequently the way they
bring issues to a larger audience. Their role in gathering and
evaluating evidence can also not be underestimated. They
know a great deal about policy issues, and have the where-
withal to collect and analyze data in real time, and have
mastered the art of effective communication with staffers.
There is something to be said “when the makers of policy
are specialized experts in the substance of the policy
domain” (Nutley, 2003, p. 14)!
A cautionary note on groups, however, was captured well
in the conclusion statement of a recent social science study
examining policy statements from organizations concerning
the effects of media on youth (Elson et al., 2019): “Thus, it
seems that current policy statements tend to be more defini-
tive than is warranted by the underlying science. This may
result in a misrepresentation of a research field to policy-
makers and the general public ” (p. 12). The authors suggest
that when formulating policy statements, “it is important
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST 45

<<< PAGE 8 >>>

that policy statements note the existence of inconsistent data
and significant debates or controversies ” (p. 21). This rec-
ommendation highlights how disconnected we are as
researchers from the reality of policymaking and how much
of our success in integrating evidence into the process
depends on consensus and surety even in the face of great
uncertainty about our findings. Policy statements are not
and cannot be balanced. They must be pitched just right so
that they can garner public support for a bill that supporters
would like to get through. Thus, educational researchers ’
successful engagement entails letting go of the false notion
that research can be integrated into the policy space as
impartial and independent of politics. Small comfort to us
as scientists who shudder at the prospect. However, if it is
any consolation, talking across the political isle does happen,
especially at the committee level and each side brings their
evidence to bear —this is where and how balance is achieved.
We must accept that if our infusion of evidence into the
conversation means we have to put it forward loudly and
confidently we cannot include it with caveats, otherwise we
run the risk of it not being considered (Gillies, 2014), and
rest assured many other voices and often voices that are not
evidence-based will prevail.
Problems in translation: Science communication and
getting your message across
One of the most important skills you learn on the Hill is
the power of “messaging.” You message to yourself, you
message to your constituents, you message to your advisors,
you message to your boss, you message to the media, you
master the art of messaging, and then learn to “pivot” so
that you can remain on message. As educational researchers,
our challenge is that our messaging is actually science com-
munication, and there are times when our message is lost in
translation because of an antipathy in the policy world
toward science itself (Horton & Brown, 2018; Schultz, 2017).
As such, part of our messaging has to be that scientific
research is important. The Alda Center for Communicating
Science ( n.d.) defines good science communication as the
ability to: “communicate complex topics in clear, vivid, and
engaging ways; leading to improved understanding by the
public, media, patients, elected officials, and others outside
of their own discipline. ” The best communications are tar-
geted and deeply succinct, the motto on the hill is mastering
the art of the “ask” and the one-page handout. Guides exist
about how to write policy briefs (ICPA, 2017; Wong, Green,
Bazemore, & Miller, 2017), but more helpful than those, if
you want your research to be appropriately considered as
evidence, is the “legislative policy brief. ” These “combine the
research syntheses and policy recommendations found in
policy briefs with a section drafted by an attorney contain-
ing model statutory language. The model statutory language
details how legislative bodies can act on the policy recom-
mendations” (National Education Policy Center, 2019).
Researchers are notoriously bad at communicating find-
ings to nonacademic audiences, and often assume their
implications are self-evident. The real world of policymaking
involves multiple layers and many people at different levels
of readiness to consider research evidence. We, therefore,
need to be able to tailor our communications. Especially
important on this front, is knowing what and what not to
include. A study by Sorian and Baugh ( 2002) illustrates that
less is most certainly more! Results of their survey of close
to 300 state government policymakers makes it clear that we
overdo it —we provide too much information. They also
note that legislators want to know what tools they can use
to find research relevant to their policy issue areas.
Lastly, we do our work a great injustice when we give
short thrift to the section on policy implications in our
manuscripts. Additionally, it helps to read actual legislative
text—doing this can vastly improve one ’s understanding
about what actually constitutes a “policy implication. ” If we
can get better at understanding the policymaking process,
and the details embedded within policy, we can make our
research count. Nutley et al. ( 2002) summarizes well some
key considerations in determining whether legislators are
apt to pay attention to and take-up particular research evi-
dence. Some considerations are personal: does the policy-
maker believe in evidence as a means to support expert
opinion? Other considerations have to do with the research
“fit”: is the evidence clear, relevant, and supportive of the
policymaker’s existing ideology? Contextual considerations
also matter: is the research timely? Is the evidence derived
through relatively uncontested research methods? Are the
users of the research partners in generating the evidence?
Do the research findings have strong advocates? Also
important are considerations regarding implementation: are
the results of implementing the policy robust? If needed
could we reverse course? These questions illustrate import-
ant dynamics inherent in the policymaking arena, and high-
light the fact that it is not impossible to adapt our
approaches accordingly. Once you have the attention of
legislators as a research expert on a particular policy issue —
be ready, and respond immediately to any requests. Note
again, that the sense of urgency on Capitol Hill is dire —
immediately means immediately!
Conclusions
In sum, legislators and staff within the policymaking land-
scape are open to incorporating science-based research into
their endeavors. This is an important role that we as educa-
tional researchers can play however, our success is contin-
gent on recognizing the dynamic, political and often urgent
tenor of the policymaking process in the United States.
Further, we have to adjust the design of our research
and communication of research findings to fit within this
policymaking milieu if our work is to be useful in
policymaking (Nutley et al., 2002). This agenda to engage
the policymaking process is not for the faint of heart among
us, but there are other ways educational researchers can be
meaningfully involved, two are briefly described below.
Congressional and executive branch fellowships are an
important entry point into policymaking experience. The
potential of programs like the American Association for the
46 Z. N. SERPELL

<<< PAGE 9 >>>

Advancement of Science (AAAS) ’s Science and Technology
Fellowship is significant, and the American Educational
Research Association ’s sponsorship of educational research-
ers to participate in this program provides opportunities to
engage with policymakers and inform policy decisions on
local, state, and national levels. This year-long experience
can be transformational (it was for me!) and can fill import-
ant gaps in educational researchers ’ knowledge about and
experience with policymaking. In this role, educational
researchers are in a position to learn, but also to bring to
bear a more data-driven, scientific approach to decision-
making in the political arena. I would hope that an outcome
of these fellowships is sustained policy engagement by edu-
cational researchers, and increased confidence in the utility
of research-based evidence among legislators and their staff
who worked with the fellows. Some fellows will stay on —
move on to the executive branches and make their contribu-
tions through setting funding priorities for research to be
funded by federal agencies like the Institutes for Education
Sciences or the National Science Foundation. Some may stay
on Capitol Hill as staffers or policy directors; committees
are often a good home because of the long-term vision on
policy issues. Other fellows will join think-tanks, policy
institutes or advocacy groups, or return to their home states
and become more engaged in state-level policymaking,
where efforts are much more tailored and specific to local
circumstances and the translation of policy-to-practice is
more tangible. For those of us who return to the academy,
because the fellowship experience entails learning while
doing, the experience may translate into a change in per-
spective about how we structure our research, and also how
we train the next generation of educational researchers. We
are likely more invested in developing and training students
to adopt effective science communication practices, and
maintain an awareness and willingness to engage in
policymaking.
Other innovative initiatives to more meaningfully engage
researchers in policy work are emerging. The Society for
Research in Child Development (SRCD) for example, has an
initiative which entails the formation of a Rapid Assessment
and Response Strategy (RARS) Team that coalesces around
a topic and engages in a rapid and systematic process to for-
mulate evidence-based responses to policy-relevant issues
that emerge. The goal is to increase engagement in public
policy issues proactively and rapidly where there is compel-
ling research they can bring to bear in response to a current
event. The process engages policy and content experts from
researchers who are members of SRCD. Lastly, many profes-
sional organizations provide opportunities for faculty to join
a delegation of researchers and college administrators to
share their work and have a “beginner’s” visit to Capitol
Hill for a day. Faculty are provided mini-trainings on how
to summarize their work, talk to staffers and familiarize
themselves with the policymaking arena in advance of the
visit so that they can make the most out of the experience.
This can also serve as an “in” with offices.
In sum, whatever the path, the message is that educa-
tional researchers can be involved with policymaking, but
the path toward that can vary. Parting and wise advice:
“Learn the lingo, and identify the key players. Realize that
the path of evidence is winding, and the destination often
distant. It ’s not unusual for it to take decades for the weight
of evidence to leave its mark on policy. But when it does,
the results can often be extraordinary …” (Malakoff, 2017,
p. 563).
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to acknowledge and thank the American
Educational Research Association (AERA) ’s Congressional Fellowship
Program for their sponsorship.
References
Alan Alda Center for Communicating Science. (n.d.). The Alda Center.
Retrieved from https://www.aldacenter.org/get-started/about-us.
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Ceci, S. J. (1994). Nature-nurture reconceptual-
ized in developmental perspective: A bioecological model.
Psychological Review , 101(4), 568 –586. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.101.4.
568
Connolly, P., Keenan, C., & Urbanska, K. (2018). The trials of evi-
dence-based practice in education: A systematic review of random-
ized controlled trials in education research 1980 –2016. Educational
Research, 60(3), 276 –291. doi: 10.1080/00131881.2018.1493353
Croft, S., Roberts, M., & Stenhouse, V. (2015). The perfect storm of
education reform: High-stakes testing and teacher evaluation. Social
Justice, 42(1), 70 –92.
Dynarski, M., & National Center for Education Evaluation Regional
Assistance. (2007). Effectiveness of reading and mathematics software
products : Findings from the first student cohort: Report to Congress .
Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Evaluation and
Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Dept. of
Education.
Elson, M., Ferguson, C. J., Gregerson, M., Hogg, J. L., Ivory, J.,
Klisanin, D., … Wilson, J. (2019). Do policy statements on media
effects faithfully represent the science? Advances in Methods and
Practices in Psychological Science , 2(1), 12 –25. doi: 10.1177/
2515245918811301
Finnigan, K. S., & Daly, A. J. (Eds). (2014). Using research evidence in
education: From the schoolhouse door to Capitol Hill . New York,
NY: Springer.
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018, 5 U.S.C. §§
115-435 (2019).
Gillies, D. (2014). Knowledge activism: Bridging the research/policy
divide. Critical Studies in Education , 55(3), 272 –288. doi: 10.1080/
17508487.2014.919942
Haskins, R., & Baron, J. (2011). Building the connection between policy
and evidence: The Obama evidence-based initiatives . Paper commis-
sioned by the U.K. National Endowment for Science, Technology
and the Arts (NESTA), London, UK.
Haskins, R., & Margolis, G. (2014). Obama ’s promise: Using evidence
to fight the nation ’s social problems. In K. Finnigan & A. Daly
(Eds.), Using research evidence in education: From the schoolhouse
door to Capitol Hill. Policy implications of research in education
(vol. 2, pp. 133 –160). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Hess, F. (Ed.). (2008). When research matters: How scholarship influen-
ces education policy . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Horton, P., & Brown, G. W. (2018). Integrating evidence, politics and
society: A methodology for the science –policy interface. Palgrave
Communications, 4(1), 1 –
5. doi: 10.1057/s41599-018-0099-3
Lortie-Forgues, H., & Inglis, M. (2019). Rigorous large-scale educa-
tional RCTs are often uninformative: Should we be concerned?
Educational Researcher , 48(3), 158 –166. doi: 10.3102/0013189X1
9832850
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGIST 47

<<< PAGE 10 >>>

Malakoff, D. (2017). A matter of fact. Science, 355(6325), 562 –563. doi:
10.1126/science.355.6325.562
Manna, P., & Petrilli, M. (2008). Double standard? “Scientifically based
research” and the No Child Left Behind Act. In Frederick M. Hess
(Ed.), When research matters: How scholarship influences education
policy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Morrison, K. (2001). Randomised controlled trials for evidence-based
education: Some problems in judging “what works. ” Evaluation &
Research in Education , 15(2), 69 –83. doi: 10.1080/09500790108666984
National Education Policy Center. (2019). Legislative briefs. Boulder,
CO: NEPC, University of Colorado.
Nolan, A., Kevin, M., Lewis, K. M., Sykes, J. B., Freeman, W. C., &
Hickey, K. J. (2018). Federalism-based limitations on congressional
power: An overview . Congressional Research Service 7-5700.
R45323. Retrieved from www.crs.gov.
Nutley, S. (2003). Bridging the policy/research divide: Reflections and
lessons from the UK . Keynote paper at National Institute of
Governance Conference; Facing the Future: Engaging stakeholders
and citizens in developing public policy, Canberra, Australia.
Nutley, S., Davies, H. T. O., & Walter, I. (2002). Evidence based policy
and practice: Cross sector lessons from the UK (Working Paper 9).
Swindon, UK: ESRC UK Centre for Evidence Based Policy and
Practice.
Oakley, C., Pesta, G., Ciftci, S., & Blomberg, T. (2013). A model and
test of policymaking as process. Journal of Politics and Law , 6(4),
1–13. doi: 10.5539/jpl.v6n4p1
Peterson, P. E. (2016). The end of the Bush-Obama regulatory
approach to school reform: Choice and competition remain the
country’s best hope. Education Next , 16(3), 22.
Policy Briefs Essential Guide: International Centre for Policy Advocacy.
(2017). An essential guide to policy brief writing. Berlin: ICPA.
Raudenbush, S. (2015). Value added: A case study in the mismatch
between education research and policy. Educational Researcher ,
44(2), 138 –141. doi: 10.3102/0013189X15575345
Russel, D., Beck, S., Campos, I., Capriolo, A., Castellari, S., den Uyl,
R. M. … Weiland, S. (2018). Analyzing the policy framework for cli-
mate change adaptation. In H. Sanderson, M. Hild /C19en, D. Russel, G.
Penha-Lopes, & A. Capriolo (Eds.), Adapting to climate change in
Europe exploring sustainable pathways – From local measures to
wider policies (pp. 273 –313). London, UK: Elsevier.
Schultz, D. (2017, March 11). What is a fact? The scientific versus pol-
itical definition. The Hill . Retrieved from http://thehill.com/blogs/
pundits-blog/energy-environment/323464-what-is-a-fact-the-scien-
tific-versus-political
Skinner, R. R. (2019). The Elementary and Secondary Education Act
(ESEA), as Amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA): A
Primer. Congressional Research Service. R45977. Retrieved from
www.crs.gov
Slavin, R. E. (2017). Evidence-based reform in education. Journal of
Education for Students Placed at Risk (JESPAR) , 22(3), 178 –184. doi:
10.1080/10824669.2017.1334560
Sorian, R., & Baugh, T. (2002). Power of information: Closing the gap
between research and policy. Health Affairs , 21(2), 264 –273. doi: 10.
1377/hlthaff.21.2.264
Styles, B., & Torgerson, C. (2018). Randomised controlled trials (RCTs)
in education research – Methodological debates, questions, chal-
lenges. Educational Research , 60(3), 255 –264. doi: 10.1080/00131881.
2018.1500194
Sutcliffe, S., & Court, J. (2005). Evidence-based policymaking: What is
it? How does it work? What relevance for developing countries?
Overseas Development Institute, UK. Retrieved from http://www.
odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/
3683.pdf
U.S. Department of Education. (2015). What is ESEA? [Web log com-
ment]. Retrieved from http://blog.ed.gov/2015/04/what-is-esea/
Weiss, C. (1977). Research for policy ’s sake: The enlightenment func-
tion of social research. Policy Analysis , 3(4), 531 –545.
Weiss, C. (1989). Congressional committees as users of analysis.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management , 8(3), 411 –431. doi: 10.
2307/3324932
Weiss, C. H. (1991). Policy research as advocacy: Pro and con.
Knowledge and Policy , 4(1–2), 37 –55. doi: 10.1007/BF02692747
Weiss, C. H., Murphy-Graham, E., Petrosino, A., & Gandhi, A. G.
(2008). The fairy godmother —and her warts: Making the dream of
evidence-based policy come true. American Journal of Evaluation ,
29(1), 29 –47. doi: 10.1177/1098214007313742
Wong, K. K. (2008). Federalism revised: The promise and challenge of
the No Child Left Behind Act. Public Administration Review , 68(S1),
S175–S185. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6210.2008.00987.x
Wong, S. L., Green, L. A., Bazemore, A. W., & Miller, B. F. (2017).
How to write a health policy brief. Families, Systems, & Health ,
35(1), 21 –24. doi: 10.1037/fsh0000238
48 Z. N. SERPELL