================================================================================
Chapter: Louder than Words: Review and comparative analysis of knowledge mobilisation models
Author(s): José Manuel Torres
Book: Who Cares about Using Education Research in Policy and Practice?: Strengthening Research Engagement
Series: Educational Research and Innovation
Publisher: OECD Publishing, Paris (2022)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/d7ff793d-en
ISBN: 978-92-64-73132-5 (PDF) / 978-92-64-96272-9 (print)
Section / Part: Part I: Conceptual landscape and the evolution of the field
Book Pages: pp. 33–54
PDF Pages: pp. 35–56 (in raw/d7ff793d-en.pdf)
================================================================================
--- [PDF Page 35 / Book Page 33] ---

2 Louder than Words: Review and

comparative analysis of knowledge
mobilisation models
José Manuel Torres, OECD

This chapter provides an overview of some dominant models of knowledge
mobilisation. First, it compares and contrasts these models using the three
approaches of thinking described by Best and Holmes: Linear, relationship
and systems. Second, the chapter highlights some additional, more recent
models that focus on a specific aspect of research dynamics. The last
section builds on these models and presents recommendations to capture
the research dynamics at play within the complex interactions of education
research, policy and practice. These recommendations may inform the
development of a future model which could ultimately enhance student and
professional learning.

--- [PDF Page 36 / Book Page 34] ---

Introduction
Understanding the links between education research and its use in policy and practice is important to frame
efforts to increase the impact of research. Substantial research has been done to conceptualise and model
knowledge mobilisation over the past two decades. It is now timely to map the evolution of this field and
identify major developments and current shortcomings.
The literature presents a large number of sometimes confusing concepts describing knowledge
mobilisation, its different elements and the contexts in which it develops. Gough and colleagues refer to
“knowledge mediation” defined as “connections between evidence production and use with the overt
purpose of bringing together producers and users of evidence” (Gough et al., 2011, p. 23[1]), Cooper uses
“knowledge mobilisation” and defines it as “intentional efforts to increase the use of research evidence […]
in policy and practice at multiple levels of the education sector” (Cooper, 2014, p. 29[2]).
In line with this diversity of definitions, multiple conceptual frameworks on knowledge mobilisation have
been developed. The focus of the models and the sectors for which they were developed differ, with health
and education being the most common. As with definitions, some frameworks cover the relationships
between research production and research use while others centre their analyses on the relationships
between research, practice and policy. The lack of agreement on terminology, conceptual framing and the
elements composing them was identified more than 10 years ago as one of the main challenges to
enhancing knowledge mobilisation efforts (Levin, 2008[3]).
These frameworks have evolved over time to capture more of the complexity of educational research
systems. They have shifted from presenting one-way processes, with research as a generalisable product,
to considering the system as a whole. This system is characterised by different elements influencing one
another. Nevertheless, this evolution has not converged towards a general framework of knowledge
mobilisation, articulating each local framework within a larger framework (Nokes, 2009[4]). Nor has it
resulted in a universally agreed model outlining the nature of research-based practice and policy (Gough,
Maidment and Sharples, 2018[5]). The feasibility of converging on such a model is highly unlikely due to
the complexity of educational ecosystems and the specific interests that different stakeholders may choose
focus on.
The aim of this chapter is to identify the strengths of existing frameworks and the shortcomings they may
still have despite their evolution. The analysis of different knowledge mobilisation models provides an
overview of how depicting complexity in education research systems have evolved over time. It also sheds
light on the relative importance assigned to each element in the models. Ultimately, this will help us think
about knowledge mobilisation in new ways and this thinking will inform initiatives aimed at reinforcing
research production and use.
First, the chapter provides an overview of selected models of knowledge mobilisation, analysing and
comparing them using three conceptual approaches described by Best and Holmes (2010[6]). Next, it
presents some additional models that focus on specific aspects of research dynamics that provide new
perspectives on knowledge mobilisation. The last section proposes recommendations emerging from the
analysis of existing models to capture the complexity of educational research dynamics in policy making
and teaching practice and inform the development of a clearer vision of knowledge mobilisation.

Conceptual approaches: An analytical lens
The different conceptualisations of interactions between research, policy and practice on one side, and
research production and its use on the other, determine their relevance and shape efforts to improve their
outcomes (Best and Holmes, 2010[6]). Finding an appropriate model for knowledge mobilisation can

--- [PDF Page 37 / Book Page 35] ---

ultimately contribute to harnessing the use of research evidence in both policy making, and school and
teaching practice.
Best and Holmes (2010[6]) characterised three ways of thinking about research-policy-practice links: The
linear model, the relationship model, and the systems model. The former two have already been analysed
in earlier OECD work (2000[7]).
The linear model presents one-way processes in which knowledge is a generalisable product and the use
of it depends on “effective packaging”. Knowledge is produced by researchers, disseminated to users, and
incorporated into practice and policy. This model assumes that these phases or processes follow a logical
successive and dependent order, an assumption reflected in the language used to describe these phases
(e.g. “knowledge transfer”, “research uptake”). While Figure 2.1 gives a simplistic representation of a linear
model of knowledge mobilisation with three phases, in more detailed models these phases can go up to
seven: production, validation, collation, dissemination, adoption, implementation, and institutionalisation
(OECD, 2000[7]).

Figure 2.1. Knowledge mobilisation linear model

Knowledge
production

Knowledge
mediation

Knowledge
application

Source: OECD (2000[7]), Knowledge Management in the Learning Society, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264181045-en.

With research knowledge production being isolated from research use in policy and practice, these linear
knowledge transfer models have been refuted since at least the late 1970s (Lave and Wenger, 1991[8]).
One argument is that one-way research transfer processes (i.e. research “passing” from producers to users
who implement it) do not adequately explain what happens in reality (Levin, 2013[9]). A second argument
is that the assumption of a linear model has led to “a gap between the communities of researchers and
decision-makers, [failing] to interact and understand each other” (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016,
p. 49[10]). Far from being an orderly exercise, “knowledge processes” tend to have feedback loops and
overlaps between them. Thus, a more accurate representation would be interactive modelling, where
connections and interdependencies between components influence one another at different points.
The relationship model focuses on the connections and interactions between either actors using
knowledge or processes related to its production and use. This model still takes into account linear
processes such as dissemination and diffusion of knowledge. It also stresses the influence that
partnerships and networks of actors with similar concerns can have on the sharing of knowledge. In this
approach, knowledge can come from multiple sources – either research or theory, policy or practice – and
its use will depend on the effectiveness of the processes and relationships developed.
In this conceptualisation, knowledge users such as teachers have a more engaged role in knowledge
production. It also accounts for the active contribution research producers can make to knowledge
mobilisation processes. These processes of transfer and integration can, in turn, lead to the creation of
new knowledge. Figure 2.2 presents a simplified version of knowledge mobilisation through the lens of this
more sophisticated way of thinking, with the interaction between the elements in the system being one of
its most relevant characteristics (OECD, 2000[7]).
Finally, the systems model builds on and extends the diffusion, dissemination and relational processes of
the former models. It builds on both systems theory and complexity theory, which postulates that systems
consist of individual actors who create relationships among each other, which in turn are formed in

--- [PDF Page 38 / Book Page 36] ---

response to feedback. New structures and behaviours emerge as a result of actors’ actions and
interactions (Snyder, 2013[11]). Self-organisation, the emergence of patterns and multi-directional flows of
knowledge are thus inherent to systems models. Here, the presence of constant feedback loops and the
understanding of the roles, actions and contexts of key stakeholders, and how they shape – and are
shaped by – the system are key.

Figure 2.2. Knowledge mobilisation relationships model

Knowledge
production

Knowledge
mediation

Knowledge
application

Source: OECD (2000[7]), Knowledge Management in the Learning Society, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264181045-en.

Systems theory sees systems (e.g. the education research system) as containing interdependent
components, structured in a hierarchical order. Organisations within these systems are also
interdependent and must maintain permeable boundaries in order to receive, transform and export
knowledge. During these processes, systems engage in negative and positive feedback loops. These
feedback loops serve to correct errors or improve the system as a whole or one particular element of it.
These different processes allow a whole system to be greater than the sum of its parts (Lai and Huili Lin,
2017[12]).
This type of model considers the presence of multiple sources of knowledge and interrelated circuits of
knowledge linking locally generated knowledge to knowledge developed through more systematic
coordination. All the relevant stakeholders actively participate in the production and/or the use of
knowledge. Researchers, practitioners, policy makers and other actors influence one another, directly and
indirectly, within dynamic systems.
Through the systems lens, strategies to coordinate the use of research knowledge have to take into
account all the key actors and factors that could affect processes in educational systems. The success of
these strategies will depend on their coordination across multiple levels; skills and capacities of the actors;
the existence of leadership spread across various actors; the effectiveness of communication channels;
and well-placed structures of accountability. It is the interdependencies of these elements that make it
difficult to capture the complexity of education research dynamics in a model.
Three ways of thinking about knowledge mobilisation – linear, relational and systems – guide the analysis
of the selected frameworks in this chapter. This point hides an important caveat: That a model is a
simplified description of a system and/or its processes. When the system it depicts is highly complex,
certain elements are not represented or minimised and some others are emphasised. The models

--- [PDF Page 39 / Book Page 37] ---

representing knowledge mobilisation, and the elements their authors chose to include, have an impact on
which, and how, different actors within the system are represented and where the efforts will be focused
(Sharples, forthcoming[13]). Thus, it must be recognised that an analysis of the evolution of these depictions
also maps changes in the perceptions of the education research system and the components of it that are
most valued.

Knowledge mobilisation models
The next two sections will briefly present the four selected models, and compare and contrast them. The
selected frameworks and models reflect the evolution of knowledge mobilisation perspectives over time.
Rather than a comprehensive review, the following four models have been selected because they are
widely cited, highly recognised by leading experts in the field and/or add a new perspective and elements
to consider on the subject.
The section starts with a brief description of each model, which is followed by a more in-depth analysis
summarised in Table 2.1.

Knowledge-transfer strategy framework
Lavis and colleagues (2003[14]) provide an organisational framework for a knowledge-transfer strategy in
both the applied health and economic/social policy sectors, represented by Figure 2.3. This framework
considers five elements, which are laid out in the form of answers to the following questions.


What should be transferred to decision makers? The message
Research organisations have to transfer actionable messages coming from a broad body of
research and not simply from a unique study. The authors highlight that not all research can or
should have an impact. The work can help with identifying problems, generating hypotheses, and
developing new methodologies rather than solely informing decision making.



Whom should research knowledge be transferred to? The target audience
The clear identification of a target audience is key. The audience, its environment and the decisions
they face define the specific strategy for the message’s transfer. Thus, the target audience directly
affects the nature of other elements in the framework. The authors describe four types of audience:
General public or service recipients; service providers; managerial decision makers; and policy
decision makers. These different audiences with their different characteristics and objectives
influence the format in which the message is delivered.



Who should transfer research knowledge? The messenger
The messenger can be an individual, group or organisation. What is most important is that the
messenger has credibility in this role as this can affect the potential success of knowledge-transfer
strategies. Building this credibility is time-consuming and skill-intensive, and having the right
messenger for a particular strategy depends on the capacity of other elements of the framework.
For instance, a credible messenger who is known among policy makers in the health sector would
not be the best choice for transferring research knowledge to teachers.



How should research knowledge be transferred? Knowledge transfer processes and supporting
communications infrastructure
Regardless of the target audience, active rather than passive engagement processes are the most
effective. One-way processes such as “producer-push” efforts that are, for example, led by research
producers who push research out into policy or practice (Davies, Powell and Nutley, 2015[15]) are
less desirable than “user-pull” approaches in which, for example, research users reach out to
researchers to obtain information (Davies, Powell and Nutley, 2015[15]). Bi-directional processes

--- [PDF Page 40 / Book Page 38] ---

that place value on what research producers and users can learn from each other are optimal for
generating an actual change in decision-making cultures, regardless of the audience. The mode of
interaction between actors requires significant attention and, consequently, so does the
communications infrastructure that supports it.


With what effect should research knowledge be transferred? The evaluation
The expected results and measurement of a knowledge-transfer strategy’s outputs depends on the
target audience, its objectives, and the types of processes analysed. In the case of education, the
objective could be changing a particular teaching practice (or the practice of a health professional
in the original focus) whereas for policy makers, it could be informing debate on the selection of a
possible course of action.

Figure 2.3. Knowledge-transfer strategy framework

MESSENGER
• Individual
• Group
• Organisation

TARGET AUDIENCE
transfers

MESSAGE

defines

• General public or service
recipients
• Service providers
• Managerial decision
makers
• Policy makers

KNOWLEDGE-TRANSFER PROCESSES | SUPPORTING COMMUNICATION INFRASTRUCTURE

EVALUATION

Measurement depending on:
• Target audience
• Objectives
• Type of process

Source: Own elaboration, based on Lavis, J. et al. (2003[14]), “How can research organizations more effectively transfer research knowledge to
decision makers”, The Milbank Quarterly, Vol. 81/2, pp. 221-248.

Knowledge-to-action framework
Graham and colleagues (2006[16]) offered a framework to elucidate the key elements of the knowledge-toaction (KTA) process in the health sector with action encompassing the use of knowledge by practitioners,
policy makers, patients, and the public. This framework is represented in Figure 2.4.
Conceptually, the KTA process is divided into two main components: Knowledge creation, represented in
the figure by the funnel, and the Action cycle, with each of them comprised of ideal phases. However, the
authors acknowledge that the actual process is complex and dynamic, and the hierarchy and limits
between the components and their phases are fluid and permeable, occurring in sequence or
simultaneously and influencing each other.
In this framework, knowledge is mainly research-based but also includes other forms of knowing such as
experiential knowledge. The Action cycle represents the activities and processes related to the use or
application of knowledge.

--- [PDF Page 41 / Book Page 39] ---

Figure 2.4. Knowledge-to-Action framework: Knowledge creation and Action cycle

Source: Crockett, L. (2017[17]), “The Knowledge-to-Action Framework”, https://medium.com/knowledgenudge/kt-101-the-knowledge-to-actionframework-7fbe399723e8 (accessed on 27 August 2021), based on Graham, I. et al. (2006[16]), “Lost in knowledge translation: Time for a map?”,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/chp.47.

Knowledge creation
The knowledge creation component of the KTA framework considers the major types of knowledge that
exist and can be used. It starts with the phase of knowledge inquiry, which represents the broad body of
primary research or information of variable quality, relevance and accessibility. The next phase, knowledge
synthesis, represents the aggregation of existing knowledge through the identification, appraisal, and
synthesis of studies or information relevant to specific questions. This synthesis often takes the form of
systematic reviews, including meta-analysis and meta-synthesis. Lastly, the third phase considers the
creation of knowledge tools or products such as synopses, practice guidelines and decision aids, which
aim to present knowledge in clear, concise, and user-friendly formats to ideally influence what research
users do.
Knowledge producers can adapt their activities to the needs of potential users in each of the phases,
tailoring their research questions to address the problems identified by users or customising the message
for the different users.

Action cycle
The authors consider the Action cycle of the KTA framework as a process leading to the implementation
of knowledge, representing the activities needed for this application. These phases, summarised in

--- [PDF Page 42 / Book Page 40] ---

Figure 2.4, are dynamic and can influence each other, leading to permanent feedback between them. They
can also be influenced by the knowledge creation phases.

Research knowledge mobilisation model
Levin (2004[18]) developed a framework on research impact in the education sector, which would later be
used by several authors to conceptualise knowledge mobilisation and later formed the basis of Levin’s own
knowledge mobilisation model. In this framework, the author considers research impact to have four core
elements.
First, the context of research production. This includes what and how research gets done, who does it, and
the communication activities undertaken. It assumes that the production is mainly located in the academic
world but that it also takes place in a variety of organisations.
Second, the context of research use. This includes governments, educational organisations, teachers, the
school community, students and all contexts that have an interest in the application of research. It
considers the views, capacities and structures enabling these organisations to find, understand and use
research or limiting them.
The framework emphasises all types of connections and interactions between these two contexts – direct
or mediated; formal or informal; face-to-face or digital; strong or weak – which should enhance impact over
time. These connections tend to happen through third-party mediation – the third element. This extends to
varying degrees in both directions as research production and mediation can be influenced by research
use. The author suggests that the contexts of mediation and use are larger than the research production
context, as they bring together a wider set of institutions, organisations and individuals.
Finally, these three elements are situated in a larger social context – the fourth element – which is itself in
constant flux. This suggests that the actions of research producers and users, while important, are not the
only ones affecting ideas and social practices. Furthermore, a variety of people and organisations work in
both research production and use contexts, with individuals moving between research posts and
educational practice.
Levin (2011[19]; 2013[9]) would later present his research knowledge mobilisation model based on the
above-mentioned framework. It represents three overlapping contexts: The production of research; use of
research; and all mediating processes between these two (see Figure 2.5). In Levin’s model, which is
based on systems theory, knowledge mobilisation happens where two or more of these contexts interact.
These contexts do not refer necessarily to structures or organisations but, rather, to functions. The model
acknowledges that some people and groups can operate in more than one context, which is why the
triangles in the representation overlap. Within each context there is a wide range of connections and
feedback loops with other parts of the system. The multiple organisational and personal connections
between the contexts are represented by two-way arrows of different thicknesses, indicating the strength
or the intensity of these relationships.
While research production mainly (though not only) takes place in academia, research use considers both
policy and practice settings such as schools and governmental organisations where the knowledge can be
applied. Research mediation considers all the individuals or organisations attempting to connect research
production and use such as think tanks, lobby groups, the media and professional organisations.
The three contexts and the knowledge mobilisation processes taking place among them are influenced by
institutional and organisational settings, and the social context in general. The structure of the system –
e.g. the institutions, legal constraints and governance arrangements – also strongly shapes the
mobilisation of research knowledge.

--- [PDF Page 43 / Book Page 41] ---

Figure 2.5. Research Knowledge Mobilisation model

Production

Use

Universities
Others

Policymakers
Practitioners

Sector
organisation

Mediation
Individuals
Organisations
Processes

Social
context

Source: Levin, B. (2013[9]), “To know is not enough: Research knowledge and its use”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3001.

Evidence use analytical framework
Gough and colleagues (2011[1]) developed a first framework to classify activities linking research evidence
with policy making. Their model focuses on components already described by some of the other selected
frameworks. In particular, it refers to the production of evidence, its use, and the mediation between these
two as outlined by both Graham and colleagues, and Levin.
The production of evidence includes not only producing relevant research but also enabling its production
(e.g. individual and organisational conditions that facilitate the research production) and communicating its
results. The use of evidence encompasses the direct use – i.e. the change of policy makers’ behaviour
and ultimately of policy itself – and the indirect use – i.e. the shape of policy makers’ knowledge and
attitudes. Mediation of evidence refers to the connections that bring together evidence producers and
users. These are all processes that may occur at the individual, organisational and structural or system
level.
Although the terms “producers” and “users” could imply a linear, unidirectional flow of information, the
authors highlight that these relationships occur in multiple directions. In this sense, evidence users are
active constructors of knowledge and not just passive recipients of the work of research producers. Despite
the fact that the three components – evidence production, mediation and use – are usually shown as
separated in models, the authors highlight that they are commonly intertwined. To reflect these
complexities of the system, Gough and colleagues added three other dimensions:


Engagement of stakeholders other than evidence producers and users that may be involved in the
process, such as civil society organisations, employers’ organisations, social partners and the
media.



Recognition that the components of the model work together as a system, emphasising the
importance of coordinated and effective interventions.



Research on evidence production and use itself, which informs the processes occurring within the
system and its continuous improvement.

The framework developed by Gough and colleagues has evolved over time, and this evolution is discussed
below and represented by Figure 2.6.

--- [PDF Page 44 / Book Page 42] ---

Figure 2.6. Evidence use ecosystem framework
A. Evidence production-to-use system

EVIDENCE-INFORMED SYSTEM
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT

EVIDENCE
PRODUCTION

EVIDENCE
USE

MEDIATION

RESEARCH ON EVIDENCE PRODUCTION AND USE
B. Evidence ecosystem

WIDER SYSTEMS AND CONTEXTS
ACTORS | PERSPECTIVES | ISSUES | QUESTIONS | POWER

DECISION MAKING

RESEARCH PRODUCTION

ENGAGEMENT

Informed by research

Support
uptake

Primary research
Mapping and synthesis
Communication
and interpretation

C. Evidence use ecosystem analytical framework

WIDER SYSTEMS AND CONTEXTS
Many players and interests
ACTORS | PERSPECTIVES | ISSUES | QUESTIONS | POWER

POLICY, PRACTICE AND
DECISION-MAKING

ENGAGEMENT

(synthesis)
Demand for research
Prioritise issues | Support uptake
Guidance | Interpret | Communicate

Enlightenment and/or
instrumental use of
evidence

WHAT WE KNOW FROM
RESEARCH

IMPLEMENTATION OF
DECISIONS

Conceptual and/or
instrumental
evidence

RESEARCH PRODUCTION
(primary research)
EVIDENCE ECOSYSTEM

Source: Panel A: Adapted from Gough, D. et al. (2011[1]), Evidence Informed Policymaking in Education in Europe : EIPEE Final Project Report,
EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University of London; Panel B: Adapted from Gough, D., C. Maidment and
J. Sharples (2018[5]), EPPI-Centre; Panel C: Adapted from Gough, D., J. Thomas and S. Oliver (2019[20]), “Clarifying differences between
reviews within evidence ecosystems”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13643-019-1089-2.

--- [PDF Page 45 / Book Page 43] ---

In 2018, Gough and colleagues (2018[5]) adapted this model to analyse the work undertaken by the United
Kingdom’s What Works Centres, enlarging its scope to evidence-informed policy and practice. Graphically,
the swap between the two components of research production, commonly on the left, and the research
use, commonly on the right, forces a new consideration of their non-linear relationship. As most countries
read from left to right, the previous configuration emphasised a “research push” interpretation in which
produced knowledge comes first and should inform decision making in practice and policy. The later model
inverses the perspective to put greater emphasis on pull mechanisms and adopts a systems view indicating
various interacting elements.
Regarding research use, the authors distinguished between use by policy makers and practitioners,
directly making and implementing the decisions (“decision making” in the figure) and use by the Centres.
This latter use acts as an enabler of the former, supporting individuals and organisations in the policy and
practice contexts to use research (“supporting uptake” in the figure).
The dotted lines surrounding the core elements of the system, represented in a later work by Gough and
colleagues (2019[20]), signifies two levels to the framework: On one hand, the narrow evidence ecosystem
with engagement between research production and research use; on the other, the broader socio-political
system and context within which the evidence ecosystem sits. The use of the term “ecosystem” points to
a dynamic figure, with different components affecting each other, directly or indirectly, and with positive
and negative feedback loops. Both systems affect the decisions made in policy and practice, the research
produced and the connections and influences between these two.

Comparative analysis
Through the lens of the conceptual approaches developed by Best and Holmes (2010[6]), this section will
analyse the above presented models. Table 2.1 summarises the main characteristics of the frameworks
and sheds light on the evolution of the conceptualisation of knowledge mobilisation.

Table 2.1. Comparative analysis of knowledge mobilisation models
Author(s)

Lavis et al.

Graham et al.

Levin

Gough et al.

Name

Knowledge-transfer strategy
framework

Knowledge-to-Action
framework

Research Knowledge
Mobilisation model

Evidence use ecosystem
analytical framework

Year(s)

2003

2006

2004 – 2013

2011 – 2019

Academic
relevance

1 467 citations

4 606 citations

949 citations
(4 articles)

123 citations
(3 articles)

Widely considered by
experts.

Widely considered by
experts

Sector

Health, Socio-economic
sectors

Health

Education

Education

Context

Policy and Practice

Policy and Practice

Policy and Practice

Policy and Practice

Generation
(Best & Holmes)

Linear

Relationship

Relationship-System

Relationship-System

Core elements

Message; Actors

Knowledge creation;
Knowledge use

Research knowledge
functions:
Production, Use and
Mediation

Research production;
Multi-level research use;
Ecosystems

Isolated

Permeable

Overlapped

Intertwined and
influenceable

Elements’
interaction

--- [PDF Page 46 / Book Page 44] ---

Author(s)

Lavis et al.

Graham et al.

Levin

Gough et al.

Key actors

Messenger and Target
audience (potential users)

Producers and Users
(practitioners, policy
makers, the general public)

Producers, Users and
Mediators

Producers, Users, Mediators
and other Stakeholders

Activities
(Actors’ roles)

Knowledge Transmission
(messenger); Knowledge
Application (user)

Knowledge Creation
(producers); Knowledge
Application (users)

Research production;
Research use; Research
mediation.

Research production and
communication (producers);
Research construction and
direct and indirect use
(users); Bringing together
producers and users
(mediators); Engagement
(stakeholders)

(Actors can operate
in more than one
particular context)

Contribution

Tailoring of the message to
the audience.
Presence of evaluation.

Fluidity and permeability of
components allowing
feedback loops.

Overlapping of functions.
Influence of larger setting
and social context.

Consideration of evidenceinformed system as a whole
and its influence.

Note: Number of citations according to Google Scholar on 12 May 2022.

The analysis compares the frameworks across a few key characteristics. The first five rows of the table
provide some basic information. The row “generation” refers to the Best and Holmes’ conceptual approach
that is reflected in the framework. “Core elements” refers to the elements that are at the centre of each
considered model. “Elements’ interaction” captures the relationships between the core elements. “Key
actors” points to the actors identified as playing a role within the models, while “activities” depicts the roles
assigned, if any, to each of these actors. Finally, “contribution” summarises the main outputs and novelties
from the reviewed models.

Core elements and their interaction
Each of the presented models has a different set of core elements. These and their relationships indicate
which “generation” of knowledge mobilisation they belong to.
The first difference is the way in which the models describe knowledge. Lavis and colleagues do not feature
the “functions” of knowledge (production, use); rather they focus on the “message”, a product to be
formatted to fulfil the target audience’s requirements by the “messenger”. To a certain extent, this
corresponds to a partial and static version of the “mediation” element of Levin’s model, focused exclusively
on the translation and formatting of knowledge. Graham and colleagues favour the terms “knowledge
creation” and “action” (used as the title of their model) while the two most recent models prefer the terms
“production” and “use”. This vocabulary, while different, can be seen as roughly corresponding
(i.e. production-creation and use-action), with some nuances. Creation has creativity as its root while
production has product. The former perhaps more naturally implies the combination of different knowledge
types (research and experiential) while the latter can be more easily associated to something thought to
be used (as a product). On the other end, “use” could be much broader than “action” once we acknowledge
that research can shape attitudes and knowledge, even when its use cannot be explicitly captured by
discrete action.
The second difference relates to the relationships between the core knowledge elements. In Lavis et al.,
the message connects two groups of actors (messenger and target audience); however, research
production and its use are clearly isolated from each other. In Graham et al.’s framework, knowledge
creation is at the centre, surrounded by stages of action that may occur simultaneously. The fluidity and
permeability of creation and action stages generate permanent feedback loops. In Levin and in Gough et
al., production and use are connected through mediation, although quite differently. In the former, the three
components appear to be equal whereas in the latter, the representation suggests that mediation is more
of a process (rather than a knowledge activity) that connects production and use.

--- [PDF Page 47 / Book Page 45] ---

An additional difference is the explicit presence (or not) of knowledge mobilisation (or similar) in the models.
Whereas Graham et al.’s model simply neglects it, Lavis et al. recognise the presence of knowledge
transfer processes and that bi-directional efforts are considered to be more effective. Levin and Gough
and colleagues consider knowledge mediation or engagement as core elements in their frameworks.
Levin’s mediation function regroups some of the connections between the contexts of research production
and research use. It overlaps with and is influenced by these contexts. Gough et al.’s mediation component
– later renamed “engagement” – also refers to the connections bringing together evidence producers and
users.

Key actors and their roles
The studied frameworks also differ on how they represent – if at all – the actors involved in the knowledge
mobilisation processes and the roles assigned to them.
The early-2000s conceptualisation of Lavis et al. identifies two main groups: The messenger and the target
audience, and the potential users, with the former being key to the success of the transmission of the
knowledge. Research producers are not considered, and research users are only considered as indirectly
defining the communication strategy of the product – the knowledge – for its correct transfer.
For their part, Gough et al. identify producers and users of evidence as relevant actors, although they
highlight that these actors are not necessarily the same in every sector and that actors can perform a
variety of different roles. Research users can be active constructors of knowledge whereas research
producers should be aware of the context of the users. Furthermore, Gough et al. recognise the presence
and relevance of other actors who influence the evidence ecosystem in the wider systems and contexts
surrounding production and use.
Graham and colleagues and Levin do not depict the actors as the central components of their models.
Instead, Graham and colleagues consider knowledge creation and use processes, and Levin considers
functions as the core elements. Whereas Graham et al. do not specify which actors are meant to be
engaged in each process, Levin acknowledges that actors can be related to more than one context, and
so their functions can overlap. Rather than a standard model focused on the relationships between the
actors – an actor-relationships model – both frameworks are more of a function-relationships model,
focused on the interactions and the influences between the functions. This allows consideration of actors
beyond a single context, not solely linked to their prescribed primary function.

Generating knowledge mobilisation: linear, relationship and systems perspectives
The analysis of these four selected knowledge mobilisation models allows the evolution of the
conceptualisation of this field to be traced over time.
There is a general move away from linear ways of thinking and towards relationship and system
approaches. Although the evaluation of all the components as a whole in Lavis and colleagues’ model may
implicitly point to one of the main characteristics of a systems perspective, it is only with Gough and
colleagues’ model that the evidence ecosystem is explicitly attempted to be considered in its entirety. This
system influences, and is influenced by, the different elements considered in the model, generating multiple
and constant feedback loops.
Nevertheless, representation of some of the elements is highly influenced by linear and relationships ideas.
Production and use of evidence are strongly differentiated with no overlap between them except in Levin’s
model. These functions tend to represent the relationship between research production and research use
as a unidirectional or a bi-directional one, with research production commonly being independent from
research use. This falls short of acknowledging and representing the multiple relationships within the
system in practice.

--- [PDF Page 48 / Book Page 46] ---

Over time, there is also a stronger consideration of the contexts and wider systems surrounding the
educational evidence ecosystem. Once again, both Lavis and colleagues, and Levin suggest it in their
models but it is Gough and colleagues who make explicit this “two-level” system and the influence they
have on the evidence ecosystem. This multi-level system characteristic, with system and sub-systems,
has been also described as “nested” or “layered” (Sharples, forthcoming[13]).
Some of the selected authors have abandoned the process-product modelling, i.e. an input (research
evidence) and an outcome (practices or decisions), with processes linking both. The former exclusive focus
on “push” processes has now included the “pull” processes. Thus, the relationships shift from unidirectional
to bi-directional. Some models even consider relationships as multi-directional, as is the case in the
frameworks of both Levin and Gough and colleagues. Actors and contexts in these conceptualisations
relate to each other in different ways and with different purposes.
Models have also shifted from a focus on actors to a focus on contexts and functions. Authors have
recognised that functions can be fulfilled by different actors and that actors can belong to different contexts.
This enriches the conception of both actors, contexts and functions by avoiding a one-dimensional
characterisation of the actors. Frameworks range in terms of their level of detail and comprehensiveness
from the specificity of Gough and colleagues’ to the simplicity and broad potential use of Levin’s.
It should not be the aim of frameworks to fully represent the complexity of systems, although non-linear
models are able to capture complexity more effectively (Sharples, forthcoming[13]). However, there is room
to improve the present conceptualisations of knowledge mobilisation. Models still struggle to jointly
represent the different functions of the education research system and the different contexts in which they
operate. They often lack consideration of the education research system as a whole and neglect the larger
system surrounding the former. Additionally, the frequent segregation between the identified functions
could suggest that the system and its elements are somehow perceived as isolated. These gaps may result
in the need for strategic coordination being overlooked.
Whereas the reviewed frameworks attempt to capture the complex nature of knowledge mobilisation – with
varying degrees of success – other models focus on some specific dimensions of the education research
system. The same way the analysis of a cross-sectoral exercise can generate key lessons for the education
sector (see Chapter 6), the analysis of models beyond knowledge mobilisation can provide useful insights
and a new perspective towards this subject. The following section discusses models directly or indirectly
related to knowledge mobilisation.

Other models relevant for understanding knowledge mobilisation
Scholars have developed knowledge mobilisation-related frameworks focused on particular aspects and
processes of knowledge mobilisation. Such processes include, for example, the use of evidence by
decision makers or teachers and the relationship between evidence and innovation. These
conceptualisations can provide a different perspective when thinking about knowledge mobilisation, and
may solve some of the shortcomings that the above-mentioned frameworks present. It is not the intention
of this section to provide a thorough analysis of these frameworks. Rather, the section aims to highlight
aspects that may enhance the understanding and conceptualisation of knowledge mobilisation in education
systems.
Langer, Tripney and Gough (2016[10]) developed a conceptual framework of how evidence-informed
decision making (EIDM) occurs. The authors define EIDM as the process in which multiple sources of
information, in particular the best available research evidence, are consulted prior to making a decision to
plan, implement and/or alter policies, programmes and other services. These interventions have the
ultimate objective of changing behaviour through the use of evidence. The EIDM framework, represented
in Figure 2.7, highlights the complexity in the use of evidence in decision making, characterising it not as

--- [PDF Page 49 / Book Page 47] ---

a straightforward action or function but, rather, as a process influenced by multiple factors such as
intervention types and levels; mechanisms; and intermediary behavioural outcomes. Furthermore, this
framework breaks with the dominant focus of thinking in knowledge mobilisation: research production
(Levin, 2013[9]).

Figure 2.7. Evidence-informed decision-making framework
INTERVENTION
TYPES

MECHANISMS
Awareness

Directly impacting
EIDM

Broader focus,
indirectly impacting
EIDM

BEHAVIOURAL
CHANGE

INTERMEDIARY
BEHAVIOURAL
OUTCOMES

Agreement

Capability

Communication
& Access

Motivation

Interaction

opportunity

Evidence Use

Skills
Structure
& Process

INTERVENTION LEVELS
Individual behaviour

Immediate organisational
context

Broader organisational
context

National or international
organisations

Source: Own elaboration based on Langer, L., J. Tripney and D. Gough (2016[10]), The Science of Using Science: Researching the Use of
Research Evidence in Decision-making, http://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Portals/0/PDF%20reviews%20and%20summaries/Science%20Technical%2
0report%202016%20Langer.pdf?ver=2016-04-18-142648-770.

Cain (2015[21]) proposed a framework on teachers’ use of research evidence. According to the author,
teachers, faced with a research text, have the options to plainly ignore it, use it in different ways and with
different objectives, or reject it after discussion. To illustrate this, Cain identifies three “voices.” Teachers’
own voice – the “first voice” – is composed of their values, previous experiences and ways of thinking and
acting. Colleagues’ voices act as a “second voice”, often sharing some of the teacher’s values. Research
acts as a “third voice” in teachers’ discussions, providing an external view often very different to the other
two voices. The literature has shown that the first two voices are more important sources for teachers than
the third one (Nelson and O’Beirne, 2014[22]; Nelson et al., 2017[23]). To become part of the discussion and
influence the content and ways of teachers’ thinking, knowledge from research has to be linked with
knowledge from the other voices. This framework, represented in Figure 2.8, gives another insight into the
use of evidence, considering the intentions and objectives of the potential user – in this case, the teacher.
Rickinson and colleagues (2020[24]) developed a conceptual framework defining and elaborating what
“quality use of research evidence” means in education. The emphasis here is on factors that enable the
“thoughtful engagement and implementation of appropriate research evidence” (Rickinson et al., 2020,
p. 6[24]). Chapter 9 deeply describes these elements. Rickinson et al. emphasise components at the
individual, organisational and system levels, all represented in In the format of an OECD working paper,
Révai proposed a representation of the knowledge dynamics around evidence and innovation in the
education sector, represented in Figure 2.10. This work aims to “repair” the broken link in education
between knowledge mobilisation for evidence and knowledge construction for innovation. It notes that
policy questions today tend to relate to scaling innovation efforts or to increasing evidence use instead of
acknowledging that the two often do and, indeed should, go together. The knowledge dynamics model

--- [PDF Page 50 / Book Page 48] ---

builds on existing innovation models in education. These traditionally begin with teachers diagnosing a
situation, identifying their needs and challenges, and formulating these issues explicitly in terms of what
additional knowledge they would need. This process may be facilitated by either knowledge brokers or
researchers (as actors external to the school or internal such as teachers or school leaders) who can
provide this external knowledge. Teachers then translate this into practice, adapting it to their context.
Experimentation leads to the readjustment of practices and the creation of new knowledge. Thus, this
knowledge mobilisation process involves knowledge creation, solving a practice-based problem by
innovation. This new knowledge is consolidated and ideally diffused or disseminated, systematised and
integrated into existing knowledge.
Figure 2.9, each of which can support quality research use and the interactions between the actors. These
components and interactions influence, and are influenced by, multiple factors. By taking this approach,
the framework implicitly adopts a systems approach.
In the format of an OECD working paper, Révai (2020[25]) proposed a representation of the knowledge
dynamics around evidence and innovation in the education sector, represented in Figure 2.10. This work
aims to “repair” the broken link in education between knowledge mobilisation for evidence and knowledge
construction for innovation. It notes that policy questions today tend to relate to scaling innovation efforts
or to increasing evidence use instead of acknowledging that the two often do and, indeed should, go
together. The knowledge dynamics model builds on existing innovation models in education. These
traditionally begin with teachers diagnosing a situation, identifying their needs and challenges, and
formulating these issues explicitly in terms of what additional knowledge they would need. This process
may be facilitated by either knowledge brokers or researchers (as actors external to the school or internal
such as teachers or school leaders) who can provide this external knowledge. Teachers then translate this
into practice, adapting it to their context. Experimentation leads to the readjustment of practices and the
creation of new knowledge. Thus, this knowledge mobilisation process involves knowledge creation,
solving a practice-based problem by innovation. This new knowledge is consolidated and ideally diffused
or disseminated, systematised and integrated into existing knowledge.

Figure 2.8. Research-informed teaching theory
Reading
research texts

Ignore

Strategic
use

Confirmatory
use

Long, focused
discussion

Reject

Conceptual
use
Content of
thinking

Ways of
thinking

Research-informed teaching

--- [PDF Page 51 / Book Page 49] ---

Source: Cain, T. (2015[21]), “Teachers’ engagement with research texts: Beyond instrumental, conceptual or strategic use”, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1080/02607476.2015.1105536.

In the format of an OECD working paper, Révai (2020[25]) proposed a representation of the knowledge
dynamics around evidence and innovation in the education sector, represented in Figure 2.10. This work
aims to “repair” the broken link in education between knowledge mobilisation for evidence and knowledge
construction for innovation. It notes that policy questions today tend to relate to scaling innovation efforts
or to increasing evidence use instead of acknowledging that the two often do and, indeed should, go
together. The knowledge dynamics model builds on existing innovation models in education. These
traditionally begin with teachers diagnosing a situation, identifying their needs and challenges, and
formulating these issues explicitly in terms of what additional knowledge they would need. This process
may be facilitated by either knowledge brokers or researchers (as actors external to the school or internal
such as teachers or school leaders) who can provide this external knowledge. Teachers then translate this
into practice, adapting it to their context. Experimentation leads to the readjustment of practices and the
creation of new knowledge. Thus, this knowledge mobilisation process involves knowledge creation,
solving a practice-based problem by innovation. This new knowledge is consolidated and ideally diffused
or disseminated, systematised and integrated into existing knowledge.

Figure 2.9. Quality Use of Research Evidence (QURE) framework

Source: Rickinson, M. et al. (2020[24]), Using Evidence Better: Quality Use of Research Evidence Framework, http://monash.edu/education/res
earch/projects/qproject (accessed on 1 September 2021).

--- [PDF Page 52 / Book Page 50] ---

Figure 2.10. Knowledge dynamics in the evidence-innovation ecosystem

Source: Révai, N. (2020[25]), “What difference do networks make to teachers’ knowledge?: Literature review and case descriptions”,
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/75f11091-en.

These specific models provide fresh insights that may be complementary to the conceptualisation of
knowledge mobilisation contained in the previously analysed models. For example, Langer and colleagues
identified a concrete objective of knowledge mobilisation, which is commonly omitted in the related
literature. Furthermore, the authors recognised and classified multiple factors, at multiple levels, affecting
this outcome. Related work by Rickinson and colleagues, focused on how these factors influence the
quality of the use of research. Whereas the recognition and classification of these causal mechanisms is
one of the novelties of both models, the definition of quality use is an original contribution by Rickinson
et al.’s study. For its part, Cain focuses on the teachers’ perspective and considers the multiple sources of
knowledge that teachers have, beyond research alone, and how research may influence the content and
ways of teachers’ thinking. Finally, Révai provides a perspective on how research is closely linked to
innovation and how knowledge mobilisation in education can be influenced by other systems.

Table 2.2 summarises these models and the new perspectives they provide to the conceptualisation of
knowledge mobilisation.

Table 2.2. Analysis of knowledge mobilisation-related models
Author(s)

Langer, Tripney and Gough

Cain

Rickinson et al.

OECD (Révai)

Name

Evidence-Informed DecisionMaking framework

Research-Informed
Teaching theory

Quality Use of Research
Evidence framework

Knowledge Dynamics
Model

Year(s)

2016

2015

2020

2020

Sector

Cross-sector

Education

Education

Education

Context

Policy and Practice

Practice

Practice

Practice

--- [PDF Page 53 / Book Page 51] ---

KMb specific
aspect

Evidence use by decision
makers

Research use by
practitioners (teachers)

Research evidence use by
practitioners

Evidence creation,
mobilisation, innovation
and use

Core elements

Interventions types and levels;
Mechanisms; Behavioural
outcomes and change.

Types of research use
in school practice.

Core components
(Evidence and
Engagement); Enabling
components (Individualand Organisational-level);
System-level influences.

Research, Innovation,
Knowledge processes:
mobilisation, brokering,
creation, systematisation,
integration.

Contribution

Identification of an ultimate
objective.
Influence of multiple factors.

Focus on teachers’
perspective and work.
Multiple sources of
knowledge.

Influence of multiple factors
enabling engagement with
research evidence.
Definition of “quality use”.

Joint consideration of
research and innovation.
Knowledge mobilisation as
knowledge creation.

Note: The row “KMb specific aspects” contains the terms “evidence”, “research” and “research evidence”. These terms are used by the authors
of each model and taken to be interchangeable for the purposes of the analysis. For a definition of “research” in the Strengthening the Impact
of Education Research project, see Chapter 1.

Towards a new approach
For over two decades, scholars have conceptualised and modelled knowledge mobilisation in diverse
ways. These efforts have substantively evolved in terms of their sector of origin, focus, components and
approaches, among others. Yet, there are still some shortcomings which may have important
repercussions on initiatives that try to address deficits of research production and use.
Linear and relationship thinking still have a considerable influence on the representation of knowledge
mobilisation processes. For example, consideration of the education research system as a whole and the
existence of systems and sub-systems are commonly neglected elements in knowledge mobilisation
models. Furthermore, the various elements in focus – whether functions or contexts – tend to be depicted
as removed from each other, with a certain degree of mutual influence but without a clear idea of their
interdependencies and overlaps. This artificial separation hampers a holistic vision and overlooks the need
for any strategic coordination.
More recent knowledge mobilisation models tend to exclusively focus on research knowledge. While
considering the entire spectrum of knowledge sources within a single model is unfeasible, it is important
that future efforts recognise that research evidence is not the sole source of educational practitioners’ and
policy makers’ knowledge. Their decisions are also affected by other types of knowledge, gained for
example through professional experience or via exchanges with colleagues.
Most of the frameworks analysed in this chapter omit the main objectives that systems aim for. Committing
to a specific goal, representing it graphically and putting it in writing can allow education systems and their
actors to keep the ultimate goal in sight. In this case, if we think of educational research as something that
has indirect and slow impact on student learning, this latter may appear as an unreachable goal on the
horizon. And no matter how far we go, we can never reach that horizon. But that is the exact purpose of
this seemingly unreachable goal: To make us move forward (Galeano, 2012[26]).
Framing the conceptual discussion on knowledge mobilisation is important because it shapes our
understanding of what can be done to improve it. The way the education research system is conceptualised
can drive thinking into new directions and break with traditional and outdated notions and practices. This
includes moving away from one-way “push” approaches, the division between components and the onedimensionality of actors. Future conceptualisations should represent a systems approach to research
dynamics in education and try to address some of the limitations of previous models. Importantly, they
should aim to drive the discussion forward and generate new ideas about reinforcing research production
and use.

--- [PDF Page 54 / Book Page 52] ---

The dialogue between experts should continue and be extended to other actors who can bring fresh
perspectives to this discussion. A shared language and understanding would ease the flow of information
and collaboration between those specialised in knowledge mobilisation. Because of this, there is a strong
interest in developing a new model collaboratively that can address the shortcomings identified above and
drive an improved understanding of research dynamics in education. A new model, collectively developed,
would make the different efforts in this field more efficient, and ultimately enhance student and professional
learning.

References
Best, A. and B. Holmes (2010), “Systems thinking, knowledge and action: Towards better
models and methods”, Evidence and Policy, Vol. 6/2, pp. 145-159,
https://doi.org/10.1332/174426410X502284.

[6]

Burns, T. and F. Köster (eds.) (2016), Governing Education in a Complex World, Educational
Research and Innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264255364en.

[27]

Cain, T. (2015), “Teachers’ engagement with research texts: Beyond instrumental, conceptual or
strategic use”, Journal of Education for Teaching, Vol. 41/5, pp. 478-492,
https://doi.org/10.1080/02607476.2015.1105536.

[21]

Cooper, A. (2014), “Knowleedge mobilisation in education across Canada: A cross-case analysis
of 44 research brokering organisations”, Evidence & Policy, Vol. 10/1, pp. 29-59,
https://doi.org/10.1332/174426413X662806.

[2]

Crockett, L. (2017), “The Knowledge-to-Action Framework”, medium.com,
https://medium.com/knowledgenudge/kt-101-the-knowledge-to-action-framework7fbe399723e8 (accessed on 27 August 2021).

[17]

Davies, H., A. Powell and S. Nutley (2015), “Mobilising knowledge to improve UK health care:
learning from other countries and other sectors – A multimethod mapping study”, Health
Services and Delivery Research, Vol. 3/27, pp. 1-190, https://doi.org/10.3310/hsdr03270.

[15]

Galeano, E. (2012), “¿Para qué sirve la Utopía?”,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GaRpIBj5xho (accessed on 3 May 2022).

[26]

Gough, D., C. Maidment and J. Sharples (2018), EPPI-Centre.

[5]

Gough, D., J. Thomas and S. Oliver (2019), “Clarifying differences between reviews within
evidence ecosystems”, Systematic Reviews, Vol. 8/170, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-0191089-2.

[20]

Gough, D. et al. (2011), Evidence Informed Policymaking in Education in Europe : EIPEE Final
Project Report, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University
of London.

[1]

Graham, I. et al. (2006), “Lost in knowledge translation: Time for a map?”, Journal of Continuing
Education in the Health Professions, Vol. 26/1, pp. 13-24, https://doi.org/10.1002/chp.47.

[16]

Lai, C. and S. Huili Lin (2017), “Systems theory”, in The International Encyclopedia of
Organizational Communication, Wiley, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118955567.wbieoc203.

[12]

--- [PDF Page 55 / Book Page 53] ---

Langer, L., J. Tripney and D. Gough (2016), The Science of Using Science: Researching the
Use of Research Evidence in Decision-making, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit,
UCL Institute of Education, University College London,
http://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Portals/0/PDF%20reviews%20and%20summaries/Science%20Tech
nical%20report%202016%20Langer.pdf?ver=2016-04-18-142648-770.

[10]

Lave, J. and E. Wenger (1991), Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511815355.

[8]

Lavis, J. et al. (2003), “How can research organizations more effectively transfer research
knowledge to decision makers”, The Milbank Quarterly, Vol. 81/2, pp. 221-248.

[14]

Levin, B. (2013), “To know is not enough: Research knowledge and its use”, Review of
Education, Vol. 1/1, pp. 2-31, https://doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3001.

[9]

Levin, B. (2011), “Mobilising research knowledge in education”, London Review of Education,
Vol. 9/1, pp. 15-26, https://doi.org/10.1080/14748460.2011.550431.

[19]

Levin, B. (2008), “Thinking about knowledge mobilization”, A discussion paper prepared at the
request of the Canadian Council on Learning and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council.

[3]

Levin, B. (2004), “Making research matter more”, Education Policy Analysis Archives, Vol. 12/56,
p. 12, https://doi.org/10.14507/epaa.v12n56.2004.

[18]

Nelson, J. et al. (2017), Measuring Teachers’ Research Engagement: Findings from a Pilot
Study, Education Endowment Foundation, London,
https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/Evaluation/Research_Use/NFER_R
esearch_Use_pilot_report_-_March_2017_for_publication.pdf.

[23]

Nelson, J. and C. O’Beirne (2014), Using Evidence in the Classroom: What Works and Why?,
National Foundation for Educational Research, Slough,
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/publications/impa01/impa01.pdf.

[22]

Nokes, T. (2009), “Mechanisms of knowledge transfer”, Thinking and Reasoning, Vol. 15/1,
pp. 1-36, https://doi.org/10.1080/13546780802490186.

[4]

OECD (2009), Working Out Change: Systemic Innovation in Vocational Education and Training,
Educational Research and Innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264075924-en.

[28]

OECD (2000), Knowledge Management in the Learning Society, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264181045-en.

[7]

Révai, N. (2020), “What difference do networks make to teachers’ knowledge?: Literature review
and case descriptions”, OECD Education Working Papers, No. 215, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/75f11091-en.

[25]

Rickinson, M. et al. (2020), Using Evidence Better: Quality Use of Research Evidence
Framework, Monash University, Victoria, Australia,
http://monash.edu/education/research/projects/qproject (accessed on 1 September 2021).

[24]

Sharples, J. (forthcoming), “Developing a systems-based based approach to research-use in
education: The case of the EEF and the deployment of teaching assistants”.

[13]

--- [PDF Page 56 / Book Page 54] ---

Snyder, S. (2013), “The Simple, the Complicated, and the Complex: Educational Reform
Through the Lens of Complexity Theory”, OECD Education Working Papers, No. 96, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5k3txnpt1lnr-en.

[11]
