================================================================================
Chapter: Who is facilitating research use in education systems?
Author(s): Jordan Hill
Book: Who Cares about Using Education Research in Policy and Practice?: Strengthening Research Engagement
Series: Educational Research and Innovation
Publisher: OECD Publishing, Paris (2022)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/d7ff793d-en
ISBN: 978-92-64-73132-5 (PDF) / 978-92-64-96272-9 (print)
Section / Part: Part II: Actors and mechanisms facilitating research use in policy and practice
Book Pages: pp. 73–102
PDF Pages: pp. 75–104 (in raw/d7ff793d-en.pdf)
================================================================================
--- [PDF Page 75 / Book Page 73] ---

Part II
Actors and mechanisms
facilitating research use in
policy and practice

--- [PDF Page 76 / Book Page 74] ---

4 Who is facilitating research use in
education systems?

Jordan Hill, OECD

This chapter describes which actors are active in facilitating the use of
research evidence in the education sector at the organisational and
individual levels. It develops key dimensions for assessing interactions
between ministries of education and relevant actors in order to advance
discussion on strengthening the use of research evidence. It also analyses
practitioner involvement in research production and the provision of
incentives. Finally, the chapter looks at the nature of policy makers’
relationships. The discussion is based on a review of the available literature
and analysis of the OECD’s Strengthening the Impact of Education
Research policy survey results.

--- [PDF Page 77 / Book Page 75] ---

Introduction
Over the past decade, there has been increasing attention on actors who facilitate research use in
education systems and the interactions between them. This is the result of a conceptual shift towards
relationships and systems thinking, as put forward by Best and Holmes (2010[1]). A systems approach calls
for a better understanding of the interactions that govern the production, dissemination and diffusion of
knowledge between actors. This chapter aims to understand actors and relationships at the organisational
and individual level, which are crucial for the effective use of research evidence.
Interpersonal relationships, whether they are built through formal organisational connections or informal
interactions, are key to shaping research use in policy and practice (Levin, 2011[2]; Ion and Iucu, 2014[3];
Wiggins et al., 2019[4]). Catalysing interpersonal relationships supports the efficient mobilisation of
resources, both human and financial (Ward, House and Hamer, 2009[5]). Interpersonal relationships are
also crucial for facilitating mutual understanding of the different knowledge needs of policy makers,
practitioners, researchers and other actors (Burns and Köster, 2016[6]). These two features of relationships,
among others, have long been held as a way to enhance the impact of education research (Mitton et al.,
2007[7]). Rickinson and colleagues (2020[8]) summarise the reasons why relationships between actors who
can facilitate the use of research still require a larger amount of attention from scholars, policy makers and
practitioners alike:


They result in the development of interpersonal skills, making it possible to explore deeper
meanings of research evidence.



They are vehicles for enhanced communication and collaboration to give the breadth of voices
needed to use evidence.



Relationships, when they are built on mutual trust, allow the consideration of appropriate
instructional, structural or policy changes.



Connections between individuals can foster stimulating debates around evidence leading to
sustained changes in practice.

The increasing recognition of the importance of relationships runs in parallel with an increasing number of
initiatives focused on building these connections within education systems to improve evidence use (Coe
and Kime, 2019[9]). Among these initiatives, establishing networks has become a popular tool for building
relationships at both individual and organisational levels (Best and Holmes, 2010[1]). However, networks
do not automatically facilitate innovation and research mobilisation (Révai, 2020[10]). For such initiatives to
be effective, a deeper understanding of the nature, quality and processes of interactions is necessary.
With this in mind, this chapter focuses on two central questions:


Who are the actors in this landscape and to what extent do they facilitate the use of education
research in policy and practice?



What do the relationships between these actors look like and how do they connect research
production and use?

The chapter addresses these questions through international data collected in the Strengthening the
Impact of Education Research policy survey and follow-up interviews conducted with a number of
respondent countries.
The chapter is structured in two parts. The first part looks at different organisational-level actors and their
perceived levels of research mobilisation activity. It then assesses the relevance of ministry relationships.
The second part looks at the nature of individual actors such as practitioners, policy makers and
researchers. Since the survey only gathered data on how policy makers use research, an assessment of
the quality of individual relationships is offered from the perspective of policy makers.

--- [PDF Page 78 / Book Page 76] ---

Key dimensions
This section reviews a number of dimensions to identify the scope of the analysis of actors and their
relationships. Actors do not sit within a vacuum and any analysis must take into account the wider context
of structures, incentives and resources that facilitate or hinder research use.
The key dimensions for this chapter are explained below, and have been summarised in Table 4.1. The
term “activeness” was purposefully kept open in the survey to allow for richer data, and defined only
through a five-point Likert scale ranging from “not active at all” to “very active”.

Table 4.1. Key dimensions summary
Key dimensions

Sub-dimensions/Categories

Indicators

System level
Context (can be at
organisation or individual
level)

Structures, priorities and resources of organisations

Presence of educational research strategy or other
mechanisms/incentives such as salary supplement for
a teacher to be involved in research production

Actor relevance for facilitating
the use of research

Policy organisations

Activeness of ministries of education, government
funding agencies and policy networks in facilitating
research use

Research organisations

Activeness of universities, public research
organisations and academic networks, in facilitating
research use

Practice-oriented organisations

Activeness of teacher unions, school networks, other
professional groups, teacher education institutions
and professional development providers in facilitating
research use

Intermediary (brokerage) organisations

Activeness of university-school partnerships,
education consulting firms, official brokerage agencies
and think tanks in facilitating research use

Other system stakeholders

Activeness of media outlets and businesses in
facilitating research use

Size of the ministry’s network

Number of actors regularly solicited

“Strength” of connections between the ministry and
actors

Frequency and intensity of interactions

Relevance of ministry relationships for research use in
policy

Strength of ministry connection to actors seen as
active in facilitating research use in policy

Relevance of ministry relationship for feedback loop

Strength of ministry connection to actors seen as
active in facilitating research across policy and
practice contexts

Organisational level

Relationships of ministry

Individual level
Actors

Individual relationships

Individuals with a research background

Embedded researcher, research fellow, research
champion, research advisor, government researchers,
academic researchers, independent researchers

Individuals in the practice context

Teachers, school leaders, teacher educators

Individuals in the policy context

Policy makers

An individual culture and mindset which supports
relationships for research use

High levels of trust, respect and shared understanding
between individuals

Presence of collaborative activities between
individuals

How policy makers access, evaluate and use
education research during the policy process

--- [PDF Page 79 / Book Page 77] ---

Organisations
The primary stakeholder groups most relevant for research mobilisation are policy organisations, research
organisations and practitioner organisations (OECD, 2007[11]). Yet, evidence shows that similar types of
organisations can have very different knowledge mobilisation roles in different systems (Powell, Davies
and Nutley, 2018[12]). Understanding which organisational actors are key “evidence intermediaries” that
bridge research use with policy and practice in individual systems is crucial. Recent research has provided
a framework for understanding the variety of organisations that fulfil this intermediary role in different
contexts. They are broadly defined as either research-producing or non-research producing intermediaries
(Global Commission on Evidence to Address Societal Challenges, 2022 [13]).

Organisational relationships
The survey asked ministries about their relationships with other organisations. Taking a systems approach
necessitates consideration of both the variety of connections and flows of evidence use between
organisational actors (Best and Holmes, 2010[1]). In high-quality organisational relationships, information,
materials, resources, services, and social support should flow reciprocally between policy, practice and
research (OECD, 2007[11]). Since the survey data contains only the ministry perspective, the reciprocity of
organisational relationships and direction of information flows remains an open question. However, the
survey data does contain information regarding the size of the ministry’s network and the strength of
relationships between the ministries of education and different actors in the policy, practice and research
contexts.
Taking into account the size and strength of ministry relationships, the relevance of these relationships for
facilitating research use must be assessed. Speaking from the perspective of healthcare policy, Brown and
colleagues (2018[14]) argue that evidence-informed policy occurs through relationships between policy and
research organisations. While this is true, it must be recognised that policy and practice are deeply
interdependent and interconnected. While it is essential to map the ministries’ relationships with
organisations working to facilitate research use policy, it is also crucial to map relationships with those
working in multiple contexts.

Individuals
The survey asked a number of questions about specific individuals relevant to research production and
use within systems. These included teachers, school leaders, policy makers, embedded researchers,
research fellows and advisors. As discussed in Chapter 1, policy makers in the context of the survey refer
to the highest level of decision making in education (ministry/department of education), with some variation
in survey respondents’ interpretation of the term. Those with a research background embedded in different
contexts (e.g. policy or practice) are particularly relevant for knowledge mobilisation (Gough, Maidment
and Sharples, 2021[15]). The distinction between having a research background and being a researcher is
an important one as those who facilitate the use of research can occupy various roles in an organisation,
and do not have to be formal researchers (Bednarek et al., 2018[16]). In that sense, they are characterised
by their skills more than their title.

Individuals’ relationships
At the individual level, scholars have defined relationships in the education context as “the interpersonal
processes and connections that are required to thoughtfully engage with and implement appropriate
research evidence” (Rickinson et al., 2020, p. 14[8]). Researchers have tried to understand and categorise
individual relationships in a knowledge mobilisation context and often regard the culture and mindset of
research use as connected to productive individual relationships (OECD, 2007[11]; Oliver et al., 2014[17]).
This culture and mindset necessitate high levels of trust, respect, and mutual understanding between

--- [PDF Page 80 / Book Page 78] ---

individuals. In addition to culture and mindset, Rickinson and colleagues (2020[8]) argue that the right skills
and knowledge are needed to facilitate the collaborative relationships between practitioners around
research use. When deploying their framework for a review of evidence use in Australian schools (see also
Chapter 9), one of the most common forms of research use was discussing best practices with colleagues
(Rickinson et al., 2021[18]). This also shows how tightly intertwined intrinsic factors such as skills, culture
and mindset are with relationships for research use.
In addition to these intrinsic aspects of individual relationships, the presence of collaborative activities must
also be taken into account. Here, Gough and colleagues (2011[19]) provide three key activities related to
research use, based on an analysis of 269 different initiatives in 30 European countries. These activities
are: Use of evidence for social influence and/ or persuasion; seeking evidence from others and/or
interpreting evidence with external input and; facilitating interaction and/or collaboration with others.

Organisational actors
One of the central questions of this chapter asks who the actors are in the landscape and to what extent
they facilitate the systematic use of education research in policy and practice. In the survey, respondent
systems were asked which actors were active in their systems on a scale from 1 to 5: ‘’Not active at all’’,
“slightly active”, “moderately active”, “active” and “very active.’’ They were asked to provide this rating for
each actor in the areas of research production, facilitating research use in policy and facilitating research
use in practice. These last two will also be referred to as “research mobilisation” in this chapter.
Education systems vary greatly in terms of the overall levels of activity of organisations. On one end of the
scale, Finland perceived its organisations as, overall, very active, with an average of 4.94 (facilitating
research use in policy), 4.59 (facilitating research use in practice) and 4.88 (research production). On the
other end, Switzerland (Uri) perceived its organisations as only slightly active, with an average of 2.14
(facilitating research use in policy) 1.86 (facilitating research use in practice) and 1.64 (research
production). An overview of system-level profiles can be found in Annex 4.A. Most respondents to the
survey did not report large differences within the system in terms of average levels of actor activity across
the three areas.

Number, type and distribution of organisations
The survey data revealed that a large number of different organisations are seen as active to some degree
in producing research and facilitating its use in policy and/ or in practice in each of the respondent systems.
The maximum number of actors that systems could report as active in the survey was 17. The average
number of actors reported as at least “slightly active” in systems was 14. Just under 1/3 of respondent
systems reported that the maximum number of actors (17) were active to some degree in their system.
Table 4.2 shows the number of systems reporting each actor to be very active or active (henceforth
“active”) in each of the three areas.

--- [PDF Page 81 / Book Page 79] ---

Teacher education
institutions

Other public research
organisations

Academic or research
networks

Government funding
agencies

University - School
networks

Pro. devt.. providers for
teachers

Other professional groups

Policy networks

Education consulting firms

Teacher unions

Brokerage agencies

Think tanks

Media

32

32

17

20

21

18

17

12

14

11

13

13

8

10

11

Facilitating research use in
PRACTICE

24

21

21

17

13

16

14

19

13

10

9

12

10

4

2

12

7

Producing education
RESEARCH

30

26

22

20

22

21

14

13

5

10

8

4

9

6

6

7

4

Businesses

Ministry of Education

Facilitating research use in
POLICY

School networks

Universities/ Faculties of
Education

Table 4.2. Number of systems reporting organisations to be active in facilitating the use of education research and in research production

6

Note: Data was collected at national and sub-national levels. School networks did not feature as an option when ministries were asked about facilitating research use in policy. This was building on the
assumption that school networks are not focused on increasing the use of research in policy.
“Pro. devt. providers for practitioners” refers to professional development providers for school practitioners.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.

--- [PDF Page 82 / Book Page 80] ---

Education ministries
Overall, the data suggest that, while ministries often see a wide range of actors as active, certain actors
are more relevant when it comes to facilitating the use of research. Universities, faculties of education and
the ministries of education themselves were seen as the most active organisations in both the production
and mobilisation of education research across the systems. Fourteen education systems viewed the
education ministry as the most active overall in all three areas. In four of these systems – Belgium (French
community), Switzerland (both Zurich and Uri) and Turkey – the ministry was reported as more active than
any other organisation. In terms of facilitating research use in practice, ministries of education often
perceive themselves to be as active in facilitating research use as, for example, teacher education
institutions. This may reflect ministries’ investments in initiatives that facilitate research use in practice. In
a small number of systems, the ministries of education perceived themselves to be the most active
organisation in the production of research. This was the case in New Zealand and Belgium (French
community).
Some scholars maintain that departments and ministries of education remain quite weak in knowledge
mobilisation (Levin, 2013[20]; Cooper, 2014[21]). However, the presence of “in-house” brokerage units that
support particular ministries in research gathering, translation and communication efforts has been
reported for some time (OECD, 2007[11]). This process has become more formalised over the past decade
within certain national administrations through the establishment of strategic intelligence units in ministries
of education (Gough et al., 2011[19]). The follow-up interviews confirmed the presence of these research
and analysis units in several systems (see Box 4.1 for two examples).

Box 4.1. Policy and analysis units in ministries of education
Slovenia
In July 2021, the Slovenian government established a new Quality and Analysis Unit within the
Department of Educational Development and Quality of the Ministry for Education, Science and Sport.
The aim of this unit is to improve the production, analysis and use of data and educational research in
policy development and practice. In this way, it operates as an internal knowledge broker within the
ministry through the commissioning of educational research and by participating in international studies.
Key outputs are expected to be best practices in both policy and practice, and enhanced involvement
in international surveys and studies. It also performs a matching function, gathering, translating and
disseminating educational research and data in response to questions around education posed by
policy makers across government. The unit is staffed by a mixture of professional civil servants and
experienced researchers.

Norway
The Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research has a special unit: Section for Policy Analysis.
The section has a specific mandate to provide educational research and data to support policy making
in cooperation with all departments at the Ministry. The section works as a “knowledge broker” through
dissemination of relevant research, and by offering analytical support to the departments and to the
political and ministry leaders. Furthermore, the section works to develop and increase the evidence
base for kindergartens, schools, higher education and research in Norway. To this end, it follows
international research, facilitates strategic discussions in the field of educational research and works
long term to strengthen educational research. It also coordinates research initiatives with the Norwegian
Research Council, the Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training, the Norwegian Directorate

--- [PDF Page 83 / Book Page 81] ---

for Higher Education and Skills and the Knowledge Center for Education – the allocation of budget
means to educational research being one of these tasks.
Source: Follow-up interviews with respondent countries and data submitted in open questions of OECD Strengthening the Impact of
Education Research policy survey.

Brokerage agencies
Official brokerage agencies (i.e. formal agencies with a specific mandated function to support the use of
research in policy/practice) were reported as being active to some degree in 16 systems that responded
to the survey. Two systems reported they exist but were not active (Austria and Switzerland [Zurich]). As
more brokerage agencies have been established across OECD countries, they have taken a wide variety
of forms, with different goals and means (OECD, 2007[11]) (see more on the changing landscape and
challenges of brokerage agencies in Chapters 3 and 7).
Although 16 systems reported that official brokerage agencies were active, only one system (England)
reported this agency to be the most active organisation across research production and facilitation of use
in policy and practice. As outlined in Chapters 5 and 7, England has a particularly well-developed
brokerage system. In the other 15 systems, such formal agencies often received much lower overall
activeness ratings and were very diverse in terms of the focus of their activities.
It is possible to draw out two distinct activity profiles for these agencies. Some systems report them to be
active in producing research and facilitating its use in both policy and practice. This was the case for six
systems (Costa Rica, Chile, Finland, Norway, Portugal and UK [England]). While others see them as active
in only one or two areas. This was the case in seven systems (Columbia, Denmark, Hungary, New Zealand,
Sweden, Switzerland [Obwalden] and Turkey). New Zealand for example reported them as only active in
facilitating the use of research in practice. Furthermore, five systems reported the presence of brokerage
agencies but also reported that they were mostly or entirely inactive in producing research or facilitating its
use (Austria, South Africa [Pretoria], Switzerland [Lucerne], Switzerland [Zurich], Switzerland [Appenzell
Ausserrhoden]).
The range of brokerage agencies reported in the open questions of the survey indicates that ministries do
not perceive a standard model for these organisations (see Annex 4.B). Some have a more traditional set
of educational stakeholders (e.g. teachers, educational establishments and decision makers in the
promotion of learning and development of education). Others, such as the EDULOG initiative1 by the
Belmiro de Azevedo Foundation in Portugal, have a much broader mandate to build bridges between
education, politics and society as a whole. Many have a classical set of brokerage goals, such as the
Knowledge Centre for Education,2 established by the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research in
2013, or the United Kingdom (UK) “What Works” Centres,3 both of which carry out and disseminate
research syntheses to support the use of research by practitioners, researchers and policy makers.
However, others also provide statistical services or access to data, for example Statistics Finland,4 which
produces statistics for the entire education system from pre-primary to adult education. Some brokerage
organisations reported in the survey are tasked with the creation of specific educational products, such as
the Costa Rican National Dean Council (CONARE),5 which produces a bi-annual General State of the
Education Report. Overall, the diversity in both levels of activity and organisational structures and goals
indicates that there is the potential for a large amount of knowledge exchange and shared learning between
the different models.

--- [PDF Page 84 / Book Page 82] ---

Networks
Education consulting firms, policy networks, school networks and businesses were reported to be active
in the fewest number of systems. Looking specifically at networks, they were seen as active to very
different extents in education systems. In particular, policy networks and school networks are not active in
a large number of systems (7 and 8, respectively). This is interesting given the huge investment that has
gone into establishing networks across different research disciplines and sectors (e.g. EC (2013[22])). In
the survey data, networks with direct involvement of academia, such as academic networks and universityschool partnerships, were seen as the most prevalent and active in both the production and mobilisation
of education research. However, the specific areas of university-school partnership activity were quite
unique to each system. Crucially, a diverse range of education systems (e.g. Colombia and Canada
[Quebec]) report that university-school partnerships and networks are not active in facilitating research use
in practice, which is not quite in line with their supposed and reported function (Farrell et al., 2021[23]).
Some systems also reported that these networks are only active in research production, as is the case in
Austria and the Slovak Republic. The varying levels of activeness of such mixed-profile partnerships and
networks suggest that these are not yet consistently adopted as institutionalised forms of collaboration
across OECD countries. This is in spite of their large potential in strengthening research use in education
policy and practice (Farrell et al., 2021[23]).
Looking specifically at school networks, research on teachers’ professional relationships has shown that
those who have more frequent interactions with other teachers also report more use of research evidence
in their schools (Brown, Daly and Liou, 2016[24]). However, school networks as a vehicle to connect
evidence and innovation in education have only recently become more widely recognised worldwide
(Révai, 2020[10]). These networks traditionally focus more on practice-based knowledge sharing, joint
activities for students, teaching and learning-related collaboration and innovation. Harnessing research
use is thus not a strong/specific focus of such networks, as illustrated by the example of the European
eTwinning network.6 This may explain why school networks in particular are perceived as less active by
the ministries in facilitating the use of education research.

Relationship between research production and mobilisation
As noted in the key dimensions section, evidence intermediaries may be active in both the production of
education research and facilitating its use, or may only be active in the latter (i.e. in research mobilisation).
This section will uncover those two kinds of evidence intermediaries in the survey data.
There is a large variation in terms of the total number of organisations active across research production
and mobilisation across systems (Figure 4.1). On one end of the scale, Chile, Finland and Spain, reported
a large number of organisations to be active in all three areas. On the other end, some systems – including
Switzerland (Uri and Lucerne), Belgium (French community), and South Africa – reported very few
organisations that are active in producing or facilitating research use.
In most of the systems, the number of actors reported as active was different for each of the three areas.
Some systems reported very large differences in terms of the number of active organisations in each of
the three areas. For example, New Zealand and England both reported significantly fewer actors to be
active in producing research (New Zealand also reported far fewer to be active in facilitating research use
in policy). Interestingly, research production is the area where most systems have the largest number of
active organisations.
When it comes to research-producing intermediaries, 13 systems reported one or more actors to be
very active across research production and mobilisation in both policy and practice. This was most
commonly ministries of education, universities and teacher education institutions. These organisations can
therefore be seen as key intermediaries in many systems, often spanning the boundaries between

--- [PDF Page 85 / Book Page 83] ---

research, policy and practice. There are some interesting exceptions, such as the Czech Republic, where
think tanks were the only actor seen as active in all three areas.
While evidence intermediaries often produce and use research, there are also organisations that are only
focused on research mobilisation and less, or not at all, on production. Overall, 12 systems reported at
least one actor to be active in facilitating research use in both policy and practice but with low levels of
research production. These systems most commonly reported education consulting firms and teacher
unions in this way.
Some actors were only active in facilitating research use in policy: 15 systems reported at least one such
actor. These were most commonly media and think tanks but other professional groups, and interestingly,
even school-university partnerships, were also mentioned. Even more systems (17) reported actors only
active in facilitating research use in practice. The most commonly reported “practice intermediaries” were
school networks and professional development providers.
The data also suggest that the profiles of different organisations is highly system-specific. For example,
public research organisations other than universities or teacher education institutions were only perceived
to be active in producing research in some systems (e.g. Iceland and Latvia) while they were very active
in producing and facilitating use in both policy and practice in others (e.g. Austria). An overall trend is that
most organisations that were seen as active in facilitating the use of research in both policy and practice
were generally also rated as active in the production of education research. In the future, it will be important
to better understand how each of these organisations actually facilitates research use and if there are
configurations that are more effective than others.

Figure 4.1. Number of actors reported as active in systems
Facilitating research use in policy

Facilitating research use in practice

Producing research

18
16
14
12

10
8
6
4
2
0

Note: Data collected shows the number of actors reported as active in each of the three areas. An organisation is considered active when the
ministry perceives them to be either ‘’active’’ or ‘’very active’’ in their response. Data collected at national and sub-national levels. “Appenzell A.”
refers to the Swiss canton of Appenzell Ausserrhoden.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/junafy

--- [PDF Page 86 / Book Page 84] ---

Quality of ministries’ relationships
No actor alone can foster the use of research; they must be connected to others to facilitate an exchange
of ideas and the construction of knowledge. The policy survey looked at the relationship of ministries with
various types of organisations. This section describes the breadth and relevance of these relationships.

Number and strength of connections at the landscape level
In the survey, ministries of education were asked how frequently and intensively they solicited different
organisations to facilitate the use of research in policy; for example, by seeking ad-hoc advice on research,
commissioning research based on policy needs or coordinating research production. The respondents
were given six potential options ranging from ‘’never’’ to ‘’very frequently”.
While there is some variation in the number of organisations ministries solicit to facilitate research use in
policy, over half of the systems indicated they have connections to at least ten types of organisations. On
the lower end of the scale, Iceland, Switzerland (Uri) Slovenia and Chile all indicated five or fewer, with a
wide range of relationship intensities. Figure 4.2 does not indicate any particular relationship between
quantity and quality. Some countries, such as Finland, have strong and extensive relationships. Others,
such as Chile and Switzerland (Nidwalden), have fewer but stronger ties.

Figure 4.2. Size and strength of ministries’ networks
Brokerage

Number of organisations
16

Policy

Practice

Research

Other

Strength

Average frequency/intensity of ties
4.00

14

3.50

12

3.00

10

2.50

8

2.00

6

1.50

4

1.00

2

0.50

0

0.00

Note: Size refers to the number of organisations ministries reported soliciting to facilitate research use in policy. Strength refers to the average
frequency/ /intensity of the interactions with the different organisations that respondents rated on a 6-point Likert scale. Data was collected at
national and sub-national levels. “Appenzell A.” refers to the Swiss canton of Appenzell Ausserrhoden.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/jag8u6

--- [PDF Page 87 / Book Page 85] ---

Looking at absolute numbers, relationships with practice-oriented organisations (teacher unions, school
leaders’ unions, subject teacher associations, teacher education institutions, professional development
providers etc.) were reported most often by ministries but were generally the weakest connections. For
example, 65% of systems reported having some contact with teacher unions. However, 92% of the systems
reporting these connections reported them as “very rare” or “occasional”.
The most commonly reported strong relationships were with research actors (universities, public research
organisations and academic or research networks). This was most often the case with universities and
faculties of education, where 11 systems reported “quite frequently” soliciting their input to facilitate the
use of research in policy. Important to bear in mind is that no ministry in the survey reported “very
frequently” soliciting any of the organisations to facilitate the use of research in policy.

Relevance of ministry connections
This section looks at the relevance of ministries’ relationships, i.e. whether they interact with the actors
they see as active in the mobilisation of education research. The section explores the relevance of
relationships from two perspectives:


Relationships the ministry has with organisations most active in facilitating research use in policy.



Relationships the ministry has with organisations that have a strong research-policy-practice
intermediary role in their system.

At the landscape level, the activeness of organisations in facilitating the use of education research in policy
roughly corresponds to the frequency of the ministry’s connections with those organisations (Figure 4.3).
While ministries generally do not have connections to every single relevant actor in the system, many
appear to have overall fairly strong connections to at least one of the actors who are active in facilitating
research use in policy. This suggests that, overall, the relationships the ministries have with organisations
facilitating research use in policy are quite relevant, albeit incomplete. There are some instances where
the relationships do not match the levels of activity. For example, think tanks often have much less frequent
ties with the ministries despite a number of systems reporting them to be active in facilitating research use
in policy.
It appears that, for some organisations, ministry awareness of their activeness in facilitating research use
often, but not always, translates into a relationship. This brings in a wider question around the role that an
organisations’ informal influence plays on research use in policy making without an actual relationship
being established. In their analysis of relationships promoting evidence-informed policy and practice,
MacGregor and colleagues (2022[25]) found that although actors in education systems often had formal
networks, many wielded indirect or invisible influence, which can still create the conditions for educational
improvement.
The data at the landscape level, presented in Figure 4.3, hides an important nuance at the level of
individual systems.
It may be the case that ministries are heavily connected to organisations because they are research
producers rather than because they are active in facilitating the use of research in policy. This is difficult to
determine because, as already noted, activeness in research mobilisation is often intertwined with research
production. For example, Belgium (Flemish community) reported having quite frequent connections to
universities and teacher education institutions, both seen as active in facilitating research use in policy but
also in producing research. One way of clarifying the interplay between production of research and
facilitation of use in policy is to look at individual ministry relationships with organisations who were less
active or not active in producing research but still active in facilitating its use in policy (i.e. policy
intermediary actors).

--- [PDF Page 88 / Book Page 86] ---

Figure 4.3. Relevance of ministry connections to organisations active in facilitating research use in
policy
Actor is ''active'' or ''very active''

Systems soliciting input "irregularly with peak periods" or "quite frequently"

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Note: Data showing the number of systems reporting that a given actor was active in facilitating research use in policy compared with the number
of systems regularly soliciting input from that actor in the policy-making process. Data was collected at national and sub-national levels. “Pro.
Devt. Providers for practitioners” refers to professional development providers for school practitioners.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/1fgnzu

In the vast majority of cases ministries did not report strong connections to “policy intermediary” actors.
In a number of cases this actor was the media, where it is natural that ministries solicit them less for
research advice or commissioning research. However, the pattern is similar with other “intermediary only”
actors, such as think tanks and professional groups. In fact, only two systems reported working “quite
frequently’’ or “occasionally” with an actor who was active in facilitating research use in policy but with low,
or no, activity in research production (Colombia with teacher unions and Slovenia with professional
groups).
Given that the purpose of education policy is to improve education practice, policy organisations also need
relationships with organisations working across multiple contexts rather than just those focusing on
research production for policy making. These relationships can support research use in practice indirectly
and reinforce the impact of policy ideas on the practice context. They are also important as practitioners
seek and share evidence from multiple sources, including ministries of education. As argued by Bednarek
and colleagues (2018, p. 1179[16]), “creating and nurturing this knowledge exchange infrastructure can help
actors in the process (including scientists) absorb new information and account for conflicting evidence
without derailing an entire [policy] process.” In this way, having a “feedback loop” with actors who use
research but are active in areas beyond producing it can also be seen as a crucial part of research-informed
policy making.
Encouragingly, systems generally reported having connections to actors seen as the most active
intermediaries working across the research, policy and practice contexts. However, there are some
exceptions within ministry networks. For example, Switzerland (Obwalden) reported academic or research
networks to be active in producing research and facilitating its use in policy and practice but reported that
it never solicits their research-related input to policy making. As previously mentioned, the Czech Republic
reported think tanks as key organisations but did not report any relationship with them. In some cases the
inverse was true: Ministries reported connections to actors who were not seen as very active in producing

--- [PDF Page 89 / Book Page 87] ---

research or facilitating its use. Sweden, for example, reported policy networks to be only “moderately
active” in both the production and mobilisation of research in policy. However, the ministry reported very
frequent and intense ties with these networks.
The ministries’ connections to brokerage agencies are also important since these are often intended to
be broad evidence intermediaries in most systems where they are active (see Chapters 3 and 7). Of the
16 systems where brokerage agencies are active, only nine reported having connections to them.
Generally, the more active these agencies are, the stronger the ministry connection to them is. There is
one exception: The ministry of education in the United Kingdom (England) reported having the strongest
relationships with universities and faculties of education as well as reporting strong links with other public
research organisations. The ministry perceived the most active organisation overall in the system to be
official brokerage agencies, yet it only reported occasional interactions with them. The main brokerage
agency in the United Kingdom, the Education Endowment Foundation (EEF), was established with a
15-year funding plan and is intended to be independent, autonomous and free from political pressures or
influence from the United Kingdom Parliamentary cycle (Education Endowment Foundation, 2012[26]).
However, this set up does not mean a strong relationship with the ministry is unnecessary since the
purpose of the agency is to influence decision making with evidence.
Seven systems did not report any connection to brokerage agencies despite their being active in the
system. In Chile and Denmark, for example, these agencies are seen to be very active in facilitating
research use in policy but the ministry did not report a relationship with them. Furthermore, in some
systems, the opposite pattern can be seen. The ministry in Colombia reported having the strongest
relationship with brokerage agencies. However, actors seen to be the main evidence intermediaries in the
system were, in fact, universities, education consulting firms and policy networks. It is remarkable that the
ministry did not report having any relationship with these three actors in the survey.
Overall, in looking at the strength of ministry connections to actors with different activity profiles, two
conclusions can be drawn.


Firstly, whether an organisation is active in research production appears to have more bearing on
how strong the ministry connection is rather than whether they are active in facilitating the use of
research in policy.



Secondly, actors that have a strong research-policy-practice intermediary role often have strong
connections to the ministry but not always. This variance is especially pronounced for brokerage
agencies, which often have a unique system context.

Individual actors
Organisations contain a variety of individual profiles and roles, which affect the use of research to different
extents. This section looks at a number of individual roles across policy, practice and research to
understand the nature of their involvement in facilitating research use.

The landscape of individuals relevant to research use
Three questions from the survey asked systems about the types of individual roles in their context. One
question asked whether specific individuals (embedded researchers, research advisors, research
champions and research fellows) existed to facilitate the use of research (Figure 4.4). These individuals
were perceived to be far more prevalent in policy making than in school practice. Two further questions
asked how active different individuals were in research production (Figure 4.5) and at which stages
(Figure 4.6).

--- [PDF Page 90 / Book Page 88] ---

Figure 4.4. Systems reporting the presence of individual roles to facilitate the use of research
In school practice

In policy making
73

Embedded researcher

32

57

Research advisor

43
35

Research champion

22

32

Research fellow

22
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80
%

Note: Figure shows the percentage of systems reporting the given role is present in their system. Data collected at national and at a sub-national
level.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/fp8cmn

Some systems maintain or increase the numbers of individuals with a research background through PhD
schemes in both policy and practice contexts (see Box 4.2). While research skills are key to increasing the
systematic use of research in policy making, data from the survey suggests that there are important
variations across systems in terms of research skills in the civil service. Embedding researchers in
ministries is often seen as a way of building relationships between the research and policy communities
(Gough, Maidment and Sharples, 2021[15]). Data from the survey indicates that the number of these
researchers varies depending on the ministry and unit. Latvia, for example, reported in the open questions
of the survey that 7.4% of employees at the ministry had a PhD in 2021. Norway stated in a follow-up
interview that around 50% of employees in the special unit Section for Policy Analysis have a PhD and/or
research background.

Box 4.2. Two models of integrated doctoral training programmes focused on the production and
use of educational research
Public Sector PhD Scheme in Norway
In public administration, the Norwegian Public Sector PhD Scheme (OFFPHD) has the specific goal
of expanding research activities in public sector bodies to increase researcher recruitment within the
public sector and promote greater collaboration between academia and the public sector. It is only open
to permanent employees in the public sector body. Approximately ten projects have been awarded in
the area of education policy and practice on topics including curriculum renewal, inclusive education,
English-language teaching, and new pedagogical models in citizenship education, school management
and leadership, and sports education.

--- [PDF Page 91 / Book Page 89] ---

Doctoral Grant for Teachers programme in the Netherlands
Related specifically to facilitating the use of education research in practice, the Dutch Research
Council has been organising calls for their Doctoral Grant for Teachers programme since 2010 and
awarded almost 500 projects. The grant is aimed at teachers in primary, secondary, vocational, higher
vocational and special education. The focus of the studies is very open, and the grant includes the costs
of a replacement teacher up to the equivalent of a maximum of 0.4 full time for a maximum of five years.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data; Research Council of Norway (n.d.[27])
https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/apply-for-funding/funding-from-the-research-council/public-sector-phd-scheme/; Dutch Research
Council (n.d.[28]), Doctoral Grant for Teachers, https://www.nwo.nl/en/researchprogrammes/doctoral-grantteachers#:~:text=The%20Doctoral%20Grant%20for%20Teachers,ties%20between%20universities%20and%20schools.

Regarding the specific levels of activity in research production (Figure 4.5), at one end of the scale
academic researchers and government researchers are most frequently reported as “active’’ or ‘’very
active’’. Policy makers, school leaders, teachers and community members sit at the other end of the scale,
and are seen as, overall, less active or not active at all. Teacher educators are the only stakeholder group
involved in producing research to some extent in all systems. This is in line with the high involvement of
teacher education institutions in producing research and the strong relationships reported by the ministries
with them. One further element to consider is that teacher educators are, in many systems, embedded in
faculties of education within universities. It is therefore not necessarily straightforward to separate them
from academic researchers.

Figure 4.5. Levels of individuals’ activity reported by systems in research production.
"Not active at all"
Academic researchers 3
Government researchers

9
7

23

70
36

6

Teacher educators

61
38

56

47

53

Policy makers

9

School leaders

12

79

Teachers

12

82

Community members

"Active" + "Very active"

88

Students (master's, doctoral) 3
Independent researchers

"Slightly active" + "Moderately active"

58

36

33
9
6
61

3
%

Note: Data showing the percentage of systems reporting a given individual profile was active in research production at a given level. Data
collected at a national and sub-national level.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/jmncl4

--- [PDF Page 92 / Book Page 90] ---

Who is involved in the various stages of the research production cycle is also highly relevant for assessing
the impact of research (Figure 4.6). Unsurprisingly, academic and independent researchers are perceived
as active across all stages of research production. In contrast, practitioners (teachers and school leaders)
were least frequently reported to be involved across the whole research production cycle, and most heavily
associated with data collection. This may suggest that practitioners’ involvement in the different phases is
primarily a passive involvement (as “objects” of research) rather than being meaningfully involved in the
production of research. The nature of co-production is also discussed in Chapters 8 and 10 of this
publication.

Figure 4.6. Individuals’ involvement in the different stages of research production
Academic or independent researchers
Government researchers
Policy makers
Teacher educators
Teachers
School leaders
In formulating the research questions
20
15
In communicating research results

In designing the research
10
5
0

In evaluating the research results

In analysing and interpreting the data

In co-ordinating the research

In collecting the data

Note: Data showing the number of systems reporting that the given group is involved in the given stage of research production. Data collected
at a national and a sub-national level.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/posudq

Incentives for (co-)production?
It has been clear for decades that a strictly “push” approach to research use does not work alone. For
research to be relevant for practice and for teachers to have ownership of research, co-producing research
has been promoted by many. While co-production is a fundamental form of evidence-use infrastructure
(Gough, Maidment and Sharples, 2021[15]), it is still far from being a mainstream instrument in education
(Honingh, Bondarouk and Brandsen, 2018[29]). This is also clear from the data.
Incentives are a key tool for driving co-production. A research-engaged school can provide the values,
resources and structures to mobilise knowledge (Rickinson et al., 2020[8]). When looking at the incentives
for research production, ministries reported more “intrinsic” motivators than “extrinsic” incentives
(Figure 4.7). Furthermore, when comparing the total number of incentives for researchers to those of
practitioners, researchers have a higher number and far more “extrinsic’’ incentives than practitioners.

--- [PDF Page 93 / Book Page 91] ---

Systems reporting a greater number of incentives for practitioners to be involved in research production
generally also reported that practitioners were more active in producing research. In that sense, incentives
do seem to be connected to the deeper involvement of practitioners.
It should be noted that the survey data cannot show whether the involvement of individuals across the
different stages of the research cycle indicates actual co-production. It may indicate co-production or it
may simply indicate that different stakeholder groups produce research in isolation. What the data does
show is that broader practitioner involvement in many stages of the research production cycle does not
necessarily mean that practitioners are overall perceived as deeply involved in research production. For
example, the Netherlands, Latvia and Spain reported that practitioners were involved in nearly all stages
of research production; however, they also reported that both teachers and school leaders were only
slightly active in the production of research overall. Furthermore, it must be recognised that incentives may
encourage different kinds of practitioner involvement in certain systems although more research is needed
to understand how these may work. Mechanisms can be aimed at incentivising research production more
intensively with a specific subset of practitioners rather than practitioners on the whole. This is, for example,
the case with researcher teachers in Hungary (Box 4.3).

Figure 4.7. Individuals’ extrinsic and intrinsic incentives to produce education research
Gives them a sense of participation in national debate
Allows them to improve practices and processes
Implies informal recognition (e.g. from their peers, hierarchy)
Allows them to support decision-making
Is part of their performance evaluation criteria (e.g. for promotion, tenure)
Implies time allocation (e.g. a certain number of hours per week)

Is part of their job description
Implies a salary supplement

Extrinsic

Intrinsic

Academic or independent researchers
Teacher educators
Government researchers
Teachers
School leaders
Policy makers
-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Note: Numbers refer to the number of systems reporting the given incentives are present in their systems for each group of individuals. Data
collected at a national and at a sub-national level.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/6qolam

Box 4.3. Researcher teachers in Hungary
Hungary launched the current pedagogical career model and related evaluation system in 2013. The
aim of this model is to support the effectiveness of teacher’s pedagogical work and identify areas for
improvement. In addition to professional recognition, this assessment can lead to career advancement
and therefore also has a financial incentive. In this pedagogical model, the following levels exist:


Trainee.

--- [PDF Page 94 / Book Page 92] ---



Teacher I.



Teacher II.



Master teacher and/ or Researcher teacher.

The "Master" and "Research Teacher" categories are not simply a higher degree of a linear progression,
they are an invitation to teachers who wish to pursue a specific path. It is possible to be a researcher
teacher without being a master teacher, although a researcher teacher requires a PhD.
The research undertaken by these categories can be about a subject matter or about teaching and
pedagogy, although teaching and pedagogy is a more common research area. Teachers working under
these two classifications are expected to contribute actively and intensively to the development,
research, and innovation processes in the public education system.
A researcher teacher is different to a master teacher in that the researcher teacher is tasked with sharing
their research results more widely. This can be outside their own school. Researcher teachers therefore
offer solutions to improve public education in general while master teachers integrate their innovative
practices into their own school.
In 2021, there were 35 researcher teachers in Hungary and 1337 master teachers. Each of these
categories has a five-year research programme, which is renewable.
Source: Information provided by National Education Authority of Hungary.

Quality of individuals’ relationships
Individuals working in siloes are less able to access research or advocate for its use among colleagues.
Understanding the current nature of policy makers’ relationships can provide insights into what already
facilitates the use of research and what can be improved.

Culture and mindset
A strong culture and mindset of research use requires trust between individuals, a shared understanding
of the purpose of research and a willingness to engage with and implement it (Rickinson et al., 2020[8]). As
discussed in Chapter 9, culture and mindset are key components not just of using research but of using
research well.
Willingness - both to use research and to engage in conversations about it - is seen by scholars as a
primary precondition of engaging in research mobilisation (Wehn and Montalvo, 2018[30]). Having a shared
understanding of what education research is and what it can be used for is also an important predictor for
research use. Research has shown that a shared understanding supports the identification of
interdependencies and trade-offs, and facilitates negotiating different interests (Best and Holmes, 2010[1]).
Levels of trust, which can be facilitated through specific initiatives, are also crucial for greater systematic
connectivity between individuals involved in evidence production and use (Oliver, Adie and Boaz, 2022[31]).
Research on evidence use commonly recognises that trust is crucial and can be built through sustained
individual interactions (Oliver et al., 2014[17]). However, studies have shown that interventions focused on
interactions between decision makers and researchers often lack conceptual clarity of what actually
constitutes trust, which may limit their effectiveness (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016[32]).
Figure 4.8 shows that ministries perceive individual attitudes, practices and processes relatively positively.
However, they seem to be less positive about the quality of relationships between individuals in the policy

--- [PDF Page 95 / Book Page 93] ---

and research communities (highlighted in the figure). This data also shows little variation perceived
between policy making and practice.

Figure 4.8. Average degree of ministries’ agreement with statements about the culture and mindset
of using research in policy and practice
Practitioners

Policy makers
4.46
4.3

Using education research in their processes is important for them
4.04
3.95

They are expected to use education research in their processes

There is a strong political will to use education research in their field

3.73
3.75

They are willing to learn new skills for using education research

3.69
3.65

They are willing to try new ways to integrate education research into their field

3.73
3.58

There is a high level of trust in research amongst them

3.4

3.65

There is a high level of trust with researchers

3.52
3.4

They are willing to use education research to question their ideas and
preconceptions
They have a shared understanding of education research and its use with
researchers

3.5
3.5
3.27
3.1

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Note: Respondents rated their degree of agreement with the above statements on a Likert scale of 1 to 5. Five indicates strong agreement with
a statement and 1 indicates strong disagreement. Data collected at a national and at a sub-national level.
The highlighted responses are those that involve relationships with colleagues or others outside the ministries.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/abl0vd

Collaborative activities and research use in policy
Research evidence plays an important role in building and sustaining relationships for many reasons. As
outlined by Gough and colleagues (2011[19]), relationships between individuals can improve access to, and
interpretation of, quality research evidence. In the survey data, this reliance on others for access appears
particularly important. Over half of respondent systems expressed uncertainty or disagreement about
whether policy makers have access to the right learning opportunities to develop their own research skills
(Figure 4.9).
As shown in Figure 4.10, relationships with external experts and in-house researchers are the primary
method of accessing research. This suggests that, on the whole, policy makers do have relationships with
relevant individuals who can support the use of education research in the policy process.
The right relationships are needed to access research evidence; however, in order to actually use research
evidence in policy making, relationships require certain characteristics. Influencing others, persuading
them to collaborate and facilitating new interactions between individuals are seen as key enablers of
research-informed policy making (Gough et al., 2011[19]). With this in mind, Figure 4.11 shows the ways in
which policy makers use education research. Overall, the data reveals that the use of research to stimulate
debate, earn trust and leverage political influence was least-commonly reported by systems. When
contrasting this data with how policy makers access research evidence, existing relationships may still be
described as rather transactional in nature (i.e. while research is systematically accessed through
relationships, it is not systematically used when interacting or discussing policy options with others).

--- [PDF Page 96 / Book Page 94] ---

The above discussion suggests that a typical research use scenario in policy involves a policy maker who
finds a piece of research, via an academic researcher for example, and validates its usefulness through a
discussion with a colleague, possibly a public servant with a research background. However, in many
systems, the actual use of this research on an advocacy level to influence, build trust and stimulate debate
appears to be weak. Thus, its impact on policy is by no means assured.

Figure 4.9. Overview of policy makers’ learning opportunities
"POLICY MAKERS HAVE EXTENSIVE LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES TO DEVELOP THEIR RESEARCH
KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS"
Strongly disagree

4

0

Disagree

27

10

20

30

Neither agree, nor disagree

Agree

31

27

40

50

60

70

Strongly agree

12

80

90

100
%

Note: Percentage indicates the number of systems reporting a given level agreement with the statement. Data collected at a national and at a
sub-national level.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/pqhr08

Figure 4.10. How policy makers access education research
Seeking advice from external experts

92

Seeking advice from in-house researchers/evaluators

84

Attending conferences and workshops

84

Commissioning research

78

Searching the internet

76

Consulting/Reading academic journals

73

Consulting/Reading the media

68

Consulting quality controlled research repositories

59

Searching scientific databases

57

Social media platforms

38

Speaking to journalists

31

Other

11
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100
%

Note: Percentage indicates the systems reporting that policy makers access education research in a given way. Data collected at a national and
at a sub-national level.
The highlighted responses are those that involve relationships with colleagues or others outside the ministries.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/sdvcgz

--- [PDF Page 97 / Book Page 95] ---

Figure 4.11. How policy makers use education research during the policy process
"Never" + "A little"
"Quite a lot" + "Systematically"
Designing policies, programmes, projects, reforms

5

Identifying the problems in the system

5

"Moderately"

24

70
30

65

Evaluating policies, programmes, projects, reforms

14

25

61

Identifying and selecting relevant existing interventions, policies

11

32

57

Formulating legislations, regulations, guidelines

14

38

Stimulating debate, dialogue and collaboration 3
Earning the trust of other policy makers or stakeholders

50
6

Leveraging political influence in policy decision-making

49
47

53

42

21
0

10

45
20

30

40

33
50

60

70

80

90

100
%

Note: Percentage indicates the number of systems reporting that policy makers use education research in a given way. Data collected at a
national and at a sub-national level.
The highlighted responses are those that involve relationships with colleagues or others outside the ministries.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/42qj7y

Conclusion
A number of overall messages are emerging on actors’ involvement in research production and facilitating
its use in policy and practice.

The field of actors facilitating the use of research is diverse
Overall, a large number of organisations are active in producing research and, in most cases, also
facilitating its use in policy and practice across the OECD. The landscape appears to be dominated by
research producers in many systems, most commonly universities and teacher education institutions.
Networks with direct involvement of academia such as research networks and university-school
partnerships are the most prevalent and active in both the production and mobilisation of education
research. This shows how tightly intertwined research production is with mobilisation (i.e. facilitating
research use). For this reason, it will be important to better understand how each of these organisations
actually operates in a knowledge mobilisation context to uncover concrete configurations or practices in
OECD countries that are more effective than others.
While universities and teacher education institutions generally have a consistent role across systems –
often active in the production of research as well as its mobilisation in policy and practice – most
organisations’ activities are highly system-specific. For example, the ministry of education’s role was quite
diverse within systems. Some are only active in facilitating research use in policy and practice and not
production whereas others are the most active research producers in the whole system. The diversity also
extends to systems reporting the presence of brokerage agencies.
This diversity in both levels of activity, and organisational structures and goals indicates that there is a
huge potential for knowledge exchange and shared learning between the same types of organisations
operating in different systems and contexts.

--- [PDF Page 98 / Book Page 96] ---

Relationships of education ministries are relevant but there are some missing pieces
In the majority of systems, ministries solicit a large number of different types of organisations in matters of
research, although the intensity of these relationships varies. The most commonly reported strong
relationships were with research actors (universities, public research organisations and academic or
research networks). This again paints the picture that the landscape is dominated by those producing
research despite the presence of non-research producing evidence intermediaries.
Interestingly, some systems did not report any connection to brokerage agencies despite their being active
in both the production of research and facilitating of its use in policy and practice. Further work is needed
to understand the precise role of these brokerage agencies in specific systems, the ways in which
ministries work with them and how this can improve research use.

Co-production is not yet a mainstream instrument across OECD countries despite its
potential role in facilitating research use
Co-production is a fundamental form of evidence-use infrastructure but it is still far from becoming a
mainstream instrument in education. Teachers and school leaders are most heavily associated with data
collection and more rarely involved in other stages of research production. This suggests that practitioners’
involvement is primarily passive rather than active in the production of research evidence. Encouragingly,
systems reporting a greater number of incentives for practitioners to be involved in research production
reported that practitioners were more active in producing research.

Policy makers’ relationships should be further leveraged to improve research use
There is a large recognition that research use is both important and expected for policy makers and
practitioners. Ministries also perceive individual attitudes, practices and processes related to research use
positively. However, they seem to be less positive about the quality of relationships between individuals in
the policy and research communities. Policy makers appear to already have relationships that could
support greater use of research but these relationships remain transactional. As such, the extent to which
research is actually used is unclear.
Further research would be useful in understanding how building the capacity of policy makers to become
‘’research advocates’’ and improve the quality of their existing relationships may result in a more systematic
deployment of evidence in policies, programmes, projects and reforms. Concurrently, one method of
increasing the use of education research in public administration could be linked to a shift in the selfconception of civil servants and policy makers towards being autonomous agents or empowered owners
of education research. This may be supported by moving away from the view that research use is chiefly
the responsibility of those with a research background.

References
Bednarek, A. et al. (2018), “Boundary spanning at the science–policy interface: The practitioners’
perspectives”, Sustainability Science, Vol. 13/4, pp. 1175-1183,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-018-0550-9.

[16]

Best, A. and B. Holmes (2010), “Systems thinking, knowledge and action: Towards better
models and methods”, Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and Practice,
Vol. 6/2, pp. 145-159, https://doi.org/10.1332/174426410x502284.

[1]

--- [PDF Page 99 / Book Page 97] ---

Brown, A. et al. (2018), “A fragile but critical link: A commentary on the importance of
government-academy relationships”, Israel Journal of Health Policy Research, Vol. 7/1,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13584-018-0247-7.

[14]

Brown, C., A. Daly and Y. Liou (2016), “Improving trust, improving schools”, Journal of
Professional Capital and Community, Vol. 1/1, pp. 69-91, https://doi.org/10.1108/jpcc-092015-0004.

[24]

Burns, T. and F. Köster (eds.) (2016), Governing Education in a Complex World, Educational
Research and Innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264255364en.

[6]

Coe, R. and S. Kime (2019), “A (new) manifesto for evidence-based education: Twenty years
on”, Evidence Based Education.

[9]

Cooper, A. (2014), “Knowledge mobilisation in education across Canada: A cross-case analysis
of 44 research brokering organisations”, Evidence and Policy, Vol. 10/1,
https://doi.org/10.1332/174426413X662806.

[21]

Dutch Research Council (n.d.), Doctoral Grant for Teachers,
https://www.nwo.nl/en/researchprogrammes/doctoral-grantteachers#:~:text=The%20Doctoral%20Grant%20for%20Teachers,ties%20between%20univer
sities%20and%20schools. (accessed on 27 June 2022).

[28]

EC (2013), The Role of Clusters in Smart Specialisation Strategies, Publications Office,
European Commission, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/43211.

[22]

Education Endowment Foundation (2012), Annual Report 2011/12,
https://d2tic4wvo1iusb.cloudfront.net/documents/annual-reports/EEF_Annual_Report_2012__printable.pdf?v=1631364429 (accessed on 25 May 2022).

[26]

Farrell, C. et al. (2021), Research-practice Partnerships in Education: The State of the Field,
William T. Grant Foundation.

[23]

Global Commission on Evidence to Address Societal Challenges (2022), The Evidence
Commission Report: A Wake-up Call and Path Forward for Decision-makers, Evidence
Intermediaries, and Impact-oriented Evidence Producers, McMaster Health Forum, Hamilton.

[13]

Gough, D., C. Maidment and J. Sharples (2021), “Enabling knowledge brokerage intermediaries
to be evidence-informed”, Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and Practice,
https://doi.org/10.1332/174426421x16353477842207.

[15]

Gough, D. et al. (2011), “Evidence informed policymaking in education in Europe”, EIPEE Final
Project Report Summary.

[19]

Honingh, M., E. Bondarouk and T. Brandsen (2018), “Co-production in primary schools: A
systematic literature review”, International Review of Administrative Sciences, Vol. 86/2,
pp. 222-239, https://doi.org/10.1177/0020852318769143.

[29]

Ion, G. and R. Iucu (2014), “Professionals’ perceptions about the use of research in educational
practice”, European Journal of Higher Education, Vol. 4/4, pp. 334-347,
https://doi.org/10.1080/21568235.2014.899154.

[3]

--- [PDF Page 100 / Book Page 98] ---

Langer, L., J. Tripney and D. Gough (2016), The Science of Using Science: Researching the
Use of Research Evidence in Decision-Making, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit,
UCL Institute of Education, University College London.

[32]

Levin, B. (2013), “To know is not enough: Research knowledge and its use”, Review of
Education, Vol. 1/1, pp. 2-31, https://doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3001.

[20]

Levin, B. (2011), “Mobilising research knowledge in education”, London Review of Education,
https://doi.org/10.1080/14748460.2011.550431.

[2]

MacGregor, S., J. Malin and E. Farley-Ripple (2022), “An application of the social-ecological
systems framework to promoting evidence-informed policy and practice”, Peabody Journal of
Education, Vol. 97/1, pp. 112-125, https://doi.org/10.1080/0161956x.2022.2026725.

[25]

Mitton, C. et al. (2007), “Knowledge transfer and exchange: Review and synthesis of the
literature”, Milbank Quarterly, Vol. 85/4, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0009.2007.00506.x.

[7]

OECD (2007), Evidence in Education: Linking Research and Policy, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264033672-en.

[11]

Oliver, K., E. Adie and A. Boaz (2022), “Mapping the field of evidence production and use”, in
Derrick, G., A. Oancea and N. Nuseibeh (eds.), A Handbook of Meta-Research, Elgar,
https://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/id/eprint/4664478.

[31]

Oliver, K. et al. (2014), “A systematic review of barriers to and facilitators of the use of evidence
by policymakers”, BMC Health Services Research, Vol. 14/2, https://doi.org/10.1186/14726963-14-2.

[17]

Powell, A., H. Davies and S. Nutley (2018), “Facing the challenges of research-informed
knowledge mobilization: ‘Practising what we preach’?”, Public Administration, Vol. 96/1,
https://doi.org/10.1111/padm.12365.

[12]

Research Council of Norway (n.d.), Public Sector Ph.D. scheme,
https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/apply-for-funding/funding-from-the-research-council/publicsector-phd-scheme/ (accessed on 27 June 2022).

[27]

Révai, N. (2020), “What difference do networks make to teachers’ knowledge?: Literature review
and case descriptions”, OECD Education Working Papers, No. 215, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/75f11091-en.

[10]

Rickinson, M. et al. (2021), Research and Evidence Use in Australian Schools: Survey, Analysis
and Key Findings, Monash Q Project, Monash University Faculty of Education, VIC, Australia,
https://doi.org/10.26180/14445663.

[18]

Rickinson, M. et al. (2020), Quality Use of Research Evidence Framework, Monash Q Project,
Monash University Faculty of Education, VIC, Australia,
https://researchmgt.monash.edu/ws/portalfiles/portal/320719238/319855344_oa.pdf.

[8]

Ward, V., A. House and S. Hamer (2009), “Knowledge brokering: The missing link in the
evidence to action chain?”, Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and Practice,
Vol. 5/3, pp. 267-279, https://doi.org/10.1332/174426409x463811.

[5]

--- [PDF Page 101 / Book Page 99] ---

Wehn, U. and C. Montalvo (2018), “Knowledge transfer dynamics and innovation: Behaviour,
interactions and aggregated outcomes”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 171, pp. S56S68, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.09.198.

[30]

Wiggins, M. et al. (2019), The Rise Project: Evidence-Informed School Improvement, Education
Endowment Foundation.

[4]

Notes
1

For more information, see https://www.edulog.pt/ (accessed on 24 February 2022).

2

See https://www.uis.no/nb/forskning/kunnskapssenter-for-utdanning (accessed on 16 May 2022).

3

For more information, see https://www.whatworksnetwork.org.uk/ (accessed on 16 May 2022).

4

For more information, see https://www.stat.fi/til/kou_en.html (accessed on 16 May 2022).

5

For more information, see http://www.inie.ucr.ac.cr/ (accessed on 24 February 2022).

6

For more information, see https://www.etwinning.net/en/pub/index.htm (accessed on 31 January 2022).

--- [PDF Page 102 / Book Page 100] ---

Annex 4.A. Average activity levels reported by
systems in survey
The OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data asked systems to rate the
levels of organisational activity in research production and mobilisation for 17 actors on a Likert scale of 1
(not active at all) to 5 (very active). From this, the following averages have been calculated showing the
average levels of activity within each system for each area.
Facilitating research use in
policy

Facilitating research use in
practice

Producing research

Finland

4.94

4.59

4.88

Switzerland (St. Gallen)

5.00

4.67

4.50

Iceland

4.27

4.45

4.11

Chile

4.40

4.18

4.18

Colombia

3.88

4.00

4.29

Spain

4.00

4.07

4.00

Hungary

4.07

4.00

3.94

UK (England)

3.88

3.88

3.35

Sweden

3.81

3.88

3.41

Switzerland (Obwalden)

3.92

3.88

3.17

Switzerland (Nidwalden)

3.60

3.69

3.56

New Zealand

3.29

4.19

2.94

Turkey

3.56

3.29

3.47

Netherlands

3.53

3.67

3.00

Canada (Saskatchewan)

3.73

3.13

3.13

Portugal

3.07

3.36

3.47

Norway

3.00

3.35

3.24

Costa Rica

3.06

2.94

3.47

Estonia

3.08

3.62

2.67

Switzerland (Appenzell Ausserrhoden)

3.13

3.35

2.76

Slovenia

3.40

2.55

3.00

Latvia

3.25

2.83

2.85

Canada (Quebec)

3.20

2.64

2.94

Czech Republic

3.23

2.64

2.86

Slovak Republic

2.62

2.55

3.38

Lithuania

3.25

2.50

2.69

Austria (Federal)

2.25

3.29

2.88

Switzerland (Zurich)

2.75

2.59

2.94

Belgium (French Community)

2.30

1.92

3.80

South Africa (Pretoria)

2.56

2.53

2.71

Belgium (Flemish Community)

2.75

2.43

2.50

Switzerland (Uri)

2.14

1.86

1.64

System

--- [PDF Page 103 / Book Page 101] ---

Annex 4.B. List of official brokerage agencies
reported by systems in survey
The survey asked systems to describe the brokerage agency(ies) in their systems as part of the open
questions. They were also asked to describe the funding, audience and activities. These descriptions can
be categorised as follows:
Private organisations


“Edupreneurs”: business actors offering products and services to schools [Sweden]



Educational consultancy groups [South Africa]

Not-for-profit organisations


Teacher-trainers not-for-profit organisations [South Africa]



NGOs and Foundations [South Africa, Colombia, Portugal]

Academy


Universities and Teacher Education Faculties [Finland, Norway]



Scholars and students groups [South Africa]

Research bodies


National institute for educational research [Finland, Costa Rica]



Centres for research on learning and education [Finland]



Research units on education [Finland, Norway]



Centre for social science research [Denmark]



Government’s analysis, assessment and research activities [Finland]



Economic advisory bodies overseeing education research [Denmark]



Research institute for economic analysis and modelling, with exploration and development of
education projections [Denmark]

Evaluation bodies


Independent agencies responsible for the evaluation of national education [Finland]



Centres for educational assessment [Finland]



Education statistics open sites [Finland]



System for monitoring the performance of the education system [Costa Rica]

Other government bodies


Edu-political apparatus (teacher certification, school inspections, new curricula) [Sweden]



National agencies for education [Finland]



School leadership centres supported by the Ministry [Chile]

--- [PDF Page 104 / Book Page 102] ---

Independent bodies


Partially or fully public-funded independent brokerage agencies [Denmark]



Grassroots organisations [Colombia]



National and international experts [Colombia]
