================================================================================
Chapter: Facilitating research use: Scary Barriers (and Super Mechanisms)
Author(s): José Manuel Torres
Book: Who Cares about Using Education Research in Policy and Practice?: Strengthening Research Engagement
Series: Educational Research and Innovation
Publisher: OECD Publishing, Paris (2022)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/d7ff793d-en
ISBN: 978-92-64-73132-5 (PDF) / 978-92-64-96272-9 (print)
Section / Part: Part II: Actors and mechanisms facilitating research use in policy and practice
Book Pages: pp. 103–124
PDF Pages: pp. 105–126 (in raw/d7ff793d-en.pdf)
================================================================================
--- [PDF Page 105 / Book Page 103] ---

5 Facilitating research use: Scary

Barriers (and Super Mechanisms)
José Manuel Torres, OECD

This chapter presents the results of the OECD Strengthening the Impact of
Education Research policy survey with regard to the various mechanisms
countries are using to facilitate research use. It presents a framework for
classifying factors that influence research use, based on a review of
literature. It then describes and contrasts mechanisms and barriers
reported by the 37 survey-participating education systems. The chapter
concludes by noting the importance of system-level coordination of the
various mechanisms and research production.

--- [PDF Page 106 / Book Page 104] ---

Introduction
At the beginning of the 20th century, John Dewey, one of the founding fathers of the scientific tradition in
education, considered that scientific knowledge had the enormous mission of influencing teachers’
practices. But the abstract world of researchers, their simplification of the classroom for the study of
phenomena, and the intricate social world that teachers live in made such study complex and challenging
(Berliner, 2008[1]).
Close to 120 years later and despite a constant growing body of literature on the benefits of evidencebased practice and policy making for education, educational research remains under-used. Instead, what
has become clear is that research alone does not inform or have direct effects – such as immediate
adoption – on practice and policy (Jones, Procter and Younie, 2015[2]; Levin, 2011[3]). Communicating
research findings is not enough to increase their use (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016[4]). And promoting
the use of research is not the same as ensuring it (Fazekas and Burns, 2012[5]).
Governments around the world have much enthusiasm and expectations about educational research
providing teachers “with evidence about what works” and thus improving the quality of teaching (Cain,
2015, p. 1[6]). However, this is not an easy task. Despite strong interest in research findings, decisionmaking practitioners and policy makers do not appear to be heavy consumers of education research,
especially in its original format (Levin, 2013[7]). Many countries in the OECD have invested in remedying
this situation in the past decade. As mentioned in the introduction to this volume, efforts have included the
production of evidence synthesis for teaching practice and schools; partnerships between practitioners,
policy makers and researchers for the sustainability of knowledge generation; and capacity building for
research use.
The gaps between research production and its use in policy and practice (the so-called research-policy
and research-practice gaps) together with interventions to bridge them have been the subject of recent
research in a variety of sectors, including health, education, criminal justice and environmental
conservation (Walter, Nutley and Davies, 2003[8]; Nutley, Walter and Davies, 2009[9]; Humphries et al.,
2014[10]; Oliver et al., 2014[11]). Knowledge mobilisation in the education sector refers to processes aimed
at improving the use of evidence to inform school leaders and teachers’ practices, and policy makers’
decisions. It has become a research field in its own right, and yet, the mechanisms that effectively mediate
between research, practice and policy are not yet properly established (Révai and Guerriero, 2017[12]).
It is now time to take stock of the various mechanisms that scale up research use, making them accessible
to educational researchers, policy makers, school leaders and teachers for effective evidence-based
practices and policies (Jones, Procter and Younie, 2015[2]). Collaborative mechanisms that increase
research use are also included. The momentary, unique and specific nature and context of each system
makes it difficult to build generally applicable solutions. But common problems exist across different
contexts and the sharing of this knowledge can reduce redundancy (Boh, 2007[13]).
This chapter presents factors that facilitate or hinder the use of educational research in policy making and
in school and teaching practice. It starts by defining key concepts and suggests an overarching framework
based on a cross-sectoral literature. This is followed by the presentation and analysis of the OECD
Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey results on mechanisms of and barriers to
the use of educational research in national and sub-national systems. The last section discusses
coordination of the educational research production system and identifies potential risks. The chapter ends
with a brief conclusion that summarises the main findings.

--- [PDF Page 107 / Book Page 105] ---

What influences the use of research? Framing the discussion
The use of evidence in educational policy and practice depends on a variety of elements (Levin, 2013[7]).
The literature defines and uses concepts such as factor, mechanism, facilitator, intervention and strategy
in a variety of heterogeneous ways that commonly overlap each other. The following definitions attempt to
introduce more uniformity into the understanding and use of these concepts in this chapter.


Factors are processes or means by which the particular activity influences research use.
Mechanisms enable and barriers hinder the use of evidence in policy making and practice (Gough
et al., 2011[14]). These factors can be intentionally created, such as mechanisms specifically
designed to bridge the gap between research and its use. They can also be unintentionally created,
such as organisational structures or cultures that may act as mechanisms or barriers without this
being its original, intentional goal. They can also be formal or informal.



Intervention is a deliberate action or plan to enhance the use of research evidence, addressing
genuine barriers to research uptake and drawing on mechanisms which are likely to affect it (Oliver
et al., 2014[11]).



Strategy is a concrete and wider action plan commonly based on more than one of these
interventions in order to encourage better use of research (Nutley, Walter and Davies, 2009[9]).
This can also be the other way around, with designed interventions based on a previously
established broad strategy.

Figure 5.1 represents graphically these concepts, and their link to each other, to ease their comprehension.

Figure 5.1. Mindmap of concepts

Mechanisms and barriers influencing research use
Mechanisms vary according to the different levels at which they act: individual, organisational and system
(Nutley, Walter and Davies, 2009[9]). On the one hand, organisational mechanisms, also referred as
institutionalised mechanisms, are collective and formally embedded into the processes, structures and
culture of organisations. These mechanisms enable a more effective mobilisation of knowledge to a larger
number of individuals and allow organisations to select the knowledge to be mobilised. They are, however,
costly in terms of time and resources. On the other hand, individualised mechanisms are casual,
unstructured, and informal. These mechanisms have limited reach as they are unique to individuals or

--- [PDF Page 108 / Book Page 106] ---

small groups but free of the organisations’ interests and structured forms. For the same reasons, they can
suffer from problems of scalability (Boh, 2007[13]).
Another widely used categorisation of knowledge mobilisation activities is based on three conceptual
approaches described by Best and Holmes (2010[15]) (see Chapters 1, 2 and 6 for further details): linear,
relational and systems. Linear models focus on the dissemination of research findings. This includes
making research available for users in terms of format and accessibility. Relationship models emphasise
strengthening relationships among stakeholders in order to facilitate the research-practice-policy link. And
finally, systems models recognise that actors are part of a complex system. They aim to activate this entire
system rather than just a few elements of it.
Humphries and colleagues’ (2014[10]) categorisation of factors fairly and consistently represents the variety
of levels present in the research production and use system. For the purposes of this chapter, this
framework has been adapted and enriched with the work of other authors who have studied factors of
research use beyond the healthcare sector to propose a new typology (see Table 5.1). It broadens the
definition and applicability of the categories in the education sector and considers both practice and policy
contexts. This proposed typology and the above-mentioned Best and Holmes’ conceptual approaches will
frame further analysis in this chapter.

Table 5.1. Typology of factors influencing research use
Type

Definition

Information

Factors related to the existence and quality of relevant research evidence, its availability, accessibility, format,
presentation, and the characteristics of its level and channels of circulation and dissemination.

Interaction

Factors related to the contact, collaboration and flow of information between researchers, practitioners and policy
makers through formal or informal, intended or unplanned relationships, as well as the values associated with
them, such as trust and mutual respect.

Individual characteristics

Factors related to researchers' understanding of the policy and practice processes and context, and to practitioners
and policy makers' skills and capacities to use and apply research, and their formal education and/or training
experience for this. It may also consider the presence of other actors influencing the use of research evidence.

Structure and organisation

Factors related to the existence of system and/or organisational support for the production and use of research,
manifested in their formal structure (e.g. provision of time, funding, learning opportunities, formal training) and/or
processes (e.g. the presence of guidelines and financial incentives).

Culture

Factors related to: researchers, practitioners and policy makers' priorities and their alignment; practitioners and
policy makers' attitudes towards research and will to use it; and system and/or organisational values, principles,
beliefs, and valorisation of research production and use.

Source: Adapted from Humphries, S. et al. (2014[10]), “Barriers and facilitators to evidence-use in program management: A systematic review of
the literature”, https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-14-171.

Annex Table 5.A.1 summarises the mechanisms and barriers identified by the literature and classified by
the proposed framework. It is important to mention that these categories are not exclusive as a mechanism
or a barrier can be classified in more than one category, depending on the lens through which it is studied.

How do systems facilitate the use of research? Findings from the survey
The presence of mechanisms and barriers provides valuable information on the level of relevance and
priority research, research use, and research mobilisation have for different education systems and their
communities. Few mechanisms and many barriers indicate that facilitating research production and use is
a low priority for an education system (Levin, 2011[3]).

--- [PDF Page 109 / Book Page 107] ---

Strengthening the Impact of Education Research surveys 37 education systems in 29 countries about the
production and use of educational research in policy making and practice. Six countries were selected for
further data collection through semi-structured follow-up interviews. The following three sections analyse
the results related to factors that facilitate or hinder the use and production of education research in these
systems.
The survey proposed a dozen mechanisms for and barriers to research use in participating systems. These
are classified conceptually based on the work of Best and Holmes (2010[15]) and the proposed framework
of the preceding section in Annex Table 5.A.2 and Annex Table 5.A.3, respectively.

Figure 5.2. Number of mechanisms by system, 2021
In policy making

In school practice

No. of reported mechanisms
12
10
8
6
4

2
0

Note: Data refers to the number of reported mechanisms out of a dozen options, by system and context. Data was collected at national and subnational levels.
“Appenzell A.” refers to the Swiss canton of Appenzell Ausserrhoden.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/2h1dco

Survey-participating education systems reported an average of 4.7 mechanisms in policy and 4.9 in
practice out of a dozen suggested options, with more systems reporting more mechanisms in practice than
in policy. Although it is a small difference, this could be linked to the slightly stronger focus on facilitating
research use in practice as opposed to policy in the past 15 years (see also Chapter 1). For example, New
Zealand reported (in a follow-up interview) that this stronger focus could relate to the larger amount of
funds available to improve practice. Historically, there have been more activities, projects and studies on
research use in practice than policy.
However, results from the survey showed strong dispersion in the number of reported mechanisms (see
Figure 5.2). Whereas Turkey, the Netherlands, Finland and Sweden declared at least nine mechanisms

--- [PDF Page 110 / Book Page 108] ---

that facilitate research use in both policy and practice, systems like the Swiss cantons of Uri and
Nidwalden, the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic declared two or fewer mechanisms for both.
Within the same systems, there is some strong variation: on the one hand, New Zealand, England (UK),
the Swiss canton of Appenzell Ausserrhoden, and Illinois in the United States reported significantly more
mechanisms in practice than policy. On the other hand, Quebec (Canada) reported significantly more
mechanisms in policy than practice.

Types of mechanisms

Figure 5.3. Presence of mechanisms facilitating the use of educational research, 2021

Inter.

In school practice

In policy making
65

Projects encouraging actors' interactions
to facilitate the use of educational research

Structure and organisation

Providing targeted funding
for research on specific topics

70
70

Systematically commissioning research
to address needs

62

49
No data

Offering resources (e.g. financial, human)
to support research use

49

Systematically identifying needs
in terms of research knowledge

51
32
25

Legislation/law or professional guidelines
that promote educational. research use
System-wide strategy for facilitating
the use of educational research

28

22
22

Information

Synthesising and disseminating educational
research findings through user-friendly tools

Indiv.

86

59
61
49

Systematically identifying relevant research gaps

43

Regular system-wide activities to monitor/
evaluate the impact of educational research

17

22

Regular system-wide activities to develop
capacity/skills to use educational research

49
39
19

Other

11
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100
%

Note: Data refers to percentage of systems reporting the existence of a given mechanism, by type of factor and context. Data was collected at
national and sub-national levels. Data was not collected for the mechanism "Offering resources to support research” in policy making.
“Indiv.” refers to mechanisms targeting individuals and “Inter.” refers to mechanisms aiming to facilitate interaction between individuals.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/jswge5

One of the most reported mechanisms facilitating evidence use are projects encouraging actors’
interactions (see Figure 5.3), which is line with the reviewed literature (Oliver et al., 2014[11]). This
mechanism has a greater presence in school and teaching practice than in policy by more than
20 percentage points. This suggests that policy makers, despite opportunities to interact with researchers,
still have fewer opportunities than practitioners do. The New Zealand Teaching and Learning Research
Initiative is an example of the efforts encouraging research-practice connections (see Box 5.1).

--- [PDF Page 111 / Book Page 109] ---

Interaction has been reported to generate an increase in research impact but differences in culture, goals,
timescales and information needs remain barriers (Walter, Nutley and Davies, 2003[16]). Interactive
mechanisms, although promising and necessary, are not sufficient for increasing evidence use. They must
be supported by an increase in motivations, opportunities and capacities for the use of evidence in practice
or have a more comprehensive strategy (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016[4]).
Capacity-building activities are fewer among surveyed systems, with about half of systems reporting them
in policy and only 39% in practice. In contrast to projects encouraging interaction, capacity-building
activities are slightly more common in policy making than in school practice. Systems seem aware of the
co-dependence between these two mechanisms. Those reporting projects encouraging interaction
between actors reported more regular system-wide activities to develop skills and capacities for research
use in both policy and practice.

Box 5.1. Teaching and Learning Research Initiative in New Zealand
New Zealand’s Teaching and Learning Research Initiative (TLRI) is a government fund established in
2003 for collaborative research about teaching and learning in the early childhood, school and tertiary
sectors. It aims to enhance the connections between educational research and practice, to accumulate
a body of knowledge linking teaching and learning, and to build research capacity in learning and
teaching. Their 2021 funding of NZD 1.5 million was allocated to five projects.
The TLRI’s objectives are achieved through research projects awarded with TLRI funding if they show
that a robust partnership between researchers and practitioners is at the core of the envisioned project.
Thus, it enables practitioners to critically reflect on their work and researchers to gain insight into the
context and challenges of teaching and learning. The funded-project leaders are key actors as they are
responsible for involving researchers and practitioners, shaping their research and practice capacities
and encouraging a true co-production of research.
One of their most recent funded projects is focused on transforming the pedagogy of Early Child
Education teachers by improving sustainable and comprehensive outcomes for indigenous infants and
toddlers. It aims to develop a rigorous and robust conceptual framework of pedagogy that supports the
cultural well-being and the sense of belonging of Samoan infants and toddlers. The project is a
collaboration between the University of Auckland, Massey University, and Samoa Aoga Amata I
Incorporated (SAASIA), an organisation comprised of early childhood centres nationally, representing
Auckland, Napier, Palmerston North, Wellington and Christchurch.
Currently, the Teaching and Learning Research Initiative encompasses 167 funded projects, more than
150 published research reports, and is composed of over 400 researchers and practitioners. Its impact,
measured through a survey answered by a randomly selected sample of past research projects and
some additional interview data, is mainly self-reported, with participants describing a profound and
positive change to their practices.
Source: Hipkins, R., J. Whatman and R. Felgate (2017[17]), Exploring the Impact of the Teaching and Learning Research Initiative; TLRI
(2022[18]), Teaching and Learning Research Initiative; TLRI (2021[19]), “Pepe meamea in the spirit of the collective: Embedding Samoan
indigenous philosophy in ECE for Samoan children under two”, http://www.tlri.org.nz/tlri-research/research-progress/ece-sector/pepemeamea-spirit-collective-embedding-samoan-indigenous (accessed on 20 April 2022).

Capacity-building interventions have significant positive benefits and outcomes on engagement in and with
research for both pupils and teachers. In particular, studies have positively linked these strategies with
pupils’ motivation, their attitudes to subjects, test performance, specific skills, pupils’ self- and grouporganisation, their approaches to collaboration and selection of learning and problem-solving strategies

--- [PDF Page 112 / Book Page 110] ---

(Cordingley, 2016[20]). These interventions have also reportedly improved decision makers’ skills to access
and make sense of evidence. Nevertheless, these effects are, once again, conditioned by intervention
design (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016[4]).
Another widely reported mechanism was targeted funding for research on specific topics: In both policy
and practice, 70% of respondents reported the existence of this mechanism within their system.
Interestingly, the literature does not report the use of targeted funding in educational systems as a
mechanism to promote research use but, rather, the lack of funding mechanisms as a barrier, although not
widely (Oliver et al., 2014[11]).
Other mechanisms in the “Structure and organisation” category have varying results among surveyed
systems. Strategies formalising and embedding research-use mechanisms within existing decision-making
structures and processes have been reported to have positive effects although the evidence is not robust
enough (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016[4]). In that line, South Africa reported during follow-up interviews
that until they become embedded in organisational processes, projects enhancing the use of research in
education have little influence on policies. Thus, support at all hierarchical levels is a key condition of the
success of this type of project.
The majority of identified mechanisms in a 2014 systematic review in health sector organisations
(Humphries et al., 2014[10]) was informational. Although such mechanisms are also highly reported in the
OECD survey of the educational sector, they are not as dominant. The presentation and circulation of
research findings in suitable formats is reported as a common existing mechanism in both policy making
and school practice, with 60% of the systems declaring its presence. One of the best-known examples of
this mechanism is the British Education Endowment Foundation’s Teaching and Learning Toolkit (see
Box 5.2). The other two informational mechanisms – systematically identifying research gaps and systemwide monitoring of research impact – were rarer. This might be caused by both mechanisms referring to
regular, systemic activities whereas in some systems these mechanisms may only exist sporadically.

Box 5.2. EEF’s Teaching and Learning Toolkit
The Teaching and Learning Toolkit of the British Education Endowment Foundation (EEF) aims to
support teachers and school leaders’ efforts to improve learning outcomes, particularly for
disadvantaged children, through the provision of summaries of education research in a systematised
and accessible way.
The Toolkit synthetises research evidence from 30 pedagogical, institutional and relational approaches
focused on enhancing teaching and learning at classroom and school levels in general. The studies are
selected based on a systematic review, which stipulates the inclusion criteria in advance in order to
avoid biased results. They are continuously updated in light of new research evidence, making it a live
and dynamic resource.
The summary of evidence on each approach includes:


Description of the approach.



Key findings.



Average impact on attainment, measured by the number of months of additional progress made
by pupils.



Strength of evidence measured by the number of studies satisfying the inclusion criteria



Average cost of a given intervention.



Recommendations on implementation.

--- [PDF Page 113 / Book Page 111] ---

The Toolkit is meant to be a starting point for discussion between education professionals, relying on
their judgement and expertise about what works in a particular school context and taking the Toolkit’s
interpretations with caution. This is complemented by other resources. As of 2017, 70% of secondaryschool leaders used it to inform their decision making.
Source: EEF (2017[21]), “EEF launches updated Teaching and Learning Toolkit”, https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/news/eeflaunches-updated-teaching-and-learning-toolkit (accessed on 28 March 2022); EEF (2022[22]), Teaching and Learning Toolkit,
https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/education-evidence/teaching-learning-toolkit (accessed on 28 March 2022);

While informational factors are undoubtedly necessary for research use, by themselves they do not lead
to improved use of evidence. Timely access to good quality and relevant research, and collaboration and
relationships between research producers and users also have to be considered (Langer, Tripney and
Gough, 2016[4]).
Systems tend to have the same mechanism in both policy and practice although this depends on the
mechanism in particular. Projects that encourage interactions between actors, provide targeted funding for
research, and generate tools based on research findings tend to exist in both contexts. This tendency could
suggest that these reported mechanisms are comprehensive in both contexts. In contrast, regular systemwide activities to develop skills and capacities to use research or monitor and evaluate research impact
tend to only exist in either policy or practice.

Mechanisms by approach: Linear, relational and systems
Reported mechanisms facilitating research use vary based on their approach as described by Best and
Holmes (see Chapter 2 for a more detailed description).
Linear mechanisms such as the systematic identification of needs in research knowledge and the
commissioning of research to address these needs are more widely present in policy making than in school
and teaching practice. Surprisingly, respondents reported commissioning research more frequently than
the systematic identification of needs in both policy and practice. This suggests that the determination of
education systems’ needs, which guides their demand for research, is not based on direct information from
those who will benefit from it, such as students and teachers. When there is no systematic mapping of
needs, questions arise about the basis of commissioned research and whether it is aligned to real needs.
System-level activities, and particularly system-wide activities (highlighted in Figure 5.3), are the least
mentioned in both policy and practice. Only one-fourth of education systems reported the existence of
legislation, laws or guidelines promoting the use of research while one out of every five systems has regular
system-wide activities to monitor and/or evaluate the impact of educational research. Moreover, only 22%
of respondent systems reported having a system-wide strategy for facilitating research use in policy and
this proportion is the same in practice. Interestingly, systems that have a system-wide strategy reported a
greater number of mechanisms than those without.
Linear mechanisms of dissemination and diffusion are incorporated into relationship mechanisms, which
are the base for systems thinking (Best and Holmes, 2010[15]). But some education systems still lack basic
linear mechanisms such as identifying actors’ needs, commissioning research based on these needs and
disseminating research findings. This is the foremost and most substantial barrier hindering the use of
education-related evidence in policy and practice.
In sum, efforts lean towards generating interactions between research producers and users, and more so
in practice than in policy. However, surveyed systems tend to not complement this with capacity-building
activities and learning opportunities, which would improve the use of evidence (Langer, Tripney and
Gough, 2016[4]). Despite some systems reporting the presence of reasonable number of mechanisms,

--- [PDF Page 114 / Book Page 112] ---

there remains a lack of system-wide strategies which could serve to enhance their coordination. This, along
with systems reporting the identification of research needs more than commissioning research to address
these needs suggests an insufficiently comprehensive strategy of effort to improve educational research
use.

What prevents systems from using evidence? Findings from the survey
Education systems were asked to rank three to six barriers out of a dozen suggested options in order of
importance. These barriers are classified by their conceptual approach based on the work of Best and
Holmes (2010[15]) and by the proposed framework in Annex Table 5.A.2 and Annex Table 5.A.3,
respectively. As with mechanisms, barriers and their perceived existence and relevance vary in relation to
the category they belong (see Figure 5.4); their conceptual approach (see Table 5.2); and context.

Figure 5.4 Presence and relevance of barriers to the use of research, 2021
IN POLICY MAKING

INDIV. INTER.

INFORMATION

STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATIONS

Rank 1

Rank 2-3

IN SCHOOL PRACTICE

Rank 4-6

Rank 2-3

Rank 4-6

30%

50%

Lack of time to access and engage with research
Conflicting timeframes with research
Lack of mechanisms that facilitate the use of research
Lack of financial resources
Lack of learning opportunities
Lack of relevant research
Low accessibility of research in appropriate formats
Low quality of research in key areas
Lack of relationships between different actors
Low levels of skills and capacity to use research
Lack of broader political will to use research

CULTURE

Rank 1

No Data

Lack of openness to new ideas from research
Lack of willingness to use research
70%

50%

30%

10%

10%

70%

Note: Data showing the percentage of systems ranking the given barrier, by context, type of factor and rank range. Data was collected at a
national and at a sub-national level. “Lack of broader political will” was not offered as an option in practice.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/eb03nl

--- [PDF Page 115 / Book Page 113] ---

Types of barriers
Overall, the most widely reported barriers are linked to structures and organisation, followed by
information-related factors. Interestingly, factors related to the culture of research use are perceived as
less of a barrier in most education systems.
Low levels of skills and capacities in using research and the lack of learning opportunities are both
perceived as being more of a barrier in practice than in policy. However, there are education systems that
consider that there is a lack of training and learning opportunities for both practitioners and policy makers.
This is true of Slovenia, which reported it during their follow-up interview.
Overall, the presence and relevance of both barriers and the perceived existence of corresponding
mechanisms seem to match. These barriers are more widely reported in practice, and capacity-building
mechanisms have a weaker presence, precisely, in practice. However, at a country or system level, there
was no systematic matching between capacity-building mechanisms, and the lack of capacities and
learning opportunities as perceived barriers. Some education systems perceived these barriers even
though they have capacity-building mechanisms. This was true for both practice and policy.
Besides the lack of political will to use research, which was mentioned by 32% of education systems,
cultural barriers were not reported in great number by respondents. This contrasts with some of the
literature suggesting that the main barriers to research use arise in cultures that do not foster its use
(Rickinson et al., 2020[23]). In that vein, during their follow-up interviews, New Zealand reported that one of
their main interests was to develop its culture into an evidence-based one. Slovenia noted that they were
reshaping the thinking of their Ministry of Education along the same lines.

Barriers by approach: Linear, relational and systems
With respect to the types of approach as described by Best and Holmes (2010[15]) (see Table 5.2), systemlevel barriers are the most mentioned and relational barriers the least in both policy and practice.
Nevertheless, basic linear factors such as little availability of relevant research and low accessibility to
appropriate formats were still significantly reported as major barriers in policy making and/or in practice.
Education systems broadly considered the lack of mechanisms facilitating the use of research as one of
the most relevant barriers to research use: 11 systems considered it to be one of their top three main
barriers in policy and 16 did in practice. Latvia and Slovenia considered this to be their main barrier in both
policy and practice.
Contradictorily, these systems reported a higher number of mechanisms on average. This could imply that
surveyed systems consider existing mechanisms to be insufficient in facilitating research use. The lack of
connections between existing mechanisms or the lack of a system-level coordination of mechanisms could
be the source of the problem, leading to the perceived need for more mechanisms.
In sum, data collected from the policy survey show some coherence. With linear mechanisms being highly
reported and system-level ones only by a few education systems, system-level barriers are highly reported
and linear barriers only a little. However, some inconsistencies are also observed. First, the large number
of projects encouraging interactions coupled with a relatively large number of reports of the absence of
relationships between actors suggest that these projects are not strictly focused on facilitating research
use. Second, lack of mechanisms was reported to be an important barrier together with a relatively high
number of reported mechanisms. This points to existing mechanisms having insufficient impact. This raises
questions about the need for connections between mechanisms and comprehensive coordination
strategies.

--- [PDF Page 116 / Book Page 114] ---

Table 5.2. Systems according to their main reported barriers by type of approach
School practice
Policy making

Linear

Relationships

Systems

Linear

Relationships

Systems

Spain

Sweden
United States
(Illinois)

Colombia
Costa Rica

Switzerland
(Nidwalden)

Switzerland
(Zurich)

Slovak Republic
Switzerland
(Appenzell Ausserrhoden)

Chile
Belgium (Flemish
Community)
Czech Republic
Norway
Switzerland
(Lucerne)

Austria
Belgium (French
Community)
Lithuania
Portugal

Canada (Quebec)
Canada
(Saskatchewan)
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
Hungary

Iceland
Japan
Latvia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Slovenia

South Africa
Switzerland
(Obwalden)
Switzerland (Uri)
Turkey
United Kingdom
(England)

Note: Data was collected at a national and at a sub-national level. Switzerland (St. Gallen) did not provide data on this question.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.

How do systems coordinate research production?
The OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey asked education systems how
the production of education research is coordinated, regulated or managed (see Figure 5.5).

Figure 5.5. Presence of coordinating mechanisms of research production, 2021
Funding mechanisms

59

Regular consultations with policy makers on their needs

59

A public research organisation

49

Regular consultations with practitioners on their needs

43

A long-term strategy for producing education research

41

No co-ordination of research production

28

A National Education Act

19

Other

11
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70
%

Note: Data showing percentage of systems reporting the existence of a given mechanism for the coordination, regulation or management of
research production. Data was collected at a national and at a sub-national level.
Source: OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey data.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/u9qiaz

--- [PDF Page 117 / Book Page 115] ---

One of the most cited methods of research production are funding mechanisms, with 59% of systems
reporting them. These education systems reported more provision of funding for research in specific topics
in both policy and practice. Funding mechanisms are active facilitators of both research production and
research use, and are not focused exclusively on one or the other. The Norwegian Programme for
Research and Innovation in the Educational Sector is an example of a system-wide institutionalised funding
mechanism (see Box 5.3).
Regular consultations with policy makers on their needs was the other most cited coordinating mechanism
for research production, with 59% of education systems reporting this. These consultations are mentioned
16 percentage points more than those with practitioners. Education systems reporting this type of
consultation with policy makers also reported the systematic identification of policy makers’ needs in terms
of research knowledge more frequently as an existing mechanism facilitating the use of research. This is
similar to consultations with practitioners as a mechanism for coordinating research production and the
systematic identification of practitioners’ needs. As with the funding mechanisms, it would appear that
these practices, when present, tend to be used for both research production and research use.

Box 5.3. Programme for Research and Innovation in the Educational Sector in Norway
The Programme for Research and Innovation in the Educational Sector (FINNUT) is a long-term
research and development programme for the education system carried out by the Research Council
of Norway from 2014 to 2023. Its primary goal is to support high-quality research aimed at spurring
innovation and informing practice and policy development at all levels of the education sector.
FINNUT provides funding for research projects across four main areas – teaching and learning;
professional education and practice; management, leadership and organisation; and education and
work – covering the entire sector, from early childhood education and care to adult learning. For the
assessment of the future impact of these funded research projects, the programme considers some
academic indicators such as the frequency of citations in international scientific journal and the inclusion
in systematic reviews, among others.
The programme features three main types of calls for applications:


Investigator-driven projects, aiming at developing high-quality, relevant knowledge and
addressing research fragmentation. Allocated grants cover doctoral and post-doctoral research
fellowships and projects related to national and international co-operation and mobility.



User-driven projects, providing practice-based training and competence development to
researchers within relevant topics for the development of practice and innovation in the
education sector.



Projects with users’ participation, developed jointly by researchers and users who identify
the needs of the latter. Collaborative research is seen to improve the sector-specific knowledge
among the research community and develop research capacity among practitioners.

FINNUT also functions as a national cooperative arena for research groups, national and local public
administration, and other organisations in the education sector while also strengthening the ties
between strategic basic research, applied research and innovation in the field of education. Another
major activity of the programme is targeted dissemination of findings and research results while
individual projects are charged with informing target groups about their research activity through
communication and dissemination plans.
Source: University of Stavanger (2022[24]), The Knowledge Centre for Education, https://www.uis.no/en/research/knowledge-centre-foreducation (accessed on 23 March 2022); Research Council of Norway (2017[25]), FINNUT Work Programme 2014-2023.

--- [PDF Page 118 / Book Page 116] ---

In half of education systems surveyed, a public research organisation is in charge of the coordination,
regulation or management of research production. However, only 41% of systems have a long-term
strategy for producing education research. (See Box 5.4) There are twice as many education systems
reporting such long-term strategies as those reporting a system-wide strategy for facilitating the use of
research in policy or practice. Nevertheless, education systems reporting a strategy in research production
report a higher presence of strategies facilitating research use in policy and in practice than those that do
not. Hungary, the Netherlands, Sweden and Turkey reported having a system-wide strategy for research
use in both practice and policy as well as a strategy for research production.
The data above suggest that there are systems that think in a “research dynamics” logic, i.e. that invest in
various mechanisms to facilitate research use and acknowledge the importance of coordinating research
production. However, given that research production is a necessary, although not sufficient, condition for
increasing interest in the use of evidence, the number of systems that do not strategically coordinate the
production of research is still high.

Box 5.4. Coordinating efforts at a system level
The Netherlands – NRO
The Netherlands Initiative for Education Research (NRO, a unit of the Netherlands Organisation for
Scientific Research, the Dutch Research Council) is in charge of coordinating research education and
its funding. The initiative aims to promote high-quality knowledge use and to enhance innovation in the
education sector by promoting collaboration between researchers and practitioners at all education
levels. The three core tasks of NRO include improving the coherence of education research, financing
high-quality research and encouraging the use of research evidence in practice. The involvement of
educational institutions and policy makers is encouraged throughout the research project cycle.
By identifying research gaps, NRO programmes upcoming research to improve the coherence of
education research. This is done through:


Gathering information from school directors, policy makers, research institutes and other key
stakeholders to help formulate the subjects for the research programmes.



Publishing calls for research proposals.



Evaluating proposals according to prescribed criteria of practical relevance and scientific rigour.

Researchers can submit applications for funding in partnership with ministries, companies or other
organisations. In addition, monitoring research projects helps to ensure that they keep in line with
established priorities throughout the process. Disseminating results enables education to gain
maximum benefits from scientific insights.

Wales – NSERE
In Wales, the National Strategy for Educational Research and Enquiry (NSERE) directs the coordination
of research-focused policy activity and the development of officials’ capacities to effectively use
research in policy development work, aiming to educational policy and practice being informed by the
best available research evidence.
This strategy was born after the commission of the UK Ministry of Education to the Welsh Government
to “co-create a national education research strategy that provides a coherent and transparent
framework for education research in Wales” in November 2018. The government then worked with
organisations and individuals within the Welsh education research ecosystem and abroad to develop
the NSERE.

--- [PDF Page 119 / Book Page 117] ---

Although the NSERE relates to all age groups, levels and sectors within the Welsh education system,
it mainly focuses on “3 to 18 education” and educational research within higher education. The
strategy’s main objectives are to:


Develop high-quality research capacity and volume within higher education institutions focused
on the needs of the Welsh education system.



Develop a national evidence-informed profession, where educational professionals use highquality research evidence and are provided with opportunities to participate in its production.



Support the development of evidence-informed policy through engagement with a wide range
of research.



Contribute to and learn from international research and evidence.

Source: For the Netherlands: PO-Raad et al. (2019[26]), “Smart Connections towards a strong knowledge infrastructure for education”; NRO
(2022[27]), About NRO, https://www.nro.nl/en/about-nro (accessed on 24 March 2022); for Wales: Welsh Government (2021[28]), The National
Strategy for Educational Research and Enquiry (NSERE): Vision Document, https://gov.wales/national-strategy-educational-research-andenquiry-nsere-vision-document-html.

Impact: A missing piece
Despite evidence-based practice being one of the goals of public services in OECD member countries and
several activities being developed for its promotion, there are too few consensual agreements on how
evidence-based practices and policies are best promoted (Nutley, Walter and Davies, 2009[9]; Boaz et al.,
2019[29]). Nevertheless, knowledge mobilisation interventions seem to work well when an appropriate
mechanism is employed (Jasimuddin, 2007[30]) and they address the clear and genuine barriers preventing
the research uptake (Oliver et al., 2014[11]).
The way in which researchers define and measure “evidence or research use” determines the
effectiveness and impact of the mechanisms and repercussion of the barriers. The concept of “research
use” has multiple dimensions (Levin, 2011[3]). Evaluations of research use interventions employ a wide
range of indicators such as changes in access to research; in knowledge and understanding; in attitudes
and beliefs; in behaviour; and/or in outcomes for services users (Nutley, Walter and Davies, 2009[9]). Thus,
even though there are considerable literature results on the impact of existing mechanisms influencing
decision makers’ research use, their evaluation outcomes are often not comparable.
An analysis of What Works Centres in the United Kingdom (Gough, Maidment and Sharples, 2018[31])
assesses impact based on:


Ultimate beneficiaries (e.g. pupils or pupils’ attainment).



Behaviours of intended users (e.g. practitioners’ or policy makers’ use of evidence to inform
decisions).



Intermediate outcomes (e.g. research users’ knowledge of research findings).

The analysis reveals that these Centres, with the exception of the Education Endowment Foundation
(EEF), undertake relatively little evaluation of impact of their work on ultimate beneficiaries (see also
Chapter 7).
It is noteworthy that research can have impact in varying ways and that most of these do not yield direct
application results in a short time frame. Its effects are often gradual and indirect, mediated through several
social processes, and shaped by the larger socio-political context (Levin, 2011[3]). Research on the health
sector considers that the time lag between the availability of research evidence and its application in

--- [PDF Page 120 / Book Page 118] ---

funded Research School Network project achieved a change in the practices of teachers and school
leaders in its first three years of implementation but has not shown any sign of impact in terms of student
outcomes (Gu et al., 2021[33]).
An extensive systematic review analysed the effectiveness of interventions focused on increasing decision
makers’ use of research. Regarding information and dissemination-related interventions, it pointed to
positive effects on research use. However, these effects are “conditional on the intervention design
simultaneously trying to enhance decision makers’ opportunity and motivation to use evidence” (Langer,
Tripney and Gough, 2016, p. 1[4]). Interventions aiming to enhance the use of educational research in policy
making and/or school and teaching practice should consider multiple mechanisms to ensure and increase
impact. Such a tendency is already observable: many strategies aiming to encourage research use draw
on more than one mechanism (Nutley, Walter and Davies, 2009[9]).

Conclusion
Education systems are complex: Multiple actors operate at different levels and with different degrees of
power, empowerment, autonomy and demands, and they interact with each other with different intensities.
In such complexity, the sharing of knowledge between different elements of education systems and the
coordinating efforts and mechanisms facilitating this become essential (Burns and Köster, 2016[34]).
System-wide coordination, involving a wide and diverse set of relevant actors, is necessary for effective
modern governance. The goal of these coordinated strategies is to replace isolated interventions and align
action to a system’s specific context, actors and resources (Burns and Köster, 2016[34]). These strategies
should aim to move the system from “single interventions and simplistic solutions to the recognition of the
need for coordinated changes throughout the system and to its constraining and enabling contexts and
resources” (Mason, 2016, p. 52[35]).
Data from the OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey provide insight into
these strategies by mapping existing mechanisms for and barriers to the use of research in policy making
and in school and teaching practice across education systems. There are three main and interrelated
points that emerge from the analysis.

Efforts to enhance research use are misaligned with the specific systems’ problems
Interventions focused on bridging gaps between research production and research use have to draw on
mechanisms that are likely to affect genuine barriers to research uptake (Oliver et al., 2014[11]).
Nevertheless, survey results show that there are misalignments between barriers and mechanisms in
many education systems. Analyses such as this complemented with more detailed national data could
point to areas for improvement. Once barriers to the use of education research have been identified,
mechanisms to overcome them can be designed and implemented in a more targeted manner.

Lack of strategic coordination inhibits impact
Local efforts to improve the use of education research exist. They aim to transform teachers, school leaders
and policy makers into critical research consumers (Jones, Procter and Younie, 2015[2]), and make
research producers aware of the context of their potential users. However, isolated one-dimensional efforts
are not enough. The lack of coordination between these initiatives at a higher level and the lack of a
system-wide strategy can block their scale-up and fulfilment of their potential impact. Research has shown
that the impact of certain mechanisms facilitating the use of educational research is stronger when these
are combined (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016[4]). However, the “ideal” combination of mechanisms for
each specific context and definition of this mix are, as yet, poorly understood.

--- [PDF Page 121 / Book Page 119] ---

Still some way to go for systems thinking
Systems thinking and system-wide coordination can have deep impact on policy, practice and research.
Coordinated and effective interventions are relevant for change at the individual, organisational, and
community level. Strategic communications have a critical role in coordinating these changes and effective
coordination structures can speed uptake of innovations (Best and Holmes, 2010[15]). However, despite
the unanimous view that governing education systems must take a systems approach, governments are
struggling to figure out how that can be done in practice. An investigation of activities that encourage
knowledge mobilisation found that while there is a large number of such activities, there is little overall
coordination between them (Cain, Wieser and Livingston, 2016[36]; Gough et al., 2011[14]). The same
picture emerges from the data presented in this chapter as well, with systems mechanisms being poorly
reported.
Finally, there is a note of caution. The effects of coordinated mechanisms or of a system-wide strategy on
facilitating the use of educational research have not yet been broadly studied. Further research should aim
to analyse and evaluate this type of strategy; enabling conditions for its correct development and
implementation in order to achieve its highest impact; and who should lead it.
A first step for education systems could be to carefully and thoroughly map the state of their educational
research use system in order to identify the factors influencing the use of research. Doing so will allow
them to align mechanisms and barriers, generating effective interventions under a holistic strategy to
enhance research use. The coordination of this strategy and its evaluation are key pieces that are
commonly neglected yet fundamental for strategic improvement.

References
Berliner, D. (2008), “Research, policy, and practice: The great disconnect”, in Lapan, S. and
M. Quartaroli (eds.), Research Essentials: An Introduction to Designs and Practices,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268390512.

[1]

Best, A. and B. Holmes (2010), “Systems thinking, knowledge and action: Towards better
models and methods”, Evidence and Policy, Vol. 6/2, pp. 145-159,
https://doi.org/10.1332/174426410X502284.

[15]

Boaz, A. et al. (2019), “What works now? An introduction”, in Boaz, A. et al. (eds.), What Works
Now?: Evidence-informed Policy and Practice, Policy Press.

[29]

Boh, W. (2007), “Mechanisms for sharing knowledge in project-based organizations”, Information
and Organization, Vol. 17/1, pp. 27-58, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoandorg.2006.10.001.

[13]

Burns, T. and F. Köster (eds.) (2016), Governing Education in a Complex World, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264255364-en.

[34]

Cain, T. (2015), “Teachers’ engagement with research texts: Beyond instrumental, conceptual or
strategic use”, Journal of Education for Teaching, Vol. 41/5, pp. 478-492,
https://doi.org/10.1080/02607476.2015.1105536.

[6]

Cain, T., C. Wieser and K. Livingston (2016), “Mobilising research knowledge for teaching and
teacher education”, European Journal of Teacher Education, Vol. 39/5, pp. 529-533,
https://doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2016.1256086.

[36]

--- [PDF Page 122 / Book Page 120] ---

Cordingley, P. (2016), “Knowledge and research use in local capacity building”, in Burns, T. and
F. Köster (eds.), Governing Education in a Complex World.

[20]

EEF (2022), Teaching and Learning Toolkit, Education Endowment Foundation,
https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/education-evidence/teaching-learning-toolkit
(accessed on 28 March 2022).

[22]

EEF (2017), “EEF launches updated Teaching and Learning Toolkit”, Education Endowment
Foundation, https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/news/eef-launches-updatedteaching-and-learning-toolkit (accessed on 28 March 2022).

[21]

Fazekas, M. and T. Burns (2012), “Exploring the Complex Interaction Between Governance and
Knowledge in Education”, OECD Education Working Papers, No. 67, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5k9flcx2l340-en.

[5]

Gough, D., C. Maidment and J. Sharples (2018), EPPI-Centre.

[31]

Gough, D. et al. (2011), Evidence Informed Policymaking in Education in Europe : EIPEE Final
Project Report, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University
of London.

[14]

Gu, Q. et al. (2021), The Research Schools Programme in Opportunity Areas: Investigating the
Impact of Research Schools in Promoting Better Outcomes in Schools, Evaluation Report,
Education Endowment Foundation,
https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/RS_Evaluation.pdf.

[33]

Hering, J. (2016), “Do we need “more research” or better implementation through knowledge
brokering?”, Sustainability Science, Vol. 11/2, pp. 363-369, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625015-0314-8.

[38]

Hipkins, R., J. Whatman and R. Felgate (2017), Exploring the Impact of the Teaching and
Learning Research Initiative.

[17]

Humphries, S. et al. (2014), “Barriers and facilitators to evidence-use in program management: A
systematic review of the literature”, BMC Health Services Research, Vol. 14/1,
https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-14-171.

[10]

Hutchinson, A. and L. Johnston (2006), “Beyond the BARRIERS scale: Commonly reported
barriers to research use”, JONA, Vol. 36/4, pp. 189-199.

[32]

Jasimuddin, S. (2007), “Exploring knowledge transfer mechanisms: The case of a UK-based
group within a high-tech global corporation”, International Journal of Information
Management, Vol. 27/4, pp. 294-300, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2007.03.003.

[30]

Jones, S., R. Procter and S. Younie (2015), “Participatory knowledge mobilisation: An emerging
model for international translational research in education”, Journal of Education for
Teaching, Vol. 41/5, pp. 555-573, https://doi.org/10.1080/02607476.2015.1105540.

[2]

Langer, L., J. Tripney and D. Gough (2016), The science of using science: Researching the use
of research evidence in decision-making, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, UCL
Institute of Education, University College London.

[4]

Levin, B. (2013), “To know is not enough: Research knowledge and its use”, Review of
Education, Vol. 1/1, pp. 2-31, https://doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3001.

[7]

--- [PDF Page 123 / Book Page 121] ---

Levin, B. (2011), “Mobilising research knowledge in education”, London Review of Education,
Vol. 9/1, pp. 15-26, https://doi.org/10.1080/14748460.2011.550431.

[3]

Mason, M. (2016), “Complexity theory and systemic change in education governance”, in
Burns, T. and F. Köster (eds.), Governing Education in a Complex World.

[35]

NRO (2022), About NRO, Nationaal Regieorgaan Onderwijsonderzoek, Netherlands,
https://www.nro.nl/en/about-nro (accessed on 24 March 2022).

[27]

Nutley, S., I. Walter and H. Davies (2009), “Promoting evidence-based practice: Models and
mechanisms from cross-sector review”, Research on Social Work Practice, Vol. 19/5,
pp. 552-559, https://doi.org/10.1177/1049731509335496.

[9]

Oliver, K. et al. (2014), “A systematic review of barriers to and facilitators of the use of evidence
by policymakers”, BMC Health Services Research, Vol. 14/2, https://doi.org/10.1186/14726963-14-2.

[11]

PO-Raad et al. (2019), “Smart Connections towards a strong knowledge infrastructure for
education”.

[26]

Research Council of Norway (2017), FINNUT Work Programme 2014-2023.

[25]

Révai, N. and S. Guerriero (2017), “Knowledge dynamics in the teaching profession”, in
Pedagogical Knowledge and the Changing Nature of the Teaching Profession, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264270695-4-en.

[12]

Rickinson, M. et al. (2020), Using Evidence Better: Quality Use of Research Evidence
Framework, Monash University, Victoria, Australia,
http://monash.edu/education/research/projects/qproject (accessed on 1 September 2021).

[23]

Sutherland, W. et al. (2019), “Building a tool to overcome barriers in research-implementation
spaces: The conservation evidence database”, Biological Conservation, Vol. 238,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2019.108199.

[37]

TLRI (2022), Teaching and Learning Research Initiative.

[18]

TLRI (2021), “Pepe meamea in the spirit of the collective: Embedding Samoan indigenous
philosophy in ECE for Samoan children under two”, Teaching and Learning Research
Initiative, http://www.tlri.org.nz/tlri-research/research-progress/ece-sector/pepe-meameaspirit-collective-embedding-samoan-indigenous (accessed on 20 April 2022).

[19]

University of Stavanger (2022), The Knowledge Centre for Education,
https://www.uis.no/en/research/knowledge-centre-for-education (accessed on
23 March 2022).

[24]

Walter, I., S. Nutley and H. Davies (2003), “Developing a taxonomy of interventions used to
increase the impacts of research”, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265233164.

[8]

Walter, I., S. Nutley and H. Davies (2003), “Research impact: A cross sector literature review”.

[16]

Welsh Government (2021), The National Strategy for Educational Research and Enquiry
(NSERE): Vision Document, https://gov.wales/national-strategy-educational-research-andenquiry-nsere-vision-document-html.

[28]

--- [PDF Page 124 / Book Page 122] ---

Annex 5.A. Additional tables
Annex Table 5.A.1. Factors influencing research use by type of factor
Mechanisms for and barriers to the use of educational research
Type
Information

Mechanisms
 Research users' timely access to relevant information
 Targeted and improved dissemination of good quality
research findings to practitioners and policy makers

Individual
characteristics

 Poor access to good quality relevant research
(e.g. paywalls)
 Lack of availability to research

 Complex intervention evaluation methods (in the case of
empirical research)

 Lack of relevance of research

 High clarity, reliability and/or relevance of research
evidence

 Poor presentation (e.g. without synthesis or highly complex)

 Audience-tailored format of research findings
Interaction

Barriers

 Poor dissemination
 Negative perceptions of research by users

 Local collaboration between the research and policy or
practice communities enabling greater discussion on
findings

 Lack of personal and/or professional contact between
research producers and potential users

 Formal, constant, large-scale partnerships between
research producers and users to support better connections
between them

 Lack of incentives for contact and/or collaboration

 Lack of structures and/or spaces for contact
 Lack of support for collaboration

 Trust and mutual respect among research producers and
users

 Cultural and/or linguistic mismatches and
misunderstandings between research producers and users

 Researchers' skills and capacities related to effective
dissemination of useful evidence

 Lack or deficit of comprehension of policy processes and
school contexts of researchers

 Researchers' good comprehension of policy processes and
the context surrounding policy priorities

 The perception of research producers as partisan and
producing biased results

 Researchers' good comprehension of educational
structures and processes and teachers’ professional
practice

 Lack or deficit of research analytical skills, experience,
literacy and awareness of practitioners and policy makers

 Policy makers and practitioners' skills and capacities
related to research literacy, utilisation and application

 Lack of formal training

 Practitioners' skills development through career-long
professional learning, beginning in initial teacher education
 "Influencers" (experts, peers)' positive attitudes, behaviour
and influence towards research use
Structure and
organisation

 Technical support (e.g. guidelines, laws)
 Financial support (e.g. funding)
 Organisational support (e.g. time, rewards, incentives)
 Provision of necessary human resources and training

 Teachers' lack of time to read research, to familiarise
themselves with new evidence-based strategies and/or to
interpret and adapt these approaches to their specific
context
 Conflicting timelines (e.g. political and research cycles),
with research outputs being not available at the time when
they are needed as input to decision making
 Inadequate system and/or organisational support (e.g. lack
of reward system)
 Financial and/or human resource constraints
 Lack of or poor formal long-term planning processes
 Inflexible and non-transparent policy processes

--- [PDF Page 125 / Book Page 123] ---

Type
Culture

Mechanisms
 Positive leadership and authority
 Facilitation role of national and local governments

Barriers
 Lack of senior management support for evidence-informed
decision making

 Support of school leaders for the use of research

 Perceived lack of authority to change procedures

 System and/or organisational support to and commitment
with evidence development and use

 Overall resistance to change
 Negative perception towards research use

 System and/or organisation underlining the value of
research use

 Difference on the priorities of research producers and users
 Competing pressures (economic, political, social factors)
 Highly politicised environment

Source: Humphries, S. et al. (2014[10]), “Barriers and facilitators to evidence-use in program management: A systematic review of the literature”,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-14-171; Oliver, K. et al. (2014[11]), “A systematic review of barriers to and facilitators of the use of evidence
by policymakers”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-14-2; Nutley, S., I. Walter and H. Davies (2009[9]), “Promoting evidence-based practice:
Models and mechanisms from cross-sector review”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1049731509335496; Hutchinson, A. and L. Johnston (2006[32]),
“Beyond the BARRIERS scale: Commonly reported barriers to research use”, JONA, Vol. 36/4, pp. 189-199; Sutherland, W. et al. (2019[37]),
“Building a tool to overcome barriers in research-implementation spaces: The conservation evidence database”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bio
con.2019.108199; Hering, J. (2016[38]), “Do we need “more research” or better implementation through knowledge brokering?”,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11625-015-0314-8; Welsh Government (2021), The National Strategy for Educational Research and Enquiry
(NSERE): Vision Document, https://gov.wales/national-strategy-educational-research-and-enquiry-nsere-vision-document-html; Rickinson, M.
et al. (2020[23]), Using Evidence Better: Quality Use of Research Evidence Framework, http://monash.edu/education/research/projects/qproject
(accessed on 1 September 2021).

Annex Table 5.A.2. Factors influencing research use by type of approach in the OECD
Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey
Type of approach

Barriers

Mechanisms

Linear

 Low quality of research in key areas
 Low accessibility of research in appropriate formats
 Lack of relevant research

 Systematically identifying relevant research gaps
 Systematically identifying needs in terms of research
knowledge
 Systematically commissioning research to address
needs
 Synthesising and disseminating ed. research findings
through user-friendly tools

Relationships

 Lack of willingness to use research
 Lack of learning opportunities
 Lack of openness to new ideas from research
 Low levels of skills and capacity to use research
 Lack of relationships between different actors

 Regular system-wide activities to develop capacity/skills
to use ed. research
 Projects encouraging actors' interactions to facilitate the
use of ed. research

Systems

 Lack of broader political will to use research
 Lack of financial resources
 Lack of mechanisms that facilitate the use of research
 Conflicting timeframes with research
 Lack of time to access and engage with research

 Regular system-wide activities to monitor/evaluate the
impact of ed. research
 System-wide strategy for facilitating the use of
ed. research
 Legislation/law or professional guidelines that promote
ed. research use
 Offering resources (e.g. financial, human) to support
research use
 Providing targeted funding for research on specific topics

--- [PDF Page 126 / Book Page 124] ---

Annex Table 5.A.3. Factors influencing research use by type of factor in the OECD Strengthening
the Impact of Education Research policy survey
Type of Factor

Barriers

Mechanisms

Information

 Low quality of research in key areas
 Low accessibility of research in appropriate formats
 Lack of relevant research

 Systematically identifying relevant research gaps
 Systematically identifying needs in terms of research
knowledge
 Systematically commissioning research to address
needs
 Synthesising and disseminating ed. research findings
through user-friendly tools

Interaction

 Lack of relationships between different actors

 Projects encouraging actors' interactions to facilitate the
use of ed. research

Individual
Characteristics

 Low levels of skills and capacity to use research

 Regular system-wide activities to develop capacity/skills
to use ed. research

Structure and
Organisation

 Lack of financial resources
 Lack of mechanisms that facilitate the use of research
 Conflicting timeframes with research
 Lack of time to access and engage with research
 Lack of learning opportunities

 Regular system-wide activities to monitor/evaluate the
impact of ed. research
 System-wide strategy for facilitating the use of
ed. research
 Legislation/law or professional guidelines that promote
ed. research use
 Offering resources (e.g. financial, human) to support
research use
 Providing targeted funding for research on specific topics

Culture

 Lack of broader political will to use research
 Lack of willingness to use research
 Lack of openness to new ideas from research
