================================================================================
Chapter: Linking research, policy and practice: Learning from other sectors
Author(s): Annette Boaz, Kathryn Oliver and Anna Numa Hopkins
Book: Who Cares about Using Education Research in Policy and Practice?: Strengthening Research Engagement
Series: Educational Research and Innovation
Publisher: OECD Publishing, Paris (2022)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/d7ff793d-en
ISBN: 978-92-64-73132-5 (PDF) / 978-92-64-96272-9 (print)
Section / Part: Part II: Actors and mechanisms facilitating research use in policy and practice
Book Pages: pp. 125–145
PDF Pages: pp. 127–147 (in raw/d7ff793d-en.pdf)
================================================================================
--- [PDF Page 127 / Book Page 125] ---

6 Linking research, policy and

practice: Learning from other
sectors
Annette Boaz, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and Transforming Evidence
Kathryn Oliver, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and Transforming Evidence
Anna Numa Hopkins, Transforming Evidence

International learning networks, significant investments in new research,
and research synthesis and methodological innovations have led the way in
developing work on evidence use in the education sector, particularly at the
practice level. However, work on research use can learn from other
domains as well. This chapter considers themes across sectors and their
implications for education. It is structured in three parts. The first part maps
the interactions between research, policy and practice in various sectors.
The second draws together the evidence from various initiatives that have
had success in facilitating research use. The final part takes these lessons
and frames them as five questions, which can help clarify implications for
the education sector.

--- [PDF Page 128 / Book Page 126] ---

Introduction
Education has led the way in developing work on evidence use, particularly at the practice level.
International networks (such as the European Union [EU]-funded Evidence Informed Policy and Practice
in Education in Europe [EIPPEE] network) have developed research use for education improvement. So
too have investments like the William T. Grant Foundation programme for use of research evidence in the
United States and the United Kingdom government investment in the Education Endowment Foundation.
And methodological innovations such as Research-Practice Partnerships between researchers and
practitioners have added to furthering research use in improving education. A recent overview looking
across sectors and geographies included two chapters focusing on learning from research use in education
(Boaz et al., 2019[1]) and there are many more reports, books and journal articles disseminating learning
from this work.
There have also been many initiatives and activities to improve links between research and policy from
other domains but these tend to be overlooked (Oliver and Boaz, 2019[2]). This chapter considers what
learning may be relevant and useful to education from other sectors. In particular, it draws on the
cross-cutting analysis in What Works Now1 (Boaz et al., 2019[1]) and a mapping exercise looking at
initiatives designed to promote the use of research in policy (Hopkins et al., 2021[3]; Oliver et al., 2022[4]).

Mapping interactions between research, policy and practice
Many researchers and their partners in policy and practice have tried out new ways to promote
engagement between decision-making and research evidence. These include secondments and
fellowships; collaborative research projects and programmes; and networking and dissemination events.
All have been undertaken to increase research use yet few have been evaluated. There is a need for more
evidence of the value of investments by our funders, and we need a robust evidence base to help us make
better decisions about how to improve research use.
To establish the quality and size of the existing evidence base, we focused on activities undertaken by
research organisations, funders, decision making organisations and intermediaries with the goal of
promoting academic-policy engagement. We mapped the activities of 513 organisations promoting
research-policy engagement between October 2019 and December 2020. To identify relevant activities,
we conducted systematic desk-based searches for eight types of organisations (research funders; learned
societies; universities; intermediaries policy organisations and bodies; practice organisations and bodies;
think tanks and independent research organisations; NGOs and non-profits; and for-profits/consultancies).
The search was international but aimed to gather learning with relevance for our own context in
the United Kingdom. For each organisation, we reviewed websites and strategy documents, and published
evaluations to identify research-policy engagement activities. This systematic search was supported by a
stakeholder roundtable, expert interviews and a survey sent to a subset of the sample. Both stakeholder
consultation and the survey served to support the quality and robustness of our approach.
To categorise and analyse the data, we drew on the work of Allan Best and Bev Holmes (2010[5]). Best
and Holmes identify three ways of thinking about improving research use: linear models, relational models,
and systemic models. Within these three categories, we also drew on a large systematic review about
evidence use to analyse initiatives (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016[6]).
For each identified initiative, we collected data on:


The initiative and its host organisation (who; where; when; at what cost; funded by whom).

--- [PDF Page 129 / Book Page 127] ---



How it sought to promote academic policy engagement (what specific activities, and what types of
practices they were engaged in).



To what effect (whether there was any evaluation of their activities or other research indicating the
impact of these practices).

We identified over 513 organisations around the world including universities, government departments,
parliaments, learned societies, research funders, intermediaries, businesses. Their activities spanned a
large range of policy areas (see Figure 6.1). While education is not the largest category, we did identify
more than 20 organisations promoting academic-policy engagement in education and higher education
(with 12 focusing specifically on school-based education).

Figure 6.1. Types of organisations that host academic-policy engagement

Note: a: Parliamentary initiatives (51); b: Business (21); c: Non-profit initiative (7)
Source: Adapted from Oliver, K. et al. (2022[4]), “What works to promote research-policy engagement?”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1332/174426421X
16420918447616.

We grouped these initiatives into nine practices (see the frequency of their use in Figure 6.2) which fall
under the three models of improving research use mentioned earlier.
In the next section, we discuss some examples and describe how initiatives are using linear, relational and
systems strategies to improve research use in different sectors and contexts. Many initiatives also combine
linear, relational and systems elements as part of a multi-dimensional approach.

--- [PDF Page 130 / Book Page 128] ---

Figure 6.2. What do research-policy engagement initiatives do?
400

350
300
250
200
150
100
50

0

Disseminating
and
communicating
research

Formal
institutional
requests for
evidence
Linear

Facilitating
access to
research

Building
decision-maker
skills

Building
researcher
skills

Building
partnerships
and networks

Strategic
leadership

Relational

Rewarding and Creating and
incentivising
embedding
impact and
infrastructure
engagement
and posts
Systems

Source: Adapted from Hopkins, A. et al. (2021[7]), Science Advice in the UK, http://dx.doi.org/10.53289/GUTW3567, p 343.

Linear approaches
Practices 1-3 all follow the linear model. Here, knowledge and research is seen as a commodity that is
generated by researchers, turned in to products such as reports or toolkits, and used by decision makers.
The process of applying knowledge is seen as a one-way exchange: people who produce research hand
it over to research users, who are assumed to be in a knowledge “deficit”. In this way of thinking, effective
communication is essential for evidence use. Implicitly, linear models view the process of getting research
evidence into policy or practice as fairly predictable and manageable.
We found that most activity and investment is focused on linear approaches. They either push evidence
out from academia (Dissemination and communication) or pull evidence into government (through formal
evidence requests, or facilitating access). Indeed, producing and disseminating research is the dominant
activity and has increased since the late 1990s. Pull mechanisms are used by decision makers to address
a particular need. They may use formal institutional mechanisms such as science advisory committees or
requests for evidence issued through legislatures and consultations (Beswick and Geddes, 2020[8];
Hopkins et al., 2021[3]). While COVID-19 has made these processes more visible (OECD, 2019[9]; Cairney,
2021[10]), formal institutional mechanisms have been the primary way that research informs policy making
from food safety to building regulation for a long time.
Initiatives may also facilitate access to research often through the (co-)commissioning of research and
evaluation projects. Beginning in the early 2000s, there has been a large increase in the number of
initiatives that support policy to commission more effectively and (mostly since 2015) co-create research
or develop briefs through consultation. See examples of linear approaches in Table 6.1 and Box 6.1.

Table 6.1. Examples of initiatives using linear approaches
Organisation

Sector

Country/
Region

Government consultations and
requests for evidence

All

Multiple

Activity
Governments may request evidence for policy by issuing consultations or
other requests on specific policy areas or topics.

--- [PDF Page 131 / Book Page 129] ---

Organisation

Sector

Country/
Region

Scientific Advisory Committees

All

Multiple

Scientific advisory committees may be temporary or permanent, involve
one type of scientific expertise, or combine expert advice from multiple
disciplines to inform policy.

The Center for Rapid Evidence
Synthesis (ACRES)

Health

Uganda

ACRES conducts rapid evidence synthesis on key policy topics and in
response to decision makers’ requests.

Partnership for Evidence and
Equity in Responsive Social
Systems (PEERSS) (Previously
PERLSS)

Development

Multiple

PEERSS is trialling different approaches to improving evidence use in
policy to support the UN Sustainable Development Goals, including:
 Rapid evidence synthesis.

What Works Centres

Social Policy

UK

The 13 What Works Centres comprise a network of social policy evidence
centres in the UK. Their work includes:
 Conducting evidence synthesis.
 Publishing evidence briefs, summaries, reports and practice guides.
 Creating evidence toolkits and rating systems to help decision makers
assess the strength of evidence supporting a programme or practice.

Danish Clearinghouse for
Educational Research

Education

Denmark

Based at Aarhus University, the Danish Clearinghouse for Educational
Research compiles, analyses and disseminates the results of educational
research, including:
 Conducting evidence synthesis.
 Publishing evidence briefs, summaries and reports.
 Maintaining a registry of Danish and Scandinavian educational
research.

Sax Institute

Health

Australia

The Sax Institute has a number of support tools such as:
 ChangeMap, an approach to helping service-delivery agencies
understand and address local barriers to adopting best-practice care.
 Analysis for Policy, designed to help health decision makers undertake
policy-relevant research using the Institute’s longitudinal research
study.
 Evidence Check, supports policy makers to commission evidence
reviews.
 Research partnerships including policy and practice stakeholders.

Activity

Note: Some of these initiatives, such as PEERSS and the Sax Institute, also use relational approaches.
Source: Data from Oliver, K. et al. (2022[4]), “What works to promote research-policy engagement?”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1332/174426421X164
20918447616.

Box 6.1. Demand-led rapid evidence synthesis at The Center for Rapid Evidence Synthesis
(ACRES), Uganda
Based at the College of Health Sciences at Makerere University, the Center for Rapid Evidence
Synthesis provides a mechanism for decision makers to more effectively “pull” evidence in to policy.
The response service was the first in a low- and middle-income country and is now modelled in over
15 countries. It aims to engage with all levels of government and support decision-making processes
with high-quality and timely evidence.
The service produces policy briefs in response to decision-makers’ requests. An evaluation of the
service focused on which formats of briefing documents were most useful and acceptable. Mijumi-Deve
and colleagues conducted user testing with healthcare policy makers at different levels of decision
making, collecting data on useability, usefulness, understandability, desirability, credibility and value of
the document. The participants generally found the format of the rapid response briefs useable,

--- [PDF Page 132 / Book Page 130] ---

credible, desirable and valuable. However, they also highlighted some issues, including the need for
recommendations and a lack of clarity about the type of document and its potential uses.
A process evaluation was also conducted, drawing on interviews with researchers, knowledge
translation (KT) specialists and policy makers. This highlighted the different contextual factors that
influenced the ability of the service to support health decision making. It found that key internal factors
were the design of the service and resources available for it. Key external factors were the service’s
visibility, integrity and relationships. Finally, the authors pointed to environmental factors that affected
its impact, including political will and the Ugandan health system and policy infrastructure.
Source: Mijumbi-Deve, R. et al. (2017[11]), “Policymaker experiences with rapid response briefs to address health-system and technology
questions in Uganda”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12961-017-0200-1; Mijumbi-Deve, R. and N. Sewankambo (2017[12]), “A process
evaluation to assess contextual factors associated with the uptake of a rapid response service to support health systems’ decision-making
in Uganda”, http://dx.doi.org/10.15171/ijhpm.2017.04.

Relational approaches
Practices 4-6 adopt the relational model. Here, knowledge production and use is seen as embedded in
social relationships and contexts. Initiatives focus on sharing knowledge among diverse stakeholders, and
developing networks and partnerships underpinned by common interests and perspectives. Importantly,
knowledge sharing is seen as a two-way process, with an appreciation of the different skills and areas of
expertise brought by all. While decision makers can learn from researchers and their evidence, researchers
also need to learn about policy contexts, issues and priorities.
Investment in relational approaches is more recent and growing. We identified two main types of initiative.
Firstly, building skills for both policy makers and researchers. Training and professional development
focused on academic-policy engagement is an expanding area. Most initiatives are one-offs and support
for academics to do engagement is patchy. In the United Kingdom, more attention is now given to training
opportunities for academics, government analysts and policy makers to support academic-policy
engagement. These are often provided by government, funders or intermediaries. The content of training
offers depend on the organisation, its stakeholders and aims. Several examples are included in Table 6.2.

Table 6.2. Examples of initiatives using relational approaches
Country/
Region

Organisation

Sector

Activity

Natural Environment Research
Council CASE studentships

Environment

United
Kingdom

CASE studentships provide doctoral students with research training
experience within the context of a research collaboration between
academic and non-academic partner organisations. Non-academic
partners include those from industry, business, public and the third/civil
sectors.

University Policy Institutes

Higher
education /
Policy
engagement

United
Kingdom

Policy Institutes aim to provide a “one-stop-shop” for policy enquiries and a
more strategic approach to policy engagement expertise within
universities. Activities may include:
 Training researchers in policy engagement and communication.
 Recommending experts to provide advice or expertise.
 Circulating government requests for evidence and other opportunities.
 Publishing blogs and policy briefs.

--- [PDF Page 133 / Book Page 131] ---

Organisation

Sector

Country/
Region

Cambridge University Centre
for Science and Policy(CSaP)

Science /
Science Policy

United
Kingdom

Activity
CSaP aims to build policy makers” research understanding and create
opportunities for networking and exchange through:
 Public lectures and seminars.
 Policy workshops.
 Senior and Junior Policy Fellowship Schemes.
 Services to Research initiative which helps researchers at the
University build policy-relevant activities into their research proposals.

American Association for the
Advancement of Science
(AAAS) Science and
Technology Policy Fellowships

Science /
Science Policy

US

The AAAS aims to advance science and serve society through initiatives in
science policy, diplomacy, education, career support, public engagement
with science, and evidence advocacy. The Science and Technology Policy
Fellowships provide opportunities for scientists and engineers to learn
about policymaking and contribute their knowledge and analytical skills
during a Fellowship placement in the policy realm.

Parliamentary Office of
Science and Technology
(POST)

Science and
social science
/ Policy

United
Kingdom

POST is the in-house science advice mechanism in the UK Parliament,
which bridges research and policy. It provides:
 Horizon scanning, reports and briefings.
 Professional training to civil service staff.
 Policy internship programme run with UK research councils and others.
 Fellowship programmes for doctoral students and for established
academics.
 Knowledge Exchange Unit (KEU) to strengthen connections between
research and policy.

Canadian Science Policy
Centre (CSPC)

Science Policy

Canada

The Canadian Science Policy Centre supports stakeholder engagement by
bringing together multi-sector expertise through:
 Knowledge exchange activities (e.g. Science meets Parliament
Program).
 Conferences, policy workshop and events.
 Science-Policy Interface programme provides departments with
evaluation assistance.
 Training, workshops and various knowledge exchange schemes for
both scientists and policymakers.
 Canadian Science Policy Awards of Excellence.
 National science policy network.

ACED (Actions pour
l”Environnement et le
Développement Durable)

Environment,
agriculture and
sustainability

Benin

ACED aims to combine research, policy and local action to reduce poverty
and hunger in vulnerable communities. It pilots solutions by collaborating
with local communities and agricultural stakeholders. It runs capacity
development for decision-makers as part of projects, as well as offering
some stand-alone workshops e.g. the Knowledge Sharing and Policy
Engagement workshop/

African Evidence Network
(AEN)

Multiple

Africa

AEN aims to foster collaboration among those engaged in or supporting
evidence-informed decision making (EIDM) and increase knowledge and
understanding of EIDM. It does this through:
 The AEN Network.
 Advocating for evidence and for EIDM in Africa.
 Knowledge sharing opportunities, seminars and workshops.
 Publications.
 Online learning space.
 African Evidence Leadership Award.

--- [PDF Page 134 / Book Page 132] ---

Organisation
UK Policy Research Units

Sector

Country/
Region

Health and
social care

United
Kingdom

Activity
The UK”s 15 Policy Research Units (PRUs) undertake research to inform
government and arms-length bodies making policy decisions about health
and social care. They support short- and long-term policy development
through:
 Multidisciplinary teams.
 Long-term partnerships with the Department of Health and Social Care
(DHSC).
 Rapid response services.
 Policy liaison roles and oversight mechanisms aims to create alignment
with long-term departmental priorities.

Collaborations for Leadership
in Applied Health Research
and Care (CLAHRCs)

Health

United
Kingdom

The Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care
(CLAHRCs) were partnerships between universities and local health
service organisations. They trialled different approaches to long-term
collaborative working between academic organisations and health
services, continuous knowledge production and implementation cycles
focused on health improvement, hybrid roles combining research, policy
and practice expertise, and capacity building. See Box 6.3.

Source: Data from Oliver, K. et al. (2022[4]), “What works to promote research-policy engagement?”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1332/174426421X164
20918447616.

The UK Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology (POST) also runs the Parliamentary Academic
Fellowship Scheme. It provides the opportunity for arts, humanities and social science researchers to be
seconded to a parliamentary office to develop a project and work alongside, advise and influence
parliamentarians. University policy institutes and teams offer training that ranges from communication and
presentation skills, and the practicalities of engagement to building research “impact” and collaboration
into projects. Commonly, training for researchers is aimed at early-career academics and is relatively short
in duration (averaging 3 months in length). The US marketplace for impact and influence training appears
to be the most diverse – a varied range of training, mentorship, advocacy and skills-building programmes
are offered by research centres and institutes, independent consultancies and policy bodies (see example
in Box 6.2).

Box 6.2. Science and Technology Policy Fellowships at the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS)
The AAAS Science and Technology Policy Fellowships provide opportunities for scientists to spend
time in government, contributing to federal policy making while learning about the intersection of science
and policy. AAAS Fellowships are a long-standing example, running annually since 1973.
Fellows spend one year in the executive, legislative and judicial branches of the federal government in
Washington. The aim is to provide them with hands-on policy experience; support skills development;
and foster a network of science and engineering leaders who understand government and policy
making. Fellows receive a stipend of USD 80-105 000 per year, publish blogs, and convene thematic
workshops and symposia.
In 2020, the programme was retrospectively evaluated.

--- [PDF Page 135 / Book Page 133] ---

The evaluation found generally high levels of Fellows” satisfaction with the programme. Over 80% felt
it improved their understanding of the intersection between science, technology and policy, and 77%
reported it encouraged them to explore a different career path. Fellows reported improved policy knowhow and skills, including on the workings of government, policy and science integration and
collaborative skills. It also showed that Fellows continued to be involved in policy-related activity after
the end of the programme. Mentors based in host offices were also evaluated. It was found that they
contributed to the overall office environment and gave their expertise to address complex problems,
clarify data interpretations, summarise and translate scientific information, and provide technical input.
Source: Pearl, J. and K. Gareis (2020[13]), “A retrospective evaluation of the STPF program”, https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/202007/STPF%20Evaluation%20Presentation%20PDF.pdf.

For decision makers, initiatives offer courses, fellowships and other opportunities that to aim to build
research skills and awareness. For example, the Cambridge University Centre for Science and Policy offer
Fellowships for policy makers in which Fellows are given opportunities to meet with a range of researchers
from different disciplines, attend workshops and build relationships. Many universities offer support
services through policy institutes or teams. Specialist training and capacity building offers are also
developed by intermediary organisations that specialise in work across research, policy and practice.
ACED (Actions pour l’Environnement et le Développement Durable) in Benin, for example, works
collaboratively with local decision makers and offers tailored capacity-building as part of pilot environmental
sustainability projects. It also provides stand-alone courses on knowledge sharing.
Secondly, relational initiatives aim to build professional partnerships – that is, long-term, non-transactional
joint working relationships to foster mutualism and trust across sectors. This includes networking activities
that support participants to leverage sustained and useful professional relationships. Examples of this
approach include the African Evidence Network (AEN), an intersectoral network of over 3 000 people that
has been running for over 15 years. In the last decade or so there have been some relatively rare attempts
to develop more formalised partnership approaches in which research and policy or practice organisations
come together on a shared work programme. Frequently cited examples in health and social care include
the United Kingdom’s Policy Research Units, which support short- and long-term policy development and
partnership (PIRU, n.d.[14]). In practice, the Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health Research and
Care (CLAHRCs) provide a long-running example of collaborations that bring together universities and
healthcare providers to test new treatments and ways of working (Box 6.3).

Box 6.3. Partnership and collaboration in the Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health
Research and Care (CLAHRCs)
The Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (CLAHRCs) were funded by
England’s National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) in 2008 and 2014. The collaborations were
partnerships between universities and local health service organisations and aimed to improve the
quality of healthcare through the production and use of applied health research. The CLAHRC model
was focused on experimentation and agenda setting at the local level. Each developed slightly
differently, with key health service stakeholders and researchers shaping the focus of work within
different local contexts. This aimed to create approaches to evidence production and use that took
account of how health care is delivered across sectors and in a defined geographical area. The
CLAHRCs drew on lessons from other countries, including Australia and the United States, and aimed
to foster collective knowledge mobilisation processes to “improve care through a continuous cycle of
knowledge production and implementation”.

--- [PDF Page 136 / Book Page 134] ---

Central aims of the CLAHRCs were:


To develop and conduct applied health research that is relevant across the National Health
Service (NHS) in the United Kingdom, and to translate research findings into improved
outcomes for patients.



To create a distributed model for the conduct and application of applied health research that
links those who conduct applied research to those who use it in practice.



To create and embed approaches to research and its dissemination.



To increase the country’s capacity to conduct high-quality applied health research focused on
the needs of patients and targeted at chronic health conditions and public health interventions.



To improve patient outcomes locally and across the wider NHS.



To contribute to the country’s growth by working with the life sciences industry.

The NIHR commissioned independent longitudinal research evaluations of the early CLAHRCs in 2010
and a number of smaller evaluations were also conducted. In 2018, Kislov and colleagues synthesised
the findings of 26 evaluations to draw out overarching learning about the CLAHRCs. The synthesis
found that many evaluations focused on describing and exploring the nature of the partnerships, and
the vision, values, structures and processes developed to facilitate sustained collaboration between
academic and health partners. Evaluations also focused on the nature and role of boundaries between
organisations, and the use of knowledge brokers and hybrid roles to support knowledge mobilisation.
Some focused on capacity building such as secondment schemes.
Overall, the evaluation synthesis noted a lack of evidence about the impact of CLAHRCs on health care
provision and outcomes. The authors highlighted the need for more studies on which knowledge
mobilisation approaches work in research and practice partnerships; what the contexts were; and the
reasons for success. A further round of funding has led to the creation of Applied Research
Collaborations (ARCs) in the place of the CLAHRCs.
Source: Kislov, R. et al. (2018[15]), “Learning from the emergence of NIHR Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health Research and
Care (CLAHRCs): A systematic review of evaluations”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13012-018-0805-y; NIHR (2019[16]), About Us,
https://www.clahrc-eoe.nihr.ac.uk/about-us/.

Systems approaches
Practices 7-9 attempt to respond to the systems model by recognising that all activities and actors
associated with knowledge production and use are embedded within wide and complex systems, working
through dynamic systemic processes. Taking a systems-informed approach includes being aware of what
needs to be in place to support research use in government, such as a positive culture of research use;
rewarded and valued career pathways associated with promotion of evidence use; and a healthy and
dynamic research production ecosystem. Systems approaches attempt to create a culture of evidence use
that is sustained and productive. These include strategic leadership and advocacy for evidence use; the
rewarding and incentivisation of engagement; and the creation of infrastructure to enable impact. Some
initiatives work across all three practices. An example might be the research-practice partnerships fostered
by the William T Grant Foundation, discussed in Chapter 10 of this publication. See Table 6.3 for examples
of different initiatives.
Most initiatives we identified focused on strategic leadership; mainly through advocacy initiatives that aim
to champion evidence use and engagement. The Bipartisan Policy Center’s Evidence Project in the United
States provides a good example of successful advocacy and influencing. At a practice level, the examples
used most frequently are the Veterans Administration and the Kaiser Permanente health systems, which
have sought to build evidence-infused services. There are many other potential aspects of strategic

--- [PDF Page 137 / Book Page 135] ---

leadership such as policy planning and cross-sector leadership of which, however, we found very few
examples.
A small but growing number of initiatives aim to reward and incentivise impact; we identified prizes and
professional incentives to recognise impact and engagement between research and policy. Some prizes
celebrate “research impact”; for example, the Economic and Social Research Council’s Celebrating Impact
Prize in the United Kingdom, which has been running since 2013. Others focus on public policy; for
example, the Federation of American Scientists (FAS) Public Service Award, which has been running since
1971 (FAS, n.d.[17]). The Irish Health Research Board Impact Prize competition is an example of a healthspecific award, while the Africa Evidence Network’s African Evidence Leadership Award (launched 2018)
is unique in recognising leadership across sectors.
Creating and embedding infrastructure covers new roles and career pathways, and supports operations
within and across organisations as well as different approaches to embedding expertise. There is little
cross-sector activity at a system’s level to promote the use of research. There are also some interesting
examples of strategic collaborations between funders, like the EU Scientific Knowledge for Environmental
Protection programme, and the Area of Research Interest programme in the United Kingdom.
The creation of new job posts and roles can contribute to the implementation of systems change. Examples
include the creation of hybrid, intermediary, brokerage and “boundary spanning” roles. In environmental
science and policy, for example, a literature on boundary spanning roles has described how these roles
create and develop specialist skill sets that combine expertise about both research and policy, serving a
whole host of functions (Posner and Cvitanovic, 2019[18]). Brokerage roles are central to the expertise of
both government and research teams working together to improve research use. Attempts to embed
researchers in practice and policy organisations have sought to make these, or at least the knowledge
they generate, sustainable (Graham, Kothari and McCutcheon, 2018[19]; Gradinger et al., 2019[20]).
However, like other initiatives that tackle systems-level challenges, they meet significant barriers in their
attempts to change organisational cultures, incentives and infrastructures.

Table 6.3. Examples of initiatives using systems approaches
Organisation

Sector

Country /
Region

William T Grant Foundation
Research-Practice
Partnerships

Education

United States

William T Grant Foundation funds long-term, mutually beneficial
collaborations that promote the production and use of research called
Research-Practice Partnerships (RPPs). RPPs are formal partnerships
between research and practice, and can involve schools, education
practitioners, researchers, designers and government bodies. They aim to
leverage research to address persistent problems of practice by building
relationships and trust, creating a shared research agenda, using the
research and evidence generated to improve practice.

Bipartisan Policy Center’s
Evidence Project

Evidence in
policy

United States

The Evidence-Based Policymaking Initiative was created to support the
implementation of the US Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking’s
initiatives and recommendations. The project published reports, convening
and advocacy, and provided expertise on implementation strategies. It was
housed within the Bipartisan Policy Center, a non-profit think tank
(https://bipartisanpolicy.org/report/evidenceworks/).

Federation of American
Scientists Public Service
Award

Science and
Security

United States

Established in 1971, the Federation of American Scientists (FAS) Public
Service Award recognises a statesperson or public interest advocate who
has made a distinctive contribution to public policy at the intersection of
science and national security (https://fas.org/about-fas/awards/).

ESRC Celebrating Impact
Prize

Science and
social science

United
Kingdom

The ESRC Celebrating Impact Prize is an annual award which recognises
ESRC-funded researchers in achieving and enabling outstanding economic
or societal impact from their research (https://www.ukri.org/publications/esrccelebrating-impact-prize-2021).

Activity

--- [PDF Page 138 / Book Page 136] ---

Organisation

Sector

Country /
Region

Irish Health Research Board
impact prize competition

Health

Ireland

Established in the 2019, the Irish Health Board Impact Award recognises
people who use their research to create real changes in health and care. The
award looks at the impact of health research in relation to practice, people’s
health, patient care and health policy (https://www.hrb-crci.ie/2018/08/hrbimpact-award-2019/).

African Evidence Leadership
Award

Evidence in
policy

Africa

The African Evidence Leadership Award has been offered annually since
2018 to members of the African Evidence Network who demonstrate
leadership in and an influential contribution to evidence-informed decision
making in Africa. There are three categories, including evidence producers
(e.g. researchers), evidence intermediaries (e.g. knowledge brokers or
knowledge translators), and evidence users (e.g. decision makers, private
sector leaders) (https://aen-website.azurewebsites.net/en/learningspace/article/6/).

EU Scientific Knowledge for
Environmental Protection –
Network of Funding Agencies

Environment

EU

The SKEP ERA-NET project brought together key funders of the national
research programmes in different European states to take a forward-looking,
strategic overview of the research needs of policy and regulation for
environmental protection. It aimed to create structure for research
coordination and co-operation between the 14 SKEP partners and provide
for effective alignment of national programmes
(https://ec.europa.eu/research/fp7/pdf/era-net/fact_sheets/fp6/skep_en.pdf).
Activities included:
 development and sharing of good practice in the management and
dissemination of research
 the identification and analysis of common strategic issues
 the development and implementation of joint research activities.

Area of Research Interest

Departmental
Policy

United
Kingdom

Areas of Research Interest (ARIs) are produced by government departments
to provide information about the main research questions they are facing.
ARIs aim to align scientific and research evidence from academia with policy
development and decision making, support engagement with researchers,
and allow departments to access stronger policy evidence bases at better
value for money, for example through shared research commissions. In
2019, two Academic Fellows working with the Government Office for Science
identified a set of topics based on existing departmental ARIs that should be
addressed as a priority during the COVID 19 pandemic. These ARIs were
divided into nine themes, which were addressed by nine Working Groups
consisting of researchers, funding bodies and policy makers
(https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/areas-of-research-interest).

EVIP-Net, World Health
Organisation EvidenceInformed Policy Network

Health

Multiple

EVIPNet was established by WHO in 2005 and is currently active in multiple
regions. EVIPNet aims to promote a network of partnerships at the national,
regional and global levels to strengthen health systems and improve health
outcomes (https://www.who.int/initiatives/evidence-informed-policy-network).
Activities include:
 Capacity-strengthening strategies to enable policymakers, researchers
and civil society representatives to combine political and policy analysis
with evidence synthesis and stakeholder engagement.
 Country-level teams who produce evidence briefs for policy conduct
policy dialogues and undertake rapid evidence synthesis and
dissemination.

Activity

Source: Data from Oliver, K. et al. (2022[4]), “What works to promote research-policy engagement?”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1332/174426421X164
20918447616.

--- [PDF Page 139 / Book Page 137] ---

How successful are these approaches? Learning from research and evaluation
Sharing and disseminating research can’t improve research use on its own
Although most money is spent on disseminating and communicating research, accessibility alone is not
enough to improve the use of evidence. We now have good evidence on which communications
approaches are most successful in helping audiences understand research findings, and we also have an
expanding national infrastructure for dissemination across multiple policy areas (Langer, Tripney and
Gough, 2016[6]). “Push” mechanisms that aim to inform government advice or consultation may be
hampered by the low academic and public visibility of Scientific Advisory Committees and Expert
Committees (UK Parliament Cabinet Office, 2017[21]). Instead, access to formal mechanisms of influence
in government occurs through multiple channels and in multiple ways.

Linear models underestimate the complexity of policy environments and evidence use
processes
Linear activities are assumed to operate by providing “missing” evidence. This is what we call the “deficit
model”. The underlying logic is that if more evidence were made available, policy makers would act
differently. However, it does not fit with what we know about policy processes from political science studies.
Instead, policy is influenced by a range of knowledge types over time, which are delivered in different ways.
For example, we know that greater dissemination does not equate with greater uptake and that single
pieces of evidence are unlikely to change a policy decision. Evaluations suggest that linear approaches to
improving evidence use do not address practical, cultural or institutional barriers to engagement.

Relationship building is important for producing useful research and supporting
research use in decision making
Recent investments aim to support government to commission and co-develop research. These projects
– as discussed in learning reports generated by the Policy Research Units and the Policy Knowledge Fund,
for example – have more potential in conducting both short- and longer-term policy-responsive research.
But there are still gaps as to how successful these knowledge production-supporting initiatives are in
supporting knowledge use. Without rigorous evaluations we can learn little about the benefits of these
substantial investments.
Regarding new training and development initiatives, there is little empirical evidence about what works
best in the evidence-use literature. However, we can learn from other sectors. Notably, from evidence on
the effectiveness of continuing professional development for teachers and other professional groups.
Networks and knowledge exchange opportunities are growing too. There are more diverse and greater
numbers of organisations that provide these opportunities, and learning from other funders and societies
will advance research use in decision making.

Collaboration is promising but lacks evidence
Collaboration appears promising but learning is difficult to capture. Initiatives that aim to build relationships
over the long term through partnerships or networks are often limited by insecure or project-based funding.
Evaluations of these approaches are limited in the United Kingdom but there is an evidence base on
partnerships in the United States, particularly on structuring and embedding learning opportunities in
professions and institutions. The CLAHRC evaluations highlighted challenges around embedding
secondment schemes in organisations while the Royal College of Policing provides a strong example of
embedding training within professional development structures (Hunter, May and Hough, 2017[22]).

--- [PDF Page 140 / Book Page 138] ---

Some learning has highlighted networks as a potentially powerful mechanism at the practice level (Boaz
et al., 2015[23]). Few have been robustly evaluated, however, and none test the primary assumption that
greater collaboration and co-working between academic and policy audiences will generate more useful,
and more used, research. Evaluations do not, so far, support the notion that working in partnerships, which
is sometimes costly, is always justified by the outputs, which are themselves hard to measure (Kislov et al.,
2018[15]). Limited evidence about their effectiveness in sustaining new connections over the long term
jeopardises networks, many of which are insecurely funded. There is much to be learnt, particularly from
the United States and Africa, about how to run effective collaborations (Cornish, Fransman and Newman,
2017[24]) and research-practice partnerships yet little robust empirical evidence about how well these
approaches might translate to others contexts, and indeed to government engagement.

Systems-level support can encourage evidence use and relational activity
What kinds of systems-level activities support activity at the relational level and fresh approaches to
strategic leadership within and across sectors? What are the best ways of incentivising engagement and
supporting brokers and boundary spanners, and infrastructures? Evidence from healthcare (Bornbaum
et al., 2015[25]) and climate science (Posner and Cvitanovic, 2019[18]) highlights several challenges in
developing, supporting and measuring the success of intermediary and boundary-spanning roles.

What effective system supports look like across different sectors and contexts
Cross-sector initiatives are key in strategic leadership but they are rare or in the early stages of
development. Higher education organisations are not set up to make the most of individuals who have
policy experience. This requires systematic thinking about how to reward and incentivise this across the
sector. Systems-levels approaches are hard to implement but allow a more comprehensive use of
evidence culture to grow and individual investments to flourish.

Cross-cutting themes
There is a well-described literature on barriers to evidence use in policy and practice (see e.g. Verboom
and Baumann (2020[26]), Orton et al. (2011[27]), Oliver et al. (2014[28])), and on policy and practice decisionmaking processes (Cairney, 2016[29]; Parkhurst, 2017[30]). However, many of the initiatives we identified in
the mapping exercise do not draw on this literature. There are also very few robust evaluations of initiatives
for us to learn from. Overall, we see increasing activity that is uncoordinated and unevaluated. We need
to better understand the decision-making context before investing in new initiatives.
To reflect on what we have to learn, we draw on our wider work synthesising and analysing the evidenceuse literature (Oliver, Lorenc and Innvær, 2014[31]; Boaz et al., 2019[1]; Oliver and Boaz, 2019[2]). We also
reflect on the recent “wake up” call issued by The Global Evidence Commission. It promotes a whole
system response to improve the use of evidence in tackling societal challenges (Evidence Commission,
2022[32]). The themes represent grand challenges for evidence use across different fields.
The first relates to what counts as evidence when we talk about evidence use for policy and practice. Some
organisations and initiatives promote evidence of effectiveness drawn from randomised controlled trials.
While this “what works” evidence is valuable to decision makers there continues to be a concern about the
potential exclusion of a wide range of other evidence that helps to address the wide range of questions
posed by decision makers. As a result, some initiatives, such as the Africa Evidence Network, were set up
with an explicit cross-disciplinary approach, aiming to avoid association with a specific form of evidence.
We continue to be surprised by the inability of research to transform policy and practice. While the language
may have shifted from evidence-based policy to evidence-informed we still shake our heads in despair that
the research remains “on tap” rather than “on top”. It is in this space that initiatives to increase research

--- [PDF Page 141 / Book Page 139] ---

literacy in policy and practice communities and vice versa have traction. They help us understand the
differences between research, policy and practice environments, and the implications for the ways in which
we produce, promote research and understand research use. This is also where we see a value in
opportunities to move between worlds of research, policy and practice through work experience,
secondments and fellowships. For example, the Cambridge Centre for Science Policy fellowship scheme
provides an opportunity for civil servants to spend time at the university on their own programme of work
and afterwards to join a growing network of fellows to continue to share learning. Fellows flow in the other
direction as well as academics join government departments to learn about how government works.
The way we prioritise and carry out research is likely to impact on its usefulness and use. For example,
there is a growing interest in engaging stakeholders in research through approaches such as
co-production, action research and partnerships. This work includes both initiatives to include both
professional stakeholders (teachers, nurses, government officials) and lay stakeholders (the public,
students, patients and carers) in research processes. While some of this work might look tokenistic and
focused on academic priorities, other initiatives seek to build deep and sustained partnerships that are
mutually beneficial. An example of this is the work undertaken in the United States to build researchpractice partnerships in education and in Australia and New Zealand to establish academic practice
partnerships in social work. Another approach is to engage stakeholders more systematically in
establishing research priorities. The James Lind Alliance in the United Kingdom has developed a process
for bringing together patients, carers and clinicians to bring the issues that matter most to the attention of
health research funders (James Lind Alliance, n.d.[33]).
The importance of thinking about evidence use from a systems perspective is gaining greater attention.
We have already improved our approaches to dissemination and established better relationships between
the users and producers of research. These efforts need to continue but the next step is to pay greater
attention to the systems that produce research and those that use it to make sure they are designed to
make the best use of research. This is the next frontier for evidence use. This is a challenging area. We
often conclude that evidence use is being thwarted by “contextual factors” and leave it there. We do know
about some important systemic factors such as the critical importance of leadership in supporting research
use. In particular, the importance of strategic leadership by organisations aiming to promote evidence use
(Oliver et al., 2022[4]) is a common feature of the literature. The role of individuals as champions and
opinion leaders who can support (and also thwart) evidence use is also highlighted in the evidence-topractice literature (Boaz, Baeza and Fraser, 2016[34]). Hopefully, in years to come we will be able to point
to the key features of healthy systems to produce and use research (and the connections between them).
We need to pay more attention to concrete policy and practice contexts, and be willing to adapt.
Researchers who study “evidence based policy making” (EBPM) tend to identify barriers between their
evidence and policy, and describe what a better-designed model of research production and use might
look like (Cairney, 2016[29]; Parkhurst, 2017[30]). In general, we need to get better at working with, and
attending to, the policy and practice environments we aim to influence. For example, policy theories
describe complex policy-making environments in which it is not clear who the most relevant policy makers
are, how they think about policy problems, or the ability policy makers have in turning evidence into policy
outcomes. Initiatives should carefully identify relevant policy makers, work (perhaps collaboratively) to
frame problems in ways that are relevant or persuasive, and identify opportune moments to try to influence
policy. Few initiatives are informed by these concerns, and much training for researchers relies on
simplified (linear) models of policy processes.
There are important strategic choices to be made about investments in strengthening evidence use,
including clarifying support for individuals, institutions, and systems. In general, initiatives focus on
providing support for individuals – whether researchers or decision makers (for example, through training,
support in responding to calls for evidence, or funding opportunities). But this fails to address the cultural,
institutional and systemic factors that influence how research is produced and used in policy or practice.
Moving towards a more systems-informed approach means recognising that different kinds of support will

--- [PDF Page 142 / Book Page 140] ---

be needed at different levels, and that we need to think through the relationships between these levels. A
recent initiative focused on the institution highlights this point: the Universities Policy Engagement Network
(UPEN) in the United Kingdom aims to influence the institutional rules and norms that shape policy
engagement in universities, for example, through a focus on equality, diversity and inclusion (UPEN,
2021[35]). These issues have different implications – and require different strategies to address – when
considered at the individual, institutional and systems levels. Taking a more strategic approach means
considering the ends as well as the means of work to strengthen research evidence use.

Implications for the education sector
Our mapping study identified 25 organisations focused on education (including higher education). Many
others addressed education as part of a broader or intersectoral agenda (such as children and young
people or development). As with the whole dataset, most of these focused on dissemination activities. The
Danish Clearinghouse, for example, provides an example of a registry of educational research while the
Education Endowment Foundation (EEF) in the United Kingdom also runs evidence seminars and provides
teaching and learning toolkits and support. Other examples focus on formal institutional mechanisms such
as the National Foundation for Educational Research (NFER), which responds to consultation requests for
expert input into government processes.
In practice, education initiatives provide some strong examples of relational approaches. In the
United States, in particular, we found initiatives aiming to develop and support research-practice
partnerships (or RPPs) and design-based education research collaboratives. These approaches
emphasise bringing researchers and practitioners together across the life cycle of making and using
research. Many models for these kinds of collaboration exist, one approach, funded by the William T Grant
Foundation, is supported by a body of research and evaluation evidence that investigates the
characteristics, processes and impacts of partnerships (see for example Henrick et al. (2017[36])). We found
fewer examples of collaborative, partnership approaches for policy, although EEF, for example, has begun
to focus more on work with teachers and practitioners to support implementation. We found a small number
of examples of training and certification around evidence use and engagement skills in education (run by
the Bloomberg and Mastercard Foundations) and in grant-making skills.
Several education initiatives describe systems-level activities. In higher education, this focuses on the
monitoring and analysis of data to support policy and planning by, for example, the Research and Higher
Education Monitoring and Analysis Centre (MOSTA) of Lithuania. Key international education stakeholders
such as UNESCO play roles in global advocacy and thought leadership, establishing multi-country
programmes and research initiatives, and investing in education, science and policy interaction at the
international level.
In comparison to sectors such as health (which represents 21.1% of the evaluations we found), public
policy (19.3% of evaluations) and the environment (8.8% of evaluations), we found comparatively little
evidence supporting education interventions (3.5% of evaluations).

Five questions to strengthen evidence for education
We identify five questions to inform learning in the education sector, drawing evidence from initiatives in
other sectors and the wider research literature.

1. How is research evidence made and shared with education stakeholders?
Our mapping found relatively few examples of education research being made and shared for education
policy and practice stakeholders in demand-led, responsive ways. In health, rapid evidence response
services (such as The Center for Rapid Evidence Synthesis [ACRES] in Uganda) facilitated commissioning

--- [PDF Page 143 / Book Page 141] ---

processes (for example, in Table 6.1) and long-term research-policy partnerships at the national level
(including the United Kingdom Policy Research Units). These are examples of different mechanisms that
support researchers to generate more policy-relevant research and policy makers to gain access to more
timely evidence.
At a more local level, research-practice partnerships and other collaborative approaches in education
provide strong examples of ways to involve professional stakeholders (teachers and managers) and lay
stakeholders (the public, students and parents) in research processes. There is scope to share learning
here as well as to consider which approaches work best in different contexts and why. Learning from
education about collaborative approaches is proving useful in other sectors such as social care
(Transforming Evidence, n.d.[37]).

2. What kinds of relationships can support evidence use in education?
Across sectors, a range of different relationships supports the production and use of research. These
include relationships between the communities of research, policy and practice as well as relationships
with intermediaries and “boundary spanners” of different kinds (see pages 13 and 16). We found relatively
few examples of education researchers, policy makers and practitioners being brought together to learn,
share ideas or work together outside of practice initiatives with a predominantly local focus. Fellowship
opportunities, secondments, internships and exchange programmes all provide possible pathways to
learning across these communities (see Table 6.2). Similarly, education networks might prioritise bringing
research, policy and practice communities together to address decision-making priorities, an approach
taken by NORRAG (the Network for International Policies and Cooperation in Education and Training in
Geneva) for example. While we found a small number of skills-building initiatives in education, there is lots
of scope for education to learn from other sectors in providing training opportunities for researchers and
decision makers.
In the environment and health sectors, intermediary organisations and professionals play an important role
in summarising, translating and curating evidence, supporting the production of policy-relevant research,
and holding relationships across research and policy. While our mapping was limited in scope, we found
very few examples of initiatives that aimed to foster these skillsets and cross-sector relationships in
education (for example, the African Evidence Leadership Award, Table 6.3). Often, intermediaries can help
identify who needs to be at the table to support the production and use of research.

3. What is the best way to support research use in (specific) education systems and
contexts?
Education systems are highly complex and varied, involving multiple stakeholders and competing priorities
at local, national, regional and global levels. Increasingly, those working on evidence use across sectors
need to attend to the specifics of concrete decision- making contexts rather than adopting a linear model,
which simplifies policy and evidence-use processes or takes a top-down, “one size fits all” approach. If a
systems approach means attending to “contextual factors”, then efforts to strengthen evidence use must
be context-sensitive too. Examples such as the European Union Scientific Knowledge for Environmental
Protection programme (Table 6.3) can inform education systems of evidence-use interventions. This can
build strategic oversight and strengthened infrastructure while providing appropriate support for individuals,
institutions and systems. Connecting with ongoing evidence-use initiatives and opportunities, and
designing new complementary interventions to strengthen local systems may also be wise to focus on.
Recent work using a systems framework to look at evidence-informed policy and practice in education has
helped to build a richer understanding of research use in context (MacGregor, Malin and Farley-Ripple,
2022[38]).

--- [PDF Page 144 / Book Page 142] ---

4. What is the relationship between how evidence is produced and how it is used in
education?
The evidence research community is paying increasing attention to how knowledge production impacts
the uses of research evidence in policy and practice. This includes attending to who produces evidence,
whose agenda evidence serves, and the values that underpin evidence and evidence-informed decision
making. Education provides some strong examples of opening up knowledge production processes but
these are unequally distributed in terms of geography and topic area, and have been used largely for
practice improvements. As education, along with other sectors, aims to take a more strategic approach,
stakeholders might benefit from considering other strategic agendas – such as Sustainable Development
Goal 4 (SDG) 4 – that evidence for policy and practice might serve, and how. Finally, there is interesting
work in Australia that looks at the quality of research use in education. It looks beyond dissemination to
understand how teachers use research in their practice. On this note, it is worth referring to work by
Rickinson et al. (2021[39]), which features in Chapter 9 of this publication.

5. Are we are investing in initiatives that work?
Across different sectors, we have much to learn about how to best improve evidence use, and how to
measure success. Establishing the impact of research on policy and practice is challenging, and in general,
evaluation has not been a priority for those with limited funds to support evidence use. This is now changing
as the need to find solutions that can effectively support policy and practice becomes pressing. Important
pockets of learning do exist across our different sectors and contexts as in, for example, the CLAHRC
evaluations (Box 6.3). We hope that by investing in learning, and sharing our insights across disciplines
and policy domains, we can take a faster route to more effective strategies.

References
Best, A. and B. Holmes (2010), “Systems thinking, knowledge and action: Towards better
models and methods”, Evidence & Policy, Vol. 6/2, pp. 145-159,
https://doi.org/10.1332/174426410X502284.

[5]

Beswick, D. and M. Geddes (2020), Evaluating Academic Engagement with UK Legislatures:
Exchanging Knowledge on Knowledge Exchange,
http://www.pol.ed.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/268496/Evaluating_academic_engagem
ent_with_UK_legislatures_Web.pdf.

[8]

Boaz, A., J. Baeza and A. Fraser (2016), “Does the “diffusion of innovations” model enrich
understanding of research use? Case studies of the implementation of thrombolysis services
for stroke”, Journal of Health Services Research & Policy, Vol. 24/4,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1355819616639068.

[34]

Boaz, A. et al. (eds.) (2019), What Works Now? Evidence-Informed Policy and Practice, Policy
Press, https://policy.bristoluniversitypress.co.uk/what-works-now.

[1]

Boaz, A. et al. (2015), “Does the engagement of clinicians and organisations in research improve
healthcare performance: A three-stage review”, BMJ Open, Vol. 5/12, p. e009415,
https://doi.org/10.1136/BMJOPEN-2015-009415.

[23]

--- [PDF Page 145 / Book Page 143] ---

Bornbaum, C. et al. (2015), “Exploring the function and effectiveness of knowledge brokers as
facilitators of knowledge translation in health-related settings: A systematic review and
thematic analysis”, Implementation Science, Vol. 10/1, pp. 1-12,
https://doi.org/10.1186/S13012-015-0351-9/TABLES/1.

[25]

Cairney, P. (2021), “The UK government”s COVID-19 policy: What does “guided by the science”
mean in practice?”, Frontiers in Political Science,
https://doi.org/10.3389/FPOS.2021.624068/FULL.

[10]

Cairney, P. (2016), The Politics of Evidence-based Policymaking, 1st Ed., Palgrave Macmillan
UK, London, https://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-137-51781-4.

[29]

Cornish, H., J. Fransman and K. Newman (2017), Rethinking Research Partnerships: Discussion
Guide and Toolkit, https://www.christianaid.org.uk/resources/about-us/rethinking-researchpartnerships.

[24]

Evidence Commission (2022), The Evidence Commission Report: A Wake-up Call and Path
Forward for Decisionmakers, Evidence Intermediaries, and Impact-oriented Evidence
Producers, Global Commission on Evidence to Address Societal Challenges,
https://www.mcmasterforum.org/networks/evidence-commission/report/english.

[32]

FAS (n.d.), Awards, Federation of American Scientists, https://fas.org/about-fas/awards/.

[17]

Gradinger, F. et al. (2019), “Reflections on the Researcher-in-Residence model co-producing
knowledge for action in an Integrated Care Organisation: A mixed methods case study using
an impact survey and field notes”, Evidence & Policy, Vol. 15/2, pp. 197–215,
https://doi.org/10.1332/174426419X15538508969850.

[20]

Graham, I., A. Kothari and C. McCutcheon (2018), “Moving knowledge into action for more
effective practice, programmes and policy: Protocol for a research programme on integrated
knowledge translatio”, Implementation Science, Vol. 13/22, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012017-0700-y.

[19]

Henrick, E. et al. (2017), “Assessing research-practice partnerships: Five dimensions of
effectiveness”.

[36]

Hopkins, A. et al. (2021), Science Advice in the UK, Technical Report, Foundation for Science
and Technology, https://doi.org/10.53289/GUTW3567.

[7]

Hopkins, A. et al. (2021), “Are research-policy engagement activities informed by policy theory
and evidence? 7 challenges to the UK impact agenda”, Policy Design and Practice, Vol. 4/3,
pp. 341–356, https://doi.org/10.1080/25741292.2021.1921373.

[3]

Hunter, G., T. May and M. Hough (2017), An Evaluation of the ‘What Works Centre for Crime
Reduction’, Final Report.

[22]

James Lind Alliance (n.d.), About Priority Setting Partnerships, https://www.jla.nihr.ac.uk/aboutthe-james-lind-alliance/about-psps.htm (accessed on 26 April 2022).

[33]

Kislov, R. et al. (2018), “Learning from the emergence of NIHR Collaborations for Leadership in
Applied Health Research and Care (CLAHRCs): A systematic review of evaluations”,
Implementation Science, Vol. 13/1, p. 111, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-018-0805-y.

[15]

--- [PDF Page 146 / Book Page 144] ---

Langer, L., J. Tripney and D. Gough (2016), The Science of Using Science Researching the Use
of Research Evidence in Decision-Making,
https://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Default.aspx?tabid=3504.

[6]

MacGregor, S., J. Malin and E. Farley-Ripple (2022), “An application of the social-ecological
systems framework to promoting evidence-informed policy and practice”, Peabody Journal of
Education, Vol. 97/1, pp. 1-14, https://doi.org/10.1080/0161956X.2022.2026725.

[38]

Mijumbi-Deve, R. et al. (2017), “Policymaker experiences with rapid response briefs to address
health-system and technology questions in Uganda”, Health Research Policy and Systems,
Vol. 15/1, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12961-017-0200-1.

[11]

Mijumbi-Deve, R. and N. Sewankambo (2017), “A process evaluation to assess contextual
factors associated with the uptake of a rapid response service to support health systems’
decision-making in Uganda”, International Journal of Health Policy and Management,
Vol. 6/10, pp. 561-571, https://doi.org/10.15171/ijhpm.2017.04.

[12]

NIHR (2019), About Us, National Institute for Health Research, https://www.clahrceoe.nihr.ac.uk/aboutus/#:~:text=%20The%20aims%20of%20the%20NIHR%20CLAHRCs%20,on%20the%20need
s%20of%20patients%20and...%20More%20.

[16]

OECD (2019), Science Advice in Times of COVID-19, OECD, Paris,
https://www.oecd.org/sti/science-technology-innovation-outlook/Science-advice-COVID/.

[9]

Oliver, K. and A. Boaz (2019), “Transforming evidence for policy and practice: creating space for
new conversations”, Palgrave Communications, Vol. 5/1, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-0190266-1.

[2]

Oliver, K. et al. (2022), “What works to promote research-policy engagement?”, Evidence &
Policy, https://doi.org/10.1332/174426421X16420918447616.

[4]

Oliver, K. et al. (2014), “A systematic review of barriers to and facilitators of the use of evidence
by policymakers”, BMC Health Services Research, Vol. 14/1, p. 2,
https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-14-2.

[28]

Oliver, K., T. Lorenc and S. Innvær (2014), “New directions in evidence-based policy research: A
critical analysis of the literature”, Health Research Policy and Systems, Vol. 12/1, p. 34,
https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4505-12-34.

[31]

Orton, L. et al. (2011), “The use of research evidence in public health decision making
processes: Systematic review”, PLoS ONE, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021704.

[27]

Parkhurst, J. (2017), The Politics of Evidence: From Evidence-based Policy to the Good
Governance of Evidence, Routledge Studies in Governance and Public Policy,
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315675008.

[30]

Pearl, J. and K. Gareis (2020), “A retrospective evaluation of the STPF program”,
https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/202007/STPF%20Evaluation%20Presentation%20PDF.pdf.

[13]

PIRU (n.d.), Progress Report 2018-19, Policy Innovation Research Unit,
https://piru.ac.uk/assets/files/PIRU progress report, Jan 11-Aug 14 for website 26 Oct.pdf.

[14]

--- [PDF Page 147 / Book Page 145] ---

Posner, S. and C. Cvitanovic (2019), “Evaluating the impacts of boundary-spanning activities at
the interface of environmental science and policy: A review of progress and future research
needs”, Environmental Science and Policy, Vol. 92, pp. 141-151,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2018.11.006.

[18]

Rickinson, M. et al. (2021), “Insights from a cross-sector review on how to conceptualise the
quality of use of research evidence”, Humanities and Social Sciences Communications,
Vol. 8/141, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-021-00821-x.

[39]

Transforming Evidence (n.d.), Creating Care Partnerships, https://transformingevidence.org/projects/creating-care-partnerships.

[37]

UK Parliament Cabinet Office (2017), Functional Review of Bodies Providing Expert Advice to
Government - A Review by the Cabinet Office Public Bodies Reform Team,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/public-bodies-2016.

[21]

UPEN (2021), Surfacing Equity, Diversity and Inclusion in Academic-Policy Engagement,
Universities Policy Engagement Network.

[35]

Verboom, B. and A. Baumann (2020), ““Mapping the qualitative evidence base on the use of
research evidence in health policy-making: A systematic review”, IJHPM,
https://www.ijhpm.com/article_3946_0.html.

[26]

Note
1

What Works Now is an internationally edited book bringing together key thinkers and researchers to
consider what we know about evidence-informed policy and practice in different countries and policy
sector. The text includes a sector-by-sector analysis, consideration of cross-cutting themes and
international commentaries. This chapter draws in particular on the final chapter of the book, which
considers cross-sector lessons from the past and prospects for the future.
