================================================================================
Chapter: Communication, collaboration and co-production in research: Challenges and benefits
Author(s): Gábor Halász
Book: Who Cares about Using Education Research in Policy and Practice?: Strengthening Research Engagement
Series: Educational Research and Innovation
Publisher: OECD Publishing, Paris (2022)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/d7ff793d-en
ISBN: 978-92-64-73132-5 (PDF) / 978-92-64-96272-9 (print)
Section / Part: Part III: New approaches to understanding research use
Book Pages: pp. 163–181
PDF Pages: pp. 165–183 (in raw/d7ff793d-en.pdf)
================================================================================
--- [PDF Page 165 / Book Page 163] ---

Part III
New approaches to
understanding research use

--- [PDF Page 166 / Book Page 164] ---

8 Communication, collaboration and
co-production in research:
Challenges and benefits

Gábor Halász, Eötvös Loránd University, Hungary

Based partly on the personal experiences of the author, this chapter
suggests that research use and impact in education should be discussed in
a perspective of co-construction. It presents various forms of cooperative
knowledge production in which researchers and practitioners
communicating bi-directionally support mutual learning and adaptation.
Most of these forms require attitudinal and behavioural changes on the part
of both researchers and practitioners. Innovation and knowledgemanagement approaches could add a positive dimension to research use
and impact.

--- [PDF Page 167 / Book Page 165] ---

Introduction
The OECD Centre for Educational Research and Innovation (CERI) project on Strengthening the Impact
of Education Research was prompted by concern that the use of educational research outcomes (by both
policy makers and practising teachers) is not as effective as it should be. Many share the implicit
assumption that researchers produce outcomes (new knowledge, evidence) that will have an impact on
the behaviour of users (practitioners, policy makers).
This reflects what innovation researchers call the Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) mode in
contrast to the Doing, Using and Interacting (DUI) mode (Jensen et al., 2007[1]; Lundvall, 2000[2]). In the
STI mode of knowledge creation and innovation, the researcher community is seen as the protagonist
while the users of the knowledge created by this community appear as secondary players. In contrast, in
the DUI mode, knowledge creation is conceived as a cooperative process and both sides equally
participate in creating innovations.
The strength of the STI approach lies in its simplicity. This way of thinking about research impact is also
strengthened by the fact that the related communication is typically led by researchers: “Much of the
academic research that studies research use places the researcher at the centre of the process” and
“researcher-centric models and frameworks for research use” dominate the discourse (Lemay and Sá,
2012[3]). Challenging this approach is not made easier by terms such as “evidence-based” or
“evidence-informed” policy and practice, which imply a clear distinction between those who produce the
evidence (researchers) and those who “use” it or are “informed” by it (practitioners).
The increasingly popular term “knowledge mobilisation” (KMb), however, opens up space for a non-linear
perspective that emphasises co-creation or co-production; that is, a form of knowledge creation in which
researchers and practitioners work together to find solutions to challenges generated by practice.
"Research knowledge is mobilised effectively when organisational leaders, practitioners, policy makers
and researchers from different institutions and contexts learn together using research to inform thinking
and professional practice" – write the editors of an oft-quoted book in their introduction on the impact of
education research (Qi and Levin, 2013[4]).
Though it has not always received the emphasis it needs, the non-linear, co-creation approach implied in
the DUI mode has been increasingly present in initiatives such as this CERI project. This is reflected in the
formulation of research questions where “relationships and interactions” and the skills needed for
“co-producing research” are among the key themes. This chapter argues that the DUI mode should receive
more attention. Six existing practices based on this mode are explored in this chapter from a knowledge
mobilisation perspective.
The author of this chapter uses, beyond the relevant literature, his own personal experiences as the former
head of a government-affiliated national research and development institute; former leader of a doctoral
school of education; former chair of a national body funding basic research in education and psychology;
and long-serving member of the CERI Governing Board of OECD, who has often served on OECD review
teams in various countries. This personal background is relevant to this chapter in that the author has
experience in the continuous mediation between communities of researchers, school practitioners and
policy makers and how they relate to each other. Because these three stakeholder groups each have their
specific understanding of what relevant and valid knowledge is, how this knowledge should be created and
how it can be used, there have been opportunities but also constraints in building bridges between them,
examples of which the author recounts.

--- [PDF Page 168 / Book Page 166] ---

Use of evidence and knowledge mobilisation
The impact of research is very often interpreted as the effective use of evidence produced by researchers.
This interpretation is present in many initiatives aiming to improve knowledge mobilisation, including the
CERI project. It is well known that the role of research-generated evidence in education is not without
controversies: This was visible in the earlier CERI project, Evidence in education (OECD, 2007[5]),
launched a few years following the adoption of the No Child Left Behind Act in the United States (NCLB
Act). It defined a hierarchy of evidence, placing randomised controlled trials at the highest level. 1
David Berliner, former president of the American Education Research Association to the NCLB Act
(2002[6]), affirmed that the bill mentioned over 100 times the terms “evidence-based practices” and
“scientific research” as “code words for randomized experiments” and that this was causing harm because
it “confused the methods of science with the goals of science” (Berliner, 2002, p. 18[6]). In a recent book
about the use of research evidence in public policy in the United States, the authors highlighted that while
“research-based evidence has an important role to play in many sectors in the US, including healthcare,
mental health, child welfare, employment, environmental management and criminal justice (…) it is in
education that many of the evidence debates are sharpest.” (Nelson and Campbell, 2019[7]).
Among the many dilemmas and challenges the “users” of research evidence face, one of the most salient
ones is that the evidence needed for answering specific questions is simply not available. This can be
aggravated by insufficient behavioural flexibility among parties involved in the policy-making process when,
for example, researchers cannot accept the constraints of the policy process or are indifferent to policy
needs. This also happens when “users” (policy makers or practitioners) have unrealistic expectations about
what research can provide. Such behavioural inflexibilities can block mutual learning and adaptation (see
two examples in Box 8.1).

Box 8.1. When behavioural inflexibilities block policy making: Two examples
In the middle of the 2000s, following the creation of a system of general competence measurement in
Hungary, a national body overseeing evaluation in the education sector was set up with members from
both the decision maker and the researcher communities. 2 A debate emerged on the allocation of
resources to improve the measurement system. Some members suggested that resources should be
provided to improve the accuracy of measurements while others thought more investment should be
made on improving schools’ capacity to react to the feedback they received on measurement results.
Researchers successfully convinced decision makers to use the resources for improving measurement
accuracy and no money was spent on improving organisational capacity building. The author of this
paper – also member of this body – perceived this as a failure but other researcher members saw this
as a major success.
The other example comes from a similar mixed composition body in Hungary. Again, in the middle of
the 2000s researchers were invited by the national development agency responsible for designing and
implementing European Union (EU)-funded development programmes to participate in the design of
interventions aimed at integrating children belonging to the Roma minority. Some members of the
researcher community refused to give advice, arguing there was a lack of reliable evidence on the
causes of Roma children failing in schools, factors that can cause it and those that can compensate for
it. They insisted that 2-3 year-long research projects should be launched before any decision be taken
to include interventions targeted to Roma integration into the national development plans though actors
representing the policy side made it clear that if no positive decision was made in the next two months,
development resources would be transferred to other policy areas.

--- [PDF Page 169 / Book Page 167] ---

Researchers, oriented by legitimate methodological considerations and reliability/validity concerns, are
often indifferent towards policy needs and policy constraints. In both cases described in Box 8.1,
considerations and concerns led to sub-optimal solutions: In the first case, the outcome was more accurate
measurement without real impact on quality improvement and in the second, fewer resources spent on
important development interventions. They both demonstrate a frequent attitude of the researcher
community towards policy practitioners: “We know what the right solution is, you just have to do what we
tell you,” or “Wait until we produce reliable evidence.”
In the DUI mode, where the emphasis is on mutual learning and co-creation of knowledge, the role of
behavioural factors is particularly strong. This is visible especially when researchers are invited to work in
“design mode”; that is, instead of producing context-free evidence they are invited to use their knowledge
to support practitioners with challenging practical issues in specific contexts.

Design-based research
The article on design experiments written by cognitive psychologist Ann Brown, former president of the
American Educational Research Association, demonstrates the complexity research encounters when it
supports interventions into educational practice (Brown, 1992[8]). Brown’s article talks about the science of
education as one of the “design sciences”, comparing it, among others, to aeronautics where there are
“myriad possible ways that things can go wrong”. Since the publication of this article, thousands of papers
have been published on what we today call “design-based research”, and it is still gaining popularity. The
way those applying this approach think about the research-practice nexus is well illustrated by this
definition:
This iterative design process allows the researcher to move beyond simply understanding the world as it is,
and involves working to change it in useful ways with the broader goal of examining how these systematic
changes influence learning and practice (Barab, 2006, p. 151[9]).
What happens in the co-creation mode cannot be adequately described as “utilisation” and even the word
“impact” might be somehow misleading. If we look, for instance, at the CERI project, Teaching, assessing
and learning creative and critical thinking skills in primary and secondary education,3 we see both research
utilisation (e.g. using PISA-like tests to measure impact) and co-creation. The latter consists of the
development of teaching instruments in collaboration between researchers and practitioners (VincentLancrin et al., 2019[10]). This was a typical activity in the research and development institute led by the
author of this paper during the 2000s. Researchers worked together with schools, teachers (and, also,
pupils) to develop new pedagogical solutions. In these collaborative activities, teachers were not just
“using” research but were active knowledge creators. It was natural for researchers to learn from them, to
use their knowledge to improve the quality of research (Mayer, 2009, pp. 95-118[11]) (see three examples
of co-creation in Box 8.2). Besides strengthening the impact of research on practice, we need to strengthen
the impact of practice on research as well.

Box 8.2. Researchers and practitioners co-creating solutions: Three examples
Give and take between researchers and policy makers
An example from the Hungarian Institute for Educational Research and Development’s practice is the
co-design and “co-implementation” of research projects with policy makers. The institute pro-actively
involved government officials in the design and implementation of research projects through small
steering bodies operating in tandem with each project. Together, researchers and policy makers
discussed every detail of the research in these steering bodies, including issues of research
methodology. It is important to stress that this was made possible only through the strategic

--- [PDF Page 170 / Book Page 168] ---

development of an appropriate organisational culture – a process that lasted about two or three years.
This allowed for a gradual rapprochement of different languages and the emergence of mutual trust.
Both sides made many concessions. For example, government decision makers gradually accepted
that they could not get immediate answers to their questions because methodologically sound research
takes time. Researchers learnt that decision makers cannot always wait for research outcomes to be
produced but have to make decisions on the basis of available, limited knowledge.

The importance of listening
The Hungarian national agency for educational curriculum research and development organised regular
workshops to discuss research outcomes with practising teachers and school leaders. The first
experiences were rather disappointing. Invited teachers remained passive: They listened attentively to
the presentations made by the researchers without saying anything about their own knowledge and
experiences, which they thought were irrelevant. We made an explicit request to our researchers to
change their behaviour so that they would listen to what the teachers, i.e. practitioners had to say and
encourage them to express their views. This resulted in a gradual change: Several months were needed
to change the communication pattern. Researchers had to learn to “decode” the less structured
discourse of practising teachers and distil the scientifically relevant elements from their stories.

Behavioural change takes time
The next example comes from a European Union-funded project aimed at developing a doctoral
programme focusing on teacher education research. The author’s university (Eötvös Loránd University)
was responsible for the work package of building partnerships with external institutions, mainly schools.
At the first partnership meetings, the school representatives had difficulties understanding the
expectations of the doctoral school: They could not answer, for instance, the question of what benefits
they could gain from hosting doctoral students to do their internship in their school. Again, more time
was needed for change to happen. After about one year, school leaders started to propose more
creative ideas about how having doctoral internship students at their school could build knowledge
about their own institution and enhance school improvement. These developments were included in a
guideline on partnerships between schools and doctoral programmes developed in co-operation
between the two parties (EDiTE, 2016[12]).
Source: EDiTE (2016[12]) (2016), Guideline for Building Institutional Links,
https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/documents/downloadPublic?documentIds=080166e5ab474665&appId=PPGMS.

The difference between the first and second example in Box 8.2 can be explained by the different attitudes
and behaviours of researchers. In the second and third cases, they were led by the explicit intention of
listening to practitioners and learning from them instead of looking at them as recipients of researchgenerated knowledge. They were committed consciously to move from the STI to the DUI mode.

Research-practice partnerships
The Triple Helix and Knowledge Triangle models of innovation in which three parties interact – typically,
academia, industry and government was the inspiration for the school-university partnerships discussed
earlier (Halász, 2016[13]). Originally such partnerships were used to improve teacher education (Tsui et al.,
2009[14]) but in the example above it supported researcher training in a doctoral school (Baráth et al.,
2020[15]). The strength of the partnership approach is that it can create highly institutionalised and
prolonged researcher-practitioner collaboration in the form of a “third space”, where partners work together

--- [PDF Page 171 / Book Page 169] ---

on an equal basis led by their common interest. A particularly advanced form of this model can be seen in
the so-called research-practice partnerships of the 1990s in the United States.
A remarkable example of the DUI approach is the Consortium on Chicago School Research created in the
1990s to support city-level school reforms. What one can see in this initiative is the emergence of a
dynamic ecosystem with intensive collaboration and communication between university-based
researchers, schools and district-level decision makers. The activity of the Consortium was guided by a
number of basic principles, summarised below:
(1) If research is to be effective, researchers must pay careful attention to the process by which people learn,
assimilate new information and ideas, internalise that information, and connect it to their own problems of
practice;
(2) Research must be closely connected over time to the core problems facing practitioners and decision
makers;
(3) If research is to build capacity, the role of the researcher and the product of research must change from
outside evaluator or expert to engaged and interactive participant in building knowledge of what matters.
(Roderick, Easton and Sebring, 2009[16])
The Chicago model has been replicated in several cities in the United States (Coburn, Penuel and Geil,
2013[17]; Farrell et al., 2021[18]). According to Coburn, Penuel and Farrell (2021[19]), research-practice
partnerships (RPPs) have five distinctive characteristics:
1. Their duration is relatively long.
2. They focus on “problems of practice”.
3. They are “committed to mutualism”.
4. They use “intentional strategies to foster partnership”.
5. They produce “original analyses”.
These authors distinguish three major existing forms of RPPs:
1. Research alliances that are typically institutionalised partnerships between research organisations
and local education agencies, focusing on ‘‘local policy and practice questions’’.
2. Design partnerships that aim at creating new pedagogical solutions ‘‘in real-world contexts’’,
typically focusing on ‘‘developing and testing instructional materials’’.
3. Networked improvement communities that seek ‘‘to leverage diverse experiences in multiple
settings” and ‘‘to understand what change strategies work, where, when, and under what
conditions’’.
This way of connecting research with practice is in sharp contrast to the model in which the two sides
remain in isolated spaces and are connected by brokering actors. The utilisation of research outcomes for
researchers in such dynamic knowledge ecosystems is a natural element of the research process; it does
not appear as a separate, supplementary task. Beyond the five characteristics listed above, RPPs typically
include capacity-building components as well, and have transformative goals; that is, they have the
intention to improve practice, often promoting radically new solutions (see an example in Box 8.3).

Box 8.3. Mutual learning through workshopping: An example
Mutual learning was in important spill-over effect of a research project exploring the impact of
EU-funded development programmes on daily school practice led by the author of this paper in the
middle of the 2000s (Fazekas, 2018[20]). During the four years of the project, workshops were organised

--- [PDF Page 172 / Book Page 170] ---

every month with the participation of policy makers and school practitioners with the aim of mutual
knowledge sharing. The dissemination of research outcomes was only one of the goals of these
workshops. More importantly, participants continuously informed the research, providing new evidence,
leading often to the adjustment or refining of research questions. Researchers in this collaborative
activity, incessantly learning from their partners, could not avoid “paying careful attention to the process
by which people learn”. They also adapted their language to their partners and were attentive to their
needs.
Source: Fazekas, Á. (Fazekas, 2018[20]), “The impact of EU-funded development interventions on teaching practices in Hungarian schools”,
European Journal of Education, Vol. 53/3, pp. 377-392.

School-university partnerships (SUPs) are a typical and frequent form of institutionalised collaboration
between researchers and practitioners. This multifunctional development tool can be used in all education
systems, including low-income countries. Not only do they enhance quality in teacher education and
professional development, they also promote research-practice dialogue (Halász and Thant Sin,
forthcoming[21]). An advanced use of SUPs to enhance research impact could be observed particularly well
in the influential Teaching and Learning Research Program of the United Kingdom. The SUPs created in
this programme were highly institutionalised and multifunctional, and functioned in a project-based mode.
An example is the Schools-University Partnership in Educational Research (SUPER) project, which was a
collaboration between the University of Cambridge Faculty of Education and eight schools (McLaughlin,
2006[22]).
A key factor in research-practice partnership is the motivation of research organisations to devote time and
energy to this kind of action. In the case of universities, this can be facilitated by institutional strategies
promoting involvement in “third mission” activities and extending existing knowledge transfer operations to
the social area, including education. Selling research outcomes for money and generating extra income
through consultancy, as presented in the next section, can also be a driver. This is not always self-evident.
Following the author’s move from a government-run research and development agency to a research
university it was interesting to see that while knowledge transfer mechanisms were clearly promoted, this
was oriented only to provide research support for industrial technology development. Social services were
not seen as a relevant target area.
In the faculty of psychology and education where the author taught, being involved in school development
and interacting with schools was not a recognised activity taken into account in performance evaluations.
This was in strong contrast with the government research and development agency where we developed
an explicit organisational strategy in which equal distance and closeness to academia, policy and school
practice was a guiding principle as represented in Figure 8.1. This strategic self-positioning of national
government-led educational development and research institutes was dominant in most similar institutions
and the model was presented at a conference of the leaders of such institutes, celebrating the
20th anniversary of the Consortium of Institutions for Development and Research in Education in Europe
(CIDREE) consortium.
The organisational strategy that included the visual model presented in Figure 8.1 had direct and visible
implications for the daily operation of our institute, as illustrated in the examples mentioned earlier. Policy
relevance and usefulness for practice development would become the norm, as basic as following classical
academic standards in writing research reports or publishing results. Our intention was to create
communities of practice of researchers and practitioners.

--- [PDF Page 173 / Book Page 171] ---

Figure 8.1. Strategic self-positioning of national government-led educational development and
research institutes

Source: Halász, G. (2010[23]), “The role of educational research and innovation in improving educational systems: A CIDREE perspective”, in
Stoney, S. (ed.), Beyond Lisbon: Perspectives from Research and Development for Education Policy in Europe, Consortium of Institutions for
Development and Research in Education in Europe (CIDREE).

Consultancy
While research-practice partnership researchers appear as knowledge providers without business
interests – which is not necessarily the case as partners often fund activities in common and researchers
involved in these activities are paid – consultancy is considered to be an income-generating business. In
consultancy work, researchers are selling their knowledge for money.
As the authors of an analysis of knowledge transfer activities in social sciences and humanities stated:
Debates on knowledge transfer usually focus on technology transfer and commercialisation. They
underlined that “the valorisation of academic results – making the results from academic research
accessible to society – has been limited mostly to the economic contribution of universities through the
licencing of intellectual property rights and spin-off creation” overlooking “the potential of the arts,
humanities and social sciences” (Olmos-P.J., Castro-Martínez and d’Este, 2014, p. 697[24]). In a book on
education consultancy, a whole chapter has been devoted to “researchers as consultants in and outside
of universities”, analysing the consultancy activity of four well-known educational researchers (Michael
Fullan, Andy Hargreaves; Ken Leithwood and David Hopkins) who have contributed significantly to
boosting the impact of educational research (Gunter and Mills, 2017[25]).
What we are doing when working, for example, as members of OECD examiner teams is providing a
consultancy service to governments (who pay for this service). But we also create generalisable new
knowledge or research. Many elements of what we do in these missions is not fundamentally different from
what we do when implementing research projects funded by research funding agencies. Researchers
contracted as project team members by private consultancy companies to design and implement research
activities, funded by governments or international organisations, have similar experiences. This is a
particularly effective way of using research-based knowledge to support the client of the contracting
consultancy company.

--- [PDF Page 174 / Book Page 172] ---

Developing skills needed in consultancy work can be an important component of researcher training. The
author, when leading a doctoral school, made deliberate efforts to help develop the transversal skills of
doctoral students, enabling them to take on client-oriented consultancy activities (see example in Box 8.4).

Box 8.4. Honing researcher skills in the field
The principal of a private school contacted our doctoral school of education, suggesting that the external
evaluation of his institution, earlier done by private consultancy companies, could perhaps be performed
by our doctoral students. An agreement was made and a team of five doctoral students submitted a
proposal to do this job. During the approximately year-long project, the student team pursued classic
research activities in the school, interacted intensively with the client and produced, at the end, an
academic book presenting the outcomes of this research-consultancy activity (Horváth et al., 2018[26]).
When asked how useful they found this for their researcher skills, the doctoral students affirmed they
had learnt more during this project than in many traditional programmes doctoral schools typically offer.
Source: Horváth, L. et al. (2018[26]), “Kutatási beszámoló az Alternatív Közgazdasági Gimnázium Pedagógiai Programjának beválásvizsgálatáról”, AKG as an innovative learning environment. Research report on the examination of the impact assessment of the pedagogical
program of the Alternative High School of Economics, Akadémiai Kiadó. Budapest.

The involvement of doctoral students in consultancy activities can be encouraged by national research and
innovation policies. This is the case, for example, in France, where the notion of “doctorant-conseil”
describes “an activity carried out in the form of a mission carried out by a doctoral student in a company,
an administration or a local authority, in parallel with his doctoral work within a research unit. The theme
of this mission is in the field of skills acquired by the doctoral student throughout her/his career; it does not
necessarily present a direct link with her/his research topic”.4 This kind of engagement of doctoral students
in consultancy work is rare in the field of educational research although it could, directly and indirectly,
enhance the impact of educational research.
An interesting example of directly using the knowledge and experiences of doctoral students to improve
practice can be found in the Dutch Inspectorate inviting PhD candidates to study the organisation and
prepare dissertations about its operation (Nusche et al., 2014[27]). In this case, a government agency with
advanced internal knowledge-management strategy and mechanisms interacted with young researchers
to generate new knowledge about its own impact and make its internal processes more innovative.

Using narratives and storytelling
There is abundant literature on the use of storytelling in science communication: Some authors defending
this contested form of communication are highly reputed scientists. “Everywhere one looks in science,
there are stories,” wrote Nobel prize-winner Roald Hoffmann in his essay on the role of narrative in scientific
discovery (Hoffmann, 2012[28]). He describes in another study the formulation of hypotheses as stories
(Hoffmann, 2014[29]). Storytelling appears not only to be an effective way of communicating scientific
content to a non-academic audience but an indispensable tool for making scientific discoveries and
communicating them within the academic community. Authors analysing the role of stories in science,
including Hoffmann, stress that when temporality and causality are treated there is always a story with a
beginning, an unfolding and an end. They also emphasise that our brain needs stories: It has a “narrative
hunger” (Morgan and Wise, 2017[30]; Norris et al., 2005[31]). And, they often stress that the use of narrative
in science is not a way of talking about science but doing science: Narratives are an inherent characteristic

--- [PDF Page 175 / Book Page 173] ---

of scientific discovery and argumentation (Newman, 2018[32]). Research on storytelling shows us that
science without stories cannot be real science and the lack of stories is a sign of imperfect science.
Transforming research outcomes into stories without distorting the content, however, is not easy: It
requires skills that researchers do not often possess and that we tend to neglect when training researchers.
Few teachers in doctoral programmes would react positively to an initiative in which doctoral students are
asked to tell their research outcomes in a fictional story form, doing what some authors describe as
“fictionalising research data” (Campbell, 2000[33]). However, it is a serious exercise that would reveal the
coherence (or not) of their arguments and their understanding of the complexity of the object they are
studying.
Story-telling was used as a dissemination tool, as well, in the two above-mentioned research projects (the
Hungarian project in Box 8.4 and the Dutch case). When a publisher invited researchers to present the
outcomes of the two projects in a larger volume – already publicly available through the project websites
and also in several journal articles – they decided not to write a classic academic book but to experiment
with an unusual hybrid form of dissemination with the hope of reaching practitioner readers.
They created a fictional character – Zita, the innovative teacher – who writes a diary in which she records
her professional experiences, reading, doctoral studies, and conversations with her colleagues. To make
Zita’s experiences more colourful, another fictional character was created: Reijo, the Finnish scientific
journalist who travels to Budapest to make a series of interviews with her. In order to present research
outcomes related to policy implementation, a third character entered the scene: Xia, the development
economist working for the Asian Development Bank, who designs and implements interventions in the
education sector in low-income countries. And, to support the presentation of issues related to research
methodology, a fourth character joined the story: Miriam, the Zambian educational researcher who
acquired her PhD in Finland. The story is told by Reijo, who often meets with his three colleagues, has
long conversations with them while travelling, and exchanges many emails with them. On the basis of his
notes, he writes a book and finds himself in a controversy with his scientific publisher who hesitates about
whether he should publish a book which does not follow the standards of classic academic genre.
After the publication of the book, entitled The Birth of Knowledge (Halász and Fazekas, 2020[34]), a sequel
was written which came out one year later with the title The Second Frontline (Halász, 2021[35]).5 The
author of this chapter uses these books in his master’s-level degree courses for students, practising
teachers and school leaders. This has resulted in much feedback from readers, demonstrating the
effectiveness of this kind of research communication. Many practising teachers affirmed that they could
understand complex content through Zita’s diary and the conversations of the characters, which they would
not be willing to assimilate if presented in classic academic form. Some people reported on transformative
effects: Inspired by the books they have enriched or plan to enrich their teaching practice with new
elements.
Both research projects that inspired the writing of the two hybrid books used mixed methods that combined
large-scale surveys providing quantitative data for complex statistical analyses and case studies providing
qualitative data in the form of interviews, collected stories, informal conversations and notes on observed
classroom and extracurricular activities. Both projects were accompanied by a deep, long and systematic
analysis of the relevant literature accompanied with discussions about the readings in a professional
community of researchers and practitioners (Halász, 2019[36]). Using a systematic review of the literature
as an institutionalised communication framework is one of the many ways that can generate professional
dialogue between researchers and practitioners: This requires a deep understanding of the authors’
thinking and the immediate translation of what they present into practical conclusions. Many of the
elements of the stories that later appeared in the books emerged during our case studies and literature
analysing community events.

--- [PDF Page 176 / Book Page 174] ---

Using teaching to connect research with practice
The last way to connect research with practice, which we mention in this chapter, is by using research in
teaching. This might seem banal at first glance but is worth exploring. It may be simply presenting research
outcomes in higher education study programmes to future practitioners or to those who enrol in continuous
professional development programmes provided by universities or other agencies linked with research.
This is a natural practice in teaching in higher education. But it can also be realised in various forms of
research-based teaching, which is, again, a common practice in higher education, especially at graduate
or post-graduate level. Doctoral education deserves special attention in this respect, particularly in light of
the fact that now the majority of doctorate holders in many European countries find employment outside
the academic sector (Boman et al., 2021[37]); that is, many of them become – or remain – practitioners
either in the private or public sector. There is a high level of probability that these people will develop a
practice that is attentive and responsive to research and will promote research utilisation in their daily work.

Box 8.5. The researcher policy maker: An example
One of the author’s doctoral students became a high-level official a few years after defending her PhD
in a government agency with regulatory, development and policy implementation responsibilities in the
field of higher education. In this position, she created a unit of analysis to support policy decisions and
monitor implementation, recruiting several young researchers and launching a number of research and
policy evaluation projects. Under her leadership research and the use of evidence became normal
practice in a government agency where regulation and legal supervision were almost exclusive
activities. This fundamentally transformed the administrative style and discourse in the organisation.
Conversations with her made it clear: without the PhD experience, she would and could not have
initiated these changes.

Many PhD-holding teachers have been promoted to a “researcher-teacher” status in the framework of a
new career promotion system introduced in the middle of the 2010s in Hungary (see Chapter 4, Box 4.3).
These teachers submit a research plan when applying to acquire or renew this status. As the reviewer of
a number of such applications, the author of this chapter saw many examples of teachers using researcher
skills acquired during their PhD studies.
Due to the status of the researcher teacher created by the new career system, this form of practitioner
research has become a frequent phenomenon in the Hungarian school system. In addition, many of the
“master teachers” (another special status) also do research, development and innovation activities.6 Most
research activities performed by practising teachers now focus on developing teaching and learning in
schools, sometimes in specific disciplinary areas, sometimes in cross-curricular domains but they can also
cover extracurricular areas or support school development and school evaluation.
This might have far-reaching implications on how to define the strategic goals of doctoral programmes and
how to organise teaching and learning in these programmes. If educating practitioners equipped with
professional researcher skills who have positive attitudes towards using research to improve practice
become part of the mission statements of doctoral schools, this would directly impact doctoral education.
It would impact the design and organisation of doctoral courses, the evaluation of performance, the
allocation of credits, the involvement of practitioners in teaching and supervision, and the possible inclusion
of internship periods in the process of becoming a doctor.
There is an interesting example of research-practice integration into teaching in an innovation management
perspective in the “EIT label”, awarded to higher education programmes by the European Institute of
Technology. Of the award’s seven principles knowledge triangle integration is foremost. This requires a

--- [PDF Page 177 / Book Page 175] ---

study programme design “where co‐creation and collaboration between education, research and
innovation, and business contribute to addressing societal challenges” (EIT, 2021, p. 12[38]). This
configuration can be applied to the education sector as well, in which the “research” pole of the knowledge
triangle would be educational research; the “education” pole would be the training of teachers, school
leaders and policy practitioners; and the “innovation” (or “business”) pole would be schools and other
education sector institutions (including government-based policy-making or policy-implementation
agencies). In this model, research is connected to practice through teaching or skills development with a
strong emphasis on co-creation and collaboration.

Conclusions
The examples presented in this chapter can help revitalise projects that aim to strengthen research-policypractice links such as the CERI project on Strengthening the Impact of Education Research. The six ways
of enhancing research impact can be encouraged simultaneously in every education research and
innovation system. Box 8.6 outlines some key recommendations for such initiatives.

Box 8.6. Recommendations for strengthening the research-policy-practice link in education
Use innovation management and knowledge-management approaches
The use of approaches applied in innovation management and knowledge management could
significantly enhance knowledge utilisation in the education sector and education policies themselves
could benefit from innovation policies. Include innovation in education into national innovations
strategies or consider the design and adoption of specific education-sector innovation strategies.

Give equal focus to the DUI and STI modes
The intention to think in non-linear, co-creating, Doing, Using and Interacting (DUI) mode is reflected in
research questions where “relationships and interactions” and the skills needed for “co-producing
research” are among the key themes. This chapter argues that the DUI mode could receive more
attention and existing practices based on this mode could be better explored, especially from a
knowledge mobilisation perspective.

Give more attention to design-based research
Design-based research, a typical form of the DUI mode, should receive more attention in initiatives such
as the CERI project on strengthening the impact of education research. Survey questionnaires
collecting data on facilitating research use should not only reflect the Science, Technology and
Innovation (STI) way of thinking about interaction between research, practice and policy. In addition to
a focus on the function of mediation or brokerage between the two worlds (research, on the one side
and policy and practice, on the other), co-creation, co-production or collaborative design also need
attention.

Create communities of practice for researchers and practitioners
Communities of practice can be created through research-practice partnerships, school-university
partnerships and other institutionalised forms of co-operation. At the doctoral level, the education of
practitioners equipped with advanced researcher skills could become a key programme component and
could be better exploited for research use and research impact in the education sector. This could be
facilitated by applying the knowledge triangle concept to the education sector, where the “innovation”
or “business” pole of the triangle are education-sector service providers.

--- [PDF Page 178 / Book Page 176] ---

Include consultancy in the scope
Although consultancy is a particularly effective form of knowledge transfer for enhancing research
impact, this way of using and disseminating research-based knowledge has rarely been identified as
an important form of knowledge mobilisation or knowledge utilisation. Most knowledge mobilisation
analyses ignore it. Consultancy is an important part the activity of many researchers and could be a
component of researcher training.

Encourage creative, user-friendly forms of scientific communication
Research outcomes published in academic journals often do not reach practitioners who can make use
of them in their practice. Storytelling can reach those who have limited interest in reading research
reports or are reluctant to look for scientifically based solutions. National or institutional policies and
research funding agencies can encourage the communication of research outcomes via storytelling.
This would result in fictional literature, films or theatrical performances conveying research-based
knowledge in a form that targets our rational thinking, senses, emotions and motivational energies. This
would require more intensive communication and co-operation between scientists and artists, and
research on the impact of communicating science through stories.
The six forms of enhancing research impact presented in this chapter highlight not only the social
dimension of research utilisation but also the high-level complexity of this process. Analysis of the practice
of using research has described this process using the language and the approach of complexity science,
underlining its non-linear nature and the difficulties of predicting its outcomes:
“There is increasing evidence that the use of research is emergent, non-linear, iterative and contingent (…)
When considered through a complexity lens, research use is a process that is characterised by multiple
interactions among many entities co-creating dynamic, non-linear patterns of unpredictable behaviour
governed by feedback loops that cause cascading changes throughout the system. (…) users are ‘active
problem-solvers and generators of their own knowledge base instead of merely passive receptacles of
information and expertise’ (…) Taking into account the contingent, emergent and unpredictable nature of
research use would imply acknowledging and accommodating unpredictable outcomes that might emerge over
time.” (Lemay and Sá, 2012, p. 479[3])
Insights from innovation and knowledge-management thinking can offer significant contribution to our
analysis of research impact. There are several ways to strengthen the impact of education research, some
of them more unusual. Therefore, we should not be too bound to the researcher’s perspective as it focuses
by whom and how the knowledge they produce will be used. Rather, we should place ourselves in the
position of practitioners. For the latter what counts are the problems and challenges they face in their daily
practice. Their concern is not how effectively research-based knowledge can be used in practice but how
they can solve their real-life problems and find the knowledge that can support this.
As the authors of a relevant earlier innovation research paper noted: “In many organizations, there is a
profound influence on operations and policies derived not from research and development but from the
accumulated wisdom of the practitioners” (Johnson and Brown, 1986[39]). These authors, drawing on earlier
research, identified four different forms of “transmission of knowledge”: (1) Research, development, and
diffusion (2) Problem solving (3) Linkage (4) Social interaction models. This classification was later applied
in analyses of knowledge transfer and utilisation in education (Becheikh et al., 2010[40]; Nelson and
O’Beirne, 2014[41]).
Attention has often focused mainly on the research, development, and diffusion, and the linkage models;
that is, on the dissemination of research outcomes in the case of the former, and on mediation in the case
of the latter. Those concerned by innovation, focusing either on micro-level innovation management or
macro-level innovation policies, show more interest in the use of knowledge for problem solving and the
creation of social spaces to enhance innovative problem solving. In other words, they look at the use of

--- [PDF Page 179 / Book Page 177] ---

knowledge from the perspective of those who have to solve problems and cooperate with each other to
find new solutions.
This paper asserts that thinking about researcher-practitioner relationships in a DUI mode promotes
“problem solving” and “social interaction”, and improves the chances of research utilisation. Taking the
perspective and language of innovation and knowledge management helps us understand the practitioners
involved in collaborative problem solving. What interests practitioners is research in a contextualised form.
They need researcher partners who listen to them, who are willing to cooperate with them in enduring
partnerships, and who can understand their everyday language and give specific, contextualised advice to
them.

References
Barab, S. (2006), “Design-based Research: A methodological toolkit for the learning scientist”, in
Sawyer, R. (ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of The Learning Sciences, Cambridge University
Press, New York.

[9]

Baráth, T. et al. (2020), School-University Partnership: Insights from an International Doctorate
Program on Teacher Education, Eötvös Loránd University (ELTE) – University of Szeged,
Hungarian-Netherlands School of Educational Management (SZTE, KÖVI),
http://publicatio.bibl.u-szeged.hu/19330/.

[15]

Becheikh, N. et al. (2010), “How to improve knowledge transfer strategies and practices in
education? Answers from a systematic literature review”, Research in Higher Education
Journal, Vol. 7, pp. 1-27.

[40]

Berliner, D. (2002), “Educational research: The hardest science of all”, Educational Researcher,
Vol. 31/8, pp. 18-20.

[6]

Boman, J. et al. (2021), “What comes after a PhD? Findings from the DocEnhance survey of
doctorate holders on their employment situation, skills match, and the value of the doctorate”,
D1.2 Report on career tracking of PhD graduates, European Science Foundation.

[37]

Brown, A. (1992), “Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating
complex interventions in classroom settings”, Journal of the Learning Sciences, Vol. 2/2,
pp. 141-178.

[8]

Campbell, A. (2000), “Fictionalising research data as a way of increasing teachers’ access to
school-focused research”, Research in Education, Vol. 63/1, pp. 81-88.

[33]

Coburn, C., W. Penuel and C. Farrell (2021), “Fostering educational improvement with researchpractice partnerships”, Phi Delta Kappan, Vol. 102/7, pp. 14-19.

[19]

Coburn, C., W. Penuel and K. Geil (2013), Research-Practice Partnerships: A Strategy for
Leveraging Research for Educational Improvement in School Districts, William T. Grant
Foundation, New York, NY.

[17]

EDiTE (2016), Guideline for Building Institutional Links, Horizon 2020 funded project aimed at
implementing a doctoral program entitled European Doctorate in Teacher Education (EDiTE),
https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/documents/downloadPublic?documentIds=080166
e5ab474665&appId=PPGMS.

[12]

--- [PDF Page 180 / Book Page 178] ---

EIT (2021), “Quality for learning” EIT Quality Assurance and Learning Enhancement Model - EIT
Label Handbook for Planning, Labelling and Reviewing Degree Programmes, European
Institute of Innovation and Technology.

[38]

Farrell, C. et al. (2021), Research-practice Partnerships in Education: The State of the Field,
William T. Grant Foundation, New York, NY.

[18]

Fazekas, Á. (2018), “The impact of EU-funded development interventions on teaching practices
in Hungarian schools”, European Journal of Education, Vol. 53/3, pp. 377-392.

[20]

Gordon, J. et al. (2009), “Key competences in Europe: Opening doors for lifelong learners across
the school curriculum and teacher education”, CASE Network Reports, No. 87, Center for
Social and Economic Research (CASE), Warsaw.

[42]

Gunter, H. and C. Mills (2017), Consultants and Consultancy: The Case of Education, Springer
International Publishing, Switzerland.

[25]

Halász, G. (2021), A második frontvonal [The Second Frontline], Gondolat. Budapest.

[35]

Halász, G. (2019), “Doing systematic literature reviews – ‘Net fishing’or ‘whale hunting’?”, in
Hoveid Honerød, M. et al. (eds.), Doing Educational Research: Overcoming Challenges In
Practice, Sage, London.

[36]

Halász, G. (2016), “School-university partnership for effective teacher learning”, Issues paper for
the seminar co-hosted by ELTE Doctoral School of Education and Miskolc-Hejőkeresztúr KIP
Regional Methodological Centre, http://halaszg.elte.hu/download/School-university.pdf.

[13]

Halász, G. (2010), “The role of educational research and innovation in improving educational
systems: A CIDREE perspective”, in Stoney, S. (ed.), Beyond Lisbon: Perspectives from
Research and Development for Education Policy in Europe, Consortium of Institutions for
Development and Research in Education in Europe (CIDREE).

[23]

Halász, G. and Á. Fazekas (2020), A tudás keletkezése [The Birth of Knowledge], Gondolat.
Budapest.

[34]

Halász, G. and K. Thant Sin (forthcoming), “Using school-university partnerships as a
development tool in low-income countries: the case of Myanmar”.

[21]

Hoffmann, R. (2014), “The tensions of scientific storytelling: Science depends on compelling
narratives”, American Scientist, Vol. 102, pp. 250-253.

[29]

Hoffmann, R. (2012), Roald Hoffmann on the Philosophy, Art, and Science of Chemistry, Oxford
University Press.

[28]

Horváth, L. et al. (2018), “Kutatási beszámoló az Alternatív Közgazdasági Gimnázium
Pedagógiai Programjának beválás-vizsgálatáról”, AKG as an innovative learning
environment. Research report on the examination of the impact assessment of the
pedagogical program of the Alternative High School of Economics, Akadémiai Kiadó.
Budapest.

[26]

Jensen, B. et al. (2007), “Forms of knowledge and modes of innovation.”, Research Policy,
Vol. 36, pp. 680-693.

[1]

--- [PDF Page 181 / Book Page 179] ---

Johnson, N. and W. Brown (1986), “The dissemination and use of innovative knowledge”,
Journal of Product Innovation Management: An International Publication of the Product
Development & Management Association, Vol. 3/2, pp. 127-135.

[39]

Lemay, M. and C. Sá (2012), “Complexity sciences: Towards an alternative approach to
understanding the use of academic research”, Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research,
Debate and Practice, Vol. 8/4, pp. 473-494.

[3]

Lundvall, B. (2000), “The Learning economy: Some Implications for the knowledge base of
health and education systems”, in Knowledge Management in the Learning Society, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264181045-en.

[2]

Mayer, J. (2009), Az OFI története narratívák tükrében (The History of the National Institute of
Public Eucation in the Mirror of Narratives), Oktatáskutató és Fejlesztő Intézet, Budapest.

[11]

McLaughlin, C. (2006), Researching Schools: Stories from a Schools-University Partnership for
Educational Research, Routledge.

[22]

Morgan, M. and M. Wise (2017), “Narrative science and narrative knowing. Introduction to
special issue on narrative science”, Studies in History and Philosophy of Science. Part A,
Vol. 62, pp. 1-5.

[30]

Nelson, J. and C. Campbell (2019), “Using evidence in education”, in Boaz, A. et al. (eds.), What
Works Now?: Evidence-informed Policy and Practice, Policy Press.

[7]

Nelson, J. and C. O’Beirne (2014), Using Evidence in the Classroom: What Works and Why?,
National Foundation for Educational, Slough.

[41]

Newman, D. (2018), “Narrative: Common ground for literature and science?”, Configurations,
Vol. 26/3, pp. 277-282.

[32]

Norris, S. et al. (2005), “A theoretical framework for narrative explanation in science”, Science
Education, Vol. 89/4, pp. 535-563.

[31]

Nusche, D. et al. (2014), OECD Reviews of Evaluation and Assessment in Education:
Netherlands 2014, OECD Reviews of Evaluation and Assessment in Education, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264211940-en.

[27]

OECD (2007), Evidence in Education: Linking Research and Policy, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264033672-en.

[5]

Olmos-P.J., E. Castro-Martínez and P. d’Este (2014), “Knowledge transfer activities in social
sciences and humanities: Explaining the interactions of research groups with non-academic
agents”, Research Policy, Vol. 43/4, pp. 696-706.

[24]

Qi, J. and B. Levin (2013), “Introduction and overview”, in Levin, B. et al. (eds.), The Impact of
Research in Education: An International Perspective, Policy Press, Bristol.

[4]

Roderick, M., J. Easton and P. Sebring (2009), A New Model for the Role of Research in
Supporting Urban School Reform, Consortium on Chicago School Research.

[16]

Tsui, A. et al. (2009), Learning in School-University Partnership: Sociocultural Perspectives,
Routledge.

[14]

--- [PDF Page 182 / Book Page 180] ---

US Congress (2002), No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, H.R.1, 107th Cong., H.R.1 - 107th
Congress (2001-2002), http://www.congress.gov/.

[43]

Vincent-Lancrin, S. et al. (2019), Fostering Students’ Creativity and Critical Thinking: What it
Means in School, Educational Research and Innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/62212c37-en.

[10]

--- [PDF Page 183 / Book Page 181] ---

Notes
1

See paragraph 37 of the act on “‘Scientifically Based Research” (Public Law 107–110. 107th Congress.
An Act „To close the achievement gap with accountability, flexibility, and choice, so that no child is left
behind” (2002[43]).
2

See the box ‘‘Assessment: Hungary’’ in Gordon et al. (2009[42]).

3

See the project’s website here: www.oecd.org/education/ceri/assessingprogressionincreativeandcriticalt
hinkingskillsineducation.htm.
4

See the website ‘‘Qu’est-ce que le « doctorant-conseil?” of the University Poitiers (https://college.ed.univpoitiers.fr/quest-ce-que-le-doctorant-conseil). English translation by the author.
5

The books have been published in Hungarian but a rough translation of many chapters are available in
English.
6

In 2020, for example, the researcher-teacher status (acquired five years earlier) of 76 applicants was
renewed and 26 new additional applications were approved. The same year 2146 teachers acquired the
master-teacher status, with 547 renewals and 1599 new applications (source: Information shared with
author by the Educational Authority of Hungary).
