================================================================================
Chapter: Perspectives on education research
Author(s): John Bangs, Martin Henry, Emese K. Nagy, Tine S. Prøitz, Mark Schneider, Vivian Tseng, Dirk Van Damme and Makito Yurita (Edited by Nóra Révai)
Book: Who Cares about Using Education Research in Policy and Practice?: Strengthening Research Engagement
Series: Educational Research and Innovation
Publisher: OECD Publishing, Paris (2022)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/d7ff793d-en
ISBN: 978-92-64-73132-5 (PDF) / 978-92-64-96272-9 (print)
Section / Part: Part III: New approaches to understanding research use
Book Pages: pp. 200–234
PDF Pages: pp. 202–236 (in raw/d7ff793d-en.pdf)
================================================================================
--- [PDF Page 202 / Book Page 200] ---

10 Perspectives on education
research

John Bangs, Education International
Martin Henry, Education International
Emese K. Nagy, Hejőkeresztúr Primary School, University of Miskolc, Hungary
Tine S. Prøitz, University of South-Eastern Norway
Mark Schneider, United States Institute of Education
Vivian Tseng, William T. Grant Foundation
Dirk Van Damme, Center for Curriculum Design
Makito Yurita, National Institute for School Teachers and Staff Development, Japan
Edited by: Nóra Révai, OECD

This chapter presents different perspectives on what education research is,
what types of research are relevant for policy and practice, and how
research should be produced. The discussion is framed by some key
questions that have emerged from decades of debate about the relevance
of education research for teaching practice and policy. This is followed by
short opinion pieces in which experts representing different countries, types
of organisations and roles answer these questions from their own
perspectives. The viewpoints include academia, policy, practice, funders,
unions and teacher training. The chapter concludes with a set of
convergences, divergences and open questions.

--- [PDF Page 203 / Book Page 201] ---

Introduction
In a discussion on the impact and use of education research in policy and practice one cannot avoid getting
into the core questions about research itself. The nature and sources of research evidence as well as its
quality and relevance for policy and practice have long been debated (e.g. Nutley, Walter and Davies
(2007[1]), OECD (2007[2]), Nutley et al. (2010[3])). There has been a great deal of discussion about what
purpose education research should serve, and which methodologies are the highest quality and most
useful for addressing various questions. The debate also includes the question of how, by whom and under
what circumstances research should be produced, and how it should be financed.
In 2007, Thomas Cook and Stephen Gorard debated the place of experimental design in evidence-based
policy making and practice in the “Evidence in Education” OECD volume (OECD, 2007[2]). Despite the fact
that one of them (Thomas Cook) is a strong proponent of randomised control trials (RCT) while the other
(Stephen Gorard) is an advocate of mixing different methods, there was more agreement than
disagreement between them. Notably, they both pointed to the importance of addressing causal questions
that lie at the core of the evidence base for education policy, much of which is concerned with improving
educational outcomes and efficiency. They also agreed that there was a lack of experimental design in
education research. Where they disagreed was the urgency of producing more research on effective
practices and the weight that experiments should have in causal studies. Fifteen years later, this chapter
aims to pick that conversation up and take it forward in four main ways.
First, by reflecting on what has changed since then and the implications of those changes for education
research today. The “what works” movement in education has led to significant investments into
intervention testing in many countries, including through RCTs, over the past decades. Does that mean
that education research today serves policy and practice more effectively? If so, in what ways? What is
still missing, if anything? Research has been growing in other areas too. For example, the interdisciplinary
fields of neuroscience and cognitive science have been yielding knowledge that could be relevant for policy
and practice. Can that knowledge be used in educational decision making and is it? Could the same debate
today be sparked by the question: “Experimental research or cognitive sciences: Which one yields a
stronger evidence base?” What other substantive changes in research matter for education policy and
practice?
Second, by enlarging the debate from a primarily methodological one to a broader discussion on the role
of actors in research production and its implications for the quality of research. The evidence-based
practice and policy agenda has led to increased collaboration between practitioners and researchers. Part
of the appeal of co-production is that it brings research knowledge directly into practice while also enriching
research with an understanding of what the practice-based challenges are. With this, the popularity of
applied research and practice-based methodologies such as action research, collaborative enquiry and
design-based research has grown. Are there additional actors engaged in research production and is now
the time for them, or for others, to become more involved? What do such models imply for the scientific
rigour of research? How can we (re-)define and ensure the quality of education research given that it now
exceeds the boundaries of academia?
Third, by considering the overall coordination of research production and what can be done to address the
perceived lack of it. Education research has been accused of not producing evidence in a cumulative way
and thus being unable to systematically improve practice and policy. Can and should education research
work towards building a comprehensive knowledge base for teaching and schooling? If so, how can that
be done? Attempts have been made to direct research production through funding but some of these have
also been strongly criticised. Should public funding be (more) prescriptive with respect to the production of
education research? And if so, how? Is there a tension between evidence-informed policy/practice and
policy/practice-driven evidence? Funders of education research have diversified in the past decades. In
addition to public funding, which in many countries is very limited compared to other service sectors,
increasingly more education research is funded by private organisations and foundations. While this

--- [PDF Page 204 / Book Page 202] ---

implies more resources, the particular interests, goals and criteria of funders influence the aim, scope and
sometimes also the methods of the research. What does that mean for research relevance and quality?
Are there any ethical considerations, and if so, how should they be addressed?
Fourth, by adding more voices to the table. In the 2007 volume, the debate took place between
two prominent academics. In general, a lot of the discussion about the purpose, quality and the production
of education research takes place within the confines of the research community. These issues are
discussed during academic conferences and published in academic literature (e.g. Moss et al. (2009[4]),
Nelson and Campbell (2017[5]), Furlong and Oancea (2005[6]), Rasmussen (2021[7]) to cite only a few
examples relevant to the above questions). This chapter aims to make other voices heard: Actors who
have roles in education policy or practice, or are at the crossroads of these communities. They may or may
not have engaged in academic education research but they are all concerned with various aspects of
research production. The invited experts not only represent different roles and types of institutions but also
different countries with different education systems.
The next section presents short opinion pieces by invited experts. They were all prompted to react to the
above introduction either by selecting and addressing one or more of the questions proposed above that
they consider the most pressing or by bringing in a new question they think is more important. These
opinion pieces aim to enrich the discussion and contrast distinct perspectives, with a view to learn from
each other and broaden the scope of reflections.
The seven opinion pieces draw an interesting arc that spans from the production of research in a more
traditional, academic sense, to the engagement of various actors, funding issues and ethical
considerations. Dirk Van Damme focuses on core issues of research production, such as the disciplinary
identity of educational research, funding (or the lack thereof), methodological and research quality issues.
Mark Schneider presents a way forward to increase the scientific rigour of education research, where this
takes into account the fact that research should serve practice and policy. John Bangs and Martin Henry
provide a perspective that bridges research and advocacy, pointing to the important role of unions in
ensuring the relevance of research production, facilitating teachers’ research use and engagement in
research. The teacher engagement piece is brought forward, with a focus on research co-production, by
Emese K. Nagy’s voice as a school leader, researcher and teacher educator. Tine S. Prøitz extends this
discussion with deeper considerations for the effectiveness of research-practice partnerships.
Vivian Tseng frames such partnerships in the democratisation of research production and proposes new
and suitable approaches to funding research. Finally, Makito Yurita expands on the idea of
democratisation, by pointing to imbalances and power issues not just between various groups of people,
but also between research methodologies and countries.

The long and winding road for educational research
Dirk Van Damme, Center for Curriculum Design, former head of CERI, OECD
Educational research is in a dire state
This bold statement may seem counterintuitive because the output of research is steadily growing and the
call for evidence-informed policy and practice has never sounded as loud as today. The list of interesting
initiatives and organisations devoting themselves to the dissemination and translation of educational
research (see the interesting overview for Europe in Pellegrini and Vivanet (2020[8])) is growing longer and
the integration of research evidence in policy and practice is steadily improving.
Educational research has grown and matured. This has resulted in thousands of valuable and interesting
research papers in specialised outlets. It has also led to growing optimism that educational research could
resolve some of the most difficult issues in educational policy and practice. The expansion of experimental

--- [PDF Page 205 / Book Page 203] ---

design and, especially, of randomised controlled trials (RCTs), often proclaimed to be the gold standard of
educational research design, has brought many people to believe that it is possible to develop a catalogue
of ‘what works’ interventions that can be readily implemented.
With the expansion of educational research funding, activity and output, the methodological quality of
educational research has improved. Though one can still find a lot of contemplative and opinionated papers
in educational journals, the ‘empirical turn’ in educational research has clearly turned research output in
the direction of quantitative, methodologically sound research. Research methodologies have become
more sophisticated and research designs more complex.
However, focusing on these positive trends leads to a distorted picture. The reality is that education
systems are still very far from becoming knowledge-intensive systems in which research evidence
penetrates decision-making processes both at macro-, meso- and micro-level. Like other complex public
policy systems, education is looking for reliable sources of knowledge and is increasingly turning to
scientifically founded research knowledge. Research evidence promises to provide the knowledge and
information-enabling complex systems to change in order to adapt to or to anticipate changing
circumstances (Fazekas and Burns, 2012[9]; Burns and Köster, 2016[10]). However, despite the growing
number of educational researchers and increasing quantity of published educational research, the influx
of research evidence into educational policy and practice is still far below what is necessary to turn
education into an evidence-informed system. The consequence is that education – both at the macro- and
at the micro-level – suffers from an epistemic or lack-of-knowledge uncertainty problem. Policy makers as
well as practitioners try to minimise the risks associated with epistemic uncertainty by tapping into various
knowledge sources that compete with research evidence, such as experiential knowledge or teachers’
professional knowledge. These knowledge sources, although valuable and not to be underestimated,
cannot match the accuracy of scientifically founded research evidence. The consequence is the
multiplication of ineffective and sometimes counterproductive interventions and practices.
To explain why education has so far failed to turn into an evidence-based system, one can look at three
possible factors: The production of research evidence; the transmission and translation of research
evidence; and the reception and integration of research evidence into policy and practice. Each factor is
relevant. But in my view, the core issue is situated on the production side. The research system is failing
to produce sufficient quantity and quality of evidence to feed a complex system such as education.

Funding and supply issues
The easy explanation is that this is the result of a lack of funding and that if more resources were available,
the situation would automatically improve. There is some truth in this. Compared to the health sector, which
is a public policy sector similar in size and mission, education is very far behind in terms of moving to an
evidence-informed system. Estimates suggest that the share of education research in public research
expenditure is about one-fifth of that of biomedical research.
But in order to assess the maturity of a research sector, the quality of published research is much more
relevant than its financial input. The share of published research synthesis papers is an excellent indicator
of this. In its recent White Paper, education.org calculated that, globally, the health/education expenditure
ratio is 1.75 but the health/education knowledge synthesis ratio is no less than 26 (Education.org, 2021[11]).
Whether the publication of research synthesis papers is a reliable metric is open to debate, but the
magnitude of the gap is significant.
However, there is little empirical support for the claim that we are dealing with a purely quantitative supply
problem. If that were the case, the positive trends in production and dissemination of educational research
would have had a visible impact on the overall effectiveness and efficiency of the educational system itself
(Tucker, 2019[12]).

--- [PDF Page 206 / Book Page 204] ---

Deeper causes
Over the past decades, education systems have not benefitted from the increase in educational research
spending and output. Education has not improved in terms of macro-efficiency indicators such as per
student cost nor overall learning outcomes or equity This is the case for both developed and developing
economies (Angrist et al., 2021[13]). How is it possible that, while knowledge of effective teaching and
learning has grown, progress in getting children into schools (i.e. in building schools and training teachers)
has not resulted in better learning opportunities?
What are the deeper causes of the problem? Why has more and better educational research not resulted
in visible impact?

The theoretical basis is weak and flawed
A lot of educational research is heavily influenced by fashionable frameworks with weak scientific support
such as social constructivism. The empirical turn in educational research enabled it to distance itself from
old philosophical and pedagogical foundations without, however, establishing a theoretical basis of its own.
Theories have been imported from neighbouring disciplines and only very rarely have they emerged from
educational research itself. The space of theory in research has been filled by particular pedagogical belief
and value systems such as early 20th-century child-centred Reformpädogogik, John Dewey’s pragmatism,
or Paulo Freire’s critical pedagogy.
The most interesting research on education is found in neighbouring research domains such as sociology
of education, economics of education, cognitive psychology and neuroscience. Educational research
benefits from these fields, but as an interdisciplinary and applied field of research, it should also be able to
produce groundbreaking research itself.

Methodological debates and biases
Philosophical and normative debates on methodology have absorbed enormous research power and
energy, and occupy a large part of publication output (Wrigley, 2018[14]). For example, the discussion on
randomised controlled trials (RTCs) lingers on, turning into an unproductive and unsolvable ideological
battle (Connolly, Keenan and Urbanska, 2018[15]).
The replication crisis in social sciences has hit educational research very hard. Already in 2014, an analysis
of the top 100 education journals revealed that only 0.13% of the published papers were replications, far
less than in any other field of social research (Makel and Plucker, 2014[16]; Perry, Morris and Lea, 2022[17]).
Policy makers and practitioners are calling on educational researchers to do more relevant research that
is applicable to educational policy and practice (Wyse, 2020[18]) and this risks further weakening the
scientific basis of educational research. Situated research with often weak methodologies does not lend
itself to generalisation and the construction of a consolidated knowledge base (Tipton and Olsen, 2018[19]).
Educational research suffers from different kinds of biases. “Insider bias” (i.e. those designing and
implementing an educational intervention being the ones evaluating its impact) is strong in educational
research (Barshay, 2019[20]). External, independent evaluation studies are rare in the educational field.
Finally, educational researchers are particularly prone to ideological or political bias. Many are strongly
motivated by political activism, which influences their research design and findings.
Education systems and societies at large do not receive the high-quality educational research they need
and deserve.

--- [PDF Page 207 / Book Page 205] ---

How to fix them
There are no quick fixes to the current situation. Making education systems more evidence-based will
require a lot of effort on multiple levels. And it will require time. More fundamental issues need to be
addressed.

Provide more strategic funding for research growth
Educational research has not reached the quantitative threshold to meet the demands of a huge and
complex system like education for reliable evidence. Growth in the production of educational research is
very much needed. Governments and research funders need to develop a strategic plan for the gradual
increase of funding resources. Qualitative issues will be more easily solved with some extra quantitative
space. Despite the call for more relevant, policy- and practice-oriented research, sufficient resources need
to go to more fundamental, time-intensive research (for example, in longitudinal designs) and theoretical
research building on generalisable empirical findings.
Educational research does not enjoy high priority in research funding mechanisms. Even though it is
perceived to be applied, educational research does not enjoy the same status as more fundamental
research domains. But for more funding and improved status to have impact, educational research must
address its qualitative deficiencies.

Establish education research as an academic discipline
The funding issue is closely related to the relationship between educational research and its neighbouring
disciplines. Interdisciplinary connections and mutual fertilisation are extremely important but education
needs and deserves its own foundational body of research evidence, informed by but not reduced to the
perspectives of neighbouring disciplines.
To establish itself firmly as an academic discipline, education needs to devote more attention and energy
to establishing its own theoretical foundation. Important pedagogical traditions can certainly inform the
construction of educational theory but are not to be considered as theories in their own right. Theories
emerge through sufficiently generalisable and replicable empirical research, not through ideological
frameworks.

Improve self-regulation and evaluation
The educational research field has to improve self-regulation in its assessment and evaluation procedures,
peer review practices and publication procedures. There needs to be more rigorous approaches to
research, and less ideology and activism. The publication pressure on researchers also leads to overpublication, with too many close to worthless papers. With so many competing publications, high-quality
publications struggle for visibility and impact. There also needs to be much more rigor in educational
research associations, research funding bodies and educational journals.

Accept limitations
In order to gain more respect (and funding), educational researchers often over-sell the capacity of
empirical research to provide useable answers to policy and practice. Much effort that goes into promoting
evidence-based policy and practice implicitly suggests that there is an evidence-based answer to every
problem in education. This is untrue; in fact, research evidence provides useful knowledge for addressing
only a very limited number of issues in policy and practice. The often-used phrase “research evidence
shows” should be employed only when there is robust, replicated and generalisable evidence from highquality research.

--- [PDF Page 208 / Book Page 206] ---

The road to upgrading educational research so that education systems become evidence-based
knowledge systems is a long and winding one. In the meantime, let’s be respectful of how policy makers
and practitioners solve their knowledge needs. The challenge lies with the research community, not with
teachers and policy makers.

More scientific rigour for education research
Mark Schneider, Director of the Institute of Education Sciences, United States

Box 10.1. Institute of Education Sciences, United States
The Institute of Education Sciences (IES) is the science office within the United States (US) Department
of Education. The Institute’s portfolio supports research on early childhood, elementary, secondary,
tertiary, and adult education.
With an annual investment in education research of around USD150 million, IES is one of the world’s
largest education research funders. Since its founding in 2002, IES has been focused on supporting
rigorous education research that is transparent, actionable, and focused on consequential outcomes
with the potential to improve student achievement.
Source: IES (n.d.[21]), Homepage, https://ies.ed.gov/.

This chapter has a wide purview but I have chosen to focus on the last point enumerated in the chapter
introduction: How should research be produced? Education research is a large field pursued in many
different ways around the globe. My contribution to this chapter has a particular focus: Increasing the
scientific rigor of education research.
I have the pleasure of reflecting on what I believe to be some of the challenges that the field of education
research faces as it works to increase the quality of work aimed at improving learner outcomes. This brief
essay reflects a set of fundamental principles I believe need to be followed to move education sciences
forward.

From RCTs to standards for excellence
For the first 20 years of the Institute of Education Sciences (IES) in the United States (see Box 10.1), we
focused on strengthening the field's capacity to do rigorous research characterised by internal validity and
relying heavily on randomised control trials (RCTs). But simply knowing that something works is not
enough. To be truly transformational, research must address a wider range of issues. We have embarked
on an institute-wide effort that emphasises factors that can make research transformational. We call this
effort Standards for Excellence in Education Research (SEER).1 I introduced SEER in two blog posts.2 IES
has refined SEER frequently and will continue to do so as we receive feedback from researchers,
practitioners, and policy makers.
IES previously enumerated eight SEER principles encouraging researchers to:


Pre-register studies.



Make findings, methods, and data open.



Identify interventions' components.



Document treatment implementation and contrast.

--- [PDF Page 209 / Book Page 207] ---



Analyse intervention costs.



Use high-quality outcome measures.



Facilitate generalisation of study findings.



Support scaling up of promising interventions.

IES recently announced a ninth principle focused on equity in education research, calling on researchers
to “Address inequities in societal resources, opportunities, and outcomes”.
SEER codifies practices that IES expects – and increasingly requires – to be implemented as part of
IES-funded causal impact studies. But note that many SEER principles and associated recommendations
are applicable to other types of research the Institute supports as well.
There is growing scientific literature supporting each of these principles – but much of SEER is relatively
new to education science research. The first two are clearly “normal science” and I will not comment on
them further. In the rest of this brief essay, I briefly highlight the importance of a few principles that have
presented challenges to American education researchers. I begin with the challenge of identifying the core
components of an intervention.

Identify the components of an intervention
Imagine a medical trial where the intervention consisted of a bag of pills – some green, some red, some
yellow. Patients take these pills and at the end of the experiment, we find that these pills improved
outcomes. It is unlikely that any medical review board would ever approve such a treatment and the results
would likely (and deservedly) be denied publication. Yet, far too many education interventions are exactly
like the bag of pills – a collection of parts, many of which have never been clearly identified, let alone
evaluated. IES has been pushing hard to get education researchers to identify the components of an
intervention and then work to isolate the effects (and the costs) of each component. This requires a lot of
work, especially in developing a common taxonomy by which to classify components and a nomenclature
to identify and describe the components themselves. We have been supporting social science research
firms who have, in turn, partnered with intervention developers and study authors to help create both.

Analyse costs
For several years, we have been requiring cost analysis for most of the research we support and the
requirements for cost analysis have been getting more demanding. Education officials need to know how
much something costs. Sometimes a less effective programme should be chosen because it is much
cheaper than a more effective programme that exceeds a school’s budget. Introducing cost analysis was
a challenge to American education researchers, very few of whom have training in economics. In the first
year of implementing this SEER principle, many grant applications were rejected as being “non-responsive”
to this requirement. We, in turn, provided technical assistance3 – from easy-to-use tools to help desks4
staffed with cost analysis experts – to the field. Given how many proposals were rejected as nonresponsive, it was obvious that we were serious about cost analysis and now almost all applications meet
this requirement (and the proposed work is getting better and better).

Use high-quality outcome measures
Consider the SEER principle that calls for the use high-quality outcome measures. This principle traces
back to a simple fact: When researchers or developers create their own outcome measures, the measures
are all too often “over-aligned” with the intervention, producing estimates of effects that can be several
times larger than observed using measures created by others. As the late Robert Slavin convincingly
argued (2014[22]) these biased measures all too often lead to false conclusions and bad recommendations.
While we still allow developers and researchers to use their own measures, we are now requiring them to

--- [PDF Page 210 / Book Page 208] ---

use high-quality “common measures” so that results can be more easily validated and compared across
interventions. We have supported work like EdInstruments5 to help catalogue measures used in
contemporary education research. More work is needed, though, to identify a more parsimonious set of
high-quality outcome measures.

Facilitate generalisation of findings
There are many prongs to the generalisation SEER principle. The one that we have emphasised most
focuses on replication. Many sciences have a replication crisis – that is outcomes of experiments fail to
replicate. The good news: Education science research does not have a replication crisis. The bad news:
That is because we hardly ever replicate existing work. There are at least two consequences to that. First,
idiosyncratic (sometimes fraudulent) work enters the mainstream (see Stuart Ritchie’s book Science
Fictions6 for just how common this is) and, often, consequential decisions are made on the basis of those
claims. Second, without replicating work, we cannot identify which populations of learners might benefit
the most (or not at all) from specific interventions. Thus, not only do we need more replications but we
need to make sure those replications systematically vary population groups to advance IES’ mission of
identifying “what works for whom under what conditions”.
Unfortunately, traditional field-based impact evaluations, especially randomised control trials, the gold
standard of research, can be very expensive and take a long time to implement and analyse. We have
been supporting7 digital learning platforms that can accommodate multiple researchers conducting faster
turnaround studies than is the norm in traditional experiments. Here, we borrowed from the work of Jim
Manzi8 and his mantra to “fail fast.” We are supporting an XPrize competition to instantiate that idea by
having teams of researchers use digital learning platforms to deliver experiments and then replications
based on the findings of the original experiment. To compete, teams had to have platforms with at least
100 000 users (some have far more).

Support scaling
Another SEER principle pertains to the scaling up of promising interventions. All too often, interventions
that have promise in transforming learner outcomes never come to market and never scale beyond the
small number of schools/students that were involved in the original field tests. Part of the problem is one
of misalignment of incentives. To the extent to which we fund academic researchers, their interests are to
publish and get tenure and promotion. Most do not have the interest nor the skills to scale their products.
IES has been struggling with this issue for some time. Most recently we have worked with SRI International
to identify and inculcate explicit market orientation into work we fund (Wu et al., 2021[23]). We still have not
found a scaleable way of encouraging scaling – but we are working on it.9

Address inequities
The final SEER principle calling on researchers to "address inequities in societal resources, opportunities,
and outcomes" is the newest addition. This principle reflects the growing concern for social justice and for
addressing historical inequities in education. This principle is a sharper version of our long-standing
commitment to research designed to close education gaps – a commitment built into our 2002 authorising
legislation (US Congress, 2002[24]).

In sum
SEER is not the only set of principles to structure the study of education interventions – and for many
problems facing education around the world, it is not even the best way. However, we can often conduct
far more rigorous research than we have done in the past. IES has placed a large bet that SEER can

--- [PDF Page 211 / Book Page 209] ---

increase the rigor of education research, help education research improve its standing as a scientific
enterprise, and, most importantly, improve the outcomes of more and more learners across the life span.

From research to advocacy
John Bangs, Special Consultant, Education International
Martin Henry, Research Coordinator, Education International

Box 10.2. Education International
Education International (EI) is the largest global union federation with just under 400 member unions
and organisations in membership who represent over 32 million teachers and support staff. Founded in
1993, it has become the principal advocate for the teaching profession across the world. In the last 15
years, EI has increasingly focused on linking research evidence to the framing of teacher policy. It works
closely with UNESCO, the OECD and a range of other global organisations.
Triennially EI publishes comprehensive research on the Global Status of Teachers. The 2021 edition
painted a graphic picture of the views and aspirations of the global teaching profession as it emerged
from adapting education to respond to the impact of the pandemic.
The full range of Education International’s research and publications can be accessed at www.eiie.org/en/resources/publications-and-research.
Source: EI (n.d.[25]), Homepage, https://www.ei-ie.org/en and EI (2021[26]), The Global Report on the Status of Teachers.

Introduction
In inviting Education International (EI) (see Box 10.2) to give its perspective on the use of research
evidence in education, the OECD asked some interesting questions. One of the most relevant to EI is:
“Does education research serve policy and practice more effectively?” (It is a question, we assume, which
uses the 2007 baseline when the OECD’s Evidence in Education: Linking Policy and Practice (2007[2]) was
published). The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate that the answer to the OECD’s question is,
unequivocally, “Yes”.

Education International and research
To answer this question, we refer to the wide range of EI research and how it informs EI’s advocacy. We
then focus on how EI’s and the OECD’s research have contributed to the development of effective teacher
policy by way of providing an in-depth exemplar of how EI has constructed research and advocacy
partnerships with another global organisation. This does not mean, however, that because a specific
EI/OECD lens is used to illustrate EI’s relationship with research and teacher policy that this presents an
exclusive summary of all EI’s research output on teaching as a profession.
Union membership density – the proportion of teachers who are members of unions – within the teaching
profession is the highest and most stable among all economic sectors (Carter, Stevenson and Passy,
2010[27]). It is not surprising, therefore, that unions are in constant touch with their membership,
investigating and analysing their views and the professional environments within which they work. In the
past, teacher unions were targets of research and contributors to research but, increasingly, teacher unions

--- [PDF Page 212 / Book Page 210] ---

have become key players in commissioning educational research. Twenty years ago, EI created its own
Research Network of member organisations who share their own research with other unions and an
independent Research Institute which commissions research directly.
Why does EI commission research? The answer is quite simply to inform the development of its education
policies and to enable its member organisations to be able to confidently advocate for them knowing that
they are supported by research evidence. One example among many illustrates this. Triennially EI
publishes comprehensive research on the Global Status of Teachers.10 The 2021 edition painted a graphic
picture of the views and aspirations of the global teaching profession as it emerged from adapting
education to respond to the impact of the pandemic (EI, 2021[26]).

Research and teacher policy – Education International and the OECD
EI supports teachers’ ownership of research
Of course, research and evidence collection has always been important to teacher unions. Prior to 2010,
the OECD’s social partner, the Trade Union Advisory Committee (TUAC) through which EI is represented,
was not represented on the OECD’s key research boards such as those for the Centre for Educational
Research and Innovation (CERI), the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) and the
Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS). Now TUAC is invited by these boards to send
participating observers to their planning meetings.
One of the reasons for this shift was that, through EI’s advocacy, the OECD understood that teachers’
active consent to take part in OECD teacher-focused studies helped it to both implement those studies
more smoothly and to achieve a much wider understanding among teachers of the studies’ outcomes. For
its part, EI’s engagement in the development of TALIS and PISA through TUAC has enabled it to contribute
to the teacher policy aspects of those studies and to argue that their data and policy findings are as much
the property of teachers and their organisations as they are of educational jurisdictions.

EI helps research reflect the reality of teaching
EI’s engagement in the developmental processes of TALIS and PISA has also, for example, led to the
questionnaire scales on the causes and nature of teachers’ stress within TALIS 2018 (OECD, 2020[28]).
This came about as result of proposals made by EI. Additionally, the scales on teacher leadership within
the TALIS 2013 questions and the conclusions within TALIS 2013 (OECD, 2014[29]) about the need for
systemic guidance on securing a shift towards distributed leadership in schools (OECD, 2014, p. 200[29])
were influenced by EI’s own commissioned study on teacher leadership (Bangs and Frost, 2012[30]). This
EI study involved a qualitative survey of classroom teachers and their organisations in a range of countries
in order to provide EI with recommendations for a policy framework for enhancing teacher leadership.
The inverse is also true: data from OECD studies has also provided the basis for EI-commissioned
research into the impact or absence of jurisdiction-wide teacher policies. For example, Burns and DarlingHammond’s analysis of TALIS 2013 data led to insights and policy proposals independent of the original
report itself, particularly in relation to teacher shortages, collaboration and leadership (Burns and DarlingHammond, 2014[31]).
Teachers themselves are also increasingly engaged in carrying out research themselves, not least
because Masters degrees and Doctorates require research reviews if not primary research. An important
question for teachers is how they can gain access to research partnerships and work alongside
researchers. Securing these opportunities is becoming an increasingly important goal for teacher unions
in countries such as Norway where teacher training includes an academic dimension involving teachers
learning about research disciplines and carrying out action research.

--- [PDF Page 213 / Book Page 211] ---

EI supports research that informs the creation of effective teacher policy
EI partnership with the OECD on teacher policy-related research has continued since 2010. For example,
through TUAC, EI has twice contributed chapters to the OECD’s synthesis of educational policy
development, Education Policy Outlook (EPO). Those contributions were informed by surveys of teacher
unions in OECD member countries carried out by EI to provide the evidential basis for its TUAC chapters.
In essence, the surveys tracked teacher unions’ changing priorities within teacher policy. For example,
“Education union partnerships in policy reforms” (OECD, 2015[32]) found that the most productive teacher
union discussions with governments were on teachers’ professional development, working conditions,
equity issues and curriculum in that order. By 2019, “Success in hard times” reported that the highest
percentages of teacher union respondents believed that the most productive areas of discussion with
governments were now on teachers’ pay and conditions, and curriculum reform (OECD, 2019[33]).
Since 2010 EI’s and the OECD’s developing relationship on research and evidence-informed policies has
enabled the creation of the International Summits on the Teaching Profession (ISTPs), which is a unique
partnership between OECD Education Ministers, the OECD itself and EI (see Box 10.3). Bangs (2020[34])
provides an in-depth analysis of the ISTPs’ relationship to the development of teacher policy. It came to
two conclusions. The first was that the bedrock of outstanding education systems was a confident teaching
profession at the edge of its game, engaged as equals in the development of reform. Secondly, it concluded
that the organised voice of teachers was essential to the success of those reforms.

Box 10.3. The International Summits on the Teaching Profession
Established in 2011 by United States Secretary for Education, Arne Duncan, the National Education
Association and the American Federation of Teachers, the ISTPs have taken place annually up until
the present day. They are unique in providing the only international forum in which elected Ministers
and teacher union leaders can meet on a confidential basis to share educational practice and set
practical education targets for the coming year. Hosted by individual OECD countries, each ISTP has
focused broadly on aspects of teacher policy. They are supported by background reports from the
OECD and EI, which synthesise evidence and research outcomes relevant to each Summit’s discussion
themes.
The most recent Summit was again hosted by the United States. Its theme, Learning from the Past,
Looking to the Future: Excellence and Equality for All, explored actions needed for post-pandemic
educational reconstruction with a focus on teacher professionalism and well-being, whole child
education and equity, and intentional collaboration (NCEE, 2021[35]). The OECD and EI reports provided
the research evidence for the background reading for the Summit (Schleicher, 2021[36]; EI, 2021[37]).
Source: NCEE (2021[35]), Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future: Excellence and Equity for All, https://ncee.org/quick-read/learningfrom-the-past-looking-to-the-future-excellence-and-equity-for-all/; Schleicher, A. (2021[36]), Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future:
Excellence and Equity for All, https://doi.org/10.1787/f43c1728-en; EI (2021[37]), Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future: Excellence
and Equity for All: A Briefing by Education International, https://www.ei-ie.org/en/item/25427:learning-from-the-past=looking-to-the-futureexcellence-and-equity-for-all.

The relationship between EI and the OECD on research developed since 2010 has led to a joint initiative
to set out the principles both organisations believe should inform post-pandemic educational recovery.
Published in 2021, they emphasise that the recovery of education systems from the effects of the health
crisis will be vital to the future social and economic health of societies. They also stress the importance of:
Schools as centres of their communities; digital technology which supports teaching; focusing on education

--- [PDF Page 214 / Book Page 212] ---

for the whole child; and the need to foster teacher well-being and efficacy. The principles draw on the
research and policy collaboration between EI and the OECD since 2010 (OECD/EI, 2021[38]).

In conclusion
It is quite clear from EI’s experience that partnership and engagement has served policy and practice more
effectively because of the alliances it has built up with global organisations that understand the policy and
practice link. OECD is one example but a similar story could be told about EI’s relationships with
organisations such as UNESCO and the United Nations.
EI’s primary interest in creating effective teacher policy is not solely because it enhances the daily
professional lives of our members but because education systems function better and students learn more
when teacher perspectives are taken into account. We also know that education systems that seek to
enhance the well-being and efficacy of their teachers are correlated overall with high levels of achievement
among all their students.
Teacher unions’ involvement in research is not confined to pay and conditions. Teacher unions around the
world commission and carry out significant research on professional issues. Yet the value, quality and
extent of teacher union-initiated research is often underestimated by educational jurisdictions, which is a
mistake because, increasingly, unions understand that evidence-informed policies are far more persuasive
than policies based on assertion.
Indeed, the primary purpose of research commissioned by unions is to support their advocacy of union
policies. Increasingly, researchers are attracted to working for teacher unions because they know that the
policy impact of their research is much more likely to be amplified by union advocacy than when it is
confined to publication in academic journals. Yet, interestingly, given the density of union membership in
teaching, there are very few academics whose main research discipline is the study of the teaching
profession and its organisations.
Engagement in research, whether as a participant completing questionnaire scales or as a director of
research, does not come without a time cost. Survey fatigue is real among teachers involved in studies.
However, teachers will willingly engage with surveys if they understand their purpose and can have access
to their results. That is why the research teachers engage in most willingly is research that is relevant to
their professional lives. They are as interested in seeing evidence have an impact as the union leaders
who represent them.
For the day-to-day practice of teaching, teacher unions can reinforce the relevance of research for
teachers. For researchers and research itself, teacher union involvement in research can amplify research
findings and encourage an increase in the range and foci of educational research activities. For the
development of robust and effective education policies, teacher unions can play a major role in
strengthening the impact of research on policy.

Thoughts on public education research
Emese K. Nagy, School leader, Hejőkeresztúr; Head of Institute of Teacher Education, University of Miskolc,
Hungary
As the director-general of a Teacher Training Institute and a core member of a doctoral school,
I continuously participate in university research. As the head of a primary school, I experience how external
and internal examinations and research affect the school. I treat the two as complementary, keeping in
mind how useful they are together for the school. There is already a lot of joint research between
universities and the school but our goal is to involve both parties in joint research with the same
communication status to increase efficiency.

--- [PDF Page 215 / Book Page 213] ---

Other public education institutions think similarly. Most have recognised that education-related research
(action research) and internal, institutional research are essential for their successful operation. While there
is excellent research going on in universities and doctoral schools, the widespread publication and practical
implementation of some of this research is slow and sometimes lags behind.
The purpose of my writing is to draw attention to the importance of action research 11 for the school and
the importance of its joint implementation by researchers and school teachers.

The purpose of educational research
Research can take place at multiple levels, affecting society as a whole. It can affect an institution, a
teacher, a student, or a parent. The overarching goal of organisational research (theory / cognitive and
experimental / action research) generated at all levels of education is to improve the quality of education,
bearing in mind that it effectively influences and supports (educational) policy and school practice.
Research on pedagogical practice (action research) can only be interpreted positively if the aim and results
of the given teaching and learning activity are mutually reinforcing, the teachers are aware of the
importance of their own activities, and all this is related to their own activities and self-efficacy. As a school
leader, useful research means that its results can be transferred to everyday education. However, I argue
that in research, process and content are at least as important as outcome. A meaningful outcome is only
possible if the research is conducted by professionals who are experienced in the activity.
School research can focus on teaching and learning in the narrow sense as well as education more
broadly. We research how to improve learning, literacy, intellectual development, and within that,
personality development, keeping in mind how knowledge gained in practice can be used to improve
education. All this is aided by the relationship between research and practice as well as that between basic
research and applied research. As a school leader, useful research is related not only to phenomena and
facts but also to their practical application or use. Therefore, applied research supported by education
policy plays an increasingly important role. It is expected that research results will be disseminated and
utilised as widely as possible, and that research will make a positive contribution to the overall development
of education policy.

Who should participate in research and how?
It is common for most school-action research to be carried out by “external” professionals and that the
whole research process follows the methods and pace they define. In such research, school teachers are
only passive participants in a process. The role of the educator in this case is not so different from when
education policy or the education government initiates reform efforts. In this configuration, teachers do not
find research useful because they feel they do not “own” the research. Thus, they do not benefit from its
results and the research does not help their daily work so there is no reason to change their daily work or
increase their knowledge. In the absence of direct impact, research is not important to them or to the
school. Once the research project ends, it is often not followed by pedagogical development. This is
regrettable as researchers primarily involved teachers because they believed that they would use the
knowledge gained during the process.
Accumulated theoretical knowledge is usually far removed from the school context. A better understanding
of educational processes is not as important and useful for a school as putting the knowledge gained
through the teaching and learning process into practice. In the life of teachers, action research only
becomes useful if they can hope to change their own school conditions and competencies, i.e. it brings
practical benefits. After identifying the questions to be answered, area to be studied, and research aspects,
and selecting the partners, the school treats both parties – external researchers and teachers – as equal
partners with both parties influencing the research. In this configuration, the teacher has the status of a
competent expert.

--- [PDF Page 216 / Book Page 214] ---

When school educators initiate action research, they often focus on areas that were not previously
available to developers. Theoretical researchers usually look at issues related to disciplines, trying to find
the system in them while school educators look for answers to questions that are expected to have a direct
and usually immediate impact on their work. In the course of the research, it is therefore worth relying on
the opinions, knowledge and research of professionals and educators with practical experience as all this
can be transformed into useful knowledge.
Box 10.4 gives two examples. One illustrates research- “burdened” teachers whose involvement in
research did not benefit the school. The other example demonstrates how the close collaboration between
a research group and the school was able to provide information that subsequently increased student
performance. It is fundamental for researchers to involve teachers in research if the aim is to expand
teachers’ professional knowledge. Action research will only be useful in the lives of educators if they can
hope to change their own school conditions and develop their competences, thereby bringing practical
benefits.

Box 10.4. Good and bad research in schools: Two examples from the author’s school
Example 1
The aim of a research project conducted in 2008 was to assess the work and workload of teachers, and
to explore the use of teachers' working time frameworks, especially mental and temporal workloads and
their distribution. The study was exploratory in nature. As the researchers had little knowledge of
teachers’ use of time, one expected result of this exploratory research was the development of an
analytical framework for teacher workload. The study aimed to measure the average number of
pedagogical hours spent in the school building, the way in which compulsory working time frame was
filled in and out of school, and the proportion of time spent teaching students per day. Methods included
questionnaires, detailed interviews and document analysis. However, after the research was
conducted, no feedback was received from the researchers. The school could not use the results and
conclusions and as school director I could not benefit from them to increase school performance.

Example 2
One of the country’s leading universities launched a research project at the school aiming to transform
the school’s organisation after diagnosis and adapting the results to school. The research would be
important in informing the school’s endeavour to scale up a major innovation. The school had adapted
the Complex Instruction Programme developed by Stanford University, transformed it into a new
innovation, and began to disseminate it to other schools. The diagnosis had three main foci:


Assess the operation and condition of the organisation.



Examine the motivation and behaviour of the faculty and teachers.



Map the operation of school management.

The diagnosis enabled the school to apply and stably integrate the programme.
As the programme is used in nearly 200 schools in Hungary, it was important that the measurement
tools be valid. University researchers prepared a questionnaire based on continuous feedback received
from school management and teachers to help ensure that the measurement could be conducted in
other schools as well. School teachers therefore played an important role in the process, drawing
researchers’ attention to the fact that questionnaires can be too general and misleading without proper
knowledge of the method. The results of the research provided useful information for the proper
foundation of the management of the institution.

--- [PDF Page 217 / Book Page 215] ---

How can policies support research and practice links?
In Hungary, the pedagogical career model and related evaluation system were launched in 2013 to support
the effectiveness of educators’ pedagogical work and identify areas for improvement. In addition to
professional recognition, financial motivation was created: The assessment qualification serving as the
basis of the teacher advancement system. The career development system includes the following grades
for qualification:


Trainee.



Teacher I.



Teacher II.



Master teacher.



Researcher teacher.

While obtaining the Teacher I. and II. categories is based on previous performance and assessed
competences, the "Master" and "Researcher Teacher" categories involve specific future assignments. This
is not simply a higher degree of a linear progression system but is quite different in quality. Teachers in
these roles are expected to contribute actively and intensively to the development, research and innovation
processes in the public education system. A researcher teacher is also expected to share their research
results outside their own school and offer solutions to improve public education (see also Box 4.3).
As an example, research has made my school a knowledge-creating organisation. Due to the help and
involvement in various projects of researcher and master teachers, the school is today characterised by
continuous research, measurement and evaluation, and the sharing and incorporation of results into
education both within the institution (with the help of master teachers) and outside the institution (thanks
to researcher teachers).
I must note, however, that we are talking about a “lucky coincidence” in the case of this school as it has a
researcher teacher who works closely with the university (as an instructor) and three master teacher
colleagues who are also involved in research. In addition, their research topics are all related to the school’s
pedagogical programme, the Complex Instruction Programme. As a researcher teacher, my own research
on the preparation of university students for a teaching career extends beyond school education. Such
lucky constellations, however, are not yet widespread.

Summary
In sum, action research is important for schools but can only be truly beneficial if implemented jointly by
researchers and teachers. I strongly believe in the effectiveness of research for public educational
institutions involving school educators. Therefore, education policy makers should support and facilitate
this type of collaborative research and ensure that they are not just sporadic “lucky constellations”.

Time to rethink research-practice relationships for practitioners
Tine S. Prøitz, professor in education science, University of South-Eastern Norway
Recent developments in education policy have emphasised the importance of practitioner involvement in
education research. Although the question of practitioner involvement in research is not new, today’s newer
ways of working collaboratively and understanding knowledge development and relationships between
researchers and practitioners have interesting potential but also face several obstacles.

--- [PDF Page 218 / Book Page 216] ---

One obstacle is how the focus of research on research-practice collaboration and partnerships often are
limited to the research itself and fail to focus on the collaborative efforts involved. In a time when
collaborative efforts are called for by policy and academia alike, there is paradoxically limited systematic
and empirical knowledge about how research-practice partnerships can be optimally performed.
Developing not only communities for the practice-based education research of scientific quality involving
multiple actor groups but also researching how such communities can work productively for all parties
involved is highly important for the development of new knowledge in education. And, it seems to be very
timely.
Still, emergent research on the topic underscores the point that research-practice relationships
characterised by the involvement of multiple actor groups need to be explored to find newer ways of
involving and mobilising both practitioners and researchers. There are multiple forms of research-practice
collaboration but finding the best way of working together requires a rethinking of both researcher and
practitioner roles.
Researchers have varied understanding of the relationship between research and practice in education,
how research use can be understood and what factors contribute to reducing or upholding the so-called
research-practice “gap”. Further, practice-based research has been highlighted as an umbrella term for
newer approaches to linking and tightening this relationship (Furlong and Oancea, 2005[6]). Governments
and universities have introduced initiatives aiming to strengthen the research-practice relationship in
education. Across the Nordic countries, we can see variations of these initiatives, including:


Partnership agreements between universities and schools, as well as with local authorities



Funding schemes that require collaboration between researchers and practitioners



Growth in professional doctoral programmes in which applicants must have teacher education and
preferably work in teacher education or in schools while doing their doctoral work (e.g. Prøitz and
Aasen (2016[39]); Prøitz and Wittek (2019[40])).

There is a recent and ongoing example of an ambitious national research-practice initiative in Sweden
(Box 10.5). Studies conducted on the initiative’s first five years of operation have shown that the issue of
multiple actor roles in education research is a particularly interesting topic to revisit (Prøitz et al.,
forthcoming[41]). Research approaches involving teachers and other practitioners in research activities as,
for example, co-researchers, is not new in Sweden; rather, there is a long tradition of action and design
research. However, this new initiative both includes and parallels these approaches, thereby raising the
question of multiple actor involvement in all types of education research, not only those that have teacher
involvement as a built-in part of the methodology.

Box 10.5. The Swedish ULF project
ULF was a national pilot project commissioned by the Swedish government from 2017 to 2021. The
project developed and tested sustainable collaboration models between academia and the school or
school system in research, school activities, and teacher education. The project involved 25 universities
with teacher education and more than 150 municipalities and a substantial number of schools and
teachers.
The goal for the pilot project has been to develop an infrastructure that deploys long-term sustainable
collaboration models between academia and schools to strengthen the disciplinary foundations and
approaches used in schools. The collaboration models are intended to result in research that is relevant
to schools by enabling professional groups within schools to initiate research, not just researchers within
academia. After the pilot project ends, the ultimate goal is to make successful collaborative models

--- [PDF Page 219 / Book Page 217] ---

permanent and start using them nationally. The vision is for the collaboration models to serve as the
basis for professional practice in schools and for teacher education.
Following the initial pilot phase the ULF project has been continued to 2024 by the Swedish government
as a transition period. The intention is for it to become a permanent arrangement after this transition
period.
Note: The Swedish acronym ULF stands for Utveckling (Development), Lärande (Learning) and Forskning (Research).
Source: Ulfavtal (n.d.[42]), ULF FAQ, https://www.ulfavtal.se/about-ulf/ (accessed on 2 March 2022).

The research-practice gap – A metaphor stating the obvious?
Despite variations, a common characteristic of initiatives is the involvement of multiple actor groups in what
we traditionally have considered to be the academic turf of researchers. Another characteristic is a strong
belief in how these actors who have been brought together will almost effortlessly develop not only a
stronger relationship between research and practice but new and improved knowledge that is applicable
and relevant to education practice (Prøitz, 2020[43]). Seen from a traditional perspective, initiatives to
strengthen the research-practice relationship and close the gap blur the demarcation lines between theory
and practice; scientific knowledge and experience-based knowledge; researcher and practitioner; and the
university and school. In the field of education, the relationship between these categories is often
characterised by tension, and as being opposites, contradictory, and even conflicting.
On the other hand, researchers have pointed out how the gap metaphor is an exaggerated
misunderstanding and that it can be used productively to make people aware of the challenges in the field
and in their development towards more integrated perspectives. Further, the literature presenting “newer
perspectives” on these matters is 15–20 years old, with studies discussing more integrated ways education
research can involve multiple actor groups. Developments in today’s situation in both academia and the
education sector indicate a growth in the mutual interest and discovery of the benefits of collaboration that
can overcome the less functional sides of the traditional divisionary lines between theory and practice, and
between discipline and profession. Most of these perspectives are rooted in the perceived need to bridge
and overcome the research-practice gap. However, the key question is whether such initiatives are
approaching the issue in the most constructive way by trying to reduce and overcome differences that are
considered to be the very qualities of the professions concerned. Another way could be to explicitly
recognise and even appreciate the differences between researchers and practitioners including the values,
perspectives, strengths and weaknesses that follow from their practices. Acknowledging the differences in
collaborative initiatives cannot only push collaborations further but also their outcomes.
One way to think of the involvement of multiple actors in practice-based research can be to consider
collaboration as an effort involving different discourses with different languages and frames of reference
anchored in the actor’s workplaces and profession. Over time and with resources and efforts, the
discourses can potentially become a common one with shared language and interests between
researchers and practitioners, creating a “third space discourse” (Moje et al., 2004[44]). This does not
necessarily mean discourses that are harmonious, without disagreement or debate or where practitioners
or researchers have to become more alike; rather, these are areas where dialogue is based on a shared
goal.
Getting there requires more than simply placing the different actors in the same physical room: It requires
time, money, dialogue, the exchange of views and mutual respect, interest, and understanding for each
other´s work environments and contexts. It will probably challenge traditional views on the status of
knowledge types as well as require openness to innovation, the redesign of roles, and different ways to
develop research-practice relationships. Even with these challenges, the potential for developing not only

--- [PDF Page 220 / Book Page 218] ---

new knowledge but innovation in education research that is informed by shared understandings in a
common search for solutions makes the effort critical.

Rethinking the research-practice relationship
A central question in research-practice initiatives is as follows: What role should/can different actor groups
have in practice-based research? Research that has described well-functioning partnerships points
towards the ideal of involving actors as equal partners in all parts of the research process. This can be
from research problem identification, definition and data collection to analysis and the presentation of
results. Others have pointed out how challenging this can be, for example, for economic reasons. It is
difficult to get the resources required to work together and find the right time and place for meetings
between teachers and researchers. Culturally, the lack of a shared language and knowledge frameworks,
and asymmetrical power structures and status also inhibit productive collaborations.
What is to be gained by teachers or administrators as co-researchers and is it best for all to get involved?
The Swedish example displays successful projects involving teachers and school administrators in various
ways, such as in the research process and other roles in the research process; it also points out practical
difficulties such as providing practitioners with the necessary time to become involved and finding gathering
areas that can function for all. Other issues relate to research competence and research literacy among
practitioners; researcher knowledge about the everyday life of schools; and funding and available
resources. The varied approaches can hopefully lead to relationships that can be beneficial to the
development of new knowledge relevant for practitioners as well as provide important new and expanded
insights into education that can further research and knowledge development in the field. Furthermore, the
Swedish initiative provides a concrete - though not exhaustive - list of proposals for further work on
practice-research relationships that have been developed by acknowledging the differences of the actor
groups involved and what they bring into education research processes.

Clarity in actor roles for both practitioners and researchers
Explore and clarify the roles of both teachers and researchers in the relationships by engaging in earlystage discussions on what involving multiple actor groups entails in research-practice initiatives. A timely
question is whether a more productive way of involving practitioners would be to have them take part in
discussions and decision-making processes to secure a practice-based perspective rather than being coresearchers.

Equality between practitioners and researchers involved
For the discussion on actor roles to be productive, every actor should be involved in research based on
their existing knowledge, competences, and experience, with the researcher as researcher and teacher as
teacher. This approach requires several issues to be considered: It requires the acknowledgment of
practitioner knowledge as being equally important in research development processes to scientific
knowledge. This is not necessarily easy because actor status, actor power, and perceptions of hierarchy
between researchers and practitioners influence what knowledge will dominate the discussions. It requires
mutual competence building, respect, and curiosity between the parties involved, which takes time and
engagement.

Accessible arenas where practitioners and researchers easily can meet
The Swedish initiative has shown that practice-based research requires well thought-out processes and
arenas adapted to practitioners and researchers working together. One example of such efforts is to gather
practitioners and researchers in seminars with smaller groups to discuss, collectively identify knowledge
needs and develop researchable topics of relevance and interest to all parties involved. Later in the

--- [PDF Page 221 / Book Page 219] ---

process, the same seminars can be used to discuss central concepts, challenges, opportunities as well as
results.

Ensuring scientific quality in the research-practice relationship
Careful considerations of what scientific quality means and what requirements must be covered to secure
quality in research-practice collaboration is needed. Issues that will emerge include questions regarding
research ethics, ownership of data and results and epistemological and methodological issues. This
requires the involvement of researcher competence and researchers experienced in practice-based
research that can foresee and handle challenges that arise when multiple actors are involved. As an
example, Swedish history has shown that over time, practice-based initiatives can become more
developmental than research-oriented and that it can be a challenge to uphold the principles of scientific
rigour when multiple actor groups with varied interests collaborate. The question of involvement requires
epistemological considerations of what constitutes and ensures quality in education research when
multiple actors are involved.

Actor involvement in the various phases of the research process
Practitioners’ involvement can be carried out in terms of practice orientation and practice involvement in
the various phases of the research process. It can also occur in pre- and post-research processes; for
example, as part of needs identification and considerations of relevance as an integrated part of securing
scientific quality. Collaboration between practitioners and researchers in these processes is highly
important for the development of a scientific knowledge basis for both policy and practice.

Multiple actor involvement for larger practice- research projects
Finally, the question of multiple actor groups in education research is not confined to smaller, local, contextbound, and practice-based research projects; it is also highly relevant for larger research projects aiming
for empirical or analytical generalisations.

First things first
Vivian Tseng, Senior Vice-President, William T. Grant Foundation

Box 10.6. William T. Grant Foundation
The William T. Grant Foundation invests in high-quality research focused on reducing inequality in youth
outcomes and improving the use of research evidence in decisions that affect young people in the
United States.
Source: William T. Grant Foundation (n.d.[45]), Homepage, http://wtgrantfoundation.org/.

First things first: What is the purpose of education research?
Any discussion about what research is needed – and the ancillary questions of how it should be conducted
and funded – must begin with the fundamental question of what purpose research serves. If the central
goal of education research is to improve practice and policy, then research agendas should focus on key
practice and policy concerns. Unfortunately, that is more often the exception than the rule. For far too long,

--- [PDF Page 222 / Book Page 220] ---

researchers and research funders have had outsized influence on research agendas, and thus it is
unsurprising that research is more likely to fill gaps in the academic literature than inform practice or policy
dilemmas. Even as the research community has increasingly sought to produce more relevant research,
we still rely heavily on our discussions about practitioners and policy makers rather than with them. Even
our attempts to study a practical topic like implementation ends up focusing on questions about intervention
dosage and fidelity (researchers’ priorities) rather than questions about adaptation for specific populations,
contextual concerns, or implementation conditions (practitioners’ priorities).
Informing practice and policy is not an end unto itself and, for many of us, the ultimate goal of education
research is to serve students and communities. Unfortunately, students and communities – especially
those marginalised by racism, poverty, xenophobia, and homophobia – are even further sidelined in
research agenda-setting than are education practitioners and policy makers.
In the United States, both universities and school districts have long histories of racial injustice (Diamond,
2021[46]). Universities sit on land acquired through theft, conquest, and the genocide of Indigenous peoples.
They were built using the proceeds from slavery and exploitive taxation of Chinese labourers. In modern
times, universities still produce “extractive research” wherein academics collect data from marginalised
students and communities but neglect to leave behind anything of significant value for the people who
shared their personal experiences, family lives, instructional time, or saliva. On the other side of the table,
education practice and policy-making bodies have also been sites of exclusion. Black, Asian, and Chicano
children were segregated from White children throughout most of US history. Indigenous children were
sent to residential schools to separate them from family members and erase their cultures and languages.
White flight from urban communities drove segregation in the 1970s and 80s, and gentrification fuels it
today.
If we see students and their communities as beneficiaries of education, then their interests should be at
the centre of education research. Their self-determination is critical given our colonial and racialised
history, and education research should serve their interests in the ways they want to be served. This is not
to say that researchers and funders have not sought to centre marginalised students in research but too
often it has been done through researchers’ perceptions of what would benefit marginalised students
(Bruno and Iruka, 2022[47]). Moreover, because the research enterprise has been racialised, research on
racially and socio-economically marginalised students has too often been deficit-oriented and damagecentred (Kirkland, 2019[48]; Tuck, 2009[49]).
If the purpose of education research is to make policy and practice more equitable, then it is critical that
marginalised students and their families and communities be present at the research agenda-setting table
along with practitioners, policy makers, and researchers. Designing, conducting, interpreting and using
research alongside them has never been more important, especially given our current social and political
moment when, for example in the United States, we witness the widening inequality caused by the
pandemic, the racial reckoning spurred by the murder of George Floyd, the White supremacist insurrection
at the US Capitol, rising anti-Asian violence, the callous treatment of Haitian and Central American
refugees at our southern border, and the backlash in communities where families of colour are moving in.

Democratising Evidence through Partnered Research
To re-centre research agendas on the intended beneficiaries of education research, practice, and policy,
we can look to the democratising evidence movement (Democratizing Evidence in Education, n.d.[50];
Tseng, forthcoming[51]). The idea is simple: To apply democratic principles to the production and use of
research evidence. Democratising the production of education research would mean that agendas are no
longer set primarily by researchers and research funders but by a variety of stakeholders who decide “what
questions are asked and answered…result[ing] in an evidence base that is more relevant to the concerns
of stakeholders, including the communities served by educational institutions” (Jackson, 2021, p. 209[52]).
Researchers, practitioners, communities, youth, and policy makers would deliberate, negotiate, and

--- [PDF Page 223 / Book Page 221] ---

compromise over research priorities. The agenda-setting process would likely be messier and more timeand resource-intensive than our current system but the research would yield more relevant, trusted, and
impactful work (Tseng, Fleischman and Quintero, 2018[53]).
Research-practice partnerships (RPPs) are a promising strategy for democratising evidence. In a recent
landscape scan in the United States, Farrell and her colleagues (Farrell et al., 2021[54]) define RPPs as
“long-term collaboration[s] aimed at educational improvement or equitable transformation through
engagement with research. [They] are intentionally organized to connect diverse forms of expertise and
shift power relations in the research endeavour to ensure that all partners have a say in the joint work.”
RPPs contrast in several ways from traditional research arrangements (Tseng and Coburn, 2019[55]). First,
researchers co-develop research agendas with practitioners, youth, and/or community members. Second,
partnerships embrace relationship building as opposed to strict researcher independence and detachment
from “the researched” (Vakil et al., 2016[56]). RPPs rely on close, iterative interactions to determine
research needs and to collectively interpret findings and their implications for policy or practice. Trust
between partners is a marker of the strength of the partnership. Third, partnerships embrace long-term
commitments. Researchers do not come and go with different projects and grants. No study can ever
address the complex problems faced by educators or communities, and RPPs emphasise sustained
commitments to build knowledge over time, delve into complex challenges, and iteratively apply research
to educational improvement.

Implications for funders
The success of research-practice partnerships and other forms of community-engaged or participatory
action research will rely in part on funders’ willingness and capacity to depart from some traditional funding
practices (Bednarek and Tseng, 2022[57]; Tseng, Bednarek and Faccer, forthcoming[58]). Below I offer four
recommendations for funders who seek to join the movement to democratise evidence.

1. Provide sustained and flexible funding
Building any kind of productive relationship requires time and the challenges are amplified by historical
uses of research to justify and exacerbate inequality. Many marginalised communities are wary of research
and researchers, and it takes time and intentionality to build more equitable, trusting relationships.
Relationship building is not a one-and-done activity (Wentworth et al., 2021[59]). Sometimes trust is broken,
and repair work is needed. Other times, leadership changes and new relationships must be created.
Funders can invest patiently in relationship building, especially with communities that have been
systematically marginalised. On the front end, funders can launch new partnerships by supporting planning
periods when partners can begin building trust and developing a shared sense of purpose and
commitments. In times of leadership transitions or community change, funders can provide supplemental
funding so partners can revisit their goals and agreements. Throughout the partnership, funders can
support “brokers” or “boundary spanners,” staff who shoulder the responsibility of strengthening the
partnership and partners’ skills to carry out collaborative work (Wentworth et al., 2021[59]).
Funders can consider which expenses are allowed, encouraged, or even required in grant budgets. When
the funding system incentivises researchers to constantly seek support for new projects, their time and
energy is diverted away from the long-term agendas developed with partners and towards funders’
priorities, which may not align with those developed in partnership with communities. Further,
organisational infrastructure and staffing are crucial for partnership activities such as communicating
findings to diverse stakeholders; applying findings to practice or programme change; supporting
communities and youth to mobilise research to advocate for change; scoping new projects; and
maintaining robust data systems (López Turley and Stevens, 2015[60]; Tseng, Easton and Supplee,

--- [PDF Page 224 / Book Page 222] ---

2017[61]). These are all operating and capacity-building costs that are not adequately covered in most
research grants.
Funders can also attend to how funds are allocated across partners (Fine, 2022[62]). Because researchers
are often the Principal Investigators on research projects, funding tends to support the researchers and
research organisations. While it is common for budgets to include “incentives” for study participants, the
payments are premised on the need to induce “the researched” to participate in studies. When funders
back authentic collaborations, however, community and practice organisations will need support for their
time, effort, staffing, and expertise.

2. Redefine deliverables
Research funders often consider publications as key deliverables, and thus it is no surprise that the field
is awash with journal articles and lengthy reports. The unfortunate reality, however, is that those
publications are rarely read by practitioners and policy makers and even more rarely by communities and
youth.
Relationships, not papers, drive the use of research (Nutley, Walter and Davies, 2007[1]). Practitioners and
policy makers seldom turn to journals, reports, or books to help them solve problems; instead, they look to
trusted colleagues. Communities turn to their neighbours. In strong RPPs, they turn to their research
partners. Publications are still important for codifying research findings but they are not the mechanism
through which research achieves impact. If funders want research to be used, we might do well to focus
less on the number of publications and more on the quality of relationships, partnership infrastructure, and
capacity support for interpreting and using findings.
While interpersonal relationships are foundational, institutional relationships are better positioned to
withstand leadership turnover. Urban school superintendents in the United States last less than three years
in their positions, and thus RPPs that foster institutional collaboration persist even as individuals come and
go (Tseng, Easton and Supplee, 2017[61]).
Funders might also consider changes in organisational capacity, incentives, and norms as grant outcomes.
Academic incentives tend to reward faculty for their influence on other academics, not policy makers,
practitioners, or communities (Bogenschneider and Corbett, 2021[63]; Hart and Silka, 2020[64]; Gamoran,
2018[65]). Graduate students and faculty are offered little guidance, mentoring, or skill-building opportunities
to conduct partnered research (Tseng et al., in press). Funders can use their grant making to incentivise
changes so that academia rewards faculty and departments that produce socially impactful research and
equips academics with the requisite skills.

Box 10.7. Examples of democratised research funding
Deliverables


The Carnegie Corporation of New York’s Rigor and Relevance Initiative (2014[66]) provides
special funding consideration to universities that “count” policy-relevant activities in promotion
and tenure reviews and that stop tenure clocks for “periods of immersion in policy work”.



The William T. Grant, Doris Duke, and Spencer Foundations’ Institutional Challenge Grants
encourage universities to reward faculty partnerships with policy makers and practitioners
(Tseng, Bednarek and Faccer, forthcoming[58]).

--- [PDF Page 225 / Book Page 223] ---

Grant criteria and processes


The Lenfest Oceans Programme at the Pew Charitable Trusts has developed a set of grantmaking criteria, which might serve as a model for education funders (Landrum et al., 2022[67]).



Henrick and colleagues’ (2017[68]) Five Dimensions of RPP Effectiveness can also inform
funding criteria for partnership proposals. The dimensions are 1) building trust and cultivating
partnership relationships, 2) conducting rigorous research to inform action, 3) supporting the
practice organisation in achieving its goals, 4) producing knowledge that can inform educational
improvement efforts more broadly, and 5) building the capacity of participating researchers,
practitioners, practice organisations, and research organisations to engage in partnership work.

Source: Carnegie Corporation of New York (2014[66]), “Rigor and Relevance Initiative: Bridging the academic-policy gap”, Request for
Proposal; Tseng, V., A. Bednarek and K. Faccer (forthcoming[58]), “How can funders promote the use of research? Three converging views
on relational research”, Humanities & Social Sciences Communications; Landrum, J. et al. (2022[67]), “Grant-making criteria for developing
useful and usable marine science: A philanthropic perspective”, https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars; Henrick, E. et al. (2017[68]), “Assessing
research-practice partnerships: Five dimensions of effectiveness”, https://wtgrantfoundation.org/new-report-assessing-research-practicepartnerships-five-dimensions-effectiveness.

3. Reconsider grant criteria and processes
Changing what gets funded requires changes in how grants are funded. Academia has criteria for
determining what constitutes strong research but funders will need additional grant-making criteria to
evaluate the strength of partnerships and partnership research, and the extent to which it serves
marginalised communities.
Grant review processes can be more inclusive and funders might consider both who they bring into the
review process and how different stakeholders are engaged in reviews. The academic peer review process
has relied on researchers as reviewers but if studies are to serve the interests of practitioners, policy
makers, youth, or communities, then perhaps there should also be proposal evaluators. Review processes
may also need to be reconfigured: While all stakeholders can weigh in on all aspects of proposals, different
parties might weigh in more heavily on certain issues. For example, communities might have final say in
whether the research fits with their goals and interests whereas researchers might be relied on more
heavily to evaluate the research methods and analyses, and practitioners might closely attend to the
potential actionability of findings.

4. Study thyself
For funders who want the research they support to be more useful and used, we can put our ideas and
practices under empirical scrutiny. We can support studies examining whether, how, and under what
conditions collaborative projects are successful, and ways to improve their effectiveness. This includes
developing methods and measures to rigorously assess whether collaborative research is used in policy
and practice and whether educational outcomes improve. We can also study the partnership practices,
and operating conditions that make some collaborative projects more successful than others – findings
that could help partners improve their work. We can also study which funding practices are more likely to
support successful projects and thereby improve our work as funders. By supporting rigorous empirical
studies, we can build stronger knowledge of how we can produce and use research to achieve educational
equity.

--- [PDF Page 226 / Book Page 224] ---

Conclusion
In offering my take on education research, I have suggested that we focus on first things first: What is the
purpose of education research? If the goal is to inform more equitable policy and practice for marginalised
students and communities, then we will need to redesign our research enterprise to fit that goal. Today we
have a research enterprise designed to address researchers’ questions. We will need to innovate new
ways to conduct and fund research so that it meets the goals of democratising evidence. ResearchPractice Partnerships are one important strategy for redesigning research so that the agendas are
co-defined by education stakeholders. Education RPPs are already expanding across the United States
but their success will strongly depend on funders’ willingness and capacity to alter our practices to support
that work.

Professionalism in the production and use of education research in the era of
useability and utility
Makito Yurita, Professor, National Institute for School Teachers and Staff Development (NITS), Japan
Introduction
This opinion piece calls for a critical look at how two decades of discussion on education research affected
what discerning and choosing “quality” research in education in today’s rhetorical space means.
Two issues are to be addressed: First, we need to critically investigate the role of different actors in defining
or affecting what constitutes “quality” in the education research chosen to make “informed decisions” in
policy and practice. Second, we need to examine the rhetoric around “quality” that poses threats on
narrowing the scope of education and limits what knowledge is used. Hence, we need to examine who are
the participants in education research and how are questions asked to inform policy and practice in
education today.

New criterion of “quality” in education research and threats to professionalism
Democratising the decision-making process in education is an ideal that makes our education system
accountable and inclusive of all people in a society. However, applying the rhetoric of democratisation to
how we decide on what education research should look like sets a trap. This is because there are complex
power dynamics and imbalances across stakeholders and participants in education decision making. Such
a trap may threaten the rigour and ethics in education research and its application to policy and practice.
Education research has measures set in place to ensure its quality. Traditionally, it is the professionals in
the research community that take on the responsibility to ensure rigour in education research through peer
review. However, there have been persisting challenges in education regarding the gap between research
and practice.
Nonetheless, the past two decades of discussion on the quality and use of education research have
ushered in new criteria on discerning the quality of research that has a bearing on policy and practice.
These criteria are established by needs and forces outside the research community: Namely, the criteria
that research findings be practically applicable to resolve pragmatic needs or grasp current issues in
education. “Is this finding applicable to resolve or answer (a certain) pressing issue?” has become a
criterion of discerning and measuring the “quality” of chosen research.

--- [PDF Page 227 / Book Page 225] ---

Whose useability should define quality?
With “useability” as the essential criterion for discerning “quality” in education research, it is critical to work
out in detail ways to balance different political powers. These are exercised by diverse actors who affect
education research and its use in policy and practice. In discussions on making education research more
relevant and responding to pragmatic needs in education, it is ideal to ensure the involvement of usercommunities such as policy makers, practitioners, students, parents and even future employers. There are
enough arguments in favour of a democratic forum in which the research community could come into
dialogue with its user-communities, and progress towards education research that contributes better to the
production of knowledge relevant to policy and practice. This is an interesting argument and even,
theoretically, ideal but there are constraints to be addressed before its application in practice.
That said, education research has already or always been open to diverse users, some of whom are
outside the research community. Furthermore, the user-communities of education research are overly
diverse and fluid, and thus each of them represents different roles, responsibilities, interest, financial
capacities and power to influence decision making in policy and practice in education. The research
community does not have exclusive power of determination over education research, and thus, it has
proved difficult to find sufficient common ground among user-communities.
The differentials in power held by different actors means that some actors have more determining power
over others on how research gets funded, what scopes are set and what methods are used when designing
research in education. For instance, in the United States, the Department of Education aims to control the
types of education research by prioritising funding for randomised control trials. In so doing, it aims to make
education research contribute to building a causal knowledge base to inform policy and practice. Many
countries have also shifted investment in education research to that which promises the production of
causal knowledge in education. Setting such a priority in the allocation of research spending is a rational
policy action in the pursuit of “value-for-money” in public spending.
Funding allocation driven by utility and efficiency in research spending prioritises responding to the needs
of the political and quantitative mainstream. Allowing the lens of “applicability” to discern who the majority
is, what a majority wants and needs, and the ways to make a functional majority drive research risks
overlooking the realities and needs of minorities, the disenfranchised, and voices that do not align with the
criteria of “applicability” in a given context. Therefore, it is important to acknowledge that efficiency-based
quality in education research comes at a cost. It sets limits on those who have a voice in education research
as well as those whose voice is represented in policy and practice through education research.

Latent threats in the dominance of experimental design
Along with favouring useability of research knowledge, there is a trend in investing in education research
using experimental design. This trend poses a threat to fairness and equity in the use of and access to
quality research in education. Experimental design in education research is costly, one that is higher when
the scope is set for system-level policy and practice. There are also the costs of the verification of produced
knowledge. Hence, making overly heavy investments in particular types of research with a certain agenda
or methodology may narrow not only the scope of research but the number and diversity of researchers
who are able to participate in knowledge production.
Lastly, in an era of declining education spending, the current trend in focusing research investment on
experimental design comes at the cost of undermining, if not ignoring, other important questions that
cannot be answered with causal explanations. Experimental design is an adequate means to understand
and measure the causal relations between inputs and their outcomes. It offers causal knowledge to better
inform decision making in policy and practice in education but the causal knowledge produced by such
research is done so through the removal of existing diversities and complexities in education practice in
the form of variables. In this respect, research-based causal knowledge can tell us what intervention

--- [PDF Page 228 / Book Page 226] ---

techniques or what area of intervention would likely impact student learning or teacher teaching more
greatly, for example. However, it answers very little about how such interventions functioned where they
were implemented. More importantly, it does not answer why the same interventions worked differently or
did not work for those for whom there was no impact.
If too much investment goes into education research that promises immediate useability in pragmatic
issues of policy and practice, this could accelerate operationalisation in teacher policy and teacher
professional development practice. Teachers would face de-professionalisation and become mere utility
tools, enacting operations of “what works”. This would be validated by quality education research at the
cost of making statistically insignificant variables of the outliers (e.g. students on both tails of the normal
distribution in terms of learning or social advantages). Undermining outliers works to reproduce social and
political inequality as they cannot afford educational alternatives and would lose educational opportunities.

Issues smouldering beneath useability-based quality in education research
To sum up, while recognising the value in the democratic involvement of different actors, interests, and
views in defining purposes and “desirable quality” in education research that is applicable to policy and
practice, it is essential to critically examine how this diversity affects the funding of and choices made in
education research. While pragmatically applicable research may enable the policy design to respond to
a perceived majority of needs, the uneven and greater distribution of investment towards research and
consequent policy that caters only to such needs leaves out “outliers” via statistic normalisation (e.g. in
terms of research fields/questions or researchers’ interests). Such omissions and exclusions of “outliers”
in education contributes to a social reproduction detrimental to minorities, disenfranchised / disadvantaged
groups and ideas that do not fit the statistical mean.
This leaves out not only individuals, communities, or minority groups of a given society but even entire
countries and systems that cannot afford or do not have the means or specialists to adapt such research
to their own conditions and contexts. They end up taking on research productions that overlook their own
context in an attempt to align to a “normality” defined without them. Similarly, the operationalisation of
teachers carried out from sources and processes external to them would make them into mere tools to
seed and enact “useable”, functional knowledge defined outside their communities of practice and their
teaching/learning sensitive contexts.

Professionalism and ethics in education research
We need to remember at all times that a productive, successful education is just as much about the needs
and rights of outliers to develop and access the opportunities of a modern society as it is about the “median
majority”. This needs to be reflected in the funding of education research as well as in the definitions of
“quality” and decisions about “applicable” research designs and products.
Therefore, no discussion on the quality and use of education research can be complete without defining
the roles of the professional community in education and ways to build trust around it. As argued in this
opinion piece, education research is open to diverse actors; and the professional community has even
smaller roles in today’s rhetorical space in which “useability” has become an additional criterion in
discerning the quality of education research. Today, education is increasingly a field in which differences
in values and priorities are constantly negotiated among diverse actors and across complex agendas. The
quality and use of education research cannot be established without defining some fundamentals of
professional rigour and ethics that should cut across participants and discussions. Professionalism,
therefore, is not so much about the knowledge and skills in conducting research in education but the ability
to be entrusted with monitoring ethics in education research and its application in policy and practice.

--- [PDF Page 229 / Book Page 227] ---

Conclusions: The future of education research
Although the seven opinion pieces in this chapter are markedly different in terms of focus, narrative and
proposed solutions, they have a striking common element. They all want education research to be more
relevant. Some authors concentrate on relevance for policy makers and educational practitioners while
others go beyond to include students and communities. There are four emerging themes that cut across
several of the perspectives.

Theme 1: Research quality and scientific rigour
It appears that the discussion on research quality has moved forward on several fronts in the past decade.
First, among those concerned with scientific rigour, the debate is no longer focused primarily on
methodological approaches. Mark Schneider demonstrates how the new research standards of the
United States Institute of Education now extend beyond traditional scientific rigour with a view to helping
establish a stronger knowledge base for educational practice and policy. Notably, they include
considerations for generalisation and scaling. In the same vein, Dirk Van Damme notes that the “empirical
turn” in education research has brought more rigorous research; however, understanding how far these
findings generalise is still a challenge. Both emphasise the lack of replications and various biases as major
obstacles and both advocate providing strategic funding and working to overcome the main biases. What
differs is that Dirk Van Damme believes that educational research needs its own identity (as a separate
academic discipline with its own non-ideological theories and more self-regulation). Mark Schneider, on
the other hand, focuses on more practical ways to increase research standards (e.g. well-defined
components, unbiased outcome measures, considerations for generalisation and scaling).
Second, those whose primary focus is to involve users (and, even, ultimate beneficiaries) in research call
for a novel conceptualisation of scientific quality. Rather than viewing practitioners’ engagement in
research as a threat to scientific rigour (as viewed by Dirk Van Damme), they favour the meaningful and
deep engagement of several actors as a new criterion of research quality. At the same time, as Tine Prøitz
stresses, ensuring scientific quality when multiple actor groups collaborate in the research process remains
an important consideration. Vivian Tseng brings this discussion to a meta-level: Rigour is needed not only
from those conducting research but those who fund it. Education research itself should be researched and
evaluated to determine what works, how and under what conditions.

Theme 2: The nature and quality of collaboration between researchers and practitioners
The authors of the last five pieces all agree that actors’ engagement in research is what ensures its
relevance. They point to various developments while also drawing attention to major challenges that
remain.
Over the past 20 years, practitioner-researcher collaboration has evolved from a wish and a discourse to
reality in many countries. However, as demonstrated by Emese K. Nagy, the nature of collaboration
matters strongly for the relevance and applicability of research. Developing mutual respect and overcoming
traditional power relations is key. Rather than forcing different types of knowledge (research knowledge
and practice-based, experiential knowledge) to converge, mutual respect is about valuing all forms of
knowledge and experience equally, according to Tine S. Prøitz.
Scaling research-practice partnerships, as illustrated by examples in Sweden and the United States, is
more recent. As a result, evidence on how and under what conditions such partnerships can contribute to
building a robust and cumulative knowledge base for education is still in its infancy. Two sets of factors are
to be understood: One is a set of characteristics internal to research-practice partnerships, including actors’
respective roles, and suitable spaces and timeframes for collaboration; the other is a set of external factors
such as funding schemes for research and systemic incentives for all actors.

--- [PDF Page 230 / Book Page 228] ---

Theme 3: Ethical considerations of democratised education research
Education research should help repair inequities in our society by making education better for everyone.
Several of the pieces are concerned with how this can be realised in practice. Addressing inequities was
added as a separate principle to the standards of research excellence in the United States. Vivian Tseng
believes that for education research to fulfil this mission, evidence itself should be democratised. The
voices of all actors, and in particular of marginalised groups, should be heard and incorporated not just in
the process of each individual research initiative but in agenda setting. Makito Yurita also discusses
democratisation in terms of methodologies. Prioritising certain methodologies, particularly expensive
experimental designs, can lead to certain types of research and groups of researchers being sidelined.
This is problematic because helping marginalised groups requires addressing different types of questions
through different methodologies.

Theme 4: Better policies for education research
Better research for better policies, yes, but also better policies for better research. Several of the pieces
remind us that improving research production has policy conditions. First and foremost: funding. The
volume and nature of the research produced is contingent not only on available funds but the criteria for
funding. Unsurprisingly, more would be better. The criteria however is a complex matter. What kind of
research should be funded? Experimental designs? Foundational and theoretical research? Participatory
research? What is the right formula to get desired outcomes?
Vivian Tseng demonstrates just how much equity depends on the way funding is provided. Makito Yurita
adds that funding criteria such as prioritising high-cost designs can marginalise education research for
entire education systems.
However, it is not just about money. Incentives for different actors also determine what and how research
is produced. John Bangs and Martin Henry emphasise incentives for teachers. Emese K. Nagy illustrates
this through a career model that explicitly incentivises teachers to engage in research. Several authors
also highlight the problem of academic incentives that, by requiring certain types of output, discourage
producing research for policy and practice. They do not favour participatory approaches either.

Bottom line
This chapter moves the dialogue on education research forward by offering a discussion space beyond
the walls of academia that spans the different contexts of policy, practice, research and advocacy, and
different countries. A great deal of thinking has gone into the production of education research in the past
decades. As a result, there is more education research today. It has become more relevant for policy and
practice, and more rigorous and more participatory. These developments have provoked a more refined
understanding of what still needs to be done. The perspectives presented above express diverse but not
truly contradictory views. We hope that readers and the authors themselves will recognise and benefit from
the complementarity of these perspectives to advance the agenda of education research. Importantly, this
dialogue should not just be broadened and continued but become more evidence-based itself.

References
Ainscow, M. et al. (2016), “Using collaborative inquiry to foster equity within school systems:
Opportunities and barriers”, School Effectiveness and School Improvement, Vol. 27/1, pp. 723, https://doi.org/10.1080/09243453.2014.939591.

[70]

--- [PDF Page 231 / Book Page 229] ---

Angrist, N. et al. (2021), “Measuring human capital using global learning data”, Nature,
Vol. 592/7854, pp. 403-408, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03323-7.

[13]

Bangs, J. (2020), “The organised voice of teachers”, in MacBeath, J., M. Galton and J. Bangs
(eds.), Reforming or Re-inventing Schools? Key Issues in School and System Reform,
Routledge, Oxford.

[34]

Bangs, J. and D. Frost (2012), Teacher Self-Efficacy, Voice and Leadership: Towards a Policy
Framework for Education International, Education International Research Institute, Brussels.

[30]

Barshay, J. (2019), “The dark side of education research: Widespread bias”, The Hechinger
Report, https://hechingerreport.org/the-dark-side-of-education-research-widespread-bias/.

[20]

Bednarek, A. and V. Tseng (2022), “A global movement for engaged research”, Issues in
Science and Technology, Vol. 38/3, pp. 53-56.

[57]

Bogenschneider, K. and T. Corbett (2021), Evidence-based Policymaking: Envisioning a New
Era of Theory, Research, and Practice, Routledge, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003057666.

[63]

Bruno, E. and I. Iruka (2022), “Reexamining the Carolina Abecedarian project using an antiracist
perspective: Implications for early care and education research”, Early Childhood Research
Quarterly, Vol. 58, pp. 165-176, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2021.0.

[47]

Burns, D. and L. Darling-Hammond (2014), Teaching Around the World: What Can TALIS Tell
Us?, Stanford Center for Opportunity Policy in Education, Stanford, California.

[31]

Burns, T. and F. Köster (eds.) (2016), Governing Education in a Complex World, Educational
Research and Innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264255364en.

[10]

Carnegie Corporation of New York (2014), “Rigor and Relevance Initiative: Bridging the
academic-policy gap”, Request for Proposal.

[66]

Carter, B., H. Stevenson and R. Passy (2010), Industrial Relations in Education-Transforming
the School Workforce, Routledge, London.

[27]

Connolly, P., C. Keenan and K. Urbanska (2018), “The trials of evidence-based practice in
education: A systematic review of randomised controlled trials in education research 19802016”, Educational Research, Vol. 60/3, pp. 276-291,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00131881.2018.1493353.

[15]

Democratizing Evidence in Education (n.d.), Homepage, http://www.democratizingevidence4.us/.

[50]

Diamond, J. (2021), “Racial equity and research practice partnerships 2.0: A critical reflection”,
William T. Grant Foundation, New York, http://wtgrantfoundation.org/racial-equity-andresearch-practice-partnerships-2-0-a-critical-reflection.

[46]

Education.org (2021), Calling for an Education Knowledge Bridge. A White Paper to Advance
Evidence Use in Education, https://education.org/white-paper.

[11]

EI (2021), Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future: Excellence and Equity for All: A
Briefing by Education International, 2021 International Summit on the Teaching Profession,
Education International, https://www.ei-ie.org/en/item/25427:learning-from-the-past=lookingto-the-future-excellence-and-equity-for-all.

[37]

--- [PDF Page 232 / Book Page 230] ---

EI (2021), The Global Report on the Status of Teachers, Education International, http://www.eiie.org/en/item/25403:the-global-report-on-the-status-of-teachers.

[26]

EI (n.d.), Homepage, Education International, https://www.ei-ie.org/en (accessed on
27 June 2022).

[25]

Farrell, C. et al. (2021), Research-practice Partnerships in Education: The State of the Field,
William T. Grant Foundation, https://wtgrantfoundation.org/research-practice-partnerships-ineducation-the-state-of-the-field.

[54]

Fazekas, M. and T. Burns (2012), “Exploring the Complex Interaction Between Governance and
Knowledge in Education”, OECD Education Working Papers, No. 67, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5k9flcx2l340-en.

[9]

Fine, M. (2022), “Critical participatory action research: From community led inquiry to policy
transformations”, Presented at Funders Learning Group for Using Evidence for Change.

[62]

Furlong, J. and A. Oancea (2005), Assessing Quality in Applied and Practice-based Educational
Research A Framework for Discussion, Department of Educational Studies, Oxford
University,
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.572.1721&rep=rep1&type=pdf
(accessed on 11 June 2020).

[6]

Gamoran, A. (2018), “Evidence-based policy in the real world: a cautionary view”, The ANNALS
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 678/1, pp. 180-191,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0002716218770138.

[65]

Hart, D. and L. Silka (2020), “Rebuilding the ivory tower: A bottom-up experiment in aligning
research with societal needs”, Issues in Science and Technology, Vol. 36/3, pp. 64-70,
https://issues.org/aligning-research-with-societal-needs/.

[64]

Henrick, E. et al. (2017), “Assessing research-practice partnerships: Five dimensions of
effectiveness”, William T. Grant Foundation, New York, https://wtgrantfoundation.org/newreport-assessing-research-practice-partnerships-five-dimensions-effectiveness.

[68]

IES (n.d.), Homepage, Institute of Education Sciences, https://ies.ed.gov/ (accessed on
27 June 2022).

[21]

Jackson, C. (2021), “Democratizing the Development of Evidence”, Educational Researcher,
Vol. 51/3, pp. 209-215, https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x211060357.

[52]

Kirkland, D. (2019), No Small Matters: Reimagining the Use of Research Evidence from a Racial
Justice Perspective, William T. Grant Foundation, New York,
http://wtgrantfoundation.org/library/uploads/2019/12/David-E.-Kirkland-2019-WTG-Digest.pdf.

[48]

Kuhne, G. and B. Quigley (1997), “Understanding and using action research in practice
Settings”, in Creating Practical Knowledge Through Action Research: Posing Problems,
Solving Problems, and Improving Daily Practice, Jossey-Bass,
https://doi.org/10.1002/ace.7302.

[69]

Landrum, J. et al. (2022), “Grant-making criteria for developing useful and usable marine
science: A philanthropic perspective”, Frontiers in Marine Science,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.

[67]

--- [PDF Page 233 / Book Page 231] ---

López Turley, R. and C. Stevens (2015), “Lessons from a school district-university research
partnership: The Houston Education Research Consortium”, Educational Evaluation and
Policy Analysis, Vol. 37/1S, pp. 6S-15S, https://doi.org/10.3102/0162373715576074.

[60]

Makel, M. and J. Plucker (2014), “Facts are more important than novelty”, Educational
Researcher, Vol. 43/6, pp. 304-316, https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x14545513.

[16]

Moje, E. et al. (2004), “Working toward third space in content area literacy: An examination of
everyday funds of knowledge and discourse”, Reading Research Quarterly, Vol. 39/1, pp. 3870.

[44]

Moss, P. et al. (2009), “Learning from our differences: A dialogue across perspectives on quality
in education research”, Educational Researcher, Vol. 38/7, pp. 501-517,
https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x09348351.

[4]

NCEE (2021), Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future: Excellence and Equity for All,
NCEE’s Report from the 2021 International Summit on the Teaching Profession, National
Center on Education and the Economy, https://ncee.org/quick-read/learning-from-the-pastlooking-to-the-future-excellence-and-equity-for-all/.

[35]

Nelson, J. and C. Campbell (2017), “Evidence-informed practice in education: Meanings and
applications”, Educational Research, Vol. 59/2, pp. 127-135,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00131881.2017.1314115.

[5]

Nutley, S. et al. (2010), Evidence and Policy in Six European Countries: Diverse Approaches
and Common Challenges, Policy Press, https://doi.org/10.1332/174426410X502275.

[3]

Nutley, S., I. Walter and H. Davies (2007), Using Evidence - How Research Can Inform Public
Services, Policy Press, Bristol.

[1]

OECD (2020), TALIS 2018 Results (Volume II): Teachers and School Leaders as Valued
Professionals, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/19cf08df-en.

[28]

OECD (2019), “Success in hard times: Learning from effective union partnerships in education
policy reform”, in Education Policy Outlook 2019: Working Together to Help Students Achieve
their Potential, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/4c334.

[33]

OECD (2015), “Education union partnerships in policy reforms”, in Education Policy Outlook
2015: Making Reforms Happen, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264225442-14-en.

[32]

OECD (2014), TALIS 2013 Results: An International Perspective on Teaching and Learning,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264196261-en.

[29]

OECD (2007), Evidence in Education: Linking Research and Policy, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264033672-en.

[2]

OECD/EI (2021), Principles for an Effective and Equitable Educational Recovery, Education
International, Brussels, http://www.ei-ie.org/en/item/25231:effective-and-equitableeducational-recovery-10-principles.

[38]

Pellegrini, M. and G. Vivanet (2020), “Evidence-based policies in education: Initiatives and
challenges in Europe”, ECNU Review of Education, Vol. 4/1, pp. 25-45,
https://doi.org/10.1177/2096531120924670.

[8]

--- [PDF Page 234 / Book Page 232] ---

Perry, T., R. Morris and R. Lea (2022), “A decade of replication study in education? A mapping
review (2011-2020)”, Educational Research and Evaluation, Vol. 27/1-2, pp. 12-34,
https://doi.org/10.1080/13803611.2021.2022315.

[17]

Prøitz, T. (2020), “Praksisnær forskning og partnerskap i et tredje rom”, Pedagogisk forskning i
Sverige, Vol. 25/4, pp. 79-82.

[43]

Prøitz, T. and P. Aasen (2016), “Balancing evidence-based and experience-based knowledge in
education”, in Att ta utbildningens komplexitet på allvar. En vänskrift till Eva Forsberg,
Uppsala University.

[39]

Prøitz, T. et al. (forthcoming), Utbildning, lärande, forskning. En evalueringsstudie av ULFförsöksverksamhet, XX University of South-Eastern Norway.

[41]

Prøitz, T. and L. Wittek (2019), “New directions in doctoral programmes: Bridging tensions
between theory and practice?”, Teaching in Higher Education, Vol. 25/5, pp. 1-19.

[40]

Rasmussen, P. (2021), “Educational research – Public responsibility, private funding?”, Nordic
Journal of Studies in Educational Policy, pp. 1-10,
https://doi.org/10.1080/20020317.2021.2018786.

[7]

Schleicher, A. (2021), Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future: Excellence and Equity for
All, International Summit on the Teaching Profession, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/f43c1728-en.

[36]

Slavin, R. (2014), How Biased Measures Lead to False Conclusions, Robert Slavin’s Blog,
https://robertslavinsblog.wordpress.com/2014/11/06/how-biased-measures-lead-to-falseconclusions/ (accessed on 27 June 2022).

[22]

Tipton, E. and R. Olsen (2018), “A review of statistical methods for generalizing from evaluations
of educational interventions”, Educational Researcher, Vol. 47/8, pp. 516-524,
https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x18781522.

[19]

Tseng, V. (forthcoming), “Democratizing evidence for equity”, in Bauer, T., R. Haskins and
K. Fitzsimmons (eds.), Next Generation Evidence, Brookings.

[51]

Tseng, V., A. Bednarek and K. Faccer (forthcoming), “How can funders promote the use of
research? Three converging views on relational research”, Humanities & Social Sciences
Communications.

[58]

Tseng, V. and C. Coburn (2019), “Using evidence in the US”, in Boaz, A. et al. (eds.), What
Works Now? Evidence-informed Policy and Practice, Policy Press.

[55]

Tseng, V., J. Easton and L. Supplee (2017), “Research-practice partnerships: Building two-way
streets of engagement”, Social Policy Report, Vol. 30/4, https://doi.org/10.1002/j.23793988.2017.tb00089.x.

[61]

Tseng, V., S. Fleischman and E. Quintero (2018), “Democratizing evidence in education”, in
Bevan, B. and W. Penuel (eds.), Connecting Research and Practice for Educational
Improvement: Ethical and Equitable Approaches, Routledge, New York.

[53]

Tuck, E. (2009), “Suspending damage: A letter to communities”, Harvard Educational Review,
Vol. 79/3, pp. 409-428, https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.79.3.n0016675661t3n15.

[49]

--- [PDF Page 235 / Book Page 233] ---

Tucker, M. (2019), “Education research: Does the United States have the right model?”, National
Center on Education and the Economy (NCEE), https://ncee.org/tucker-writing/educationresearch/.

[12]

Ulfavtal (n.d.), ULF FAQ, https://www.ulfavtal.se/about-ulf/ (accessed on 2 March 2022).

[42]

US Congress (2002), No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, H.R.1, 107th Cong., H.R.1 - 107th
Congress (2001-2002), http://www.congress.gov/.

[24]

Vakil, S. et al. (2016), “Rethinking race and power in design-based research: Reflections from
the field”, Cognition and Instruction, Vol. 34/3, pp. 194-209,
https://doi.org/10.1080/07370008.2016.1169817.

[56]

Wentworth, L. et al. (2021), RPP Brokers Handbook: A Guide to Brokering in Education
Research-Practice Partnerships, National Network of Education Research-Practice
Partnerships (NNERPP), Houston, Texas.

[59]

William T. Grant Foundation (n.d.), Homepage, http://wtgrantfoundation.org/ (accessed on
27 June 2022).

[45]

Wrigley, T. (2018), “The power of ‘evidence’: Reliable science or a set of blunt tools?”, British
Educational Research Journal, Vol. 44/3, pp. 359-376, https://doi.org/10.1002/berj.3338.

[14]

Wu, J. et al. (2021), From research to market: Development of a transition process to integrate
sustainable scaling methodologies into education innovation research design and
development, SRI International, https://www.sri.com/publication/from-research-to-marketdevelopment-of-a-transition-process-to-integrate-sustainable-scaling-methodologies-intoeducation-innovation-research-design-and-development/.

[23]

Wyse, D. (2020), “Presidential Address: The academic discipline of education. Reciprocal
relationships between practical knowledge and academic knowledge”, British Educational
Research Journal, Vol. 46/1, pp. 6-25, https://doi.org/10.1002/berj.3597.

[18]

--- [PDF Page 236 / Book Page 234] ---

Notes
1

For more information, see https://ies.ed.gov/seer.

2

See https://ies.ed.gov/director/remarks/researchcomp2018.asp and https://ies.ed.gov/director/remarks/
seer2018.asp.
3

See https://capproject.org/.

4

See https://ies.ed.gov/seer/cost_analysis.asp.

5

See https://edinstruments.com/.

6

For more information, see https://us.macmillan.com/books/9781250222695/sciencefictions.

7

See https://seernet.org/.

8

See https://www.basicbooks.com/titles/jim-manzi/uncontrolled/9780465023240/.

9

See https://ies.ed.gov/funding/pdf/2022_84305N.pdf.

10

See https://issuu.com/educationinternational/docs/2021_ei_research_statusofteachers_eng_final/.

11

Action research – originally termed by Kurt Lewin – is a systematic enquiry centred on a problem related
to teaching practice, in which the practitioner performs the roles of both researcher and teacher. In its
popular adaptation, collaborative enquiry, researchers and teachers work together to solve a problem
through systematic investigation (Kuhne and Quigley, 1997[69]; Ainscow et al., 2016[70]).
