================================================================================
Chapter: Improving research-policy-practice engagement: Lessons learnt and ways forward
Author(s): Nóra Révai
Book: Who Cares about Using Education Research in Policy and Practice?: Strengthening Research Engagement
Series: Educational Research and Innovation
Publisher: OECD Publishing, Paris (2022)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/d7ff793d-en
ISBN: 978-92-64-73132-5 (PDF) / 978-92-64-96272-9 (print)
Section / Part: Part III: New approaches to understanding research use
Book Pages: pp. 235–243
PDF Pages: pp. 237–245 (in raw/d7ff793d-en.pdf)
================================================================================
--- [PDF Page 237 / Book Page 235] ---

11 Improving research-policy-

practice engagement: Lessons
learnt and ways forward
Nóra Révai, OECD

This chapter summarises the main lessons learnt from the volume. It begins
by connecting the themes discussed in the publication with wider societal
challenges. It then summarises six key lessons. Two relate to conceptual
developments: The need for shared understanding, vocabulary and
conceptual clarity; and a call to view policy and practice as two parts of the
same whole rather than separate contexts. Three pertain to enabling
systematic and high-quality production and use of research: The need to
improve research quality and use it well; the need for deeper and more
meaningful collaboration between researchers, policy makers and
practitioners; and enhanced governance through renewed leadership,
stronger incentives and appropriate funding. Finally, a last message calls
for a greater focus on understanding “what works in what works’’. The
chapter ends with a proposal to advance this agenda in two concrete ways.

--- [PDF Page 238 / Book Page 236] ---

Introduction
Viewing the pale blue dot (Sagan, 1994[1]) – our planet – in the vastness of space raises a razor-sharp
awareness of what matters most for humanity: To protect life. Education also needs to respond
appropriately to what is already happening: The scarcity of resources and energy, large-scale migration
due to climate change and the changing landscape of our planet. Responding appropriately requires a
relentless effort to build cumulative knowledge of how we can best empower children not just to cope in
life and with the coming challenges but also to become active and responsible agents of change.
Continuously generating relevant research and ensuring its quality use in education policy and practice is
fundamental to keeping education systems agile, relevant and efficient.
Evidence-informed decision making is not a new idea nor a new movement but its importance and
complexity are becoming increasingly more visible not just to experts, policy makers and practitioners but
to the general public. This increased awareness, particularly in the health and environment sectors,
presents a window of opportunity for other sectors such as education to rethink research use in policy
making and practice. Inversely, understanding how we can reinforce the dynamics of research production
and use in education might also inform other sectors.
This volume set out to map recent developments in knowledge mobilisation in education policy and
practice. Leading experts brought new perspectives on evidence-informed policy/practice through recent
research. The OECD Strengthening the Impact of Education Research policy survey provided initial
insights into how countries are tackling the challenge of reinforcing research use. The introduction chapter
pointed to two conceptual considerations:


Recognising complexity in the way we talk about “knowledge mobilisation”.



Connecting policy and practice.

It also outlined key questions related to enabling a more systematic and high-quality production and use
of research in policy and practice.


How can we think about the quality and relevance of research and its use?



What structures, processes and relationships support this? (see Table 1.1).

While there are no straightforward answers or recipes to respond to these questions, a number of
messages have emerged from the chapters of this volume that can take us forward on the path.

What have we learnt about the conceptual considerations?
Naming the game: From brokerage to engagement
The first conceptual consideration was that the terms we use to talk about knowledge mobilisation do not
appropriately recognise complexity. The chapters in this volume demonstrate just how scattered our
vocabulary is when it comes to capturing the dynamics of research production, mediation and use. In fact,
the OECD team has been struggling from the beginning of this project to decide what term to use. Just the
introduction above uses four different expressions: Knowledge mobilisation; evidence-informed
practice/policy; strengthening the impact of education research; and reinforcing research use.
Terms that suggest clearly linear thinking – knowledge transfer, transmission, dissemination, knowledgeto-action – are no longer “trendy” in literature, precisely to avoid narrowing the problem to a push/transfer
one. Mediation and brokerage evoke a two-way process and are used more frequently, particularly when
the focus is on the “in-between” of research and decision making. In this volume, David Gough, Jonathan
Sharples and Chris Maidment, speak about “knowledge brokerage initiatives” (Chapter 7). Tracey Burns
and Tom Schuller (Chapter 3) explicitly point to the contested nature of terminology and use brokerage

--- [PDF Page 239 / Book Page 237] ---

agencies to signal continuity with previous work that looked at institutional brokerage efforts. As Gábor
Halász (Chapter 8) underlines, the term “knowledge mobilisation” is increasingly popular because it turns
away from linear thinking and brings into focus the idea of co-creation. This means that researchers and
practitioners / policy makers are not simply connected but work together to come up with new solutions.
Mark Rickinson and colleagues (Chapter 9) focus on a particular aspect: The quality of research use, which
they define as the “thoughtful engagement with and implementation of appropriate research evidence”.
Annette Boaz, Kathryn Oliver and Anna Numa Hopkins (Chapter 6) use “research-policy engagement
initiatives”, which draws attention to the importance of mutual engagement to reinforce research production
and use. Engagement is described as ultimately the key element in several of the opinion pieces in Chapter
10 as well (e.g. Tine Prøitz, Vivian Tseng, Emese K. Nagy), and appears central in the most recent
“evidence ecosystem” models by David Gough, Jonathan Sharples and Chris Maidment (Chapter 2 and
7).
If we believe that discourse shapes how we think about “the impact of education research” and ultimately
what we do to reinforce its use, then we must make deliberate efforts to improve the clarity of that
discourse. Research today seems robust on the importance of the collective engagement of different actors
– primarily but not limited to researchers, practitioners and policy makers – in both the production and use
of research. In fact, engagement of latter two increasingly overlap from a co-creation perspective. Thus,
research-policy-practice engagement seems a promising new phrasing. (Although to note the beauty
and hazard of the conceptual nature of the English language: One can put everything and nothing in a
condensed expression. Such expressions are also often untranslatable into other languages.)

Policy and practice: Putting the pieces together
The second conceptual consideration set out in the introduction chapter aims to recognise and elaborate
on connections between policy and practice. While there are distinctive differences between policy and
practice (e.g. in terms of structures, the number of actors and the nature of work), there are also
fundamental similarities, particularly in terms of practitioner and policy maker professionalism, including
research competences. Not recognising the link between research use in policy and practice ultimately
hampers the capacity of both policy and practice to improve student learning. As pointed out by
Tracey Burns and Tom Schuller in Chapter 3, it has been difficult to shift the focus from evidence-informed
policy to evidence-informed practice in education. When this happened, the discussions shifted too much
and almost “left policy off the hook”.
This phenomenon is apparent in several instances across this volume. When it comes to deeper forms of
engagement in education, in particular research co-production (or more broadly, knowledge co-creation),
most chapters talk about research-practice partnerships (see e.g. Emese K. Nagy, Tine Prøitz and Vivian
Tseng). But there is a general lack of discourse on policy-research partnerships (although some examples
are given by Gábor Halász in Chapter 8). Recent research such as that conducted by Mark Rickinson and
colleagues has advanced the understanding of research use in practice but this has not yet been
translated/applied to policy. Similarly, as pointed out by Annette Boaz, Kathryn Oliver and Anna Numa
Hopkins, we now have a decent amount of evidence on teachers’ professional learning but policy makers’
capacity building has not been widely evaluated. To avoid shifting emphases and parallel but disconnected
developments, the first step would be to connect research use in policy and practice at the abstract level.
The second step is unfolding what research-policy-practice engagement means in practice. Jordan Hill (in
Chapter 4) argues that policy organisations should have strong relationships not just with research
producers but also with organisations that work across the contexts of research and practice. Linking policy
with practice-oriented research intermediaries can create a unique channel in which research “travels”
across these interconnected contexts. Some interesting examples were given in various chapters such as
the Policy Innovation Research Unit that works with the United Kingdom’s Ministry of Health to pilot policies
and co-produce early-stage research with healthcare stakeholders at both the policy and practice levels

--- [PDF Page 240 / Book Page 238] ---

(in Chapter 6). The OECD survey shows that some ministries of education solicit university-school
partnerships to facilitate research use in policy, which suggests that there are examples for the threefold
nature of research-policy-practice engagement. Understanding how such partnerships work exactly and
what their potential is in increasing research dynamics and improving learning should be on our research
agenda in the future.

What have we learnt about the key questions?
Research yes, but quality research! And, also values…
Reinforcing the use of research in decision making is only desirable if we have good research and if that
research is used well. Quality is a recurring theme in this volume. Chapter 7 stresses that brokerage
initiatives must attend to the quality of research by establishing clear standards for evidence. What this
involves is exemplified by the standards of the United States Institute of Education described by Mark
Schneider in Chapter 10. Dirk Van Damme (Chapter 10) suggests that this is not just about methodology
but about establishing a disciplinary identity for education research; overcoming ideological dispositions
and biases; and acknowledging limitations.
Tracey Burns and Tom Schuller (Chapter 3) stress the need to collectively create a cumulative knowledge
base in education that is “quasi-universally acknowledged as well-founded”. A consolidated body of
knowledge requires research to be replicated in different contexts and the growing evidence to be regularly
synthesised. The authors suggest that brokerage organisations should be working more closely together
to advance the science of evidence synthesis.
Even if we do have high-quality education research, using it well adds another dimension to quality as
explored by Mark Rickinson and colleagues in Chapter 9. The authors unpack the term “thoughtful
engagement” with research and identify its key ingredients. These include individual enablers (skills,
mindset and relationships), organisational ones (leadership, culture and infrastructure) as well as systemic
elements.
As stressed by José Manuel Torres in Chapter 2, values and the ultimate objectives of producing and using
research should not disappear into the distant horizon. Learning needs to be at the centre of all efforts.
Research is not and should not be deprived of values. Vivian Tseng reminds us to not forget marginalised
groups, and to work with them instead of treating them as research objects. Makito Yurita also draws our
attention to the dangers of marginalising research groups and methodologies, and even entire systems if
we narrow the focus and methods of education research too harshly.

Unpacking engagement: Dialogue is not enough
The meaning of high-quality research-policy-practice engagement is not straightforward and must be
unpacked.
As research evidence rarely gives clear instructions for practice, teachers and policy makers need to be
active in interpreting and implementing it. Engaging with research does not necessarily involve interaction
with researchers. For Rickinson et al. (Chapter 9), “thoughtful engagement and implementation” means
that teachers critically engage with research evidence, collectively deliberate about its meaning, and
effectively integrate aspects of the evidence within practice. Such direct research use remains important.
However, to strengthen the link between research, policy and practice, scholars have been encouraging
more dialogue between researchers, practitioners and policy makers. The OECD policy survey shows that
almost all countries have projects that encourage interactions between various actors and ministries often
have extensive relationships with a number of actors. Still, many countries perceive the lack of relationships
as a main barrier to research use. It seems that speaking to each other is not enough. Research has shown

--- [PDF Page 241 / Book Page 239] ---

that interaction needs to be accompanied by capacity building (see Chapter 5). As Gábor Halász describes
in one of his personal experiences: Researchers have to learn to listen. The language and stories of
teachers and policy makers is not a scientific discourse but carries the deep knowledge of students,
schools, teaching and learning. Without understanding their experience and unpacking their knowledge, it
is more difficult to ask relevant research questions, formulate meaningful hypotheses, and design
appropriate research. A good conversation between the different actors requires genuine curiosity, respect
and active listening.
There seems to be consensus across the board that teachers’ and policy makers’ involvement in research
is important to make research more relevant and reinforce its use. However, the nature of involvement is
significant. Emese K. Nagy (Chapter 10) demonstrates how research can be useless for a school when
teachers and students are mere objects of study. Vivian Tseng (Chapter 10) goes beyond that, pointing to
the deep disrespect of communities, particularly marginalised ones, when research does not originate from
their needs and does not feed its results back to those groups. John Bangs and Martin Henry (Chapter 10)
emphasise the role unions can play in bringing research and practice closer to each other, both through
advocacy and direct involvement in research production.
Teachers and policy makers need to recognise the hypotheses studied as relevant to problems.
Developing appropriate hypotheses is easier when researchers and practitioners / policy makers work
closely: Teachers / policy makers can help refine the hypotheses to be relevant, while researchers can
make sure they are suitable for research. Similarly, collective engagement in the subsequent phases of
research production – research design, interpretation and dissemination of findings – can also strenghten
the relevance and usefulness of research. Yet, the OECD policy survey finds that teachers and school
leaders are primarily involved in restricted ways in research production: Most often in data collection, i.e. as
objects of study. The situation is not much better for policy makers who may be more involved in asking
questions and communicating results but rarely have a say in research design and interpreting the findings.
There are promising initiatives that explore deeper forms of engagement and genuine co-creation (as the
Swedish research-practice partnerships described in Chapter 10). But there is still a need to understand
how such partnerships can produce relevant and high-quality research. Tine Prøitz (Chapter 10) points to
key elements such as having a space for co-creation, understanding how the specialised knowledge of all
participants can be best capitalised on, and producing suitable deliverables for all parties. Research in this
field is only in its infancy and has, until now, been largely confined to a handful of countries where researchpractice partnerships have existed for a while (Coburn and Penuel, 2016[2]). We have limited understanding
of how engagement between researchers, practitioners and policy makers works exactly; what the
necessary ingredients and the current barriers are to it.

Governing the system: Leadership, incentives and funding
Research-policy-practice engagement is not a simple triangle with three groups of actors. Research
dynamics (production and use) is a complex sub-system of a complex education system. Systems thinking
– as laid out by Best and Holmes (2010[3]) and discussed across various chapters in this volume – requires
a good understanding of the landscape of mechanisms and the network of actors. David Gough, Jonathan
Sharples and Chris Maidment point out in Chapter 7 that mapping this landscape and developing a theory
of change based on its understanding is largely missing in the work of brokerage institutions. The OECD
policy survey attempts an initial mapping across countries. The survey data presented in Chapters 4 and
5 show the diversity of this landscape. Some key findings are:


Overall, a large number of organisations are active in producing research and facilitating its use in
policy and practice, with universities and teacher education institutions dominating the landscape
in many systems. However, the number and type of organisations active across research
production and mobilisation varies considerably across systems.

--- [PDF Page 242 / Book Page 240] ---



Brokerage agencies (i.e. institutions with an explicit mission to facilitate research use) exist in less
than half of the systems. Some systems did not report any connection between ministries and
brokerage agencies despite the latter being active in research production and facilitating its use in
policy and practice.



The number of mechanisms that facilitate research use in policy and practice vary greatly across
systems.



Around 40% of systems do not synthesise and disseminate educational research findings through
user-friendly tools, and less than a quarter of them have a system-wide strategy for facilitating
research use in policy/practice.

While there is no one approach that can suit such diverse landscapes, there are elements that all countries
and initiatives aiming to reinforce research dynamics need to consider. There are also many opportunities
for shared learning, which can result from comparing and contrasting these different contexts.
First, strategic leadership – within and across organisations and at the system level – is necessary to drive
the dynamics of research production and use. Annette Boaz and colleagues (Chapter 6) found that only
less than half of research-policy-practice engagement initiatives have an explicit focus on strategic
leadership and this is mostly limited to advocacy. The analysis of David Gough, Jonathan Sharples and
Chris Maidment (Chapter 7) echoes this finding for the United Kingdom What Works Centres. Going
beyond leadership of brokerage initiatives, leadership at the central level remains important in governing
complex education systems, notably in providing a strategic vision, clear guidelines and feedback (Burns
and Köster, 2016[4]).
Second, incentives for a good research-policy-practice engagement need to be in place for practitioners,
policy makers and researchers. The OECD survey shows that teachers, school leaders and policy makers
are encouraged to use research but do not have formal incentives such as allocated time, salary
supplement and formal recognition to do so. Some promising initiatives include research co-production
built into teachers’ career development (e.g. a “researcher teacher” status in Hungary that requires
completing doctoral studies and regularly conducting research); public sector PhD schemes; and various
researcher roles in government (e.g. embedded researchers, research fellows). It will be important to
evaluate and compare these initiatives to understand their impact and the conditions under which they
work. In addition, traditional academic incentives, such as publishing in high-impact journals, seem to be
a major obstacle to researchers engaging with practitioners and policy makers more deeply. This point
appears across the chapters.
Finally, funding mechanisms need to respond to the nature of research-policy-practice engagement.
Dirk Van Damme (Chapter 10) reminds us that, despite growing investment, funding for education research
remains much lower than in other comparable sectors. Importantly, Vivian Tseng calls for rethinking
funding schemes and aligning criteria, timeframes and deliverables to adjust to the needs of high-quality
research-policy-practice engagement. In particular, funding needs to take into account all of the above
points. It should provide appropriate incentives, recognise the time it takes to create trustful relationships,
reward skills and capacity building as one of the outcomes of such partnerships, and emphasise outputs
that serve the needs of users and ultimate beneficiaries.

What works in what works? More meta-research is needed
The ultimate objective of the OECD project Strengthening the Impact of Education Research is to
understand how we can effectively reinforce the use of research in education practice and policy. This
meta-level in education research has been termed as “What works in what works” (Gough, Maidment and
Sharples, 2018[5]) or the Science of Using Science (Langer, Tripney and Gough, 2016[6]).

--- [PDF Page 243 / Book Page 241] ---

The good news is: This has become a vibrant field of study across countries and sectors, and it has brought
important insights already as demonstrated by numerous chapters in this volume (some of which have
been summarised above). As stressed by José Manuel Torres in Chapter 2, conceptual development is
important because it helps frame discussions in new ways and drive our thinking on research-policypractice engagement forward. However, mental gymnastics are not enough. The study by David Gough,
Jonathan Sharples and Chris Maidment (Chapter 7) was one of the first efforts to build evidence on
brokerage initiatives. The chapter underscores the need for these initiatives to become evidence-informed
themselves. The systematic investigation and evaluation of existing efforts aimed at reinforcing research
impact are critical to improving such efforts. However, Annette Boaz, Kathryn Oliver and Anna Numa
Hopkins (Chapter 6), and Tracey Burns and Tom Schuller (Chapter 3) point to the striking lack of such
evaluations.
Further research is needed to understand how we can make research-policy-practice engagement more
effective. As the authors of Chapter 7 emphasise: Neglecting research on research use jeopardises the
credibility and effectiveness of efforts aiming to increase research impact. The different chapters point to
a number of questions that remain to be explored, including, but not limited to the following:


How can we conceptualise and measure the impact of education research?



How successful are initiatives that support knowledge production by non-researcher actors
(e.g. governments) in generating high-quality research and reinforcing its use?



Under what conditions are partnerships (research-practice, research-policy and research-policypractice) most effective in generating high-quality research and reinforcing its use?



How should the various types of brokerage efforts be prioritised, sustained and funded?



How can we coordinate efforts at the system level more effectively? What sort of leadership,
incentives and funding are needed?



How should education research as a discipline improve to produce higher quality and more relevant
findings?

It must be recognised that “what works in what works” research is unlikely to produce a simple checklist
approach or prescriptive recipes for solving the problem. Such checklists or recipes would either be too
general (and thus not operational) or overwhelmingly detailed with myriads of conditions and dependencies
(and thus not operational). This is because the research production-use system is in constant evolution
and it is hard to predict what patterns will be emerging. A complex system cannot be geared towards a
particular idealised state in a straightforward way by fixing some parameters at a certain point of time. In
addition, Annette Boaz, Kathryn Oliver and Anna Numa Hopkins (Chapter 6) remind us that contextspecific solutions will always be fundamental: A top-down, “one size fits all” approach will not work.
However, complexity does not mean we are unable to act. Further investigation of the above questions
and continuous reflection on the state of the system is critical for building a cumulative knowledge base on
what works in what works – as underscored by Tracey Burns and Tom Schuller (Chapter 3). It is possible
to steer the system by finding “triggers” that make an impact, understanding what structures and processes
are effective under what conditions, and scaling them.

What’s next?
This volume’s primary focus was to provide an overview of recent research and an initial mapping of
structures, processes and relationships aimed at reinforcing research use. The introduction chapter
outlined a number of questions around the key dimensions for strengthening the impact of education
research: Quality and relevance of research; culture and mindset; and skills and capacity necessary for
high-quality, systematic research production and use. This report helped specify what we already know
and what elements of those questions remain to be explored (see the list of questions above for example).

--- [PDF Page 244 / Book Page 242] ---

The next step in developing a more robust knowledge base on research mobilisation – or research-policypractice engagement – in education is to systematically explore these dimensions.
The Strengthening the Impact of Education Research CERI project will continue to advance this agenda
in two main ways.
First, through research and analysis. The policy survey conducted in 2021 offers insights into aspects not
yet explored in this volume. In particular, building individual skills, and organisational and systemic capacity
for better research production and use is critical for countries. This will be the main focus of the next
volume. The policy survey represents the perspectives of one group of actors only – policy makers at the
level of education ministries. As such, it paints a partial and one-sided picture of the landscape. The next
phase of the project will focus on collecting data from other actors. In particular, it will target intermediary
organisations, including not only brokerage agencies but other types of intermediaries that can reveal
various facets of what works in research-policy-practice engagement, and how it works.
Second, through building a network of key actors in the field and providing extensive opportunities for peer
learning. These actors include academics and experts, a range of intermediary organisations, and, of
course, regional and national authorities across OECD and partner countries. Several of the chapters in
this volume point to the untapped but immense potential of peer learning in these areas from a number of
different angles:


Learning from other contexts: Discussion and debate about education research should not stay
within closed cliques – confined within the walls of academia, public authorities, schools or funding
institutions. We have already seen how much policy and practice could borrow from one another’s
developments in the field of research use.



Learning from other countries and systems: Our survey demonstrates the diverse landscape of
research production and use across systems. This diversity provides fertile ground for sharing good
and bad practices, and exploring what works and how.



Learning from other sectors: This volume provides an initial glimpse into the vastness of research
and experience accumulated in other sectors from which education could benefit.

By developing a platform for mutual learning, the OECD can play the role of an independent broker of
brokers in education, as advocated by Tracey Burns and Tom Schuller in Chapter 3 in this volume. By
collecting and analysing data from OECD and partner countries, it can contribute to developing a robust
knowledge base in the field.

References

Best, A. and B. Holmes (2010), “Systems thinking, knowledge and action: Towards better
models and methods”, Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and Practice,
Vol. 6/2, pp. 145–159, https://doi.org/10.1332/174426410X502284.

[3]

Burns, T. and F. Köster (eds.) (2016), Governing Education in a Complex World, Educational
Research and Innovation, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264255364en.

[4]

Coburn, C. and W. Penuel (2016), “Research–practice partnerships in education”, Educational
Researcher, Vol. 45/1, pp. 48-54, https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x16631750.

[2]

--- [PDF Page 245 / Book Page 243] ---

Gough, D., C. Maidment and J. Sharples (2018), UK What Works Centres: Aims, Methods and
Contexts, PPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, UCL Institute of,
https://eppi.ioe.ac.uk/cms/Portals/0/PDF%20reviews%20and%20summaries/UK%20what%2
0works%20centres%20study%20final%20report%20july%202018.pdf?ver=2018-07-03155057-243.

[5]

Langer, L., J. Tripney and D. Gough (2016), The Science of Using Science Researching the Use
of Research Evidence in Decision-Making, EPPI-Centre, Institute of Education, University
College London.

[6]

Sagan, C. (1994), Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space, Random House.

[1]
